[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmm16)  [Next](tmm18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

# MIDRASH PSALMS

As the sea throws up its refuse on its shores, so have the wicked their
filthiness upon their mouths.--Mid. Psalms 2.

As the billows of the sea, when rushing towards the shores in their
violence and fury, threaten to swamp the whole shore, yet when they near
the shore their fury and violence are lessened, and at last they meekly
spend themselves; so also with those who persecute Israel (likened to
the sand on the shore of the sea) and threaten to overwhelm them; they
are eventually constrained to lessen their violence and fury.--Mid.
Psalms 2.

The wicked try to improve on one another in their acts of wickedness.
Cain killed Abel. Esau sought to improve on Cain, who killed his brother
whilst Adam was yet alive to beget another son instead of Abel; he would
wait till his father died, then he would kill his brother, so that he
alone might inherit everything. Pharaoh thought Esau's scheme did not go
far enough, because whilst Esau was waiting he allowed Jacob to raise up
a family of his own; therefore his design was an improvement on Esau's:
better kill the Israelites' males at their very birth; the women would
then be intermixed with the Egyptians, and thus Israel would be entirely
obliterated. Haman criticised Pharaoh's wisdom, and decided upon the
policy of making a clean sweep of all the Jews without distinction of
sex. Gog and Magog ridiculed all their predecessors in iniquity, and
taking into account that the Jews had a Protector in their Heavenly
Father, thought of attacking God Himself.--Mid. Psalms 2.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

All the prophets started with admonitions and ended with words of
comfort. Jeremiah alone had no words of comfort to offer.--Mid. Psalms
4.

That the mere mechanical application to the Throne of Mercy is not
efficacious is plainly seen from the words of King David, who says God
is nigh to all that call upon Him, and, as it were, as a condition, he
adds the important words, 'to those who call upon Him *in truth*.'--Mid.
Psalms 4.

The last words of Rabbi Zivry b. Leves were: 'For this let every saint
pray to Thee.' Those of Rabbi José b. Pinehas were: 'Better one day in
thy court'; and those of Rabbi Joshua b. Levi were: 'How great is thy
goodness which Thou hast reserved for those who revere Thee.'--Mid.
Psalms 5.

A man is bound to pay the same respect to his wife's father as he would
to his own father.--Mid. Psalms 7.

With regard to the conduct of life, men may be said to be divided into
three sections. There are men who are thoroughly good, practising
righteousness for righteousness' sake. They are thankful to their Maker
for having brought them to this life and endowed them with intellect to
view the works of creation; they expect and ask for no reward. There is
another sect who, when doing any commendable deed, book it, as it were,
to their credit and expect recompense in the future life. But there is,
alas! a worse section, who neither have nor seek to have any merits of
their own, but look for favours to the merits of their ancestors.--Mid.
Psalms 8.

If one tells you definitely when the Messiah will come, believe him
not.--Mid. Psalms 9.

The following Rabbis were martyrs: Rabbi Simeon b. Gamaliel, Rabbi
Ishmael b. Elisha, Jeshbab the scribe, Chuzpas the translator, José
Judah b. Baba, Judah Nachtom, Simon b. Azai, Chanina b. Tradyon, and
Rabbi Akiba.--Mid. Psalms 9.

David's words clearly show that righteous non-Jews

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

will inherit future bliss. He says: 'The wicked shall go to 'Sheol' and
all the nations that forget God' (Ps. 9. 18), i.e. those of the nations
that forget God, but not those who worship God.--Mid. Psalms 9. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md)

A certain philosopher asked Rabbi Elisha:--'Your prophet predicts about
us "They shall build, but I will throw down" (Mal. 1. 4). Now look at
Alexandria built by Alexander; at Constantinople, built by Constantine;
or Antiochia, raised up by Antiochus; at Seleucia, built by Seleucus; or
at our Roman empire. The founders and builders themselves are gone, yet
their works stand as a monument to their might and wisdom.' 'What the
prophet means,' answered the sage, 'is not the structures of brick and
mortar, but your designs against us, in which you will not prevail, but
which our God will throw down.' 'If it is that,' confessed the Roman
philosopher, 'to which your prophet alludes, then I must admit the truth
of it, because I well know what weapons are forged every year, in our
councils, for your destruction; and somehow each time some one comes and
frustrates our designs.'--Mid. Psalms 9.

There would be a serious discrepancy in two parts of Scripture were it
not that we know, traditionally, the explanation. In the second Book of
Samuel 47. 25) mention is made of 'Ithra an Israelite.' In the first of
Chronicles (2. 18) the same person is mentioned as 'Ithra the
Ishmaelite.' The fact is that this man was originally an Ishmaelite who
used to frequent the Jewish seminary, when he heard Jesse hold forth on
the text in Isaiah (45. 23) 'Look unto Me and be ye saved, all the ends
of the earth; for I am God and there is none else.' So impressed was
this Ithra with the expounding of this text that he became a convert to
Judaism, married Jesse's daughter, and was henceforth known as Ithra the
Israelite.--Mid. Psalms 9.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

Of all the good men who are designed to see God, those that were upright
in their lives here stand in the first rank.--Mid. Psalms 11.

Moses' prayer for his people was, 'O that there were such a heart in
them,' etc. (Deut. 5.), and when his disciple Joshua suggested to him to
prohibit any but himself to prophesy, this meek and unselfish man burst
out in the prayer, 'Would that all the Lord's people were prophets, that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them' (Numb. 11.). Such a prayer from
such a man cannot be left unanswered, though we must leave it to God's
own good time, when these prayers will be brought into fulfilment. By
the prophet Ezekiel God's people are promised a new heart (Ezkl. 36.),
and through his prophet Joel God promises to pour out his Spirit upon
all flesh, and they shall prophesy (Joel 2.).--Mid. Psalms 14.

Most of the blessings that God bestows upon his people proceed from
Zion. The Torah, as it is said in Isaiah (2. 3). Blessings in general
(Ps. 134.). The blessing of brightness (Ps. 52.), that of support (Ps.
20.), of life (Ps. 133.), of greatness (Ps. 98.), and of salvation (Ps.
14.).--Mid. Psalms 14.

David enumerates eleven attributes which will render a man fit to abide
in the Tabernacle of the Lord (Ps. 15.). One of these is, 'he that
putteth not his money out to usury.' And this applies equally to
non-Jews. One is not allowed to take usury from either.--Mid. Psalms 17.

Hillel and Shammai declined to accept remuneration for the instruction
they gave to their pupils, and truly can we say of them 'they have not
put their money out to usury.'--Mid. Psalms 15.

He who hears himself abused (or cursed) and does not retaliate may be
called a saintly man.--Mid. Psalms 16.

The six hundred and thirteen commandments which were handed over to the
Israelites were reduced by King David to eleven (Ps. 15.). Isaiah
further reduced

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

all the commandments to six (Isa. 33. 15, 16). Micah made a further
reduction of them to three (Micah 6. 8). Habakkuk reduced the whole to
one, that of faith (Hab. 2-4).--Mid. Psalms 17.

Rabbi Joshua b. Levi mentions a tradition to the effect that when Jacob
and Esau met for the purpose of burying their father Isaac (Gen. 35.),
Esau at last attempted to carry his long cherished desire for vengeance
on his brother into effect, and took up a threatening attitude towards
Jacob; but when Judah--who with his brothers was present at the burial
of Isaac--saw that Esau's enmity towards Jacob was still smouldering, he
prevented any untoward event by killing Esau.--Mid. Psalms 18.

It is much more difficult to cope with a Jewish enemy than with a
non-Jewish enemy.--Mid. Psalms 18.

Good men are meek and humble, and style themselves servants, and they
are registered in the book of God's army as servants. Abraham called
himself servant (Gen. 18.) and God refers to him as his servant (Gen.
18.); Jacob pronounced himself servant (Gen. 32.), and God calls him his
servant (Isa. 44.); Moses refers to himself as servant (Dent. 3.), and
God declares him his servant (Numb. 12.); David describes himself as
servant (Ps. 116.), and God calls him his servant (2 Saml. 3.). And
there are two individuals who had not taken the opportunity of
pronouncing themselves servants, but God declares them to be his
servants, viz. Isaac (Exod. 32)., and Joshua (Josh. 24.).--Mid. Psalms
18.

A father and his son being on a long journey, the son said that he would
like to know when they would arrive at the end of it. The older man
replied that when they saw a cemetery they might hope to arrive at the
town soon. Similarly our Heavenly Father indicates to us that when heavy
persecution and sorrow meet us we may hope to be brought to Him, to a
haven of rest and shelter.--Mid. Psalms 20.

The whole of our history tends to show that, when

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

distress was at its greatest, God was nearest. Even when we well
deserved God's punishment, as for the making of the golden calf for
which our destruction was threatened, yet we find soon after, 'And the
Lord repented of the evil which He thought to do unto his people' (Exod.
32.). When in darkness the Lord hath become our light (Micah 7.). In his
anger God yet grants us his mercy (Hab. 2.). The very time of trouble is
transposed into a time of joy and help (Jer. 30.), the estrangement to a
bringing near (Hosea 2.), the threat of annihilation into exaltation
(Esther 4).--Mid. Psalms 21.

Trust in God delivers us from impending peril.--Mid. Psalms 22.

The more good men are exalted the meeker they become. Abraham declared
himself dust and ashes (Gen. 18). Moses and Aaron disclaimed all
greatness (Exod. 16.). David styled himself a worm and not a man (Ps.
22.). Saul called himself but a child of a Benjaminite (1 Saml. 9.).
Gideon said he was the humblest in Manasseh (Jud. 6.). Not so with the
heathen in his brief authority. Pharaoh said, 'Who is the Lord that I
should obey his voice?' (Exod. 5.). Goliath defied the armies of Israel
(1 Saml. 17.). Sennacherib boasted, 'Who are they among all the gods
that have delivered their country out of my hands?' (2 Kings 18.).
Nebuchadnezzar asked, 'Who is that god that shall deliver you out of my
hands?' (Dan. 3.). Belshazzar was rebuked by Daniel for having lifted
himself up against 'the Lord of heaven' (Danl. 5.). Hiram too received a
sharp rebuke for having set his heart as the heart of God (Ezkl.
28.).--Mid. Psalms 22.

Woe to any man when death approaches him, to the strong man when he
becomes weak, or to him who loses his sight; but woe to the whole
generation which is ruled by a woman.--Mid. Psalms 22.

An officiating Priest once scorned a woman who

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

brought a handful of flour as an offering, and, in a vision which he had
immediately afterwards, he received a very severe rebuke.--Mid. Psalms
22.

Haman's property was divided as follows: One-third went to Mordecai and
Esther, another went to those who separated themselves from the outer
world and devoted themselves to study and religion, and one-third
towards the building of the Temple.--Mid, Psalms 22.

The Holy Spirit sometimes rested on King David before he commenced
singing and playing hymns, and he was in fact prompted to the hymns by
the Holy Spirit that rested upon him. At other times the Holy Spirit
kept away from him, but came upon him as soon as he gave himself up to
hymns and praises.--Mid. Psalms 24.

We Jews surely give practical proof of our faith in God's promises. No
resurrection has yet taken place, yet the established ritual throughout
Jewry contains the prayers to be said, 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who
quickenest the dead.' Our last (chief) redemption has not yet been
brought about, but we proclaim twice every day, 'Blessed art Thou, O
God, the Redeemer of Israel.' --Mid. Psalms 31.

If all your life is given up to the pursuit of earthly things, it is
quite consistent for you to look downwards; but if you pursue the higher
life, look upwards.--Mid. Psalms 32.

He that feels as though his heart is torn within him on account of his
sin may well hope for God's forgiveness. Yet whilst continually thinking
of his grievous sin, man must not make a habit of sinning and rely on
his sorrow and confession for the expiation of his sin.--Mid. Psalms 32.

The wicked are, as a rule, brought to judgment when all fear of judgment
has left them.--Mid. Psalms 36.

Jerusalem is destined to become the Metropolis of the world.--Mid.
Psalms 36.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

Israel was in the darkness of slavery in Egypt, and Moses and Aaron were
the means of bringing them to the light of freedom. They were in
captivity in Babylon; Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah were the messengers
of their freedom. They were oppressed at the hands of the Greeks, and
deliverance was brought by Mattathias Hashmonai and his sons. When again
brought under the yoke of Edom (Rome) Israel wishes no longer any human
agency for his rescue, but looks direct to God to be his light of
deliverance (Ps. 118). So one enveloped in darkness endeavours to get
artificial light time after time, but each time the light becomes
extinguished, and he at last resolves to abandon all further attempts to
procure light, and to wait for sunrise to bring him natural light.--Mid.
Psalms 36.

How flexible is the tongue, and how great is its power! It is related of
a Persian king that his physicians ordered him to drink the milk of a
lioness, and one of his servants offered to procure the rare medicine.
Taking with him some sheep with which to lure the beast, he actually
succeeded in obtaining milk from a lioness.

On his journey homewards, being fatigued, he fell into a deep slumber,
during which the various members of his body commenced disputing as to
which of them had contributed most towards the success of their owner in
obtaining so rare a thing as milk from a lioness.

Said the feet: 'There can be no doubt that we are the only factors in
this successful undertaking. Without us there could have been no setting
out on this dangerous venture.' 'Not so,' said the hands, 'the facility
you offered would have been of no avail had our power not been called
into requisition; it is the service we rendered that enabled our owner
to procure milk from the lioness.' 'Neither of you could have rendered
any service,' exclaimed the eyes, 'without the sight which we supplied.'
'And yet,' interrupted the heart, 'had not I

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

inspired the idea, no steps would have been taken to bring any of your
powers into exercise.' At last the tongue put in her claim, and was
utterly ridiculed by the unanimous opinions of all the other contending
members of the body.

'You,' they scornfully replied, 'you who have not the free power of
action which is possessed by all and each of us, you who are imprisoned
in the narrow space of the human mouth,--you dare to put in a claim to
have contributed to this success! 'In the midst of this contention the
man woke up, and prosecuted his journey homewards. Being brought before
the king with the much desired milk, the man, by a slip of the tongue,
said, 'Here I have brought your Majesty the dog's milk.' The savage king
becoming incensed by this insulting remark, there and then ordered the
man to be put to death. On the man's way to execution, all the members
of his body, heart, eyes, feet, and hands trembled and were terribly
afraid. 'Did I not tell you,' said the tongue, I that my power is above
all the united powers you possess? and you ridiculed me for my trouble.
What think you of my power now? Are you now prepared to acknowledge my
power to be greater than all yours?'

When all the members of the body consented to the tongue's proposition,
the tongue requested and obtained a short reprieve, so that it could
make a last appeal for the king's clemency. When the man was brought to
the king his tongue started in all its eloquence. 'Is this the reward,'
it began, 'great and just king, to be meted out to the only one of your
majesty's servants who was glad of the opportunity to offer his life to
fulfil his king's desire, who gladly carried his life in his hand to
obtain for his august master what scarcely ever was obtained by mortal
man?' 'But,' replied the king, 'your own statement was that you brought
me dog's milk instead of the lioness' milk which you undertook to
procure.' 'Not so, O gracious king,' replied the tongue, 'I brought

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the identical milk that your majesty required; it was merely by an
unfortunate mistake in my speech that I changed the name; and in fact
there is a similarity, as the word כליא may mean either lioness or dog.
My words will be verified if your majesty will condescend to make use of
the milk I procured, for it will effect the cure your majesty desires.'
The milk was submitted to the test, and was found to be that of a
lioness; and so the tongue triumphantly demonstrated its great power for
good or for evil.--Mid. Psalms 39.

View David's career, and you will see both the necessity and the
efficacy of repentance.--Mid. Psalms 40.

He that is satiated with tears cannot be expected to have appetite for
food.--Mid. Psalms 42.

In futurity the righteous will feast on the splendour of the
Shechinah.--Mid. Psalms 45:

To Israel's question 'O Lord, when wilt Thou redeem us?' God's answer
is, 'When you have fallen to your lowest depth.'--Mid. Psalms 45.

He that puts his sin wilfully away from his eyes has no right to expect
or hope for pardon. 'My sin,' says David, 'is continually before me.'
David was like the patient to whom the physician said, 'I am very sorry
for you, your illness is a very serious one.' 'No,' said the patient,
'the reason of my illness is that there may be a reward for curing me.'
Thus David prayed to God to cure him (to pardon his sins), so that God's
great power, his mercy and lovingkindness, might be known, since He had
pardoned such great and grievous sin.--Mid. Psalms 51.

He that is deeply sensible of his sin, is in terror of it, confesses it,
and is in communion with God concerning this burden of uncleanliness,
may hope for forgiveness.--Mid. Psalms 51.

If you intend to put man to rights, put yourself to rights first.--Mid.
Psalms 53.

As there is no limit to the evils of a bad wife, so

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

there is no limit to the good that is caused by a good wife.--Mid.
Psalms 53.

Men who do not marry deprive themselves of (1) God's blessing, for it
was only after Adam became possessed of Eve that God blessed them (Gen.
28.). (2) Life, as King Solomon has it, 'Live joyfully with the wife,'
etc. (Eccles. 9.). (3) Joy, as it is said, 'Rejoice with the wife of thy
youth' (Prov. 5.). (4) Help, 'I will make a helpmate for him' (Gen. 2.).
(5) Good, 'Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing' (Prov. 18.).--Mid.
Psalms 59.

If a man should intend committing an evil act, but has not carried out
his intention, the Merciful One will forbear punishing him. On the other
hand, if a man intends doing a religious deed, and is somehow prevented
from carrying it into effect, he will receive his reward as though he
had carried out his intention. We find that David was looked upon almost
as the builder of the Temple, and the Consecration Psalm (30.) is called
'the dedication of the house of David.'--Mid. Psalms 62.

'I am that I am,' said God to Moses, by which He intimated that He
created the world in mercy, and will always rule the world in
mercy.--Mid. Psalms 72.

The great faith manifested by the tribe of Judah entitles it to the
dignified position it has attained, that of being the Royal House of
Israel. On the banks of the Red Sea the people hesitated to plunge into
the water, until the tribe of Judah, exclaiming that there can be no
hesitation where one has God's promise of protection, like one man took
the initiative and jumped into the sea; then their example was followed
by all the other tribes.--Mid. Psalms 76.

One is not to think lightly of a parable or a simile: indeed one is to
look upon them in the same sense as psalms, hymns, or prophecy.

Hath not the Lord sent his prophet Ezekiel to put forth a riddle and
speak a parable unto the house of Israel (Ezkl. 17.)? and hath not the
Psalmist said,

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

'I will open my mouth in a parable' (Ps. 78.)?-Mid. Psalms 79.

It seems strange that, out of all the Patriarchs, the Temple should only
be called by the name of Jacob (Isa. 2. 3, and Jer. 30. 18). Yet it is
but proper that the Temple is styled 'the house of the God of Jacob.' A
king once intimated to three of his friends his intention of building a
palace, and showed them the spot upon which that palace was to be
erected. The first friend remarked slightingly, 'there was a mountain on
this spot before.' The second friend made the disparaging remark, 'This
is an open field.' The third friend said, 'This is the place for a
palace.' Abraham, being on the spot where the Temple was destined to be
erected, called it the *mountain* of God (Gen. 22.). Isaac alluded to
the spot as a *field* that God blessed (Gen. 27.). It was left to Jacob
to call the place by the proper name when he said, on waking up from his
vision, 'This is no other than the house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven' (Gen. 28.). Therefore the Temple was called by his name.--Mid.
Psalms 81.

A generation is twenty years.--Mid. Psalms 90.

The coats, or covers, with which God clothed Adam and Eve after their
fall were made of the serpent's skin.--Mid. Psalms 92.

Moses and Isaiah alone of all the prophets knew what they were
prophesying; all the other prophets, including Elijah and Samuel,
uttered their prophecies mechanically.--Mid. Psalms 90.

If you bear in mind that your prayers are directed to the God above,
then they will be a blending of joy and awe.--Mid. Psalms 100.

Sing praises unto the Eternal whether you worship Him as a God of
judgment or as a God of mercy.--Mid. Psalms 101.

God asks neither for burnt offerings nor for other sacrifices. He asks
for earnest prayer.--Mid. Psalms 102.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

Rabbi Gamaliel was asked by a heathen to define the residence of God.
When the sage stated his inability to do so, the questioner retorted:
'and yet you pray to Him daily without even knowing where He is. Surely
our position is a more rational one; we know and we see the god that we
worship.' 'Now,' said Rabbi Gamaliel, 'you ask of me a thing as
difficult to comply with as though you had asked me to walk for five
hundred years: I will, in return, ask you something by no means so
difficult to answer. In which part of your body does your soul reside?'
'I do not know,' answered R. Gamaliel's friend. 'Well then,' observed
the sage, 'hath David said "Bless the Lord, O my soul," for in certain
attributes the soul resembles its giver. As God filleth the whole world
so the human soul filleth the whole body. God is unique, and the soul is
unique. God neither eats nor drinks, neither does the soul. As God is
pure, so is the soul (his spark) pure. As God cannot be seen, so the
soul cannot be seen.'--Mid. Psalms 103.

Prayer is not to be offered in the midst of frivolity or laughter, but
with humility and bowed head.--Mid. Psalms 108.

At the redemption of Israel, the nations amongst which they have been
scattered, and out of which they will be redeemed, will sing praises to
God.--Mid. Psalms 117.

The wicked walk in darkness, but those who have the light of God, the
Torah, as their guide are restricted from committing sin even when they
have a passing desire to do so.--Mid. Psalms 119.

The fact that special mention is made of the affair of Zimri (Numb. 24.
14) tends to show that the Israelites, in those days, were very chaste,
as such conduct seems to have come as a surprise to the whole
camp.--Mid. Psalms 122.

Every man gets the wife he deserves.--Mid. Psalms 125.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

Repentance is of no avail in a matter of wronging your fellow-man,
without first rectifying the wrong done.--Mid. Psalms 125.

Whether in season or out of season, it is a good omen to see white
grapes in a dream. With black grapes there is a difference: in their
season it is favourable, but if they are seen when they are not in
season it is exceedingly unfavourable, and the dreamer should pray for
God's mercy.--Mid. Psalms 128.

Water, milk and wine should never be left uncovered.--Mid. Psalms 136.

No one has a right to expect success in his mundane affairs unless he
works for it. Moses blessed the works of the hands and all of man's
doings (Deut. 14. 29).Mid. Psalms 136.

Let no man say 'My father was a righteous man; I shall be all right for
his sake,' or 'My brother was a righteous man, and I shall reap the
benefit of his merits.' Abraham could not save Ishmael, and Jacob could
not save Esau. Each man must work out his own salvation.--Mid. Psalms
146.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[200:1](tmm17.htm#fr_23.md) See also Tosephta
Sanhedrin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Midrash Proverbs](tmm18.md)
