[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmm14)  [Next](tmm16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

# MIDRASH LAMENTATIONS

RABBI JOSHUA, as was his wont, was on a mission of charity on a hot
summer's day, in a glowing sun, without finding a drop of water to
quench his thirst. Towards evening he reached a small village, where he
espied a girl filling her pitcher at the village well. 'O grant me a
draught of your refreshing water,' he said to the damsel, 'for I am
well-nigh perishing of thirst.' Like the graceful Rebecca of Holy Writ,
the maid handed her pitcher full to the thirsty sage, with the remark,
'Drink, worthy man, to thy full, and I will then also give water to the
beast upon which thou camest hither.' Touched by the kindly act, the
Rabbi said to the maiden, 'I see you understand well how to imitate our
pious mother Rebecca.' 'And you, I hope,' came the quick answer, 'will
equally understand how to imitate the faithful Eliezer.' 'Quite right,
my daughter,' replied Rabbi Joshua, struck by the quick-wittedness of
the maiden, 'You well deserve golden trinkets for your kindness; but you
deserve them, you do not need them, for you possess a jewel in your
kindly soul that is the brightest ornament one can possess. The only
addition I can give you to it is my prayer that the Lord may aid you to
retain your kindly nature through life.' With this Rabbi Joshua took his
departure.--Mid. Lament. 1.

At Sinai the Israelites carried a glorious weapon with the name of God
inscribed on it. They were deprived of it after making the golden
calf.--Pesichta of Mid. Lament.

Rav Assé and Rabbi Ammé went to inspect a town, to see what improvements
were required therein. When

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

they came to the place they asked for the protectors of it. The watchmen
of the town were presented to them, as being what they asked for.
'These,' the Rabbis said, 'are not the protectors of your place. What we
want to see is your *real* protectors: your schools, your teachers and
their pupils.'--Mid. Lament. 1.

Balaam the son of Beor and Abinimos the Gardite, who were considered the
wisest men amongst their people at the time, were consulted how to act
in order to effect a serious injury to the Israelites. The advice of
these two wise men was, to find out whether there were any elementary
schools for the instruction of the rising generation amongst the Jews.
'If you hear,' said they, 'children's voices studying their Torah, all
your efforts to hurt that people will be in vain; if not, you will
succeed. For you should remember the words in connexion with the
blessings they have received: "the voice is the voice of Jacob, but the
hands are the hands of Esau." As long as the voice of Jacob is used in
prayer and in study of the Torah, he will defy the hands of Esau.'--Mid.
Lament. 1.

He who trains a bad pupil must expect discredit.--Mid. Lament.
(Pesichta).

There was harmony between God and his people when He redeemed them from
Egypt. They have sinned and broken that harmony, and become separated
from their God.--Mid. Lament. (Pesichta).

At the destruction of the Temple, whilst some of the enemy were busy
with the plunder of gold and silver, the men of Ammon and Moab sought to
lay hands on the scrolls of the Pentateuch, as it is there written
(Deut. 23. 4), 'An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the
congregation of the Lord.' So, when a fire breaks out on a slaveowner's
premises, while others look for plunder among his valuables, the slave's
first care is to look for the contract which binds him to his master and
to destroy it.--Mid. Lament. 1.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

The following story is related of a woman named Miriam, daughter of
Nachtem, who was made captive with her seven sons. When the chief of the
place had her sons brought before an image of an idol and bade them bow
down before it, six of the sons, each in his turn, stubbornly declined
to do so, each basing his refusal on a different Biblical passage
showing the prohibition of idolatry; and each on his refusal to comply
with the mandate of the savage paid the penalty of death. When at last
the turn of the youngest son came, and he, like his elder brothers,
refused to bow down before the idol, the perpetrator of this wholesale
slaughter seemed to be overcome with something like pity for the young
life, and tried, instead of violence, his persuasive powers, and argued
with the youngster to induce compliance with his orders. 'See,' he said,
'the fate of your brothers for refusing to do my bidding.' 'No,'
answered the lad, 'I will not bow down to an idol, and I am prepared to
meet death with the same fortitude as my brothers.' 'But your brothers,'
argued the heathen, 'did not die before they had seen something of life,
and tasted its sweetness; whilst you are so young and have seen nothing
of life, you should not be so ready to sacrifice it.' 'No,' persisted
the boy, 'I will not do an act which is offensive to my God and
destructive of my soul.' 'I am prepared to compromise with you,' the
savage went on with his subterfuges, 'I will drop my ring in front of
the image, and you will bend down to pick the ring up, so that it shall
appear to my people that you did my bidding, and they will no longer be
able to say that I was defied, not only by your six brothers, but even
by one of such tender years as you.' When all these devices had failed,
the chief adopted other tactics. 'See,' he said, 'in my idol you have
something tangible, which is more than can be said of your God, whom no
one has ever seen and who has nothing visible about Him. Has your God a
mouth, as you

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

see my god has?' He has not a mouth,' replied the lad, 'for He is
incorporeal; but by his word the heavens were made (Ps. 33.). He has no
eyes, yet I know that the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the
land (Zech. 4.). He has no bodily ears, but he hearkens and hears (Mal.
3.). He has no mortal hand, but his hands founded the earth' (Isa. 48.).
'Then,' said the heathen, 'why does He not save you out of my hands?'
'Because I am destined to die,' replied the boy, 'and you are but the
instrument-as any wild beast, such as a lion, a wolf, or a snake might
be-to bring about the destiny decreed upon me.' Hereupon the child was
put to death by order of the savage, and his mother, bereft of reason by
the loss of all her children, threw herself down from the top of her
house. Thus perished the mother and all her seven sons.--Mid. Lament. T.

God in his love and mercy provides the remedy even before the disease
visits us. He sent the sweet balm of comfort through one prophet before
another of his prophets uttered his lamentations over the woes and
sorrows which had overtaken Jerusalem and its people. In the first
chapter of the Book of Lamentations Jeremiah pours out his bitter heart
in twenty-two verses, alphabetically arranged; but before Jeremiah thus
uttered his sorrows the prophet Isaiah anticipated each of his
colleague's woes with words of comfort suitable to the complaint.

Jeremiah said, 'How doth the city sit solitary' (Lament. 1. 1), but in
anticipation of this lament Isaiah declares, 'The place is too strait
for me, give place to me that I may dwell' (Isa. 49. 20). Against
Jeremiah's lament, 'She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on
her cheeks,' Isaiah preceded him with the words, 'For the people shall
dwell in Zion at Jerusalem, thou shalt weep no more' (Isa. 30. 19).

Jeremiah says, 'Judah is gone into captivity,' which Isaiah anticipates
with the assurance, 'He shall assemble

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

the outcasts of Israel,' etc. (Isa. 11. 12). The words of Jeremiah, 'The
ways of Zion do mourn,' Isaiah meets beforehand with the words, 'Prepare
ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our
God' (Isa. 40. 3). Jeremiah complains, 'Her adversaries have become
chiefs': but Isaiah tells us before this, 'The sons of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending their knee' (Isa. 60. 14). Jeremiah
cries, 'From the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed': Isaiah
had already said, 'And the Redeemer shall come to Zion' (Isa. 59. 20).
Jeremiah says, 'Jerusalem remembers in her days of affliction'; Isaiah
assures us, 'The former shall not be remembered' (Isa. 65. 17). Jeremiah
says, 'Jerusalem hath sinned'; Isaiah previous to this declares, 'I have
blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions' (Isa. 44. 22). Jeremiah
says, 'Her filthiness is in her skirts'; Isaiah speaks of a time 'when
the Lord shall wash away the filth of the daughters of Zion' (Isa. 4.
4). Jeremiah laments, 'The enemy hath spread out his hands on all her
pleasant things'; Isaiah anticipates this lament by assuring us, 'the
Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of
his people' (Isa. ii. 11). Jeremiah says, 'All her people sigh, they
seek bread'; Isaiah anticipates this complaint with the comforting
words, 'they shall not hunger nor thirst' (Isa. 49. 10). Jeremiah asks,
'See if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow'; Isaiah has it, 'The
Spirit shall be poured out on us from on high' (Isa. 32. 15). Jeremiah
laments, 'From above hath He sent a fire into my bones'; Isaiah brought
the message from the Most High, 'For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth' (Isa. 57. 16). Jeremiah complains, 'The
yoke of transgressions is bound by his hand'; which Isaiah anticipates
with the words, 'Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck,' etc. (Isa.
52. 2). Jeremiah cries, 'The Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty
men '; Isaiah comforts us with the words,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

'Prepare ye the way of the people, cast up the highway, lift up the
standard for the people' (Isa. 62. 10). Jeremiah says, 'For this I weep,
mine eye runneth down with tears'; Isaiah assures us, 'For they shall
see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion' (Isa. 52. 7).
Jeremiah complains, 'Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none
to comfort her'; Isaiah had said, 'Comfort you, even I am He that
comforteth you' (Isa. 51. 12). Jeremiah declares, 'The Lord is
righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandments'; Isaiah
declares, 'Thy people also shall be all righteous' (Isa. 60. 2).
Jeremiah wails, 'I called for my lovers, but they deceived me'; Isaiah
declares, 'But thou shalt call thy walls salvation and thy gates praise'
(Isa. 60. 18). Jeremiah cries, See, O Lord, for I am in distress';
Isaiah declared, 'And when ye see this your heart shall rejoice' (Isa.
66. 14). Jeremiah laments, 'There is none to comfort me'; Isaiah had
previously proclaimed, 'Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people,' etc. (Isa.
40. 1). Jeremiah finally says, 'Let their wickedness come before thee,'
etc.; Isaiah had previously said, 'Even them will I bring to my holy
mountain,' etc.--Mid. Lamentations 1.

It seems that the identical word used to describe Israel's sin is
employed to particularize the punishment for that sin, and is again made
use of as the forgiveness of their transgression. It is, for instance,
said that Israel sinned, and with the sin employed the word ראש 'head'
in suggesting 'Let us appoint a head--a leader--and let us return to
Egypt' (Numb. 14.). In punishing them the same word ראסה 'head' is used
(Isa. 1. 5), and in comforting them the same word ראסה 'head' is
employed (Micah 2. 13).

They transgressed with the word 'ear' (Zech. 7. 11) in punishing them
the same word is used (1 Saml. 3. 11), and they are comforted with the
same word (Isa. 30-24 They sinned with the word 'eye' (Isa. 3.); they
were

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

punished with that word (Lament. 1. 16), and comforted with the same
word (Isa. 52). They transgressed with the word 'nose' (Ezkl. 8. 17);
they were punished with the word (Levit. 2,6. 24), and comforted with
that word (Levit. 26. 423). They committed sin, and used in connexion
therewith the word 'mouth' (Isa. 5.); they were punished with that word
(Isa. 9.), and comforted with the same word (Ps. 126.). They erred with
their tongue (Jer. 9.); they had their retribution with the same word
(Lament. 4. 4), and were comforted with the same word (Ps. 126.). They
sinned, and used in connexion with their sin the word 'heart' (Zech.
7.); and so they were punished with that word (Isa. 1.), and were also
comforted with the same word (Isa. 40.). They committed iniquity with
their hands (Isa. 1.), were punished with the same (Lament. 4. 10), and
comforted with the same (Isa. 11. 11). They sinned with the word 'foot'
(Prov. 1.), were punished with the word (Jer. 11), and comforted with
that word (Isa. 52). They committed sin with the word 'fire' (Jer. 7),
were punished with it (Lament. 1. 3), and comforted with it (Zech.
2.).--Mid. Lament. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Midrash Esther](tmm16.md)
