[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3226)  [Next](sbe3228) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 166.

#### ASH*T*AKA II, ADHYÂYA 4, VARGA 1-3.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Let us now proclaim for the robust [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:1:1)
host, for the herald [2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:1:2) of the powerful
(Indra), their ancient greatness! O ye strong-voiced Maruts, you heroes,
prove your powers on your march, as with a torch, as with a sword
[3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:1:3)!

2\. Like parents bringing a dainty to [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:2:1)
their own [2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:2:2) son, the wild (Maruts) play
playfully at the sacrifices. The Rudras reach the worshipper with their
protection, strong in themselves, they do not fail the sacrificer.

3\. For him to whom the immortal guardians have given fulness of wealth,
and who is himself a giver of oblations, the Maruts, who gladden men
with the milk (of rain), pour out, like friends, many clouds.

4\. You who have stirred [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:4:1) up the clouds
with might, your horses rushed [2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:4:2) forth,
self-guided. All beings who dwell in houses
[3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:4:3) are afraid of you, your march is brilliant
with your spears thrust forth.

5\. When they whose march is terrible have caused the rocks to tremble
[1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:5:1), or when the manly Maruts have shaken the
back of heaven, then every lord of the forest fears at your racing, each
shrub flies out of your way [2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:5:2), whirling like
chariot-wheels [3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:5:3).

6\. You, O terrible Maruts, whose ranks are never broken, favourably
[1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:6:1) fulfil our prayer
[2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:6:2)! Wherever your gory-toothed
[3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:6:3) lightning bites
[4](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:6:4), it crunches [5](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:6:5)
cattle, like a well-aimed bolt [6](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:6:6).

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

7\. The Maruts whose gifts are firm, whose bounties are never ceasing,
who do not: revile [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:7:1), and who are highly
praised at the sacrifices, they sing their song
[2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:7:2) for to drink the sweet juice: they know
the first manly deeds of the hero (Indra).

8\. The man whom you have guarded, O Maruts,—shield him with hundredfold
strongholds from injury [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:8:1) and mischief,—the
man whom you, O fearful, powerful singers, protect from reproach in the
prosperity of his children.

9\. On your chariots, O Maruts, there are all good things, strong
weapons [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:9:1) are piled up clashing against each
other. When you are on your journeys, you carry the rings
[2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:9:2) on your shoulders, and your axle turns the
two wheels at once [3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:9:3).

10\. In their manly arms there are many good things, on their chests
golden chains [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:10:1), flaring
[2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:10:2) ornaments, on their shoulders speckled
deer-skins [3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:10:3), on their fellies sharp edges
[4](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:10:4); as birds spread their wings, they spread
out splendours behind.

11\. They, mighty by might, all-powerful powers
[1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:11:1), visible from afar like the heavens
[2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:11:2) with the stars, sweet-toned, soft-tongued
singers with their mouths [3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:11:3), the Maruts,
united with Indra, shout all around.

12\. This is your greatness [1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:12:1) O well-born
Maruts!—your bounty [3](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:12:3) extends far, as the
sway [2](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:12:2) of Aditi
[4](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:12:4). Not even [5](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:12:5)
Indra in his scorn [6](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:12:6) can injure that
bounty, on whatever man you have bestowed it for his good deeds.

13\. This is your kinship (with us), O Maruts, that you, immortals, in
former years have often protected the singer
[1](sbe3227.htm#an_1:166:13:1). Having through this prayer granted a
hearing to man, all these heroes together have become well-known by
their valiant deeds.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

14\. That we may long flourish, O Maruts, with your wealth, O ye racers,
that our men may spread in the camp, therefore let me achieve the rite
with these offerings.

15\. May this praise, O Maruts, this song of Mândârya, the son of Mâna,
the poet, ask you with food for offspring for ourselves! May we have an
invigorating autumn, with quickening rain!

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is ascribed to Agastya, the reputed son of Mitrâvaru*n*au, and
brother of Vasish*th*a. The metre in verses 1-13 is *G*agatî, in 14, 15
Trish*t*ubh. No verse of this hymn occurs in SV., VS., AV., TS., TB.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:166:1:1">1</span>. Rabhasá, an adjective of rábhas,
and this again from the root rabh, to rush upon a thing, â-rabh, to
begin a thing. From this root rabh we have the Latin robur, in the
general sense of strength, while in rabies the original meaning of
impetuous motion has been more clearly preserved. The Greek λάβρος, too,
as pointed out by Cowell, comes from this root. In the Vedic Sanskrit,
derivatives from the root rabh convey the meaning both of quickness and
of strength. Quickness in ancient languages frequently implies strength,
and strength implies quickness, as we see, for instance, from the German
snël, which, from meaning originally strong, comes to mean in modern
German quick, and quick only. The German bald again, meaning soon, comes
from the Gothic balths, the English bold. Thus we read:

I, 145, 3. *s*í*s*u*h* â´ adatta sám rábha*h*.

The child (Agni) acquired vigour.

Indra is called rabha*h*-dâ´*h*, giver of strength; and rabhasá,
vigorous, is applied not only to the Maruts, who in V, 58, 5, are called
rábhish*th*â*h*, the most vigorous, but also to Agni, II, 10, 4, and to
Indra, III, 31, 12.

In the sense of rabid, furious, it occurs in

X, 95, 14. ádha enam v*rí*kâ*h* rabhasâ´sa*h* adyú*h*.

May rabid wolves eat him!

In the next verse rabhasá, the epithet of the wolves, is replaced by
á*s*iva, which means unlucky, uncanny.

In our hymn rabhasá occurs once more, and is applied there, in verse 10,
to the a*ñg*í or glittering ornaments of the Maruts. Here Sâya*n*a
translates it by lovely, and it was most likely intended to convey the
idea of lively or brilliant splendour, though it may mean also strong.
See also IX, 96, 1.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

Note <span id="an_1:166:1:2">2</span>. Ketú, derived from an old root
ki, in Sanskrit *k*i, to perceive, from which also *k*itra, conspicuous,
ken-speckled, beautiful, means originally that by which a thing is
perceived or known, whether a sign, or a flag, or a herald. It is the
Gothic haidu, species. It then takes the more general sense of light and
splendour. In our passage, herald seems to me the most appropriate
rendering, though B. and R. prefer the sense of banner. The Maruts come
before Indra, they announce the arrival of Indra, they are the first of
his army.

Note <span id="an_1:166:1:3">3</span>. The real difficulty of our verse
lies in the two comparisons aidhâ´-iva and yudhâ´-iva. Neither of them
occurs again in the Rig-veda. B. and R. explain aidhâ´ as an
instrumental of aídh, flaming, or flame, and derive it from the root
idh, to kindle, with the preposition â. Professor Bollensen in his
excellent article Zur Herstellung des Veda (Orient and Occident, vol.
iii, p. 473) says: 'The analysis of the text given in the Pada, viz.
aidhâ´-iva and yudhâ´-iva, is contrary to all sense. The common
predicate is tavishâ´*n*i kartana, exercise your power, you roarers,
i. e. blow as if you meant to kindle the fire on the altar, show your
power as if you went to battle. We ought therefore to read aidhé va and
yudhé \| va. Both are infinitives, aidh is nothing but the root idh + â,
to kindle, to light.' Now this is certainly a very ingenious
explanation, but it rests on a supposition which I cannot consider as
proved, viz. that in the Veda, as in Pâli, the comparative particle iva
may be changed, as shown in the preface to the first edition, to va. It
must be admitted that the two short syllables of iva are occasionally
counted in the Veda as one, but yudhé-iva, though it might become yudhá
iva, would never in the Veda become yudhéva.

As yudhâ´ occurs frequently in the Veda, we may begin by admitting that
the parallel form aidh must be explained in analogy to yudhâ´. Now yúdh
is a verbal noun and means fighting. We have the accusative yúdham, I,
53, 7; the genitive yudhá*h*, VIII, 27, 17; the dative yudhé, I, 61, 13;
the locative yudhí, I, 8, 3; the instrumental yudhâ´, I, 53, 7, &c.;
loc. plur. yut-sú, I, 91, 21. As long as yúdh

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

retains the general predicative meaning of fighting, some of these cases
may be called infinitives. But yúdh soon assumes not only the meaning of
battle, battle-ground, but also of instrument of fighting, weapon. In
another passage, X, 103, 2, yúdha*h* may be taken as a vocative plural,
meaning fighters. Passages in which yúdh means clearly weapon, are, for
instance,

V, 52, 6. â´ rukmaí*h* â´ yudhâ´ nára*h* *ri*shvâ´*h* *ri*sh*t*î´*h*
as*ri*kshata.

With their bright chains, with their weapon, the tall men have stretched
forth the spears.

X, 55, 8. pîtvî´ sómasya divá*h* â´ v*ri*dhâná*h* *s*û´ra*h* ní*h*
yudhâ´ adhamat dásyûn.

The hero, growing, after drinking the Soma, blew away from the sky the
enemies with his weapon. See also X, 103, 4.

I therefore take yúdh in our passage also in the sense of weapon or
sword, and, in accordance with this, I assign to aídh the meaning of
torch. Whether aídh comes from idh with the preposition â, which, after
all, would only give edh, or whether we have in the Sanskrit aídh the
same peculiar strengthening which this very root shows in Greek and
Latin <span id="fr_108"></span>[a](#fn_99), would be difficult to
decide. The torch of the Maruts is the lightning, the weapon the
thunderbolt, and by both they manifest their strength; ferro et igne, as
Ludwig remarks.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: We proclaim eagerly, Maruts, your
ancient greatness, for (the sake of inducing) your prompt appearance, as
the indication of (the approach of) the showerer (of benefits).
Loud-roaring and mighty Maruts, you exert your vigorous energies for the
advance (to the sacrifice), as if it was to battle.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:166:2:1">1</span>. That úpa can be construed with
the accusative is clear from many passages:

III, 35, 2. úpa imám ya*gñ*ám â´ vahâta*h* índram.

Bring Indra to this sacrifice!

I, 25, 4. váya*h* ná vasatî´*h* úpa.

As birds (fly) to their nests.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Note <span id="an_1:166:2:2">2</span>. Nítya, from ni + tya <span
id="fr_109"></span>[a](#fn_100), means originally what is inside,
internus, then what is one's own; and is opposed to nísh*t*ya, from nis
+ tya, what is outside, strange, or hostile. Nítya has been well
compared with ni*g*á, literally eingeboren, then, like nítya, one's own.
What is inside, or in a thing or place, is its own, is peculiar to it,
does not move or change, and hence the secondary meanings of nítya,
one's own, unchanging, eternal. Thus we find nítya used in the sense of
internal or domestic:

I, 73, 4. tám tvâ nára*h* dáme â´ nítyam iddhám ágne sá*k*anta kshitíshu
dhruvâ´su.

Our men worshipped thee, O Agni, lighted within the house in safe
places.

This I believe to be a more appropriate rendering than if we take nítya
in the sense of always, continuously lighted, or, as some propose, in
the sense of eternal, everlasting.

VII, 1, 2. dakshâ´yya*h* yá*h* dáme â´sa nítya*h*.

Agni who is to be pleased within the house, i. e. as belonging to the
house, and, in that sense, who is to be pleased always. Cf. I, 140, 7;
141, 2; X, 12, 2, and III, 25, 5, where nítya*h*, however, may have been
intended as an adjective belonging to the vocative sûno.

Most frequently nítya occurs with sûnú, I, 66, 1; 185, 2; tánaya, III,
15, 2; X, 39, 14; toká, II, 2, 11; âpí, VII, 88, 6; páti, I, 71, 1, and
has always the meaning of one's own, very much like the later Sanskrit
ni*g*a, which never occurs in the Rig-veda, though it makes its
appearance in the Âtharva*n*a.

Nísh*t*ya, extraneus, occurs three times in the Rig-veda:

VI, 75, 19. yá*h* na*h* svá*h* ára*n*a*h* yá*h* *k*a nísh*t*ya*h*
*g*íghâ*m*sati.

Whoever wishes to hurt us, our own friend or a stranger from without.

X, 133, 5. yá*h* na*h* indra abhi-dâ´sati sá-nâbhi*h* yá*h* *k*a
nísh*t*ya*h*.

He who infests us, O Indra, whether a relative or a stranger.

VIII, I, 13. mâ´ bhûma nísh*t*yâ*h*-iva índra tvád ára*n*â*h*-iva.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

Let us not be like outsiders, O Indra, not like strangers to thee.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: Ever accepting the sweet
(libation), as (they would) a son, they sport playfully at sacrifices,
demolishing (all intruders).

<span class="smallcaps">Ludwig</span>: Wie einen nicht absterbenden Sohn
das Madhu bringend.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:166:4:1">1</span>. Ávyata, a Vedic second aorist of
vî (a*g*), to stir up, to excite. From it pravaya*n*a, a goad,
pra-vetar, a driver. The Greek οἶ-σ-τρος, gad-fly, has been referred to
the same root. See Fick, Wörterbuch, p. 170.

Roth (Wenzel, Instrumental, p. 54) translates: 'While you quickly throw
yourselves into the mists;' from a verb vyâ.

Note <span id="an_1:166:4:2">2</span>. Adhra*g*an, from dhra*g*, a root
which, by metathesis of aspiration, would assume the form of dra*gh* or
dragh. In Greek, the final medial aspirate being hardened, reacts on the
initial media, and changes it to t, as bâhu becomes πῆχυς, budh πυθ,
bandh, πενθ. This would give us τρεχ, the Greek root for running, Goth.
thrag-jan.

Note <span id="an_1:166:4:3">3</span>. Harmyá is used here as an
adjective of bhúvana, and can only mean living in houses. It does not,
however, occur again in the same sense, though it occurs several times
as a substantive, meaning house. Its original meaning is fire-pit, then
hearth, then house, a transition of meaning analogous to that of aedes.
Most of the ancient nations begin their kitchen with a fire-pit. ‘They
dig a hole in the ground, take a piece of the animal's raw hide, and
press it down with their hands close to the sides of the hole, which
thus becomes a sort of pot or basin. This they fill with water, and they
make a number of stones red-hot in a fire close by. The meat is put into
the water, and the stones dropped in till the meat is boiled. Catlin
describes the process as awkward and tedious, and says that since the
Assinaboins had learnt from the Mandans to make pottery, and had been
supplied with vessels by the traders, they had entirely done away the
custom, “excepting at public festivals; where they seem, like all others
of the human family, to take pleasure in cherishing and perpetuating

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

their ancient customs <span id="fr_110"></span>[a](#fn_101).”’ This pit
was called harmyá <span id="fr_111"></span>[b](#fn_102) or gharmá, which
is the Latin formus. Thus we read:

VII, 56, 16. té harmye-sthâ´*h* *s*í*s*ava*h* ná *s*ubhrâ´*h*.

The Maruts bright like boys standing by the hearth.

From meaning fire-pit, or hearth, harmyá afterwards takes the more
general sense of house:

VII, 55, 6. téshâm sám hanma*h* akshâ´*n*i yáthâ idám harmyám táthâ.

We shut their eyes as we shut this house (possibly, this oven).

VII, 76, 2. pratî*k*î´ â´ agât ádhi harmyébhya*h*.

The dawn comes near, over the house-tops.

X, 46, 3. *g*âtá*h* â´ harmyéshu.

Agni, born in the houses.

X, 73, 10. manyó*h* iyâya harmyéshu tasthau.

He came from Manyu, he remained in the houses.

In some of these passages harmyá might be taken in the sense of
householder; but as harmyá in VII, 55, 6, has clearly the meaning of a
building, it seems better not to assign to it unnecessarily any new
significations.

If harmya or \*harma meant originally a fire-pit, then a hearth, a
house, we see the close connection between harma and gharma, harmya and
gharmya. Thus by the side of harmyesh*th*a we find gharmyesh*th*a (RV.
X, 106, 5). We find gharma meaning, not only heat in general, but
fire-pit, hearth; and we find the same word used for what we should call
the pit, a place of torture and punishment from which the gods save
their worshippers, or into which they throw the evil-doers.

V, 32, 5. yûyutsantam támasi harmyé dhâ´*h*.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

When thou, Indra, hadst placed *S*ush*n*a, who was anxious to fight, in
the darkness of the pit.

In the next verse we find

asûryé támasi, in the ghastly darkness.

VIII, 5, 23. yuvám ká*n*vâya nâsatyâ ápi-riptâya harmyé *s*á*s*vat
ûtî´*h* da*s*asyatha*h*.

You, Nâsatyas, always grant your aid to Ka*n*va when thrown into the
pit.

This fiery pit into which Atri is thrown, and whence he, too, was saved
by the A*s*vins, is likewise called gharmá, I, 112, 7; 119, 6; VIII, 73,
3; X, 80, 3.

Lastly we find:

X, 114, 10. yadâ´ yamá*h* bhávati harmyé hitá*h*.

When Yama is seated in the house, or in the nether world.

When the Pitars, too, the spirits of the departed, the Manes, are called
gharma-sád, this is probably intended to mean, dwelling on the hearth
(X, 15, 9 and 10), and not dwelling in the abode of Yama.

Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. ii, p. 234: 'Die ihr die Luft erfüllt mit eurer
Kraft, hervorstürmt ihr selbst-gelenkten Laufes.'

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:166:5:1">1</span>. Nad certainly means to sound, and
the causative might be translated by 'to make cry or shriek.' If we took
párvata in the sense of cloud, we might translate, 'When you make the
clouds roar;' if we took párvata for mountain, we might, with Professor
Wilson, render the passage by 'When your brilliant coursers make the
mountains echo.' But nad, like other roots which afterwards take the
meaning of sounding, means originally to vibrate, to shake; and if we
compare analogous passages where nad occurs, we shall see that in our
verse, too, the Vedic poet undoubtedly meant nad to be taken in that
sense:

VIII, 20, 5. á*k*yutâ *k*it va*h* á*g*man â´ nâ´nadati párvatâsa*h*
vánaspáti*h*, bhû´mi*h* yâ´meshu re*g*ate.

At your racing even things that are immovable vibrate, the rocks, the
lord of the forest; the earth quivers on your ways. (See I, 37, 7, note
I.) Grassmann here translates nadáyanta by erschüttern, but in VIII, 20,
5 by erdröhnt.

Note <span id="an_1:166:5:2">2</span>. See I, 37, 7, note 1.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

Note <span id="an_1:166:5:3">3</span>. Rathiyántî-iva does not occur
again. Sâya*n*a explains it, like a woman who wishes for a chariot, or
who rides in a chariot. I join it with óshadhi, and take it in the sense
of upamânâd â*k*âre (Pâ*n*. III, 1, 10), i. e. to behave like or to be
like a chariot, whether the comparison is meant to express simply the
quickness of chariots or the whirling of their wheels. The Pada has
rathiyántî, whereas the more regular form is that of the Sa*m*hitâ,
rathîyántî. Cf. Prâti*s*âkhya, 587.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_1:166:6:1">1</span>. Su-*k*etúnâ, the instrumental of
su-*k*etú, kindness, good-mindedness, favour. This word occurs in the
instrumental only, and always refers to the kindness of the gods; not,
like sumatí, to the kindness of the worshipper also:

I, 79, 9. â´ na*h* agne su-*k*etúnâ rayím vi*s*vâ´yu-poshasam,
mâr*d*îkám dhehi *g*îváse.

Give us, O Agni, through thy favour wealth which supports our whole
life, give us grace to live.

I, 127, 11. sá*h* na*h* nédish*th*am dádri*s*âna*h* â´ bhara ágne
devébhi*h* sá-*k*anâ*h* su-*k*etúnâ mahá*h* râyá*h* su-*k*etûnâ.

Thou, O Agni, seen close to us, bring to us, in union with the gods, by
thy favour, great riches, by thy favour!

I, 159, 5. asmábhyam dyâvâp*ri*thivî (íti) su-*k*etúnâ rayím dhattam
vásu-mantam *s*ata-gvínam.

Give to us, O Dyâvâp*ri*thivî, by your favour, wealth, consisting of
treasures and many flocks.

V, 51, 11. svastí dyâvâp*ri*thivî (íti) su-*k*etúnâ.

Give us, O Dyâvâp*ri*thivî, happiness through your favour!

V, 64, 2. tâ´ bâhávâ su-*k*etúnâ prá yantam asmai ár*k*ate.

Stretch out your arms with kindness to this worshipper! In one passage
of the ninth Ma*nd*ala (IX, 65, 30) we meet with su-*k*etúnam, as an
accusative, referring to Soma, the gracious, and this would pre-suppose
a substantive *k*etúna, which, however, does not exist.

Note <span id="an_1:166:6:2">2</span>. Sumatí has, no doubt, in most
passages in the Rig-veda, the meaning of favour, the favour of the gods.
'Let us obtain your favour, let us be in your favour,' are familiar
expressions of the Vedic poets. But there are also numerous passages
where that meaning is inapplicable, and

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

where, as in our passage, we must translate sumatí by prayer or desire.

In the following passages sumatí is clearly used in its original sense
of favour, blessing, or even gift:

I, 73, 6 (7). su-matím bhíkshamâ*n*â*h*.

Begging for thy favour.

I, 171, 1. su-ukténa bhikshe su-matím turâ´*n*âm.

With a hymn I beg for the favour of the quick Maruts.

I, 114, 3. a*s*yâ´ma te su-matím.

May we obtain thy favour! Cf. I, 114, 9:

I, 114, 4. su-matím ít vayám asya â´ v*rin*îmahe.

We choose his favour. Cf. III, 33, 1.

I, 117, 23. sádâ kavî (íti) su-matím â´ *k*ake vâm.

I always desire your favour, O ye wise A*s*vins.

I, 156, 3. mahá*h* te vish*n*o (íti) su-matím bha*g*âmahe.

May we, O Vish*n*u, enjoy the favour of thee, the mighty!

Bhiksh, to beg, used above, is an old desiderative form of bha*g*, and
means to wish to enjoy.

III, 4, 1. su-matím râsi vásva*h*.

Thou grantest the favour of wealth.

VII, 39, 1. ûrdhvá*h* agní*h* su-matím vásva*h* a*s*ret.

The lighted fire went up for the favour of wealth. Cf. VII, 60, 11; IX,
97, 26.

III, 57, 6. váso (íti) râ´sva su-matím vi*s*vá-*g*anyâm.

Grant us, O Vasu, thy favour, which is glorious among men!

VII, 100, 2. tvâm vish*n*o (íti) su-matím vi*s*vá-*g*anyâm—dâ*h*.

Mayest thou, Vish*n*u, give thy favour, which is glorious among men!

X, 11, 7. yá*h* te agne su-matím márta*h* ákshat.

The mortal who obtained thy favour, O Agni.

II, 34, 15. arvâ´*k*î sâ´ maruta*h* yâ´ va*h* ûtí*h* ó (íti) sú
vâ*s*râ´-iva su-matí*h* *g*igâtu.

Your help, O Maruts, which is to usward, your favour may it come near,
like a cow!

VIII, 22, 4. asmâ´n á*kkh*a su-matí*h* vâm *s*ubha*h* patî (íti) â
dhenú*h*-iva dhâvatu.

May your favour, O A*s*vins, hasten towards us, like a cow!

But this meaning is by no means the invariable meaning of sumatí, and it
will easily be seen that, in the following

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

passages, the word must be translated by prayer. Thus when Sarasvatî is
called (I, 3, 11) *k*étantî su-matînâ´m, this can only mean she who
knows of the prayers, as before she is called *k*odayitrî´ sûn*rí*tânâm,
she who excites songs of praise:

I, 151, 7. á*kkh*a gíra*h* su-matím gantam asma-yû´ (íti).

Come towards the songs, towards the prayer, you who are longing for us.
Cf. X, 20, 10.

II, 43, 3. tûsh*n*î´m â´sîna*h* su-matím *k*ikiddhi na*h*.

Sitting quiet, listen, O *S*akuni (bird), to our prayer!

V, 1, 10. â´ bhándish*th*asya su-matím *k*ikiddhi.

Take notice of the prayer of thy best praiser! Cf. V, 33, I.

VII, 18, 4. â´ na*h* índra*h* su-matím gantu á*kkh*a.

May Indra come to our prayer!

VII, 31, 10. prá-*k*etase prá su-matím k*rin*udhvam.

Make a prayer for the wise god!

IX, 96, 2. su-matím yâti á*kkh*a.

He (Soma) goes near to the prayer.

X, 148, 3. rishî*n*âm vípra*h* su-matím *k*akâná*h*.

Thou, the wise, desiring the prayer of the *Ri*shis.

VIII, 22, 6. tâ´ vâm adyá sumatí-bhi*h* *s*ubha*h* patî (íti) á*s*vinâ
prá stuvîmahi.

Let us praise to-day the glorious A*s*vins with our prayers.

IX, 74, 1. tám îmahe su-matî´.

We implore him with prayer.

In our passage the verb pipartana, fill or fulfil, indicates in what
sense sumatí ought to be taken. Su-matím pipartana is no more than
kâ´mam pipartana, fulfil our desire! See VII, 62, 3. â´ na*h* kâ´mam
pûpurantu; I, 158, 2. kâmapré*n*a-iva mánasâ. On sumná, see Burnouf,
Études, p. 91, and Aufrecht, in Kuhn's Zeitschrift, vol. iv, p. 274.

Note <span id="an_1:166:6:3">3</span>. Krívi*h*-datî has been a crux to
ancient and modern interpreters. It is mentioned as a difficult word in
the Nigha*nt*u, and all that Yâska has to say is that it means possessed
of cutting teeth (Nir. VI, 30. krivirdatî vikartanadantî). Professor
Roth, in his note to this passage, says that krivi can never have the
meaning of well, which is ascribed to it in the Nigha*nt*u III, 23, but
seems rather to mean an animal, perhaps the wild boar, κάπρος, with
metathesis of v and r. He translates our passage: 'Where

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

your lightning with boar-teeth tears.' In his Dictionary, however, he
only says, 'krivis, perhaps the name of an animal, and dant, tooth.'
Sâya*n*a contents himself with explaining krívirdatî by
vikshepa*n*a*s*îladantî, having teeth that scatter about.

My own translation is founded on the supposition that krívis, the first
portion of krívirdatî, has nothing to do with krivi, but is a dialectic
variety of kravís, raw flesh, the Greek κρέας, Latin caro, cruor. It
means what is raw, bloody, or gory. From it the adjective krûra,
horrible, cruentus (Curtius, Grundzüge, p. 142; Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol.
ii, p. 235). A name of the goddess Durgâ in later Sanskrit is
krûradantî, and with a similar conception the lightning, I believe, is
here called krívirdatî, with gory teeth.

Note <span id="an_1:166:6:4">4</span>. It should be observed that in
rádati the simile of the teeth of the lightning is carried on. For
rádati may be supposed to have had in the Veda, too, the original
meaning of râdere and rôdere, to scratch, to gnaw. Rada and radana in
the later Sanskrit mean tooth. It is curious, however, that there is no
other passage in the Rig-veda where rad clearly means to bite. It means
to cut, in

I, 61, 12. gó*h* ná párva ví rada tira*sk*â´.

Cut his joint through, as the joint of an ox.

But in most passages where rad occurs in the Veda, it has the meaning of
giving. It is not the same which we have in the Zend râd, to give, and
which Justi rightly identifies with the root râdh. But rad, to divide,
may, like the German theilen in zutheilen, have taken the meaning of
giving. Greek δαίω means to divide, but yields δαίς, portion, meal, just
as Sanskrit day, to divide, yields dâyas, share, i. e. inheritance.

This meaning is evident in the following passages:

VII, 79, 4. tâ´vat usha*h* râ´dha*h* asmábhyam râsva yâ´vat
stot*rí*-bhya*h* árada*h* g*rin*ânâ´.

Grant us, Ushas, so much wealth as thou hast given to the singers, when
praised.

I, 116, 7. kakshî´vate aradatam púram-dhim.

You gave wisdom to Kakshîvat.

I, 169, 8. ráda marút-bhi*h* *s*urúdha*h* gó-agrâ*h*.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Give to the Maruts gifts, rich in cattle.

VII, 62, 3. ví na*h* sahásram *s*urúdha*h* radantu.

May they (the gods) give to us a thousand gifts!

I, 117, 11. vâ´*g*am víprâya—rádantâ.

Giving spoil to the sage!

VI, 61, 6. ráda pûshâ´-iva na*h* saním.

Give us, Sarasvatî, wealth, like Pûshan!

IX, 93, 4. rada índo (íti) rayím.

Give us, O Indra, wealth!

VII, 32, 18. rada-vaso (íti).

Indra, thou who givest wealth!

In many passages, however, this verb rad is connected with words meaning
way or path, and it then becomes a question whether it simply means to
grant a way, or to cut a way open for some one. In Zend, too, the same
idiom occurs, and Professor Justi explains it by 'prepare a way.' I
subjoin the principal passages:

VI, 30, 3. yát âbhya*h* árada*h* gâtúm indra.

That thou hast cut a way for them (the rivers). Cf. VII, 74, 4.

IV, 19, 2. prá vartanî´*h* arada*h* vi*s*vá-dhenâ*h*.

Thou (Indra) hast cut open the paths for all the cows.

X, 75, 2. prá te aradat váru*n*a*h* yâ´tave pathá*h*.

Varu*n*a cut the paths for thee to go.

VII, 87, 1. rádat pathá*h* váru*n*a*h* sû´ryâya.

Varu*n*a cut paths for Sûrya.

V, 80, 3. pathá*h* rádantî suvitâ´ya devî´.

She, the dawn, cutting open the paths for welfare.

VII, 60, 4. yásmai âdityâ´*h* ádhvana*h* rádanti.

For whom the Âdityas cut roads.

II, 30, 2. pathá*h* rádantî*h*—dhûnaya*h* yanti ártham.

Cutting their paths, the rivers go to their goal.

This last verse seems to show that the cutting open of a road is really
the idea expressed by rad in all these passages. And thus we find the
rivers themselves saying that Indra cut them out or delivered them:

III, 33, 6. índra*h* asmâ´n aradat vá*g*ra-bâhu*h*. Cf. X, 89, 7.

Note <span id="an_1:166:6:5">5</span>. Ri*n*â´ti, like the preceding
expressions krívirdatî and rádati, is not chosen at random, for though
it has the

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

general meaning of crushing or destroying, it is used by the Vedic poets
with special reference to the chewing or crunching by means of the
teeth. For instance,

I, 148, 4. purû´*n*i dasmá*h* ní ri*n*âti *g*ámbhai*h*.

Agni crunches many things with his jaws.

I, 127, 4. sthirâ´ *k*it ánnâ ní ri*n*âti ó*g*asâ.

Even tough morsels he (Agni) crunches fiercely. In a more general sense
we find it used,

V, 41, 10. *s*o*k*í*h*-ke*s*a*h* ní ri*n*âti vánâ.

Agni with flaming hair swallows or destroys the forests.

IV, 19, 3. áhim vá*g*re*n*a ví ri*n*â*h*.

Thou destroyedst Ahi with the thunderbolt.

X, 120, 1. sadyá*h* *g*a*gñ*âná*h* ní ri*n*âti *s*átrûn.

As soon as born he destroys his enemies.

Note <span id="an_1:166:6:6">6</span>. Súdhitâ-iva barhá*n*â. I think
the explanation of this phrase given by Sâya*n*a may be retained. He
explains súdhitâ by suhitâ, i. e. sush*th*u preritâ, well thrown, well
levelled, and barhá*n*â by hatis, tatsâdhanâ hetir vâ, a blow or its
instrument, a weapon. Professor Roth takes barhá*n*â as an instrumental,
used adverbially, in the sense of powerfully, but he does not explain in
what sense súdhitâ-iva ought then to be taken. We cannot well refer it
to didyút, lightning, on account of the iva, which requires something
that can form a simile of the lightning. Nor is su-dhitâ ever used as a
substantive so as to take the place of svádhitîva. Sú-dhita has
apparently many meanings, but they all centre in one common conception.
Sú-dhita means well placed, of a thing which is at rest, well arranged,
well ordered, secure; or it means well sent, well thrown, of a thing
which has been in motion. Applied to human beings, it means well
disposed or kind.

III, 23, 1. ní*h*-mathita*h* sú-dhita*h* â´ sadhá-sthe.

Agni produced by rubbing, and well placed in his abode.

VII, 42, 4. sú-prîta*h* agní*h* sú-dhita*h* dáme â´.

Agni, who is cherished and well placed in the house.

III, 29, 2. ará*n*yo*h* ní-hita*h* gâtá-vedâ*h* gárbha*h*-iva
sú-dhita*h* garbhí*n*îshu.

Agni placed in the two fire-sticks, well placed like an embryo in the
mothers. Cf. X, 27, 16.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

VIII, 60, 4. abhí práyâ*m*si sú-dhitâ â´ vaso (íti) gahi.

Come, O Vasu, to these well-placed offerings. Cf. I, 135, 4; VI, 15, 15;
X, 53, 2.

X, 70, 8. sû-dhitâ havî´*m*shi.

The well-placed offerings.

IV, 2, 10 (adhvarám). VII, 7, 3 (barhí*h*).

As applied to â´yus, life, súdhita may be translated by well
established, safe:

II, 27, 10. a*s*yâ´ma â´yû*m*shi sú-dhitâni pû´rvâ.

May we obtain the happy long lives of our forefathers.

IV, 50, 8. sá*h* ít ksheti sú-dhita*h* ókasi své.

That man dwells secure in his own house.

Applied to a missile weapon, súdhita may mean well placed, as it were,
well shouldered, well held, before it is thrown; or well levelled, well
aimed, when it is thrown:

I, 167, 3. mimyáksha yéshu sú-dhitâ—*ri*sh*t*í*h*.

To whom the well held spear sticks fast.

VI, 33, 3. tvám tâ´n indra ubháyân amítrân dâ´sâ v*ri*trâ´*n*i â´ryâ
*k*a *s*ûra, vádhî*h* vánâ-iva sú-dhitebhi*h* átkai*h*.

Thou, Indra, O hero, struckest both enemies, the barbarous and the Aryan
fiends, like forests with well-aimed weapons.

Applied to a poem, súdhita means well arranged or perfect:

I, 140, 11. idám agne sú-dhitam dú*h*-dhitât ádhi priyâ´t û*m* (íti)
*k*it mánmana*h* préya*h* astu te.

May this perfect prayer be more agreeable to thee than an imperfect one,
though thou likest it.

VII, 32, 13. mántram ákharvam sú-dhitam. A poem, not mean, well
contrived.

As applied to men, súdhita means very much the same as hitá, well
disposed, kind:

IV, 6, 7. ádha mitrá*h* ná sú-dhita*h* pâvaká*h* agní*h* dîdâya
mâ´nushîshu vikshú.

Then, like a kind friend, Agni shone among the children of man.

V, 3, 2. mitrám sú-dhitam.

VI, 15, 2. mitrám ná yám sú-dhitam.

VIII, 23, 8. mitrám ná *g*áne sú-dhitam *ri*tá-vani.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

X, 115, 7. mitrâ´sa*h* ná yé sú-dhitâ*h*.

At last sú-dhita, without reference to human beings, takes the general
sense of kind, good:

III, 11, 8. pári ví*s*vâni sú-dhitâ agné*h* a*s*yâma mánma-bhi*h*.

May we obtain through our prayers all the goods of Agni.

Here, however, práyâ*m*si may have to be supplied, and in that case this
passage, too, should be classed with those mentioned above, VIII, 60, 4,
&c.

If then we consider that súdhita, as applied to weapons, means well held
or well aimed, we can hardly doubt that barhá*n*â is here, as Sâya*n*a
says, some kind of weapon. I should derive it from barhayati, to crush,
which we have, for instance,

I, 133, 5. pi*s*áṅga-bh*ri*sh*t*im ambhri*n*ám pisâ´*k*im indra sám
m*rin*a, sárvam ráksha*h* ní barhaya.

Pound together the fearful Pi*s*â*k*i with his fiery weapons, strike
down every Rakshas.

II, 23, 8. b*rí*haspate deva-nída*h* ní barhaya.

B*ri*haspati strike down the scoffers of the gods. Cf. VI, 61, 3.

Barhá*n*â would therefore mean a weapon intended to crush an enemy, a
block of stone, it may be, or a heavy club, and in that sense barhá*n*â
occurs at least once more:

VIII, 63, 7. yát pâ´*ñk*a-*g*anyayâ vi*s*â´ índre ghóshâ*h*
ás*ri*kshata, ást*rin*ât barhá*n*â vipá*h*.

When shouts have been sent up to Indra by the people of the five clans,
then the club scattered the spears; or, then he scattered the spears
with his club.

In other passages Professor Roth is no doubt right when he assigns to
barhá*n*â an adverbial meaning, but I do not think that this meaning
would be appropriate in our verse. Grassmann also translates, 'ein
wohlgezielter Pfeil.'

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_1:166:7:1">1</span>. Alât*rin*â´sa*h*, a word which
occurs but once more, and which had evidently become unintelligible even
at the

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

time of Yâska. He (Nir. VI, 2) explains it by alamâtardano megha*h*, the
cloud which opens easily. This, at least, is the translation given by
Professor Roth, though not without hesitation. Alamâtardana*h*, as a
compound, is explained by the commentator as âtardanaparyâpta*h*, alam
âtardayitum udakam, i. e. capable of letting off the water. But
Devarâ*g*aya*g*van explains it differently. He says: alam paryâptam
âtardanam hi*m*sâ yasya, bahûdakatvâ*kkh*abalo megho vi*s*eshyate, i. e.
whose injuring is great; the dark cloud is so called because it contains
much water. Sâya*n*a. too, attempts several explanations. In III, 30,
10, he seems to derive it from t*ri*h, to kill, not, like Yâska, from
t*ri*d, and he explains its meaning as the cloud which is exceedingly
hurt by reason of its holding so much water. In our passage he explains
it either as anât*rin*a, free from injury, or good hurters of enemies,
or good givers of rewards.

From all this I am afraid we gain nothing. Let us now see what modern
commentators have proposed in order to discover an appropriate meaning
in this word. Professor Roth suggests that the word may be derived from
râ, to give, and the suffix t*rin*a, and the negative particle, thus
meaning, one who does not give or yield anything. But, if so, how is
this adjective applicable to the Maruts, who in this very verse are
praised for their generosity? Langlois in our passage translates,
'heureux de nos louanges;' in III, 30, 10, qui laissait flétrir les
plantes.' Wilson in our passage translates, 'devoid of malevolence;' but
in III, 30, 10, 'heavy.'

I do not pretend to solve all these difficulties, but I may say this in
defence of my own explanation that it fulfils the condition of being
applicable both to the Maruts and to the demon Bala. The suffix t*rin*a
is certainly irregular, and I should much prefer to write alât*rin*a,
for in that case we might derive lâtrin from lâtra, and to this lâtra,
i. e. râtra, I. should ascribe the sense of barking. The root rai or râ
means to bark, and has been connected by Professor Aufrecht with Latin
rire, inrire, and possibly inritare <span
id="fr_112"></span>[a](#fn_103),

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

thus showing a transition of meaning from barking, to provoking or
attacking. The same root râ explains also the Latin lâtrare, to bark,
allatrare, to assail; and, whatever ancient etymologists may say to the
contrary, the Latin latro, an assailer. The old derivation 'latrones eos
antiqui dicebant, qui conducti militabant, ἀπὸ τῆς λατρείας,' seems to
me one of those etymologies in which the scholars of Rome, who had
learnt a little Greek, delighted as much as scholars who know a little
Sanskrit delight in finding some plausible derivation for any Greek or
Latin word in Sanskrit. I know that Curtius (Grundzüge, p. 326) and
Corssen (Kritische Nachträge, p. 239) take a different view; but a
foreign word, derived from λάτρον, pay, hire, would never have proved so
fertile as latro has been in Latin.

If then we could write alâtri*n*â´sa*h*, we should have an appropriate
epithet of the Maruts, in the sense of not assailing or not reviling, in
fact, free from malevolence, as Wilson translated the word, or rather
Sâya*n*a's explanation of it, âtardanarahita. What gives me some
confidence in this explanation is this, that it is equally applicable to
the other passage where alât*rin*a occurs, III, 30, 10:

alât*rin*á*h* valá*h* indra vra*g*á*h* gó*h* purâ´ hánto*h* bháyamâna*h*
ví âra.

Without barking did Vala, the keeper of the cow, full of tear, open,
before thou struckest him.

If it should be objected that vra*g*á means always stable, and is not
used again in the sense of keeper, one might reply that vra*g*á*h*, in
the nom. sing., occurs in this one single passage only, and that
bháyamâna*h*, fearing, clearly implies a personification. Otherwise, one
might translate: 'Vala was quiet, O Indra, and the stable of the cow
came open, full of fear, before thou struckest.' The meaning of
alât*rin*á would remain the same, the not-barking being here used as a
sign that Indra's enemy was cowed, and no longer inclined to revile or
defy the power of Indra. Hom. hymn. in Merc. 145, οὐδὲ κύνες λελάκοντο.

Note <span id="an_1:166:7:2">2</span>. See I, 38, 15, note 1, page
[95](sbe3219.htm#page_95).

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_1:166:8:1">1</span>. Abhí-hruti seems to have the
meaning of assault, injury, insult. It occurs but once, but abhí-hrut, a
feminine substantive with the same meaning, occurs several times. The
verb hru, which is not mentioned in the Dhâtupâ*th*a, but has been
identified with hvar, occurs in our hymn, verse 12:

I, 128, 5. sá*h* na*h* trâsate du*h*-itâ´t abhi-hrúta*h* *s*á*m*sât
aghâ´t abhi-hrúta*h*.

He protects us from evil, from assault, from evil speaking, from
assault.

X, 63, 11. trâ´yadhvam na*h* du*h*-évâyâ*h* abhi-hrúta*h*.

Protect us from mischievous injury!

I, 189, 6. abhi-hrútâm ási hí deva vishpá*t*.

For thou, god, art the deliverer from all assaults. Vishpá*t*,
deliverer, from vi and spa*s*, to bind.

Ví-hruta, which occurs twice, means evidently what has been injured or
spoiled:

VIII, 1, 12. íshkartâ ví-hrutam púnar (iti).

He who sets right what has been injured. Cf. VIII, 20, 26.

Ávi-hruta again clearly means uninjured, intact, entire:

V, 66, 2. tâ´ hí kshatrám ávi-hrutam—â´*s*âte.

For they both have obtained uninjured power.

X, 170, 1. â´yu*h* dádhat ya*gñ*á-patau ávi-hrutam.

Giving uninjured life to the lord of the sacrifice.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_1:166:9:1">1</span>. Tavishá certainly means strength,
and that it is used in the plural in the sense of acts of strength, we
can see from the first verse of our hymn and other passages. But when we
read that tavishâ´*n*i are placed on the chariots of the Maruts, just as
before bhadrâ´, good things, food, &c., are mentioned, it is clear that
so abstract a meaning as strength or powers would not be applicable
here. We might take it in the modern sense of forces, i. e. your armies,
your companions are on your chariots, striving with each other; but as
the word is a neuter, weapons, as the means

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

of strength, seemed a preferable rendering. As to mithasp*ri*dhya, see
I, 119, 3, [p. 164](sbe3224.htm#page_164).

Note <span id="an_1:166:9:2">2</span>. The rendering of this passage
must depend on the question whether the khâdís, whatever they are, can
be carried on the shoulders or not. We saw before ([p.
120](sbe3221.htm#page_120)) that khâdís were used both as ornaments and
as weapons, and that, when used as weapons, they were most likely rings
or quoits with sharp edges. There is at least one other passage where
these khâdís are said to be worn on the shoulders:

VII, 56, 13. á*m*seshu â´ maruta*h* khâdáya*h* va*h* váksha*h*-su
rukmâ´*h* upa-*s*i*s*riyâ*n*â´*h*.

On your shoulders are the quoits, on your chests the golden chains are
fastened.

In other places the khâdís are said to be in the hands, hásteshu, but
this would only show that they are there when actually used for
fighting. Thus we read:

I, 168, 3. â´ eshâm á*m*seshu rambhínî-iva rarabhe, hásteshu khâdí*h*
*k*a k*ri*tí*h* *k*a sám dadhe.

To their shoulders there clings as if a clinging wife, in their hands
the quoit is held and the dagger.

In V, 58, 2, the Maruts are called khâ´di-hasta, holding the quoits in
their hands. There is one passage which was mentioned before ([p.
112](sbe3221.htm#page_112)), where the khâdís are said to be on the feet
of the Maruts, and on the strength of this passage Professor Roth
proposes to alter prá-patheshu to prá-padeshu, and to translate, 'The
khâdís are on your forefeet.' I do not think this emendation necessary.
Though we do not know the exact shape and character of the khâdí, we
know that it was a weapon, most likely a ring, occasionally used for
ornament, and carried along either on the feet or on the shoulders, but
in actual battle held in the hand. The weapon which Vish*n*u holds in
one of his right hands, the so-called *k*akra, may be the modern
representation of the ancient khâdí. What, however, is quite certain is
this, that khâdí in the Veda never means food, as Sâya*n*a optionally
interprets it. This interpretation is accepted by Wilson, who
translates, 'At your resting-places on the road refreshments (are
ready).' Nay, he

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

goes on in a note to use this passage as a proof of the advanced
civilisation of India at the time of the Vedic *Ri*shis. 'The
expression,' he says, 'is worthy of note, as indicating the existence of
accommodations for the use of travellers: the prapatha is the choltri of
the south of India, the sarái of the Mohammedans, a place by the
road-side where the travellers may find shelter and provisions.'

Note <span id="an_1:166:9:3">3</span>. This last passage shows that the
poet is really representing to himself the Maruts as on their journey,
and he therefore adds, 'your axle turns the two (IV, 30, 2) wheels
together,' which probably means no more than, 'your chariot is going
smoothly or quickly.' Though the expression seems to us hardly correct,
yet one can well imagine how the axle was supposed to turn the wheels as
the horses were drawing the axle, and the axle acted on the wheels.
Anyhow, no other translation seems possible. Samáyâ in the Veda means
together, at once, and is the Greek (ὁμῇ, generally ὁμοῦ or ὁμῶς, the
Latin simul. Cf. I, 56, 6; 73, 6; 113, 10; 163, 3; VII, 66, 15; IX, 75,
4; 85, 5; 97, 56.

V*ri*t means to turn, and is frequently used with reference to the
wheels:

VIII, 46, 23. dá*s*a *s*yâvâ´*h*—nemím ní vav*ri*tu*h*.

The ten black horses turn down the felly or the wheel.

IV, 30, 2. satrâ´ te ánu k*ri*sh*t*áya*h* ví*s*vâ*h* *k*akrâ´-iva
vav*ri*tu*h*.

All men turn always round thee, like wheels.

That the Âtmanepada of v*ri*t may be used in an active sense we see from

I, 191, 15. táta*h* vishám prá vav*ri*te.

I turn the poison out from here.

All the words used in this sentence are very old words, and we can with
few exceptions turn them into Greek or Latin. In Latin we should have
axis vos(ter) circos simul divertit. In Greek ἄξων ὑ(μῶν) κύκλω ὁμῇ …

##### Verse 10.

Note <span id="an_1:166:10:1">1</span>. See I, 64, 4, note 1, page
[111](sbe3221.htm#page_111).

Note <span id="an_1:166:10:2">2</span>. See I, 166, 1, note 1, page
[212](#page_212).

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

Note <span id="an_1:166:10:3">3</span>. On éta in the sense of fallow
deer, or, it may be, antelope, see I, 165, 5, note 2, page
[196](sbe3226.htm#page_196).

Éta originally means variegated, and thus becomes a name of any speckled
deer, it being difficult to say what exact species is meant. Sâya*n*a in
our passage explains étâ*h* by *s*uklavar*n*â mâlâ*h*, many-coloured
wreaths or chains, which may be right. Yet the suggestion of Professor
Roth that étâ*h*, deer, stands here for the skins of fallow deer, is
certainly more poetical, and quite in accordance with the Vedic idiom,
which uses, for instance, go, cow, not only in the sense of milk,—that
is done even in more homely English,—but also for leather, and thong. It
is likewise in accordance with what we know of the earliest dress of the
Vedic Indians, that deer-skins should here be mentioned. We learn from
Â*s*valâyana's G*ri*hya-sûtras, of which we now possess an excellent
edition by Professor Stenzler, and a reprint of the text and commentary
by Râma Nârâya*n*a Vidyâratna, in the Bibliotheca Indica, that a boy
when he was brought to his tutor, i. e. from the eighth to possibly the
twenty-fourth year, had to be well combed, and attired in a new dress. A
Brâhma*n*a should wear the skin of an antelope (ai*n*eya), the Kshatriya
the skin of a deer (raurava), the Vai*s*ya the skin of a goat (â*g*a).
If they wore dresses, that of the Brâhma*n*a should be dark red
(kâshâya), that of the Kshatriya bright red (mâ*ñg*ish*th*a), that of
the Vai*s*ya yellow (hâridra). The girdle of the Brâhma*n*a should be of
Mu*ñg*a grass, that of the Kshatriya a bow-string, that of the Vai*s*ya
made of sheep's wool. The same regulations occur in other Sûtras, as,
for instance, the Dharma-sûtras of the Âpastambîyas and Gautamas, though
there are certain characteristic differences in each, which may be due
either to local or to chronological causes. Thus according to the
Âpastambîya-sûtras, which have been published by Professor Bühler, the
Brâhma*n*a may wear the skin of the hari*n*a deer, or that of the
antelope (ai*n*eyam), but the latter must be from the black antelope
(k*ri*sh*n*am), and, a proviso is added, that if a man wears the black
antelope skin, he must never spread it out to sit or sleep on it. As
materials for the dress, Âpastamba

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

allows *s*a*n*a, hemp <span id="fr_113"></span>[a](#fn_104), or kshumâ,
flax, and he adds that woollen dresses are allowed to all castes, as
well as the kambala (masc.), which seems to be any cloth made of
vegetable substances (darbhâdinirmitam *k*îram kambalam). He then adds a
curious remark, which would seem to show

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

that the Brâhma*n*as preferred skins, and the Kshatriyas clothes, for he
says that those who wish well to the Brâhma*n*as should wear a*g*ina,
skins, and those who wish well to the Kshatriyas should wear vastra,
clothes, and those who wish well to both should wear both, but, in that
case, the skin should always form the outer garment. The Dharma-sûtras
of the Gautamas, which were published in India, prescribe likewise for
the Brâhma*n*a the black antelope skin, and allow clothes of hemp or
linen (*s*â*n*akshauma*k*îra) as well as kutapas (woollen cloth) for
all. What is new among the Gautamas is, that they add the kârpâsa, the
cotton dress, which is important as showing an early knowledge of this
manufacture. The kârpâsa dress occurs once more as a present to be given
to the Potar priest (Â*s*v. *S*rauta-sûtras IX, 4), and was evidently
considered as a valuable present, taking precedence of the kshaumî or
linen dress. It is provided that the cotton dress should not be dyed,
for this, I suppose, is the meaning of avik*ri*ta. Immediately after,
however, it is said, that some authorities say the dress should be dyed
red (kâshâyam apy eke), the very expression which occurred in Âpastamba,
and that, in that case, the red for the Brâhma*n*a's dress should be
taken from the bark of trees (vârksha). Manu, who here, as elsewhere,
simply paraphrases the ancient Sûtras, says, II, 41:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

kârsh*n*arauravabâstâni *k*armâ*n*i brahma*k*âri*n*a*h*  
vasîrann ânupûrvye*n*a *s*â*n*akshaumâvikâni *k*a.

</div>

'Let Brahma*k*ârins wear (as outer garments) the skins of the black
antelope, the deer, the goat, (as under garments) dresses of hemp, flax,
and sheep's wool, in the order of the three castes.'

The Sanskrit name for a dressed skin is a*g*ina, a word which does not
occur in the Rig-Veda, but which, if Bopp is right in deriving it from
a*g*á, goat, as αἰγίς from αἴξ, would have meant originally, not skin in
general, but a goat-skin. The skins of the éta, here ascribed to the
Maruts, would be identical with the ai*n*eya, which Â*s*valâyana
ascribes to the Brâhma*n*a, not, as we should expect, to the Kshatriya,
if, as has been supposed, ai*n*eya is derived from ena, which is a
secondary form, particularly in the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

feminine enî, of eta. There is, however, another word, e*d*a, a kind of
sheep, which, but for Festus, might be haedus, and by its side e*n*a, a
kind of antelope. These two forms pre-suppose an earlier er*n*a or
ar*n*a, and point therefore in a different direction, though hardly to
ἄρνες.

Note <span id="an_1:166:10:4">4</span>. I translate kshurá by sharp
edges, but it might have been translated literally by razors, for,
strange as it may sound, razors were known, not only during the Vedic
period, but even previous to the Aryan separation. The Sanskrit kshurá
is the Greek ξυρός or ξυρόν. In the Veda we have clear allusions to
shaving:

X, 142, 4. yadâ´ te vâ´ta*h* anu-vâ´ti *s*o*k*í*h*, váptâ-iva *s*má*s*ru
vapasi prá bhû´ma.

When the wind blows after thy blast, then thou shavest the earth as a
barber shaves the beard. Cf. I, 65, 4.

If, as B. and R. suggest, vaptar, barber, is connected with the more
modern name for barber in Sanskrit, viz. nâpita. we should have to admit
a root svap, in the sense of tearing or pulling, vellere, from which we
might derive the Vedic svapû´ (VII, 56, 3), beak. Corresponding to this
we find in Old High-German snabul, beak, (schnepfe, snipe,) and in Old
Norse nef. The Anglo-Saxon neb means mouth and nose, while in modern
English neb or nib is used for the bill or beak of a bird <span
id="fr_114"></span>[a](#fn_105). Another derivation of nâpita, proposed
by Professor Weber (Kuhn's Beiträge, vol. i, p. 505), who takes nâpita
as a dialectic form of snâpitar, balneator, or lavator, might be
admitted if it could be proved that in India also the barber was at the
same time a balneator. Burnouf, Lotus, p. 452, translating from the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta, mentions among the different professions of the
people those of 'portier,' 'barbier,' and 'baigneur.'

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_1:166:11:1">1</span>. Ví-bhûtaya*h* is properly a
substantive, meaning

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

power, but, like other substantives <span
id="fr_115"></span>[a](#fn_106), and particularly substantives with
prepositions, it can be used as an adjective, and is, in fact, more
frequently used as an adjective than as a substantive. In English we may
translate it by power. It is a substantive,

I, 8, 9. evá hí te ví-bhûtaya*h* ûtáya*h* indra mâ´-vate sadyá*h* *k*it
sánti dâ*s*úshe.

For indeed thy powers, O Indra, are at once shelters for a sacrificer,
like me.

But it is an adjective,

I, 30, 5. ví-bhûti*h* astu sûn*rí*tâ.

May the prayer be powerful.

VI, 17, 4. mahâ´m ánûnam tavásam ví-bhûtim matsarâ´sa*h*
*g*arh*ri*shanta pra-sáham.

The sweet draughts of Soma delighted the great, the perfect, the strong,
the powerful, the unyielding Indra. Cf. VIII, 49, 6; 50, 6.

Vibhvã*h*, with the Svarita on the last syllable, has to be pronounced
vibhúà*h*. In III, 6, 9, we find vi-bháva*h*.

Note <span id="an_1:166:11:2">2</span>. See I, 87, 1, note 1, page
[160](sbe3224.htm#page_160).

Note <span id="an_1:166:11:3">3</span>. See I, 6, 5, note 1, page
[41](sbe3216.htm#page_41).

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_1:166:12:1">1</span>. Mahi-tvanám, greatness, is
formed by the suffix tvaná, which Professor Aufrecht has identified with
the Greek σύνη (συνον); see Kuhn's Zeitschrift, vol. i, p. 482. The
origin of this suffix has been explained by Professor Benfey, ibid. vol.
vii, p. 120, who traces it back to the suffix tvan, for instance,
i-tvan, goer, in prâta*h*-ítvâ = prâta*h*-yâ´vâ.

Note <span id="an_1:166:12:2">2</span>. Vratá is one of the many words
which, though we may perceive their one central idea, and their original
purport, we have to translate by various terms in order to make them
intelligible in every passage where they occur. Vratá (from v*ri*,
v*rin*oti), I believe, meant originally what is enclosed, protected, set
apart, the Greek νομός:

1\. V, 46, 7. yâ´*h* pâ´rthivâsa*h* yâ´*h* apâ´m ápi vraté tâ´*h* na*h*
devî*h* su-havâ*h* *s*árma ya*kkh*ata.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

O ye gracious goddesses, who are on the earth or in the realm of the
waters, grant us your protection!

Here vratá is used like v*rig*ána, see I, 165, 15, note 3, page
[208](sbe3226.htm#page_208).

X, 114, 2. tâ´sâm ní *k*ikyu*h* kaváya*h* ni-dâ´nam páreshu yâ´*h*
gúhyeshu vratéshu.

The poets discovered their (the Nir*ri*tis’) origin, who are in the far
hidden chambers.

I, 163, 3. ási tritá*h* gúhyena vraténa.

Thou art Trita within the hidden place, or with the secret work.

Dr. Muir sent me another passage:

III, 54, 5. dád*ris*re eshâm avamâ´ sádâ*m*si páreshu yâ´ gúhyeshu
vratéshu.

2\. Vratá means what is fenced off or forbidden, what is determined,
what is settled, and hence, like dhárman, law, ordinance. Vârayati means
to prohibit. In this sense vratá occurs very frequently:

I, 25, 1. yát *k*it hí te ví*s*a*h* yathâ prá deva varu*n*a vratám,
minîmási dyávi-dyavi.

Whatever law of thine we break, O Varu*n*a, day by day, men as we are.

II, 8, 3. yásya vratám ni mî´yate.

Whose law is not broken.

III, 32, 8. índrasya kárma sú-k*ri*tâ purû´*n*i vratâ´ni devâ´*h* ná
minanti ví*s*ve.

The deeds of Indra are well done and many, all the gods do not break his
laws, or do not injure his ordinances.

II, 24, 12. ví*s*vam satyám maghavânâ yuvó*h* ít â´pa*h* *k*aná prá
minanti vratám vâm.

All that is yours, O powerful gods, is true; even the waters do not
break your law.

II, 38, 7. náki*h* asya tâ´ni vratâ´ devásya savitú*h* minanti.

No one breaks these laws of this god Savitar. Cf. II, 38, 9.

I, 92, 12. áminatî daívyâni vratâ´ni.

Not injuring the divine ordinances. Cf. I, 124, 2.

X, 12, 5. kát asya áti vratám *k*akrima.

Which of his laws have we overstepped?

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

VIII, 25, 16. tásya vratâ´ni ánu va*h* *k*arâmasi.

His ordinances we follow.

X, 33, 9. ná devâ´nâm áti vratám *s*ati-âtmâ *k*aná *g*îvati.

No one lives beyond the statute of the gods, even if he had a hundred
lives.

VII, 5, 4. táva tri-dhâ´tu p*ri*thivî´ utá dyaú*h* vaí*s*vânara vratám
agne sa*k*anta.

The earth and the sky followed thy threefold law, O Agni Vai*s*vânara.

VII, 87, 7. yá*h* m*ril*áyâti *k*akrúshe *k*it â´ga*h* vayám syâma
váru*n*e ánâgâ*h*, ánu vratâ´ni ádite*h* *ri*dhánta*h*.

Let us be sinless before Varu*n*a, who is gracious even to him who has
committed sin, performing the laws of Aditi!

II, 28, 8. náma*h* purâ´ te varu*n*a utá nûnám utá aparám tuvi-*g*âta
bravâma, tvé hí kam párvate ná *s*ritâ´ni ápra*k*yutâni du*h*-dabha
vratâ´ni.

Formerly, and now, and also in future let us give praise to thee, O
Varu*n*a; for in thee, O unconquerable, all laws are grounded, immovable
as on a rock.

A very frequent expression is ánu vratám, according to the command of a
god, II, 38, 3; 6; VIII, 40, 8; or simply ánu vratám, according to law
and order:

I, 136, 5. tám aryamâ´ abhí rakshati *rig*u-yántam ánu vratám.

Aryaman protects him who acts uprightly according to law.

Cf. III, 61, 1; IV, 13, 2; V, 69, 1.

3\. The laws or ordinances or institutions of the gods are sometimes
taken for the sacrifices which are supposed to be enjoined by the gods,
and the performance of which is, in a certain sense, the performance of
the divine will.

I, 93, 8. yá*h* agnî´shómâ havíshâ saparyâ´t devadrî´*k*â mánasâ yá*h*
gh*ri*téna, tásya vratám rakshatam pâtám á*m*hasa*h*.

He who worships Agni and Soma with oblations, with a godly mind, or with
an offering, protect his sacrifice, shield him from evil!

I, 31, 2. tvám agne prathamá*h* áṅgira*h*-tama*h* kaví*h* devâ´nâm pári
bhûshasi vratám.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

Agni, the first and wisest of poets, thou performest the sacrifice of
the gods.

III, 3, 9. tásya vratâ´ni bhûri-poshí*n*a*h* vayám úpa bhûshema dáme â´
suv*ri*ktí-bhi*h*.

Let us, who possess much wealth, perform with prayers the sacrifices of
Agni within our house.

In another acceptation the vratas of the gods are what they perform and
establish themselves, their own deeds:

III, 6, 5. vratâ´ te agne mahatá*h* mahâ´ni táva krátvâ ródasî (íti) â´
tatantha.

The deeds of thee, the great Agni, are great, by thy power thou hast
stretched out heaven and earth.

VIII, 42, 1. ástabhnât dyâ´m ásura*h* vi*s*vá-vedâ*h* ámimîta
varimâ´*n*am p*ri*thivyâ´*h*, a asîdat ví*s*vâ bhúvanâni sam-râ´*t*
ví*s*vâ ít tâ´ni váru*n*asya vratâ´ni.

The wise spirit established the sky, and made the width of the earth, as
king he approached all beings,—all these are the works of Varu*n*a.

VI, 14, 3. tû´rvanta*h* dásyum âyáva*h* vrataí*h* sî´kshanta*h* avratám.

Men fight the fiend, trying to overcome by their deeds him who performs
no sacrifices; or, the lawless enemy.

Lastly, vratá comes to mean sway, power, or work, and the expression
vraté táva signifies, at thy command, under thy auspices:

I, 24, 15. átha vayám âditya vraté táva ánâgasa*h* áditaye syâma.

Then, O Âditya, under thy auspices may we be guiltless before Aditi.

VI, 54, 9. pû´shan táva vraté vayám ni rishyema kádâ *k*aná.

O Pûshan, may we never fail under thy protection.

X, 36, 13. ye savitû*h* satyá-savasya ví*s*ve mitrásya vraté váru*n*asya
devâ´*h*.

All the gods who are in the power of Savitar, Mitra, and Varu*n*a.

V, 83, 5. yásya vraté p*ri*thivî´ námnamîti yásya vraté *s*aphá-vat
*g*árbhurîti, yásya vraté óshadhî*h* vi*s*vá-rûpâ*h* sá*h* na*h*
par*g*anya máhi *s*árma ya*kkh*a.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

At whose bidding the earth bows down, at whose bidding hoofed animals
run about, at whose bidding the plants assume all shapes, mayest thou, O
Par*g*anya, yield us great protection!

Note <span id="an_1:166:12:3">3</span>. Dâtrá, if derived from dâ, would
mean gift, and that meaning is certainly the most applicable in some
passages where it occurs:

IX, 97, 55. ási bhága*h* ási dâtrásya dâtâ´.

Thou art Bhaga, thou art the giver of the gift.

In other passages, too, particularly in those where the verb dâ or some
similar verb occurs in the same verse, it can hardly be doubted that the
poet took dâtrá, like dátra or dáttra, in the sense of gift, bounty,
largess:

I, 116, 6. yám a*s*vinâ dadáthu*h* *s*vetám á*s*vam—tát vâm dâtrám máhi
kîrtényam bhût.

The white horse, O A*s*vins, which you gave, that your gift was great
and to be praised.

I, 185, 3. anehá*h* dâtrám ádite*h* anarvám huvé.

I call for the unrivalled, the uninjured bounty of Aditi.

VII, 56, 21. mâ´ va*h* dâtrâ´t maruta*h* ní*h* arâma.

May we not fall away from your bounty, O Maruts!

III, 54, 16. yuvám hí sthá*h* rayi-daú na*h* rayî*n*â´m dâtrám
rakshethe.

For you, Nâsatyas, are our givers of riches, you protect the gift.

VI, 20, 7. *rig*í*s*vane dâtrám dâ*s*úshe dâ*h*.

To Ri*g*i*s*van, the giver, thou givest the gift.

VIII, 43, 33. tát te sahasva îmahe dâtrám yát ná upadásyati, tvát agne
vâ´ryam vásu.

We ask thee, strong hero, for the gift which does not perish; we ask
from thee the precious wealth.

X, 69, 4. dâtrám rakshasva yát idám te asmé (íti).

Protect this gift of thine which thou hast given to us.

VIII, 44, 18. î´*s*ishe vâ´ryasya hí dâtrásya agne svã*h*-pati*h*.

For thou, O Agni, lord of heaven, art the master of the precious gift.
Cf. IV, 38, 1.

Professor Roth considers that dâtrá is derived rather from dâ, to
divide, and that it means share, lot, possession. But there is not a
single passage where the meaning of gift or

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

bounty does not answer all purposes. In VII, 56, 21, mâ´ va*h* dâtrâ´t
maruta*h* ní*h* arâma, is surely best translated by, 'let us not fall
away from your bounty,' and in our own passage the same meaning should
be assigned to dâtrá. The idea of dâtrá, bounty, is by no means
incompatible with vratá, realm, dominion, sway, if we consider that the
sphere within which the bounty of a king or a god is exercised and
accepted, is in one sense his realm. What the poet therefore says in our
passage is simply this, that the bounty of the Maruts extends as far as
the realm of Aditi, i. e. is endless, or extends everywhere, Aditi being
in its original conception the deity of the unbounded world beyond, the
earliest attempt at expressing the Infinite.

As to dâ´tra occurring once with the accent on the first syllable in the
sense of sickle, see M. M., 'Über eine Stelle in Yâska's Commentar zum
Naigha*nt*uka,' Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,
1853, vol. vii, P. 375.

VIII, 78, 10. táva ít indra ahám â-*s*ásâ háste dâ´tram *k*aná â´ dade.

Trusting in thee alone, O Indra, I take the sickle in my hand.

This dâ´tra, sickle, is derived from do, to cut.

Aditi, the Infinite.

Note <span id="an_1:166:12:4">4</span>. Aditi, an ancient god or
goddess, is in reality the earliest name invented to express the
Infinite; not the Infinite as the result of a long process of abstract
reasoning, but the visible Infinite, visible, as it were, to the naked
eye, the endless expanse beyond the earth, beyond the clouds, beyond the
sky. That was called A-diti, the un-bound, the un-bounded; one might
almost say, but for fear of misunderstandings, the Absolute, for it is
derived from diti, bond, and the negative particle, and meant therefore
originally what is free from bonds of any kind, whether of space or
time, free from physical weakness, free from moral guilt. Such a
conception became of necessity a being, a person, a god. To us such a
name and such a conception seem decidedly modern, and to find in the
Veda Aditi, the

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Infinite, as the
mother of the principal gods, is certainly, at first sight, startling.
But the fact is that the thoughts of primitive humanity were not only
different from our thoughts, but different also from what we think their
thoughts ought to have been. The poets of the Veda indulged freely in
theogonic speculations, without being frightened by any contradictions.
They knew of Indra as the greatest of gods, they knew of Agni as the god
of gods, they knew of Varu*n*a as the ruler of all, but they were by no
means startled at the idea that their Indra had a mother, or that their
Agni was born like a babe from the friction of two fire-sticks, or that
Varu*n*a and his brother Mitra were nursed in the lap of Aditi. Some
poet would take hold o the idea of an unbounded power, of Aditi,
originally without any reference to other gods. Very soon these ideas
met, and, without any misgivings, either the gods were made subordinate
to, and represented as the sons of Aditi, or where Indra was to be
praised as supreme, Aditi was represented as doing him homage.

VIII, 12, 14. utá sva-râ*g*e áditi*h* stómam índrâya *g*î*g*anat.

And Aditi produced a hymn for Indra, the king.

Here Professor Roth takes Aditi as an epithet of Agni, not as the name
of the goddess Aditi, while Dr. Muir rightly takes it in the latter
sense, and likewise retains stómam instead of sómam, as printed by
Professor Aufrecht. Cf. VII, 38, 4.

The idea of the Infinite, as I have tried to show elsewhere, was most
powerfully impressed on the awakening mind, or, as we now say, was
revealed, by the East <span id="fr_116"></span>[a](#fn_107). ‘It is
impossible to enter fully into all the thoughts and feelings that passed
through the minds of the early poets when they formed names for that
far, far East from whence even the early dawn, the sun, the day, their
own life, seemed to spring. A new life flashed up every morning before
their eyes, and the fresh breezes of the dawn reached them like
greetings from the distant lands beyond the mountains, beyond the
clouds, beyond the dawn, beyond “the immortal

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

sea which brought us hither.” The dawn seemed to them to open golden
gates for the sun to pass in triumph, and while those gates were open,
their eyes and their mind strove in their childish way to pierce beyond
the limits of this finite world. That silent aspect awakened in the
human mind the conception of the Infinite, the Immortal, the Divine.’
Aditi is a name for that distant East, but Aditi is more than the dawn.
Aditi is beyond the dawn, and in one place (I, 113, 19) the dawn is
called 'the face of Aditi,' áditer ánîkam. Thus we read:

V, 62, 8. híra*n*ya-rûpam ushása*h* ví-ush*t*au áya*h*-sthû*n*am út-itâ
sû´ryasya, â´ rohatha*h* varu*n*a mitra gártam áta*h* *k*akshâthe (íti)
áditim dítim h.

Mitra and Varu*n*a, you mount your chariot, which is golden, when the
dawn bursts forth, and has iron poles at the setting of the sun: from
thence you see Aditi and Diti, i. e. what is yonder and what is here.

If we keep this original conception of Aditi clearly before our mind,
the various forms which Aditi assumes, even in the hymns of the Veda,
will not seem incoherent. Aditi is not a prominent deity in the Veda,
she is celebrated rather in her sons, the Âdityas, than in her own
person. While there are so many hymns addressed to Ushas, the dawn, or
Indra, or Agni, or Savitar, there is but one hymn, X, 72, which from our
point of view, though not from that of Indian theologians, might be
called a hymn to Aditi. Nevertheless Aditi is a familiar name; a name of
the past, whether in time or in thought only, and a name that lives on
in the name of the Âdityas, the sons of Aditi, including the principal
deities of the Veda.

Aditi and the Âdityas.

Thus we read:

I, 107, 2. ûpa na*h* devâ´*h* ávasâ â´ gamantu áṅgirasâm sâ´ma-bhi*h*
stûyámânâ*h*, índra*h* indriyaí*h* marûta*h* marút-bhi*h* âdityaí*h*
na*h* áditi*h* *s*árma ya*m*sat.

May the gods come to us with their help, praised by the songs of the
Aṅgiras,—Indra with his powers, the Maruts with the storms, may Aditi
with the Âdityas give us protection!

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

X, 66, 3. índra*h* vásu-bhi*h* pári pâtu na*h* gáyam âdityaí*h* na*h*
áditi*h* *s*árma ya*kkh*atu, rudrá*h* rudrébhi*h* devá*h* m*ril*ayâti
na*h* tvásh*t*â na*h* gnâ´bhi*h* suvitâ´ya *g*invatu.

May Indra with the Vasus watch our house, may Aditi with the Âdityas
give us protection, may the divine Rudra with the Rudras have mercy upon
us, may Tvash*t*ar with the mothers bring us to happiness!

III, 54, 20. âdityaí*h* nah áditi*h* *srin*otu yá*kkh*antu na*h*
marûta*h* *s*árma bhadrám.

May Aditi with the Âdityas hear us, may the Maruts give us good
protection!

In another passage Varu*n*a takes the place of Aditi as the leader of
the Âdityas:

VII, 35, 6. *s*ám na*h* índra*h* vásu-bhi*h* devá*h* astu *s*ám
âdityébhi*h* váru*n*a*h* su-*s*á*m*sa*h*, *s*ám na*h* rudrá*h*
rudrébhi*h* *g*álâsha*h* *s*ám na*h* tvásh*t*â gnâ´bhi*h* ihá *srin*otu.

May Indra bless us, the god with the Vasus! May Varu*n*a, the glorious,
bless us with the Âdityas! May the relieving Rudra with the Rudras bless
us! May Tvash*t*ar with the mothers kindly hear us here!

Even in passages where the poet seems to profess an exclusive worship of
Aditi, as in

V, 69, 3. prâtá*h* devî´m áditim *g*ohavîmi madhyándine út-itâ
sû´ryasya,

I invoke the divine Aditi early in the morning, at noon, and at the
setting of the sun,

Mitra and Varu*n*a, her principal sons, are mentioned immediately after,
and implored, like her, to bestow blessings on their worshipper.

Her exclusive worship appears once, in VIII, 19, 14.

A very frequent expression is that of âdityâ´*h* áditi*h* without any
copula, to signify the Âdityas and Aditi:

IV, 25, 3. ká*h* devâ´nâm áva*h* adyá v*rin*îte ká*h* âdityâ´n áditim
*g*yóti*h* î*tt*e.

Who does choose now the protection of the gods? Who asks the Âdityas,
Aditi, for their light?

VI, 51, 5. ví*s*ve âdityâ*h* adite sa-*g*óshâ*h* asmábhyam *s*árma
bahulám ví yanta.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

All ye Âdityas, Aditi together, grant to us your manifold protection!

X, 39, 11. ná tám râ*g*ânau adite kúta*h* *k*aná ná á*m*ha*h* a*s*noti
du*h*-itám náki*h* bhayám.

O ye two kings (the A*s*vins), Aditi, no evil reaches him from anywhere,
no misfortune, no fear (whom you protect). Cf. VII, 66, 6.

X, 63, 5. tâ´n â´ vivâsa námasâ suv*ri*ktí-bhi*h* mahá*h* âdityâ´n
áditim svastáye.

I cherish them with worship and with hymns, the great Âdityas, Aditi,
for happiness' sake.

X, 63, 17. evá platé*h* sûnú*h* avîv*ri*dhat va*h* ví*s*ve âdityâ*h*
adite manîshî´.

The wise son of Plati magnified you, all ye Âdityas, Aditi!

X, 65, 9. par*g*ányâvâ´tâ v*ri*shabhâ´ purîshí*n*â indravâyû´ (íti)
váru*n*a*h* mitrá*h* aryamâ´, devâ´n âdityâ´n áditim havâmahe yé
pâ´rthivâsa*h* divyâ´sa*h* ap-sú yé.

There are Par*g*anya and Vâta, the powerful, the givers of rain, Indra
and Vâyu, Varu*n*a, Mitra, Aryaman, we call the divine Âdityas, Aditi,
those who dwell on the earth, in heaven, in the waters.

We may not be justified in saying that there ever was a period in the
history of the religious thought of India, a period preceding the
worship of the Âdityas, when Aditi, the Infinite, was worshipped, though
to the sage who first coined this name, it expressed, no doubt, for a
time the principal, if not the only object of his faith and worship.

Aditi and Daksha.

Soon, however, the same mental process which led on later speculators
from the earth to the elephant, and from the elephant to the tortoise,
led the Vedic poets beyond Aditi, the Infinite. There was something
beyond that Infinite which for a time they had grasped by the name of
Aditi, and this, whether intentionally or by a mere accident of
language, they called dáksha, literally power or the powerful. All this,
no doubt, sounds strikingly modern, yet, though the passages in which
this dáksha is mentioned are few in number, I should not venture to

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

say that they are necessarily modern, even if by modern we mean only
later than 1000 <span class="smallcaps">b.c.</span> Nothing can bring
the perplexity of the ancient mind, if once drawn into this vortex of
speculation, more clearly before us than if we read:

X, 72, 4-5. âdite*h* dáksha*h* a*g*âyata dákshât û*m* (íti) áditi*h*
pári,—áditi*h* hí á*g*anish*t*a dáksha yâ´ duhitâ´ táva, tâ´m devâ´*h*
ánu a*g*âyanta bhadrâ´*h* am*rí*ta-bandhava*h*.

Daksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi from Daksha. For Aditi was born, O
Daksha, she who is thy daughter; after her the gods were born, the
blessed, who share in immortality.

Or, in more mythological language:

X, 64, 5. dákshasya vâ adite *g*ánmani vraté râ´*g*ânâ mitrâ´-váru*n*â
â´ vivâsasi.

Or thou, O Aditi, nursest in the birthplace of Daksha the two kings,
Mitra and Varu*n*a.

Nay, even this does not suffice. There is something again beyond Aditi
and Daksha, and one poet says:

X, 5, 7. ásat *k*a sát *k*a paramé ví-oman dákshasya *g*ánman ádite*h*
upá-sthe.

Not-being and Being are in the highest heaven, in the birthplace of
Daksha, in the lap of Aditi.

At last something like a theogony, though full of contradictions, was
imagined, and in the same hymn from which we have already quoted, the
poet says:

X, 72, 1-4. devâ´nâm nú vayám *g*â´nâ prá vo*k*âma vipanyáyâ, ukthéshu
*s*asyámâneshu yá*h* (yát?) pá*s*yât ut-tare yugé. 1.

bráhma*n*a*h* páti*h* etâ´ sám karmâ´ra*h*-iva adhamat, devâ´nâm pûrvyé
yugé ásata*h* sát a*g*âyata. 2.

devâ´nâm yugé prathamé ásata*h* sát a*g*âyata, tát â´*s*â*h* ánu
a*g*âyanta tát uttâná-pada*h* pári. 3.

bhû´*h* *g*a*gñ*e uttâná-pada*h* bhuvá*h* â´*s*â*h* a*g*âyanta, ádite*h*
dáksha*h* a*g*âyata, dákshât û*m* (íti) áditi*h* pári. 4.

1\. Let us now with praise proclaim the births of the gods, that a man
may see them in a future age, whenever these hymns are sung.

2\. Brahma*n*aspati <span id="fr_117"></span>[a](#fn_108) blew them
together like a smith (with

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

his bellows); in a former age of the gods, Being was born from
Not-being.

3\. In the first age of the gods, Being was born from Not-being, after
it were born the Regions (space), from them Uttânapada;

4\. From Uttânapad the Earth was born, the Regions were born from the
Earth. Daksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi from Daksha.

The ideas of Being and Not-being (τὸ ὄν and τὸ μὴ ὄν) are familiar to
the Hindus from a very early time in their intellectual growth, and they
can only have been the result of abstract speculation. Therefore dáksha,
too, in the sense of power or potentia, may have been a metaphysical
conception. But it may also have been suggested by a mere accident of
language, a never-failing source of ancient thoughts. The name
dáksha-pitara*h*, an epithet of the gods, has generally been translated
by 'those who have Daksha for their father.' But it may have been used
originally in a very different sense. Professor Roth has, I think,
convincingly proved that this epithet dáksha-pitar, as given to certain
gods, does not mean, the gods who have Daksha for their father, but that
it had originally the simpler meaning of fathers of strength, or, as he
translates it, 'preserving, possessing, granting faculties <span
id="fr_118"></span>[a](#fn_109).' This is particularly clear in one
passage:

III, 27, 9. bhûtâ´nâm gárbham â´ dadhe, dákshasya, pitáram.

I place Agni, the source of all beings, the father of strength …

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

After this we can hardly hesitate how to translate the next verse:

VI, 50, 2. su-*g*yótisha*h*—dáksha-pit*rî*n—devâ´n.

The resplendent gods, the fathers of strength.

It may seem more doubtful, when we come to gods like Mitra and Varu*n*a,
whom we are so much accustomed to regard as Âdityas, or sons of Aditi,
and who therefore, according to the theogony mentioned before, would
have the best claim to the name of sons of Daksha; yet here, too, the
original and simple meaning is preferable; nay, it is most likely that
from passages like this, the later explanation, which makes Mitra and
Varu*n*a the sons of Daksha, may have sprung.

VII, 66, 2. yâ´—su-dákshâ dáksha-pitarâ.

Mitra and Varu*n*a, who are of good strength, the fathers of strength.

Lastly, even men may claim this name; for, unless we change the accent,
we must translate:

VIII, 63, 10. avasyáva*h* yushmâ´bhi*h* dáksha-pitara*h*.

We suppliants, being, through your aid, fathers of strength.

But whatever view we take, whether we take dáksha in the sense of power,
as a personification of a philosophical conception, or as the result of
a mythological misunderstanding occasioned by the name of dáksha-pitar,
the fact remains that in certain hymns of the Rig-veda (VIII, 25, 5)
Dáksha, like Aditi, has become a divine person, and has retained his
place as one of the Âdityas to the very latest time of Purâ*n*ic
tradition.

Aditi in her Cosmic Character.

But to return to Aditi. Let us look upon her as the Infinite
personified, and most passages, even those where she is presented as a
subordinate deity, will become intelligible.

Aditi, in her cosmic character, is the Beyond, the unbounded realm
beyond earth, sky, and heaven, and originally she was distinct from the
sky, the earth, and the ocean. Aditi is mentioned by the side of heaven
and earth, which

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

shows that, though in more general language she may be identified with
heaven and earth in their unlimited character, her original conception
was different. This we see in passages where different deities or powers
are invoked together, particularly if they are invoked together in the
same verse, and where Aditi holds a separate place by the side of heaven
and earth:

I, 94, 16 (final). tát na*h* mitrá*h* váru*n*a*h* mamahantâm áditi*h*
síndhu*h* p*ri*thivî´ utá dyaú*h*.

May Mitra and Varu*n*a grant us this, may Aditi, Sindhu (sea), the
Earth, and the Sky!

In other passages, too, where Aditi has assumed a more personal
character, she still holds her own by the side of heaven and earth; cf.
IX, 97, 58 (final):

I, 191, 6. dyaû*h* va*h* pitâ´ p*ri*thivî´ mâtâ´ sóma*h* bhrâ´tâ
áditi*h* svásâ.

The Sky is your father, the Earth your mother, Soma your brother, Aditi
your sister.

VIII, 101, 15. mâtâ´ rudrâ´*n*âm duhitâ´ vásûnâm svásâ âdityâ´nâm
am*rí*tasya nâ´bhi*h*, prá nú vo*k*am *k*ikitúshe *g*ánâya mâ´ gâ´m
ánâgâm áditim vadhish*t*a.

The mother of the Rudras, the daughter of the Vasus, the sister of the
Âdityas, the source of immortality, I tell it forth to the man of
understanding, may he not offend the cow, the guiltless Aditi! Cf. I,
153, 3; IX, 96, 15; Vâ*g*asan. Sa*m*hitâ XIII, 49.

VI, 51, 5. dyaũ*h* pítar (íti) p*rí*thivi mâ´ta*h* ádhruk ágne bhrâta*h*
vasava*h* m*ril*áta na*h*, ví*s*ve âdityâ*h* adite sa-*g*óshâ*h*
asmábhyam *s*árma bahulám vi yanta.

Sky, father, Earth, kind mother, Fire, brother, bright gods, have mercy
upon us! All Âdityas (and) Aditi together, grant us your manifold
protection!

X, 63, 10. su-trâ´mâ*n*am p*ri*thivî´m dyâ´m anehásam su*s*ármâ*n*am
áditim su-pránîtim, daívîm nâ´vam su-aritrâ´m ánâgasam ásravantîm â´
ruhema svastáye.

Let us for welfare step into the divine boat, with good oars, faultless
and leakless—the well-protecting Earth, the peerless Sky, the
sheltering, well-guiding Aditi!

X, 66, 4. áditi*h* dyâ´vâp*ri*thivî´ (íti).

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

Aditi, and Heaven and Earth.

Where two or more verses come together, the fact that Aditi is mentioned
by the side of Heaven and Earth may seem less convincing, because in
these Nivids or long strings of invocations different names or
representatives of one and the same power are not unfrequently put
together. For instance,

X, 36, 1-3. ushásânáktâ b*ri*hatî´ (íti) su-pé*s*asâ dyâ´vâkshâ´mâ
váru*n*a*h* mitrá*h* aryamâ´, índram huve marúta*h* párvatân apá*h*
âdityâ´n dyâ´vâp*ri*thivî´ (íti) apá*h* svãr (íti svã*h*). 1.

dyaú*h* *k*a na*h* p*ri*thivî´ *k*a prá-*k*etasâ *ri*távarî (íty
ritávarî) rakshatâm á*m*hasa*h* rishá*h*, mâ´ du*h*-vidátrâ
ní*h*-*ri*ti*h* na*h* î*s*ata tát devâ´nâm áva*h* adyá v*rin*îmahe. 2.

ví*s*vasmât na*h* áditi*h* pâtu á*m*hasa*h* mâtâ´ mitrásya váru*n*asya
reváta*h* svã*h*-vat *g*yóti*h* av*ri*kám na*s*îmahi. 3.

1\. There are the grand and beautiful Morning and Night, Heaven and
Earth, Varu*n*a, Mitra, Aryaman; I call Indra, the Maruts, the Waters,
the Âdityas, Heaven and Earth, the Waters, the Heaven.

2\. May Heaven and Earth, the provident, the righteous, preserve us from
sin and mischief! May the malevolent Nir*ri*ti not rule over us! This
blessing of the gods we ask for to-day.

3\. May Aditi protect us from all sin, the mother of Mitra and of the
rich Varu*n*a! May we obtain heavenly light without enemies! This
blessing of the gods we ask for to-day.

Here we cannot but admit that Dyâ´vâkshâ´mâ, heaven and earth, is meant
for the same divine couple as Dyâ´vâp*ri*thivî´, heaven and earth,
although under slightly differing names they are invoked separately. The
waters are invoked twice in the same verse and under the same name; nor
is there any indication that, as in other passages, the waters of the
sky are meant as distinct from the waters of the sea. Nevertheless even
here, Aditi, who in the third verse is called distinctly the mother of
Mitra and Varu*n*a, cannot well have been meant for the same deity as
Heaven and Earth, mentioned in the second verse; and the author of

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

these two verses, while asking the same blessing from both, must have
been aware of the original independent character of Aditi.

Aditi as Mother.

In this character of a deity of the far East, of an Orient in the true
sense of the word, Aditi was naturally thought of as the mother of
certain gods, particularly of those that were connected with the daily
rising and setting of the sun. If it was asked whence comes the dawn, or
the sun, or whence come day and night, or Mitra and Varu*n*a, or any of
the bright, solar, eastern deities, the natural answer was that they
come from the Orient, that they are the sons of Aditi. Thus we read in

IX, 74, 3. urvî´ gávyûti*h* ádite*h* *ri*tám yaté.

Wide is the space for him who goes on the right path of Aditi.

In VIII, 25, 3, we are told that Aditi bore Mitra and Varu*n*a, and
these in verse 5 are called the sons of Daksha (power), and the
grandsons of *S*avas, which again means might: nápâtâ *s*ávasa*h*
maná*h* sûnû´ (íti) dákshasya su-krátû (íti). In X, 36, 3, Aditi is
called the mother of Mitra and Varu*n*a; likewise in X, 132, 6; see also
VI, 67, 4. In VIII, 47, 9, Aditi is called the mother of Mitra, Aryaman,
Varu*n*a, who in VII, 60, 5 are called her sons. In X, 11, 1, Varu*n*a
is called yahvá*h* ádite*h*, the son of Aditi (cf. VIII, 19, 12); in
VII, 41, 2, Bhaga is mentioned as her son. In X, 72, 8, we hear of eight
sons of Aditi, but it is added that she approached the gods with seven
sons only, and that the eighth (mârtâ*nd*á, addled egg) was thrown away:
ash*t*aú putrâ´sa*h* ádite*h* yé *g*âtâ´*h* tanvã*h* pári, devâ´n úpa
prá ait saptá-bhi*h* párâ mârtâ*nd*ám âsyat.

In X, 63, 2, the gods in general are represented as born from Aditi, the
waters, and the earth: yé sthá *g*âtâ´*h* ádite*h* at-bhyá*h* pári yé
p*ri*thivyâ´*h* té me ihá *s*ruta hávam.

You who are born of Aditi, from the water, you who are born of the
earth, hear ye all my call!

The number seven, with regard to the Âdityas, occurs also in

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

IX, 114, 3. saptá dí*s*a*h* nâ´nâ-sûryâ*h* saptá hótâra*h*
*ri*tví*g*a*h*, devâ´*h* âdityâ´*h* yé saptá tébhi*h* soma abhí raksha
na*h*.

There are seven regions with their different suns, there are seven
Hotars as priests, those who are the seven gods, the Âdityas, with them,
O Soma, protect us!

The Seven Âdityas.

This number of seven Âdityas requires an explanation. To say that seven
is a solemn or sacred number is to say very little, for however solemn
or sacred that number may be elsewhere, it is not more sacred than any
other number in the Veda. The often-mentioned seven rivers have a real
geographical foundation, like the seven hills of Rome. The seven flames
or treasures of Agni (V, 1, 5) and of Soma and Rudra (VI, 74, I), the
seven paridhis or logs at certain sacrifices (X, 90, 15), the seven
Harits or horses of the sun, the seven Hotar priests (III, 7, 7; 10, 4),
the seven cities of the enemy destroyed by Indra (I, 63, 7), and even
the seven *Ri*shis (X, 82, 2; 109, 4), all these do not prove that the
number of seven was more sacred than the number of one or three or five
or ten used in the Veda in a very similar way. With regard to the seven
Âdityas, however, we are still able to see that their number of seven or
eight had something to do with solar movements. If their number had
always been eight, we should feel inclined to trace the number of the
Âdityas back to the eight regions, or the eight cardinal points of the
heaven. Thus we read:

I, 35, 8. ash*t*aú ví akhyat kakúbha*h* p*ri*thivyâ´*h*.

The god Savitar lighted up the eight points of the earth (not the eight
hills).

But we have seen already that though the number of Âdityas was
originally supposed to have been eight, it was reduced to seven, and
this could hardly be said in any sense of the eight points of the
compass. Cf. Taitt. Âr. I, 7, 6.

As we cannot think in ancient India of the seven planets, I can only
suggest the seven days or tithis of the four parvans of the lunar month
as a possible prototype of the

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Âdityas. This
might even explain the destruction of the eighth Âditya, considering
that the eighth day of each parvan, owing to its uncertainty, might be
represented as exposed to decay and destruction. This would explain such
passages as,

IV, 7, 5. yá*g*ish*th*am saptá dhâ´ma-bhi*h*.

Agni, most worthy of sacrifice in the seven stations.

IX, 102, 2. ya*gñ*ásya saptá dhâ´ma-bhi*h*.

In the seven stations of the sacrifice.

The seven threads of the sacrifice may have the same origin:

II, 5, 2. â´ yásmin saptá ra*s*máya*h* tatâ´*h* ya*gñ*ásya netári,
manushvát daívyam ash*t*amám.

In whom, as the leader of the sacrifice, the seven threads are stretched
out,—the eighth divine being is manlike (?).

The sacrifice itself is called, X, 124, 1, saptá-tantu, having seven
threads.

X, 122, 3. saptá dhâ´mâni pari-yán ámartya*h*.

Agni, the immortal, who goes round the seven stations.

X, 8, 4. usháh-usha*h* hí vaso (íti) ágram éshi tvám yamáyo*h* abhava*h*
vi-bhâ´vâ, *ri*tâ´ya saptá dadhishe padâ´ni *g*anáyan mitrám tanvẽ
svâ´yai.

For thou, Vasu (Agni), comest first every morning, thou art the
illuminator of the twins (day and night). Thou holdest the seven places
for the sacrifice, creating Mitra (the sun) for thy own body.

X, 5, 6. saptá maryâ´dâ*h* kaváya*h* tatakshu*h* tâ´sâm ékâm ít abhí
a*m*hurá*h* gât.

The sages established the seven divisions, but mischief befell one of
them.

I, 22, 16. áta*h* devâ´*h* avantu na*h* yáta*h* vísh*n*u*h* vi-*k*akramé
p*ri*thivyâ´*h* saptá dhâ´ma-bhi*h*.

May the gods protect us from whence Vish*n*u strode forth, by the seven
stations of the earth!

Even the names of the seven or eight Âdityas are not definitely known,
at least not from the hymns of the Rig-veda. In II, 27, 1, we have a
list of six names: Mitrá, Aryamán, Bhága, Váru*n*a, Dáksha, Á*ms*a*h*.
These with Aditi would give us seven. In VI, 50, 1, we have Áditi,

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Váru*n*a, Mitrá,
Agní, Aryamán, Savitár, and Bhága. In I, 89, 3, Bhága, Mitrá, Áditi,
Dáksha, Aryamán, Váru*n*a, Sóma, A*s*vínâ, and Sárasvatî are invoked
together with an old invocation, pû´rvayâ ni-vídâ. In the
Taittirîya-âra*n*yaka, I, 13, 3, we find the following list: 1. Mitra,
2. Varu*n*a, 3. Dhâtar, 4. Aryaman, 5. A*ms*a, 6. Bhaga, 7. Indra, 8.
Vivasvat, but there, too, the eighth son is said to be Mârtâ*nd*a, or,
according to the commentator, Âditya.

The character of Aditi as the mother of certain gods is also indicated
by some of her epithets, such as râ´*g*a-putrâ, having kings for her
sons; su-putrâ´, having good sons; ugrá-putrâ, having terrible sons:

II, 27, 7. pípartu na*h* áditi*h* râ´*g*a-putrâ áti dvéshâ*m*si aryamâ´
su-gébhi*h*, b*ri*hát mitrásya váru*n*asya *s*árma úpa syâma
puru-vî´râ*h* árish*t*â*h*.

May Aditi with her royal sons, may Aryaman carry us on easy roads across
the hatreds; may we with many sons and without hurt obtain the great
protection of Mitra and Varu*n*a!

III, 4, 11. barhí*h* na*h* âstâm áditi*h* su-putrâ´.

May Aditi with her excellent sons sit on our sacred pile!

VIII, 67, 11. párshi dîné gabhîré â´ úgra-putre *g*íghâ*m*sata*h*,
mâ´ki*h* tokásya na*h* rishat.

Protect us, O goddess with terrible sons, from the enemy in shallow or
deep water, and no one will hurt our offspring!

Aditi identified with other Deities.

Aditi, however, for the very reason that she was originally intended for
the Infinite, for something beyond the visible world, was liable to be
identified with a number of finite deities which might all be
represented as resting on Aditi, as participating in Aditi, as being
Aditi. Thus we read:

I, 89, 10 (final). áditi*h* dyaû*h* áditi*h* antáriksham áditi*h* mâtâ´
sá*h* pitâ´ sá*h* putrá*h*, ví*s*ve devâ´*h* áditi*h* pá*ñk*a *g*ánâ*h*
áditi*h* *g*âtám áditi*h* *g*áni-tvam.

Aditi is the heaven, Aditi the sky, Aditi the mother, the

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

father, the son. All the gods are Aditi, the five clans, the past is
Aditi, Aditi is the future.

But although Aditi may thus be said to be everything, heaven, sky, and
all the gods, no passage occurs, in the Rig-veda at least, where the
special meaning of heaven or earth is expressed by Aditi. In X, 63, 3,
where Aditi seems to mean sky, we shall see that it ought to be taken as
a masculine, either in the sense of Âditya, or as an epithet, unbounded,
immortal. In I, 72, 9, we ought probably to read p*ri*thvî´ and
pronounce p*ri*thuvî´, and translate 'the wide Aditi, the mother with
her sons;' and not, as Benfey does, 'the Earth, the eternal mother.'

It is more difficult to determine whether in one passage Aditi has not
been used in the sense of life after life, or as the name of the place
whither people went after death, or of the deity presiding over that
place. In a well-known hymn, supposed to have been uttered by
*S*una*hs*epa when on the point of being sacrificed by his own father,
the following verse occurs:

I, 24, 1. ká*h* na*h* mahyaí áditaye púna*h* dât, pitáram *k*a
d*ris*éyam mâtáram *k*a.

Who will give us back to the great Aditi, that I may see father and
mother?

As the supposed utterer of this hymn is still among the living, Aditi
can hardly be taken in the sense of earth, nor would the wish to see
father and mother be intelligible in the mouth of one who is going to he
sacrificed by his own father. If we discard the story of *S*una*hs*epa,
and take the hymn as uttered by any poet who craves for the protection
of the gods in the presence of danger and death, then we may choose
between the two meanings of earth or liberty, and translate, either, Who
will give us back to the great earth? or, Who will restore us to the
great Aditi, the goddess of freedom?

Aditi and Diti.

There is one other passage which might receive light if we could take
Aditi in the sense of Hades, but I give this translation as a mere
guess:

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

IV, 2, 11. râyé *k*a na*h* su-apatyâ´ya deva dítim *k*a râ´sva áditim
urushya.

That we may enjoy our wealth and healthy offspring, give us this life on
earth, keep off the life to come! Cf. I, 152, 6.

It should be borne in mind that Diti occurs in the Rig-veda thrice only,
and in one passage it should, I believe, be changed into Aditi. This
passage occurs in VII, 15, 12. tvám agne vîrá-vat yá*s*a*h* devá*h* ka
savitâ´ bhága*h*, díti*h* *k*a dâti vâ´ryam. Here the name of Diti is so
unusual, and that of Aditi, on the contrary, so natural, that I have
little doubt that the poet had put the name of Aditi; and that later
reciters, not aware of the occasional license of putting two short
syllables instead of one, changed it into Aditi. If we remove this
passage, then Diti, in the Rig-veda at least, occurs twice only, and
each time together or in contrast with Aditi; cf. V, 62, 8, page
[243](#page_243). I have no doubt, therefore, that Professor Roth is
right when he says that Diti is a being without any definite conception,
a mere reflex of Aditi. We can clearly watch her first emergence into
existence through what is hardly more than a play of words, whereas in
the epic and Purâ*n*ic literature this Diti (like the Suras) has grown
into a definite person, one of the daughters of Daksha, the wife of
Ka*s*yapa, the mother of the enemies of the gods, the Daityas. Such is
the growth of legend, mythology and religion!

Aditi in her Moral Character.

Besides the cosmical character of Aditi, which we have hitherto
examined, this goddess has also assumed a very prominent moral
character. Aditi, like Varu*n*a, delivers from sin. Why this should be
so, we can still understand if we watch the transition which led from a
purely cosmical to a moral conception of Aditi. Sin in the Veda is
frequently conceived as a bond or a chain from which the repentant
sinner wishes to be freed:

VII, 86, 5. áva drugdhâ´ni pítryâ s*rig*a na*h* áva yâ´ vayám
*k*ak*ri*má tanû´bhi*h*, áva râ*g*an pa*s*u-t*rí*pam ná tâyúm s*rig*á
vatsám ná dâ´mna*h* vásish*th*am.

Absolve us from the sins of our fathers, and from those

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

which we have committed with our own bodies. Release Vasish*th*a, O
king, like a thief who has feasted on stolen cattle; release him like a
calf from the rope <span id="fr_119"></span>[a](#fn_110).

VIII, 67, 14. té na*h* âsná*h* v*rí*kâ*n*âm â´dityâsa*h* mumó*k*ata
stenám baddhám-iva adite.

O Âdityas, deliver us from the mouth of the wolves, like a bound thief,
O Aditi! Cf. VIII, 67, 18.

*S*una*hs*epa, who, as we saw before, wishes to be restored to the great
Aditi, is represented as bound (dita) by ropes, and in V, 2, 7, we read:

*s*úna*h*-*s*épam *k*it ní-ditam sahásrât yû´pât amu*ñk*a*h*
á*s*amish*t*a hí sá*h*, evá asmát agne ví mumugdhi pâ´*s*ân hótar (íti)
*k*ikitva*h* ihá tú ni-sádya.

O Agni, thou hast released the bound *S*una*hs*epa from the stake, for
he had prayed; thus take from us, too, these ropes, O sagacious Hotar,
after thou hast settled here.

Expressions like these, words like dâ´man, bond, ní-dita, bound,
naturally suggested á-diti, the un-bound or unbounded, as one of those
deities who could best remove the bonds of sin or misery. If we once
realise this concatenation of thought and language, many passages of the
Veda that seemed obscure, will become intelligible.

VII, 51, 1. âdityâ´nâm ávasâ nû´tanena sakshîmáhi *s*árma*n*â
*s*ám-tamena, anâgâ*h*-tvé aditi-tvé turâ´sa*h* imám ya*gñ*ám dadhatu
*s*róshamâ*n*â*h*.

May we obtain the new favour of the Âdityas, their best protection; may
the quick Maruts listen and place this sacrifice in guiltlessness and
Aditi-hood.

I have translated the last words literally, in order to make their
meaning quite clear. Â´gas has the same meaning as the Greek ἄγος,
guilt, abomination; an-âgâs-tvá, therefore, as applied to a sacrifice or
to the man who makes it, means guiltlessness, purity. Aditi-tvá,
Aditi-hood, has a similar meaning, it means freedom from bonds, from
anything that hinders the proper performance of a religious act; it may
come to mean perfection or holiness.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Aditi having once been conceived as granting this adititvá, soon assumed
a very definite moral character, and hence the following invocations:

I, 24, 15. út ut-tamám varu*n*a pâ´*s*am asmát áva adhamám ví madhyamim
*s*rathaya, átha vayám âditya vraté táva ánâgasa*h* áditaye syâma.

O Varu*n*a, lift the highest rope, draw off the lowest, remove the
middle; then, O Âditya, let us be in thy service free of guilt before
Aditi.

V, 82, 6. ánâgasa*h* áditaye devásya savitú*h* *h* savé, ví*s*vâ vâmâ´ni
dhîmahi.

May we, guiltless before Aditi, and in the keeping of the god Savitar,
obtain all goods! Professor Roth here translates Aditi by freedom or
security.

I, 162, 22. anâgâ*h*-tvám na*h* áditi*h* k*rin*otu.

May Aditi give us sinlessness! Cf. VII, 51, 1.

IV, 12, 4. yát *k*it hí te purusha-trâ´ yavish*th*a á*k*itti-bhi*h*
*k*ak*ri*má kit *k*it â´ga*h*, k*ri*dhí sú asmâ´n ádite*h* ánâgân ví
énâ*m*si *s*i*s*ratha*h* víshvak agne.

Whatever, O youthful god, we have committed against thee, men as we are,
whatever sin through thoughtlessness, make us guiltless of Aditi, loosen
the sins on all sides, O Agni!

VII, 93, 7. sáh agne enâ´ námasâ sám-iddha*h* á*kkh*a mitrám váru*n*am
índram vo*k*e*h*, yát sîm â´ga*h* *k*ak*ri*má tát sú m*ril*a tát aryamâ´
áditi*h* *s*i*s*rathantu.

O Agni, thou who hast been kindled with this adoration, greet Mitra,
Varu*n*a, and Indra. Whatever sin we have committed, do thou pardon it!
May Aryaman, Aditi loose it!

Here the plural *s*i*s*rathantu should be observed, instead of the dual.

VIII, 18, 6-7. áditi*h* na*h* dívâ pa*s*úm áditi*h* náktam ádvayâ*h*,
áditi*h* pâtu á*m*hasa*h* sadâ´-v*ri*dhâ.

utá syâ´ na*h* dívâ matí*h* áditi*h* ûtyâ´ â´ gamat, sâ *s*ám-tâti
máya*h* karat ápa srídha*h*.

May Aditi by day protect our cattle, may she, who never deceives,
protect by night; may she, with steady increase, protect us from evil!

And may she, the thoughtful Aditi, come with help to

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

us by day; may she kindly bring happiness to us, and carry away all
enemies! Cf. X, 36, 3, page [251](#page_251).

X, 87, 18. â´ v*risk*yantâm áditaye du*h*-évâ*h*.

May the evil-doers be cut off from Aditi! or literally, may they be
rooted out before Aditi!

II, 27, 24. ádite mítra váru*n*a utá m*ril*a yát va*h* vayám *k*ak*ri*má
kát *k*it â´ga*h*, urú a*s*yâm ábhayam *g*yóti*h* indra mâ´ na*h*
dîrghâ´*h* abhí na*s*an támisrâ*h*.

Aditi, Mitra, and also Varu*n*a forgive, if we have committed any sin
against you. May I obtain the wide and fearless light, O Indra! May not
the long darkness reach us!

VII, 87, 7. yá*h* m*ril*áyâti *k*akrúshe *k*it â´ga*h* vayám syâma
váru*n*e ánâgâ*h*, ánu vratâ´ni ádite*h* *ri*dhánta*h* yuyám pâta
svastí-bhi*h* sádâ na*h*.

May we be sinless before Varu*n*a, who is gracious even to him who has
committed sin, and may we follow the laws of Aditi! Protect us always
with your blessings!

Lastly, Aditi, like all other gods, is represented as a giver of worldly
goods, and implored to bestow them on her worshippers, or to protect
them by her power:

I, 43, 2. yáthâ na*h* áditi*h* kárat pá*s*ve n*rí*-bhya*h* yáthâ gáve,
yáthâ tokâ´ya rudríyam.

That Aditi may bring Rudra's favour to our cattle, our men, our cow, our
offspring.

I, 153, 3. pîpâ´ya dhenú*h* áditi*h* *ri*tâ´ya *g*ánâya mitrâvaru*n*â
havi*h*-dé.

Aditi, the cow, gives food to the righteous man, O Mitra and Varu*n*a,
who makes offerings to the gods. Cf. VIII, 101, 15.

I, 185, 3. anehá*h* dâtrám ádite*h* anarvám huvé.

I call for the unrivalled, uninjured gift of Aditi. Here Professor Roth
again assigns to Aditi the meaning of freedom or security.

VII, 40, 2. dídesh*t*u devî´ áditi*h* rék*n*a*h*.

May the divine Aditi assign wealth!

X, 100, 1. â´ sarvá-tâtim áditim v*rin*îmahe.

We implore Aditi for health and wealth.

I, 94, 15. yásmai tvám su-dravi*n*a*h* dádâ*s*a*h* anâgâ*h*-tvám

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

adite sarvá-tâtâ, yám bhadré*n*a *s*ávasâ *k*odáyâsi pra*g*â´-vatâ
râ´dhasâ té syâma.

To whom thou, possessor of good treasures, grantest guiltlessness, O
Aditi, in health and wealth <span id="fr_120"></span>[a](#fn_111), whom
thou quickenest with precious strength and with riches in progeny, may
we be they! Cf. II, 40, 6; IV, 25, 5; X, 11, 2.

The principal epithets of Aditi have been mentioned in the passages
quoted above, and they throw no further light on the nature of the
goddess. She was called devî´, goddess, again and again; another
frequent epithet is anarván, uninjured, unscathed. Being invoked to
grant light (VII, 82, 10), she is herself called luminous,
*g*yótishmatî, I, 136, 3; and svâ´rvatî, heavenly. Being the goddess of
the infinite expanse, she, even with greater right than the dawn, is
called úrû*k*î, VIII, 67, 12; uruvyá*k*as, V, 46, 6; uruvra*g*â, VIII,
67, 12; and possibly p*ri*thvî´ in I, 72, 9. As supporting everything,
she is called dhârayátkshiti, supporting the earth, I, 136, 3; and
vi*s*vá*g*anyâ, VII, 10, 4. To her sons she owes the names of
râ´*g*aputrâ, II, 27, 7; suputrâ´, III, 4, 11; and ugráputrâ, VIII, 67,
11: to her wealth that of sudravi*n*as, I, 94, 15, though others refer
this epithet to Agni. There remains one name pastyẫ, IV, 55, 3; VIII,
27, 5, meaning housewife, which again indicates her character as mother
of the gods.

 

I have thus given all the evidence that can be collected from the
Rig-veda as throwing light on the character of the goddess Aditi, and I
have carefully excluded everything that rests only on the authority of
the Ya*g*ur- or Atharva-vedas, or of the Brâhma*n*as and Âra*n*yakas,
because in all they give beyond the repetitions from the Rig-veda, they
seem to me to represent a later phase of thought that ought not to be
mixed up with the more primitive conceptions of the Rig-veda. Not that
the Rig-veda is free from what seems decidedly modern, or at all events
secondary and late. But it is well to keep the great collections, as
such,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

separate, whatever our opinions may be as to the age of their component
parts.

In the Atharva-veda Aditi appears more unintelligible, more completely
mythological, than in the Rig-veda. We read, for instance, Atharva-veda
VII, 6, 1:

‘Aditi is the sky, Aditi is the welkin, Aditi is mother, is father, is
son; all the gods are Aditi, and the five clans of men; Aditi is what
was, Aditi is what will be.

‘We invoke for our protection the great mother of the well-ruling gods,
the wife of *Ri*ta, the powerful, never-aging, far-spreading, the
sheltering, well-guiding Aditi.’

In the Taittirîya-âra*n*yaka and similar works the mythological
confusion becomes greater still. Much valuable material for an
analytical study of Aditi may be found in B. and R.'s Dictionary, and in
several of Dr. Muir's excellent contributions to a knowledge of Vedic
theogony and mythology.

Aditi as an Adjective.

But although the foregoing remarks give as complete a description of
Aditi as can be gathered from the hymns of the Rig-veda, a few words
have to be added on certain passages where the word áditi occurs, and
where it clearly cannot mean the goddess Aditi, as a feminine, but must
be taken either as the name of a corresponding masculine deity, or as an
adjective in the sense of unrestrained, independent, free.

V, 59, 8. mímâtu dyaú*h* áditi*h* vîtáye na*h*.

May the boundless Dyú (sky) help us to our repast!

Here Aditi must either be taken in the sense of Âditya, or better in its
original sense of unbounded, as an adjective belonging to Dyú, the
masculine deity of the sky.

Dyú or the sky is called áditi or unbounded in another passage, X, 63,
3:

yébhya*h* mâtâ´ mádhu-mat pínvate páya*h* pîyû´sham dyaû*h* áditi*h*
ádri-barhâ*h*.

The gods to whom their mother yields the sweet milk, and the unbounded
sky, as firm as a rock, their food.

IV, 3, 8. kathâ´ *s*árdhâya marútâm *ri*tâ´ya kathâ´ sûré b*ri*haté
p*rikkh*yámâna*h*, práti brava*h* áditaye turâ´ya.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

How wilt thou tell it to the host of the Maruts, how to the bright
heaven, when thou art asked? How to the quick Aditi?

Here Aditi cannot be the goddess, partly on account of the masculine
gender of turâ´ya, partly because she is never called quick. Aditi must
here be the name of one of the Âdityas, or it may refer back to sûré
b*ri*haté. It can hardly be joined, as Professor Roth proposes, with
*s*árdhâya marútâm, owing to the intervening sûré b*ri*haté.

In several passages áditi, as an epithet, refers to Agni:

IV, 1, 20 (final). ví*s*veshâm áditi*h* ya*gñ*íyânâm ví*s*veshâm
átithi*h* mâ´nushâ*n*âm.

He, Agni, the Aditi, or the freest, among all the gods; he the guest
among all men.

The same play on the words áditi and átithi occurs again:

VII, 9, 3. ámûra*h* kaví*h* áditi*h* vivásvân su-sa*m*sát mitrá*h*
átithi*h* *s*ivá*h* na*h*, *k*itrá-bhânu*h* ushásâm bhâti ágre.

The wise poet, Aditi, Vivasvat, Mitra with his good company, our welcome
guest, he (Agni) with brilliant light came at the head of the dawns.

Here, though I admit that several renderings are possible, Aditi is
meant as a name of Agni, to whom the whole hymn is addressed, and who,
as usual, is identified with other gods, or, at all events, invoked by
their names. We may translate áditi*h* vivásvân by 'the brilliant
Aditi,' or 'the unchecked, the brilliant,' or by 'the boundless
Vivasvat,' but on no account can we take áditi here as the female
goddess. The same applies to VIII, 19, 14, where Aditi, unless we
suppose the goddess brought in in the most abrupt way, must be taken as
a name of Agni; while in X, 92, 14, áditim anarvá*n*am, to judge from
other epithets given in the same verse, has most likely to be taken
again as an appellative of Agni. In some passages it would, no doubt, be
possible to take Aditi as the name of a female deity, if it were certain
that no other meaning could be assigned to this word. But if we once
know that Aditi was the name of a male deity also, the structure of
these passages becomes far more perfect, if we take Aditi in that sense:

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

IV, 39, 3. ánâgasam tám áditi*h* k*rin*otu sá*h* mitré*n*a váru*n*ena
sa-*g*óshâ*h*.

May Aditi make him free from sin, he who is allied with Mitra and
Varu*n*a.

We have had several passages in which Aditi, the female deity, is
represented as sa*g*óshâ*h* or allied with other Âdityas, but if sá*h*
is the right reading here, Aditi in this verse can only be the male
deity. The pronoun sá cannot refer to tám.

With regard to other passages, such as IX, 81, 5; VI, 51, 3, and even
some of those translated above in which Aditi has been taken as a female
goddess, the question must be left open till further evidence can be
obtained. There is only one more passage which has been often discussed,
and where áditi was supposed to have the meaning of earth:

VII, 18, 8. du*h*-âdhyã*h* áditim sreváyanta*h* a*k*etása*h* ví
*g*ag*ri*bhre párush*n*îm.

Professor Roth in one of his earliest essays translated this line, 'The
evil-disposed wished to dry the earth, the fools split the Parush*n*î,'
and he supposed its meaning to have been that the enemies of Sudâs swam
across the Parush*n*î in order to attack Sudâs. We might accept this
translation, if it could be explained how by throwing themselves into
the river, the enemies made the earth dry, though even then there would
remain this difficulty that, with the exception of one other doubtful
passage, discussed before, áditi never means earth. We might possibly
translate: 'The evil-disposed, the fools, laid dry and divided the
boundless river Parush*n*î.' This would be a description of a stratagem
very common in ancient warfare, viz. diverting the course of a river and
laying its original bed dry by digging a new channel, and thus dividing
the old river. This is also the sense accepted by Sâya*n*a, who does not
say that vigraha means dividing the waves of a river, as Professor Roth
renders kûlabheda, but that it means dividing or cutting through its
banks. In the Dictionary Professor Roth assigns to áditi in this passage
the meaning of endless, inexhaustible.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

Kaná.

Note <span id="an_1:166:12:5">5</span>. Nothing is more difficult in the
interpretation of the Veda than to gain an accurate knowledge of the
power of particles and conjunctions. The particle *k*aná, we are told,
is used both affirmatively and negatively, a statement which shows
better than anything else the uncertainty to which every translation of
Vedic hymns is as yet exposed. It is perfectly true that in the text of
the Rig-veda, as we now read it, kaná means both indeed and no. But this
very fact shows that we ought to distinguish where the first collectors
of the Vedic hymns have not distinguished, and that while in the former
case we read *k*aná, we ought in the latter to read *k*a ná.

I begin with those passages in which *k*aná is used emphatically, though
originally it may have been a double negation.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I a. In negative sentences:

</div>

I, 18, 7. yásmât *ri*té ná sídhyati ya*gñ*á*h* vipa*h*-*k*íta*h* *k*aná.

Without whom the sacrifice does not succeed, not even that of the sage.

V, 34, 5. ná ásunvatâ sa*k*ate púshyatâ *k*aná.

He does not cling to a man who offers no libations, even though he be
thriving.

I, 24, 6. nahí te kshatrám ná sáha*h* ná manyúm váya*h* *k*aná amî´
(íti) patáyanta*h* âpú*h*.

For thy power, thy strength, thy anger even these birds which fly up, do
not reach. Cf. I, 100, 15.

I, 155, 5. t*ri*tî´yam asya náki*h* â´ dadharshati váya*h* *k*aná
patáyanta*h* patatrí*n*a*h*.

This third step no one approaches, not even the winged birds which fly
up.

I, 55, 1. divá*h* *k*it asya varimâ´ ví papratha, índram ná mahnâ´
p*ri*thivî´ *k*aná práti.

The width of the heavens is stretched out, even the earth in her
greatness is no match for Indra.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I b. In positive sentences:

</div>

VII, 32, 13. pûrvî´*h* *k*aná prá-sitaya*h* taranti tám yá*h* índre
kárma*n*â bhúvat.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

Even many snares pass him who is with Indra in his work.

VIII, 2, 14. ukthám *k*anâ *s*asyámânam ágo*h* arí*h* â´ *k*iketa, ná
gâyatrám gîyámânam.

He (Indra) marks indeed a poor man's prayer that is recited, but not a
hymn that is sung. (Doubtful.)

VIII, 78, 10. táva ít indra ahám â-*s*ásâ háste dâ´tram *k*aná â´ dade.

Hoping in thee alone, O Indra, I take even this sickle in my hand.

I, 55, 5. ádha *k*aná *s*rát dadhati tvíshi-mate índrâya vá*g*ram
ni-ghánighnate vadhám.

Then indeed they believe in Indra, the majestic, when he hurls the bolt
to strike.

I, 152, 2. etát *k*aná tva*h* ví *k*iketat eshâm.

Does one of them understand even this?

IV, 18, 9. mámat kaná used in the same sense as mámat *k*it.

I, 139, 2. dhîbhí*h* *k*aná mánasâ svébhi*h* akshá-bhi*h*.

V, 41, 13. váya*h* *k*aná su-bhvã*h* â´ áva yanti.

VII, 18, 9. â*s*ú*h* *k*aná ít abhi-pitvám *g*agâma.

VIII, 91, 3. â´ *k*aná tvâ *k*ikitsâma*h* ádhi kaná tvâ ná imasi.

We wish to know thee, indeed, but we cannot understand thee.

X, 49, 5. ahám randhayam m*rí*gayam *s*rutárva*n*e yát mâ á*g*ihîta
vayûnâ *k*aná ânu-shák.

VI, 26, 7. ahám *k*aná tát sûrí-bhi*h* âna*s*yâm.

May I also obtain this with the lords.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I c. Frequently *k*aná occurs after interrogative pronouns, to which it
imparts an indefinite meaning, and principally in negative sentences:

</div>

I, 74, 7. ná yó*h* upabdí*h* á*s*vya*h* *srin*vé ráthasya kát *k*aná,
yát agne yâ´si dûtyâ´m.

No sound of horses is heard, and no sound of the chariot, when thou, O
Agni, goest on thy message.

I, 81, 5. ná tvâ´-vân indra ká*h* *k*aná ná *g*âtá*h* ná *g*anishyaté.

No one is like thee, O Indra, no one has been born, no one will be!

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

I, 84, 20. mâ´ te râ´dhâ*m*si mâ´ to ûtáya*h* vaso (íti) asmâ´n kádâ
*k*aná dabhan.

May thy gifts, may thy help, O Vasu, never fail us!

Many more passages might be given to illustrate the use of *k*aná or
ká*s* *k*aná and its derivatives in negative sentences.

Cf. I, 105, 3; 136, 1; 139, 5; II, 16, 3; 23, 5; 28, 6; III, 36, 4; IV,
31, 9; V, 42, 6; 82, 2; VI, 3, 2; 20, 4; 47, 1; 3; 48, 17; 54, 9; 59, 4;
69, 8; 75, 16; VII, 32, 1; 19; 59, 3; 82, 7; 104, 3; VIII, 19, 6; 23,
15; 24, 15; 28, 4; 47, 7; 64, 27, 66, 13; 68, 19; IX, 61, 27; 69, 6;
114, 4; X, 33, 9; 39, 11; 48, 5; 49, 10; 59, 8; 62, 9; 85, 3; 86, 11;
95, 1; 112, 9; 119, 6; 7; 128, 4; 129, 2; 152, 1; 168, 3; 185, 2.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I d. In a few passages, however, we find the indefinite pronoun ká*s*
*k*aná used in sentences which are not negative:

</div>

III, 30, 1. títikshante abhí-*s*astim *g*ánânâm índra tvát â´ ká*h*
*k*aná hí pra-ketá*h*.

They bear the scoffing of men; for, Indra, from thee comes every wisdom.

I, 113, 8. ushâ´*h* m*ri*tám kám *k*aná bodháyantî.

Ushas, who wakes every dead (or one who is as if dead).

I, 191, 7. âd*ri*sh*t*â*h* kím *k*aná ihá va*h* sárve sâkám ní
*g*asyata.

Invisible ones, whatever you are, vanish all together!

 

II\. We now come to passages in which *k*aná stands for *k*a ná, and
therefore renders the sentence negative without any further negative
particle. It might seem possible to escape from this admission, by
taking certain sentences in an interrogative sense. But this would apply
to certain sentences only, and would seem forced even there:

II, 16, 2. yásmât índrât b*ri*hatá*h* kím *k*aná îm *ri*té. Beside whom,
(beside) the great Indra, there is not anything.

II, 24, 12. ví*s*vam satyám magha-vânâ yuvó*h* ít â´pa*h* *k*aná prá
minanti vratám vâm.

Everything, you mighty ones, belongs indeed to you; even the waters do
not transgress your law.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

IV, 30, 3. ví*s*ve *k*aná ít anâ´ tvâ devâ´sa*h* indra yuyudhu*h*.

Even all the gods do not ever fight thee, O Indra.

V, 34, 7. du*h*-gé *k*aná dhriyate ví*s*va*h* â´ purú *g*ána*h* yá*h*
asya távishîm á*k*ukrudhat.

Even in a stronghold many a man is not often preserved who has excited
his anger.

VII, 83, 2. yásmin â*g*â´ bhávati kím *k*aná priyám.

In which struggle there is nothing good whatsoever.

VII, 86, 6. svápna*h* kaná ít án*ri*tasya pra-yotâ´.

Even sleep does not remove all evil.

In this passage I formerly took *k*aná as affirmative, not as negative,
and therefore assigned to prayotâ´ the same meaning which Sâya*n*a
assigns to it, one who brings or mixes, whereas it ought to be, as
rightly seen by Roth, one who removes.

VIII, 1, 5. mahé *k*aná tvâ´m adri-va*h* párâ *s*ulkâ´ya deyâm, ná
sahásrâya ná ayútâya va*g*ri-va*h* ná *s*atâ´ya *s*ata-magha.

I should not give thee up, wielder of the thunderbolt, even for a great
price, not for a thousand, not for ten thousand (?), not for a hundred,
O Indra, thou who art possessed of a hundred powers!

VIII, 51, 7. kadâ´ *k*aná starî´*h* asi.

Thou art never sterile.

VIII, 52, 7. kadâ´ *k*aná prá yu*kkh*asi.

Thou art never weary.

VIII, 55, 5. *k*ákshushâ *k*aná sam-ná*s*e.

Not to be reached even with eye.

X, 56, 4. mahimná*h* eshâm pitára*h* *k*anâ î*s*ire.

Note <span id="an_1:166:12:6">6</span>. Considering the particular
circumstances mentioned in this and the preceding hymn, of Indra's
forsaking his companions, the Maruts, or even scorning their help, one
feels strongly tempted to take tyá*g*as in its etymological sense of
leaving or forsaking, and to translate, by his forsaking you, or, if he
should forsake you. The poet may have meant the word to convey that
idea, which no doubt would be most appropriate here; but it must be
confessed, at the same time, that in other passages where tyá*g*as
occurs, that meaning could hardly be ascribed to it. Strange as it may
seem, no one who is acquainted with the general

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

train of thought in the Vedic hymns can fail to see that tyá*g*as in
most passages means attack, onslaught; it may be even the instrument of
an attack, a weapon. How it should come to take this meaning is indeed
difficult to explain, and I do not wonder that Professor Roth in his
Dictionary simply renders the word by forlornness, need, danger, or by
estrangement, unkindness, malignity. But let us look at the passages.
and we shall see that these abstract conceptions are quite out of place:

VIII, 47, 7. ná tám tigmám *k*aná tyá*g*a*h* ná drâsad abhí tám gurú.

No sharp blow, no heavy one, shall come near him whom you protect.

Here the two adjectives tigmá, sharp, and gurú, heavy, point to
something tangible, and I feel much inclined, to take tyá*g*as in this
passage as a weapon, as something that is let off with violence, rather
than in the more abstract sense of onslaught.

I, 169, 1. mahá*h* *k*it asi tyá*g*asa*h* varûtâ´.

Thou art the shielder from a great attack.

IV, 43, 4. ká*h* vâm mahá*h* *k*it tyá*g*asa*h* abhî´ke urushyátam
mâdhvî dasrâ na*h* ûtî´.

Who is against your great attack? Protect us with your help, O A*s*vins,
ye strong ones.

Here Professor Roth seems to join mahá*h* *k*it tyá*g*asa*h* abhî´ke
urushyátam, but in that case it would be impossible to construe the
first words, ká*h* vâm.

I, 119, 8. ága*kkh*atam k*rí*pamâ*n*am parâ-váti pitú*h* svásya
tyá*g*asâ ní-bâdhitam.

You went from afar to the suppliant, who had been struck down by the
violence of his own father.

According to Professor Roth tyá*g*as would here mean forlornness, need,
or danger. But níbâdhita is a strong verb, as we may see in

VIII, 64, 2. padâ´ pa*n*î´n arâdhása*h* ní bâdhasva mahâ´n asi.

Strike the useless Pa*n*is down with thy foot, for thou art great.

X, 18, 11. út *s*va*ñk*asva p*ri*thivi mâ´ ní bâdhathâ*h*.

Open, O earth, do not press on him (i. e. the dead, who is

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

to be buried; cf. M. M., Über Todtenbestattung, Zeitschrift der
D. M. G., vol. ix, p. xv).

VII, 83, 6. yátra râ´*g*a-bhi*h* da*s*á-bhi*h* ní-bâdhitam prá su-dâ´sam
â´vatam t*rí*tsu-bhi*h* sahá.

Where you protected Sudâs with the T*ri*tsus, when he was pressed or set
upon by the ten kings.

Another passage in which tyá*g*as occurs is,

VI, 62, 10. sánutyena tyá*g*asâ mártyasya vanushyatâ´m ápi *s*îrshâ´
vav*ri*ktam.

By your covert attack turn back the heads of those even who harass the
mortal.

Though this passage may seem less decisive, yet it is difficult to see
how tyá*g*asâ could here, according to Professor Roth, be rendered by
forlornness or danger. Something is required by which enemies can be
turned back. Nor can it be doubtful that *s*îrshâ´ is governed by
vav*ri*ktam, meaning turn back their heads, for the same expression
occurs again in I, 33, 5. párâ *k*it *s*îrshâ´ vav*rig*u*h* té indra
áya*g*vâna*h* yá*g*va-bhi*h* spárdhamânâ*h*.

Professor Ben fey translates this verse by, 'Kopfüber flohn sie alle vor
dir;' but it may be rendered more literally, 'These lawless people
fighting with the pious turned away their heads.'

X, 144, 6. evá tát índra*h* índunâ devéshu *k*it dhârayâte máhi
tyá*g*a*h*.

Indeed through this draught Indra can hold out against that great attack
even among the gods.

X, 79, 6. kím devéshu tyá*g*a*h* éna*h* *k*akartha.

What insult, what sin hast thou committed among the gods?

In these two passages the meaning of tyá*g*as as attack or assault is at
least as appropriate as that proposed by Professor Roth, estrangement,
malignity.

There remains one passage, VI, 3, 1. yám tvám mitré*n*a váru*n*a*h*
sa-*g*óshâ*h* déva pâ´si tyá*g*asâ mártam á*m*ha*h*.

I confess that the construction of this verse is not clear to me, and I
doubt whether it is possible to use tyá*g*asâ as a verbal noun governing
an accusative. If this were possible, one might translate, 'The mortal
whom thou, O God (Agni),

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Varu*n*a, together
with Mitra, protectest by pushing back evil.' More probably we should
translate, 'Whom thou protectest from evil by thy might.'

If it be asked how tyá*g*as can possibly have the meaning which has been
assigned to it in all the passages in which it occurs; viz. that of
forcibly attacking or pushing away, we can only account for it by
supposing that tya*g*, before it came to mean to leave, meant to push
off, to drive away with violence (verstossen instead of verlassen). This
meaning may still be perceived occasionally in the use of tya*g*; e. g.
devâs tya*g*antu mâm, may the gods forsake me! i. e. may the gods drive
me away! Even in the latest Sanskrit tya*g* is used with regard to an
arrow that is let off. 'To expel' is expressed by nis-tya*g*. Those who
believe in the production of new roots by the addition of prepositional
prefixes might possibly see in tya*g* an original ati-a*g*, to drive
off; but, however that may be, there is evidence enough to show that
tya*g* expressed originally a more violent act of separation than it
does in ordinary Sanskrit, though here, too, passages occur in which
tya*g* may be translated by to throw, to fling; for instance, khe
dhûli*m* yas tya*g*ed u*kk*air mûrdhni tasyaiva sâ patet, he who throws
up dust in the air, it will fall on his head. Ind. Spr. 1582.

Mu*k*, too, is used in a similar manner; for instance, va*g*ram
mokshyate té mahendra*h*, Mahâbh. XIV, 263. Cf. Dhammapada, ver. 389.

##### Verse 13.

Note <span id="an_1:166:13:1">1</span>. *S*á*m*sa, masc., means a spell,
whether for good or for evil, a blessing as well as a curse. It means a
curse, or, at all events, a calumny:

I, 18, 3. mâ´ na*h* *s*á*m*sa*h* árarusha*h* dhûrtí*h* prá*n*ak
mártyasya.

Let not the curse of the enemy, the onslaught of a mortal hurt us.

I, 94, 8. asmâ´kam *s*á*m*sa*h* abhí astu du*h*-dhyã*h*. May our curse
overcome the wicked!

III, 18, 2. tápa *s*á*m*sam árarusha*h*.

Burn the curse of the enemy!

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

VII, 25, 2. âré tám *s*á*m*sam k*rin*uhi ninitsó*h*.

Take far away the curse of the reviler! Cf. VII, 34, 12.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

It means blessing:

</div>

II, 31, 6. utá ya*h* *s*á*m*sam u*s*í*g*âm-iva *s*masi.

We desire your blessing as a blessing for suppliants.

X, 31, 1. â´ na*h* devâ´nâm úpa vetu *s*á*m*sa*h*.

May the blessing of the gods come to us!

X, 7, 1. urushyá na*h* urú-bhi*h* deva *s*á*m*sai*h*.

Protect us, god, with thy wide blessings!

II, 23, 10. mâ´ na*h* du*h*-*s*á*m*sa*h* abhi-dipsú*h* î*s*ata prá
su*s*á*m*sâ*h* matí-bhi*h* târishîmahi.

Let not an evil-speaking enemy conquer us; may we, enjoying good report,
increase by our. prayers!

In some passages, however, as pointed out by Grassmann, *s*á*m*sa may
best be rendered by singer, praiser. Grassmann marks one passage only,

II, 26, 1. *rig*ú*h* ít *s*á*m*sa*h* vanavat vanushyatá*h*.

May the righteous singer conquer his enemies.

He admits, however, doubtfully, the explanation of B. R., that *rig*ú*h*
*s*á*m*sa*h* may be taken as one word, meaning, 'requiring the right.'
This explanation seems surrendered by B. R. in the second edition of
their Dictionary, and I doubt whether *s*á*m*sa*h* can mean here
anything but singer. That being so, the same meaning seems more
appropriate in other verses also, which I formerly translated
differently, e. g.

VII, 56, 19. imé *s*á*m*sam vanushyatá*h* ní pânti.

They, the Maruts, protect the singer from his enemy.

Lastly, *s*á*m*sa means praise, the spell addressed by men to the gods,
or prayer:

I, 33, 7. prá sunvatá*h* stuvatá*h* *s*á*m*sam âva*h*.

Thou hast regarded the prayer of him who offers libation and praise.

X, 42, 6. yásmin vayám dadhimá *s*á*m*sam índre.

Indra in whom we place our hope. Cf. â*s*a*m*s, Westergaard, Radices
Linguae Sanscritae, s. v. *s*a*m*s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[214:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_108) Schleicher,
Compendium, § 36, αἴθω, αἰθήρ, αἴθουσα; and § 49, aides, aidilis aestas.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[215:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_109) Ápa-tya; cf. Bopp,
Accentuationssystem, § 138, ἔπι-σσαι, Nachkommen.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[217:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_110) Tylor, Early
History of Mankind, p. 262.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[217:b](sbe3227.htm#fr_111) Spiegel, who had
formerly identified harmyá with the Zend zairimya in zairimya*n*ura, has
afterwards recalled this identification; see Spiegel, Av. Ubers. I, p.
190; Commentar über den Avesta, I, p. 297; Justi, Handbuch, p. 119;
Haug, Pahlavi Glossary, p. 22. According to the Parsis, the
Hairimya*n*ura, a daêva animal which appears at the rising of the sun,
is the turtle, and Darmesteter (Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 283) identifies
zair in zair-imya with the Greek χελ-ύς, Sanskrit har-mu*t*a.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[227:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_112) Kuhn, Zeitschrift,
vol. ix, p. 233.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[233:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_113) *S*a*n*a is an old
Aryan word, though its meanings differ. Hesychius and Eustathius mention
κάννα as being synonymous with ψίαθος, reed. Pollux gives two forms,
κάννα and κάνα, (Pollux X, 166 πτανάκα δέ ἐστι ψίαθος ἡ ἐν τοῖς ἀκατίοις
ἣν καὶ κάναν καλοῦσιν. VII, 176 κάνναι δὲ τὸ ἐκ κανάβων πλέγμα) This is
important, because the same difference of spelling occurs also in
κάνναβις and κάναοβς or κάννβος, a model, a lay figure, which Lobeck
derives from κάνναι. In Old Norse we have hanp-r, in A. S. hænep, hemp,
Old High-Germ. hanaf.

The occurrence of the word *s*a*n*a is of importance as showing at how
early a time the Aryans of India were acquainted with the uses and the
name of hemp. Our word hemp, the A. S. hænep, the Old Norse hanp-r, are
all borrowed from Latin cannabis, which, like other borrowed words, has
undergone the regular changes required by Grimm's law in Low-German, and
also in High-German. hanaf. The Slavonic nations seem to have borrowed
their word for hemp (Lith. kanapẽ) from the Goths, the Celtic nations
(Ir. canaib) from the Romans (cf. Kuhn, Beiträge, vol. ii, p. 382). The
Latin cannabis is borrowed from Greek, and the Greeks, to judge from the
account of Herodotus, most likely adopted the word from the Aryan
Thracians and Scythians (Her. IV, 74; Pictet, Les Aryens, vol. i, p.
314). Κάννβις being a foreign word, it would be useless to attempt an
explanation of the final element bis, which is added to *s*a*n*a, the
Sanskrit word for hemp. It may be visa, fibre, or it may be anything
else. Certain it is that the main element in the name of hemp was the
same among the settlers in Northern India, and among the Thracians and
Scythians through whom the Greeks first became acquainted with hemp.

The history of the word κάνναβις must be kept distinct from that of the
Greek κάννα or κάνα, reed. Both spellings occur, for Pollux, X, 166,
writes πτανάκα δέ ἐστι ψίαθος ἡ ἐν τοῖς ἀκατίοις ἣν καὶ κάναν καλοῦσιν,
but VII, 176, κάνναι δὲ τὸ ἐκ κανάβων πλέγμα. This word κάννα may be the
same as the Sanskrit *s*a*n*a, only with this difference, that it was
retained as common property by Greeks and Indians before they separated,
and was applied differently in later times by the one and the other.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[235:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_114) Grimm, Deutsche
Grammatik, vol. iii, pp. 400, 409. There is not yet sufficient evidence
to show that Sanskrit sv, German sn, and Sanskrit n are interchangeable,
but there is at least one case that may be analogous. Sanskrit sva*ñg*,
to embrace, to twist round a person, German slango, Schlange, snake, and
Sanskrit nâga, snake. Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, vol. iii, p. 364.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[236:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_115) See Benfey, Kuhn's
Zeitschrift, vol. ii, p. 216.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[242:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_116) Lectures on the
Science of Language, Second Series, p. 499.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[246:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_117) Bráhma*n*aspáti,
literally the lord of prayer, or the lord of the sacrifice, sometimes a
representative of Agni (I, 38, 13, note), but <span id="page_247">p.
247</span> by no means identical with him (see VII, 41, 1); sometimes
performing the deeds of Indra, but again by no means identical with him
(see II, 23, 18. índre*n*a yu*g*â´—ní*h* apâ´m aub*g*a*h* ar*n*avám; cf.
VIII, 96, 15). In II, 26, 3, he is called father of the gods (devâ´nâm
pitáram); in II, 23, 2, the creator of all beings (ví*s*veshâm
*g*anitâ´).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[247:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_118) The accent in this
case cannot help us in determining whether dáksha-pitar means having
Daksha for their father (Λοκροπάτωρ), or father of strength. In the
first case dáksha would rightly retain its accent (dáksha-pitar) as a
Bahuvrîhi; in the second, the analogy of such Tatpurusha compounds as
g*ri*há-pati (Pâ*n*. VI, 2, 18) would be sufficient to justify the
pûrvapadaprak*ri*tisvaratvam.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[257:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_119) See M. M., History
of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 2nd ed., p. 541.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[260:a](sbe3227.htm#fr_120) On sarvátâti,
salus, see Benfey's excellent remarks in Orient and Occident, vol. ii,
p. 519. Professor Roth takes aditi here as an epithet of Agni.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 167. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3228)
