[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3247)  [Next](sbe3249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

### MA*ND*ALA VII, HYMN 58.

#### ASH*T*AKA V, ADHYÂYA 4, VARGA 28.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Sing to the company (of the Maruts), growing up together, the strong
among the divine host [1](sbe3248.htm#an_7:58:1:1): they stir heaven and
earth by their might, they mount up to the firmament from the abyss of
Nir*ri*ti [2](sbe3248.htm#an_7:58:1:2).

2\. Even your birth [1](sbe3248.htm#an_7:58:2:1) was with fire and fury,
O Maruts! You, terrible, wrathful, never tiring! You who stand forth
with might and strength; every one who sees the sun
[2](sbe3248.htm#an_7:58:2:2), fears at your coming.

3\. Grant mighty strength to our lords, if the Maruts are pleased with
our praise. As a trodden path furthers a man, may they further us; help
us with your brilliant favours.

4\. Favoured by you, O Maruts, a wise man wins a hundred, favoured by
you a strong racer wins a thousand, favoured by you a king also kills
his enemy: may that gift of yours prevail, O ye shakers.

5\. I invite these bounteous sons of Rudra [1](sbe3248.htm#an_7:58:5:1),
will these Maruts turn again to us? Whatever they hated secretly or
openly, that sin we pray the swift ones to forgive.

6\. This praise of our lords has been spoken: may the Maruts be pleased
with this hymn. Keep far from us, O strong ones, all hatred, protect us
always with your favours!

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

### NOTES.

Ascribed to Vasish*th*a. None of its verses occurs in SV., VS., AV.,
TS., TB., MS. Metre, Trish*t*ubh.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_7:58:1:1">1</span>. Dhâman is one of the cruces of
translators, and it remains so after all that has been written on the
subject by Bergaigne, III, 210 seq. There are many words in the Veda
which it is simply impossible to translate, because their meaning has
not yet been differentiated, and they convey such general or rather
vague concepts that it is utterly impossible to match them in our modern
languages. Translators are often blamed that they do not always render
the same Vedic by the same English word. It would be simply impossible
to do so, because, according to the different surroundings in which it
occurs, the same word receives different shades of meaning which in
English can only be approximately expressed by different words.
Bergaigne is, no doubt, right when he says that dhâ-man is derived from
dhâ, to set or settle, and that it therefore meant at first what is
settled. From this he proceeds to argue that the original meaning of
dhâman, from which all others are derived, is law. But law is a very
late and very abstract word, and we must never forget that words always
progress from the concrete to the abstract, from the material to the
spiritual, and but seldom, and at a much later time, in an opposite
direction. Now even if we were to admit that dhâman does not occur in
the Veda in the sense of settlement, i. e. abode, this is certainly its
most general meaning afterwards, and no one would maintain that a
settlement, i. e. a household, was called dhâman, because it involved a
settlement, i. e. laws. The same applies to vratá. Bergaigne (III, 213)
agrees with me that vrata should be derived from var, to surround, to
guard, and not from var, to choose, but he thinks that it meant at once
'garde, protection,'

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

and not 'lieu clos.' I still hold that like νομός, vrata must have meant
first a real hedge, or ἕρκος, and then only an abstract enclosure, i. e.
a law, νόμος. In this case we can see the actual transition of thought.
People would begin by saying, 'there is a fence here against your
cattle,' and this would in time assume the meaning 'there is a defence
against your cattle straying on my meadow.' But it would be impossible
to begin, as Bergaigne (p. 216) does, with the abstract meaning of
protection, law, and then return and use the word in such phrases as V,
46, 7. apâ´m vraté, 'within the pale of the waters.'

Dhâman, therefore, meant originally, I still believe, what was actually
laid down or settled, hence an abode. When, as in the Veda, it means
law, I do not say that this was necessarily derived from the meaning of
abode. I only maintain that it was a second, if not a secondary,
meaning, and that, at all events, the meaning of abode cannot be derived
from that of law.

After dhâman meant what is settled, it has sometimes to be translated by
law, by nature, sometimes by class, or clan, where it comes very near to
nâman, name, while sometimes it may best be rendered by a general and
abstract suffix, or even by a plural. Thus in our passage, daívyasya
dhâ´mna*h* is not very different from devânâm.

What is peculiar to our passage is the genitive governed by tuvishmân.
After all the learning which Bergaigne has expended on the analysis of
dhâman, he does not help us to a translation of our sentence. If we
translate 'of the divine law, powerful,' we have words, but no sense. I
take daívyasya dhâ´mna*h* as a genitivus partitivus, such as AV. IV, 37,
5. óshadhînâm vîrúdhâm vîryẫvati:. See Kuhn, Zeitschrift XIII, 120;
Siecke, Genitivus, p. 14. Grassmann: 'Die mächtig walten in der Götter
Wohnsitz.' Ludwig: 'Die von göttlicher natur, die starke.' He denies
that tuvishmân could be followed by the genitive. I do not maintain that
I am satisfied on that point. All I say in this as in many other cases
is that my translation gives something which we can understand. Let
others give us something better.

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

Note <span id="an_7:58:1:2">2</span>. On Nir*ri*ti, see Hibbert
Lectures, p. 245; Lect. Science of Lang., vol. ii, p. 562. Avam*s*á,
literally without beams of support, or bottomless.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_7:58:2:1">1</span>. On *g*anûs, see Lanman, p. 571.

Note <span id="an_7:58:2:2">2</span>. Svard*rí*k, according to
Grassmann, der lichte Himmel; according to Ludwig, jeder der das licht
schaut. Sâya*n*a, among other meanings, gives that of tree. See VII, 83,
2.

##### Verse 3.

On the construction of this verse, see Delbrück, Syntax p. 384, and
Bergaigne, Mélanges Renier, p. 82.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_7:58:5:1">1</span>. With regard to tâ´n mî*lh*úsha*h*
rudrásya, 'these bounteous (sons) of Rudra,' see VIII, 20, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 59. To the Maruts and Rudra](sbe3249)
