[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3242)  [Next](sbe3244) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

### MA*ND*ALA V, HYMN 61.

#### ASH*T*AKA IV, ADHYÂYA 3, VARGA 26-29.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Who are you, O men, the very best, who have approached one by one,
from the furthest distance [1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:1:1)?

2\. Where are your horses, where the bridles? How could you, how did you
come?—the seat on the back, the rein in the nostrils?

3\. Their goad is on the croup [1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:3:1), the heroes
stretched their legs apart [2](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:3:2)…

4\. Move along, heroes, young men, the sons of an excellent mother
[1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:4:1), so that you may warm yourselves at our
fire [2](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:4:2).

5\. (1.) May the woman, if she stretched out her arm
[1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:5:1) as a rest for the hero, praised by
*S*yâvâ*s*va [2](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:5:2), gain cattle consisting of
horses, cows, and a hundred sheep.

6\. (2.) Many a woman is even more often kindlier than a godless and
miserly man,

7\. (3.) A woman who finds out the weak, the thirsty, the needy, and is
mindful of the gods.

8\. (4.) Even though many an unpraiseworthy miser (Pa*n*i) is called a
man, she is worth as much in weregild.

9\. (5.) Also the young woman joyfully whispered to me, to *S*yâva, the
road,—and the two bays went straight to Purumî*lh*a
[1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:9:1), the wise, the far-famed,

10\. (6.) Who gave me a hundred cows, like Vaidada*s*vi, like Taranta,
in magnificence.

11\. (1.) The Maruts, who drive on their quick horses, drinking the
delightful mead, have gained glory here;

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

12\. (2.) They on whose chariots Rodasî [1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:12:1)
glitters in glory [2](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:12:2), like the golden disk
above in heaven;

13\. (3.) That youthful company of the Maruts, with blazing chariots,
blameless, triumphant, irresistible.

14\. (4.) Who now knows of them where the strikers rejoice, the
well-born, the faultless?

15\. (5.) You who are fond of praise, become the leaders of the mortal,
listening to his imploring invocations, thus is my thought
[1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:15:1).

16\. (6.) Bring then to us delightful and resplendent
[1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:16:1) treasures, ye worshipful Maruts,
destroyers of enemies.

17\. (1.) O night, like a charioteer, carry away this hymn to Dârbhya,
and these songs, O goddess.

18\. (2.) And then tell him thus from me, 'When Rathavîti offers Soma,
my desire never goes away from me.'

19\. (3.) That mighty Rathavîti dwells among people rich in cattle
[1](sbe3243.htm#an_5:61:19:1), retired among the mountains.

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is of a very composite nature. It is addressed to the Maruts
by *S*yâvâ*s*va. According to the Anukrama*n*î, however, the Maruts are
addressed in vv. 1-4, 11-16 only; vv. 5-8 are addressed to *S*a*s*îyasî
Tarantamahishî, 9 to Purumî*lh*a Vaidada*s*vi, 10 to Taranta
Vaidada*s*vi, 17-19 to Rathavîti Dârbhya. None of the verses occurs in
SV., VS., AV., TS., TB., MS. Metre, 1-4, 6-8, 10-19 Gâyatrî; 5
Anush*t*ubh; 9 Satob*ri*hatî.

It has been pointed out that in the hymns addressed to the Maruts
beginning with V, 52, and ending with V, 60, there is the usual decrease
in the number of verses of each successive hymn, viz. 17, 16, 15, 10, 9,
8, 8, 8, 8. Our hymn, however, which is the last in the collection of
hymns addressed by *S*yâvâ*s*va to the Maruts, breaks the rule, and it
has been suggested with great plausibility that it contains a number of
verses thrown together at random. Possibly the four verses in the
beginning formed an independent hymn, addressed to the Maruts, and again
5-10, and 11-16, followed by an appendix, 17-19. These verses refer to a
legend which will have to be discussed at verse 5.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_5:61:1:1">1</span>. As to paramásyâ*h* parâváta*h*,
see TS. IV, 1, 9, 3, where we also find (IV, 1, 9, 2) párasyâ ádhi
sa*m*váta*h*.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_5:61:3:1">1</span>. *G*agháne, like *g*aghanata*h*,
may mean simply behind, as agre and agrata*h* mean before.

Note <span id="an_5:61:3:2">2</span>. It is clear that the Maruts are
here supposed to sit astride on their horses. This is also shown by
p*ri*sh*th*é sádas (v. 2), and by putrak*ri*thé ná *g*ánaya*h*, they
stretched out their legs, ὡς γυναῖκες ἐν τεκνοποιίᾳ. Zimmer (p. 230)
says, 'Zum Reiten wurde das Ross nicht benutzt.' On p. 295 he modifies
this by saying, 'Keine einzige klare Stelle des Rig-veda ist mir
bekannt, wo das Reiten beim Kampfe erwähnt wurde; man fährt immer zu
Wagen, wie die Griechen in homerischen Zeiten.'

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_5:61:4:1">1</span>. Bhádra*g*ânaya*h*, generally
rendered by 'possessed of beautiful wives,' seems really to mean
'possessed of an excellent mother.' *G*âni clearly means mother, when
Agni dvimâtâ, having two mothers, is called dvi*g*âni*h*; for it is
never said that he has two wives. Besides, the Maruts are constantly
addressed as the sons of their mother, P*ris*ni, while their wives are
mentioned but rarely. However, the other meaning is not impossible. See
also Bergaigne, II, 387 seq.

Note <span id="an_5:61:4:2">2</span>. The fire here intended is, I
suppose, the sacrificial fire, to which the Maruts are here invited as
they had been in former hymns.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_5:61:5:1">1</span>. Ludwig compares the A. S.
expression healsgebedde; see also RV. X, 10, 10.

Note <span id="an_5:61:5:2">2</span>. I have very little belief in the
legends which are told in the Brâhma*n*as and in the Anukrama*n*î in
illustration of certain apparently personal and historical allusions in
the hymns of the Veda. It is clear in many cases that they are made up
from indications contained in the hymns. as in IX, 58, 3, and it seems
best therefore to forget them altogether in interpreting the words of
the Vedic hymns.

The story told in the introductory verses, quoted by Sâya*n*a, is
this:—'Ar*k*anânas Âtreya was chosen by Rathavîti Dârbhya to be his
*Ri*tvi*g* priest. At the sacrifice Ar*k*anânas saw the daughter of
Rathavîti and asked her in marriage for his son *S*yâvâ*s*va. Rathavîti
consulted his wife, but she declined on the ground that no daughter of
theirs had ever been given to a man who was not a poet (*Ri*shi).
Thereupon *S*yâvâ*s*va performed penance, and travelled about collecting
alms. He thus came to *S*a*s*îyasî, who recommended him, as a *Ri*shi,
to her husband, king Taranta. King Taranta was very generous to him, and
sent him on to his younger brother, Purumî*lh*a. On his way to
Purumî*lh*a, *S*yâvâ*s*va saw the Maruts, and composed a hymn in their
praise (vv. 11-16). He had thus become a real poet or *Ri*shi, and on
returning home, he received from Rathavîti his daughter in marriage.'

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

*S*aunaka confirms the same story, see Sâya*n*a's commentary to V, 61,
17. Here therefore we have to deal with two princely brothers, both
Vaidada*s*vis, namely Taranta and Purumî*lh*a. They both give presents
to *S*yâvâ*s*va, who is a Brâhma*n*a, and he marries the daughter of
another prince, Rathavîti Dârbhya.

In the Tâ*nd*ya-Brâhma*n*a, however, XIII, 7, 12, another story is told,
which I quoted in my edition of the Rig-veda at IX, 58, 3 (vol. v, p.
xxxiii). Here Dhvasra and Purushanti are introduced as wishing to give
presents to the two Vaidada*s*vis, Taranta and Purumî*lh*a. These
hesitate for a while, because they have no right to accept a present
without deserving it or having done something for it. They then compose
a hymn in praise of Dhvasra and Purushanti, and after that feel
justified in accepting their present.

Here therefore the Vaidada*s*vis are receivers, not givers of presents,
therefore of princely, not, as has been supposed, of priestly rank, and
this would agree better with the words of verse 9, purumî*lh*â´ya
víprâya. See on all this Oldenberg in Z. D. M. G. XLII, p. 232.

If we accept this story, we have to take *s*á*s*îyasî in verse 6 as a
proper name.

But *s*á*s*îyasî may be a comparative of *s*a*s*-vat (see B.-R. s. v.),
and would then mean, more frequent. We expect, no doubt, an adverb
rather like *s*a*s*vat, but a feminine corresponding to vásyasî is
perhaps admissible. In that case we should have simply to deal with some
woman, tvâ strî´, who, as the poet says, is as good as, if not better
than, many a man.

##### Verse 8.

This verse is very obscure. Sâya*n*a translates: 'And the other half
(the husband of *S*a*s*îyasî, viz. Taranta) is a man not praised
(enough), thus I, the poet, say: and that Taranta is equal or just in
the giving of wealth.' Grassmann translates: 'Und dagegen ist mancher
nicht lobenswerth geizig, der ein Mann sich nennt, ein solcher ist der
Strafe verfallen.' Ludwig: 'Auch mancher halbmensch,

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

ungepriesen, der “mensch” zwar heiszt, doch ein Pa*n*i ist, der ist auf
böse gabe nur bedacht.'

The first light that was thrown on this verse came from Prof. Roth. He
showed (Z. D. M. G. XLI, p. 673) that vairadeya means weregild, the
German wergelt, the price to be given for a man killed. Vaira would here
be derived from vîra, man, the Goth. waír, the Latin vir, and vairadeya
would mean what is to be given as the value of a man. Still I doubt
whether Prof. Roth has discovered the true meaning of the verse. He
translates: 'So ist auch mancher Mann nicht zu loben, mehr ein Pa*n*i
(unfromm, gegen die Götter karg, zugleich Bezeichnung habsüchtiger
Dämonen), obschon man ihn einen Menschen nennt—nur am Wergeld steht er
den andern gleich.' I confess I do not see much point in this. It is
quite clear that the poet praises a charitable woman, and wishes to say
that she is sometimes better than a man, if he gives nothing. Now the
weregild, if we may say so, for women was generally, though not always,
less than that for men, and I therefore propose to read sâ´ vaíradeye ít
samâ´, and translate: 'Even though many an unpraiseworthy miser (Pa*n*i)
is called man, she is like him in weregild, i. e. she is worth as much,
even though she is a woman.' On uta, see Delbrück, Syntaktische
Forschungen, V, p. 528.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_5:61:9:1">1</span>. Purumî*lh*a is here clearly the
man from whom benefits are expected, and therefore could not be the same
as Purumî*lh*a Vaidada*s*vi, mentioned by the commentator, who accepted
gifts from Dhvasra and Purushanti. Nor can Taranta Vaidada*s*vi in the
next verse be taken for a recipient, but only for a giver, and
therefore, most likely, a prince. The whole story, however, is by no
means clear, and I doubt whether the commentator drew his information
from any source except his own brain.

##### Verse 11.

I agree with Ludwig that a new hymn begins with verse 11.

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_5:61:12:1">1</span>. I have adopted the reading
Rodasî´ vibhrâ´*g*ate in my translation; cf. VI, 66, 6, where Rodasî is
compared with a róka*h*.

Note <span id="an_5:61:12:2">2</span>. Roth (K. Z. XXVI, 51) takes
*s*riyâ´dhi as *s*riyás ádhi, but such a sandhi has not yet been
established in the hymns of the Rig-veda, see Oldenberg, Proleg. p. 459,
Anm. 1. Oldenberg himself suggests *s*ríyó<sup>ऽ</sup>dhi, and would
translate, 'They whose charms shine over the two worlds on their
chariots.' Pischel (Ved. Stud. p. 54) translates yéshâm *s*riyâ´ by 'for
whose sake.'

##### Verse 15.

Note <span id="an_5:61:15:1">1</span>. On itthâ´ dhiyâ´, see Pischel,
Ved. Stud. p. 184.

##### Verse 16.

Note <span id="an_5:61:16:1">1</span>. The Pada ought to have
puru-*k*andrâ´, as suggested by Grassmann and Ludwig.

##### Verses 17-19.

These verses are very peculiar, and may refer to historical events, for
Dâlbhya or Dârbhya and Rathavîti sound like real names. Of course the
Indian commentators are never at a loss to tell us what it all refers
to, but we can never say how little they knew, and how much they
invented. The invocation of Ûrmyâ, if it is meant for the Night, and the
request that she may convey the hymn to Dârbhya, is different from the
usual style of the hymns. See, however, VIII, 24, 28, and Oldenberg,
Z. D. M. G. XXXIX, 89.

The following names, occurring in our hymn, have the sanction of the
Anukrama*n*î: *S*a*s*îyasî Tarantamahishî (V, 61, 5; 8), Purumî*lh*a
Vaidada*s*vi (V, 61, 9), Taranta Vaidada*s*vi (V, 61, 10), Rathavîti
Dâlbhya (V, 61, 17-19). There is another Purumî*lh*a, a Sauhotra, in IV,
43, and a Purumî*lh*a Âṅgirasa in VIII, 71.

##### Verse 19.

Note <span id="an_5:61:19:1">1</span>. See Oldenberg, Z. D. M. G. XXXIX,
89. He corrects gómatî*h* to gómatîm, the name of a river, mentioned in
a very similar way in VIII, 24, 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 87. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3244)
