[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3206)  [Next](sbe3208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I begin with some mistakes of my own, mistakes which I might have
avoided, if I had always consulted the Prâti*s*âkhya, where single words
or whole passages of the Veda are quoted. Some of these mistakes have
been removed by Professor Aufrecht, others, however, appear in his
transcript as they appear in my own edition.

I need hardly point out passages where palpable misprints in my edition
have been repeated in Professor Aufrecht's text. I mean by palpable
misprints, cases where a glance at the Pada text or at the Sa*m*hitâ
text or a reference to Sâya*n*a's commentary would show at once what was
intended. Thus, for instance, in VI, 15, 3. v*ri*dhé, as I had printed
in the Sa*m*hitâ, was clearly a misprint for v*ri*dhó, as may be seen
from the Pada, which gives v*ri*dhá*h*, and from Sâya*n*a. Here, though
Professor Aufrecht repeats v*ri*dhé, I think it hardly necessary to show
that the authority of the best MSS. (S 2 alone contains a correction of
v*ri*dhó to v*ri*dhé) is in favour of v*ri*dhá*h*, whatever we may think
of the relative value of these two readings. One must be careful,
however, in a text like that of the Vedic hymns, where the presence or
absence of a single letter or accent begins to become

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

the object of the most learned and painstaking discussions, not to claim
too large an indulgence for misprints. A misprint in the Sa*m*hitâ, if
repeated in the Pada, or if admitted even in the commentary of Sâya*n*a,
though it need not be put down to the editor's deplorable ignorance,
becomes yet a serious matter, and I willingly take all the blame which
is justly due for occasional accidents of this character. Such are, for
instance, II, 12, 14, *s*a*s*amânám instead of *s*a*s*amánâm; I, 124, 4,
*s*udhyúva*h*, in the Pada, instead of *s*undhyúva*h*; and the
substitution in several places of a short u instead of a long û in such
forms as *s*û*s*ávâma, when occurring in the Pada; cf. I, 166, 14; 167,
9.

It is clear from the Prâti*s*âkhya, Sûtra 819 and 163, 5, that the words
ûtî´ índra in IV, 29, I, should not be joined together, but that the
hiatus should remain. Hence ûtî´ndra, as printed in my edition and
repeated in Professor Aufrecht's, should be corrected, and the hiatus be
preserved, as it is in the fourth verse of the same hymn, ûtî´ itthâ´.
MSS. S 1, S 3 are right; in S 2 the words are joined.

It follows from Sûtra 799 that to double the y in vaiya*s*va is a
mistake, but a mistake which had to be pointed out and guarded against
as early as the time of the Prâti*s*âkhya. In VIII, 26, 11, therefore,
vaiyya*s*vásya, as printed in my edition and repeated in Professor
Aufrecht's, should be changed to vaiya*s*vásya. MSS. S 1, S 3 are right,
likewise P 1, P 2; but S 2 has the double mistake vayya*s*vásya, as
described in the Prâti*s*âkhya; another MS. of Wilson's has vaiyy. The
same applies to VIII, 23, 24, and VIII, 24, 23. P 1 admits the mistaken
spelling vayya*s*va.

Some corrections that ought to be made in the Padapâ*th*a only, as
printed in my edition, are pointed out in a note to Sûtra 738 of the
Prâti*s*âkhya. Thus, according to Sûtra 583, 6, *s*rûyâ´*h* in the Pada
text of II, 10, 2, should be changed to *s*ruyâ´*h*. MSS. P 1, P 2 have
the short u.

In V, 7, 8, I had printed *s*ú*k*i*h* shma, leaving the a of

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

shma short in accordance with the Prâti*s*âkhya, Sûtra 514, where a
string of words is given before which sma must not be lengthened, and
where under No. 11 we find yásmai. Professor Aufrecht has altered this,
and gives the â as long, which is wrong. The MSS. S 1, S 2, S 3 have the
short a.

Another word before which sma ought not to be lengthened is mâ´vate.
Hence, according to Sûtra 514, 14, I ought not to have printed in VI,
65, 4, shmâ mâ´vate, but shma mâ´vate. Here Professor Aufrecht has
retained the long â, which is wrong. MSS. S 1, S 2, S 3 have the short
a.

It follows from Sûtra 499 that in I, 138, 4, we should not lengthen the
vowel of sú. Hence, instead of asyâ´ û shû´ *n*a úpa sâtáye, as printed
in my edition and repeated by Professor Aufrecht, we should read asyâ´ û
shú *n*a úpa sâtáye. S 1, S 2, S 3 have short u <span
id="fr_37"></span>[a](#fn_28).

In VII, 31, 4, I had by mistake printed viddhí instead of viddhî´. The
same reading is adopted by Professor Aufrecht (II, p. 24), but the
authority of the Prâti*s*âkhya, Sûtra 445, can hardly be overruled. S 1,
S 2, S 3 have viddhî´.

While in cases like these, the Prâti*s*âkhya is an authority which, as
far as I can judge, ought to overrule the authority of every MS.,
however ancient, we must in other cases depend either on the testimony
of the best MSS. or be guided, in fixing on the right reading, by
Sâya*n*a and the rules of grammar. I shall therefore, in cases where I
cannot consider Professor Aufrecht's readings as authoritative
improvements, have to give my reasons why I adhere to the readings which
I had originally adopted.

In V, 9, 4, I had printed by mistake purú yó instead of purû´ yó. I had,
however, corrected this misprint in my edition of the Prâti*s*âkhya,
393, 532. Professor Aufrecht decides in favour of purú with a short u,
but against the authority of the MSS., S 1, S 2, S 3, which have purû´.

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

It was certainly a great mistake of mine, though it may seem more
excusable in a Romanised transcript, that I did not follow the writers
of the best MSS. in their use of the Avagraha, or, I should rather say,
of that sign which, as far as the Veda is concerned, is very wrongly
designated by the name of Avagraha. Avagraha, according to the
Prâti*s*âkhya, never occurs in the Sa*m*hitâ text, but is the name given
to that halt, stoppage, or pause which in the Pada text separates the
component parts of compound words. That pause has the length of one
short vowel, i. e. one mâtrâ. Of course, nothing is said by the
Prâti*s*âkhya as to how the pause should be represented graphically, but
it is several times alluded to as of importance in the recitation and
accentuation of the Veda. What we have been in the habit of calling
Avagraha is by the writers of certain MSS. of the Sa*m*hitâ text used as
the sign of the Viv*ri*tti or hiatus. This hiatus, however, is very
different from the Avagraha, for while the Avagraha has the length of
one mâtrâ, the Viv*ri*tti or hiatus has the length of ¼ mâtrâ, if the
two vowels are short; of ½ mâtrâ, if either vowel is long; of ¾ mâtrâ,
if both vowels are long. Now I have several times called attention to
the fact that though this hiatus is marked in certain MSS. by the sign
<sup>ऽ</sup>, I have in my edition omitted it, because I thought that
the hiatus spoke for itself and did not require a sign to attract the
attention of European readers; while, on the contrary, I have inserted
that sign where MSS. hardly ever use it, viz. when a short initial a is
elided after a final e or o; (see my remarks on pp. 36, 39. of my
edition of the Prâti*s*âkhya.) Although I thought, and still think, that
this use of the sign . is more useful for practical purposes, yet I
regret that, in this one particular, I should have deviated from the
authority of the best MSS., and caused some misunderstandings on the
part of those who have made use of my edition. If, for instance, I had
placed the sign of the Viv*ri*tti, the <sup>ऽ</sup>, in its proper
place, or if, at least, I had not inserted it where, as we say. The
initial a has been elided after e or o, Professor Bollensen would have
seen at once that the authors of the Prâti*s*âkhyas fully agree with him
in looking on this change, not as an

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

elision, but as a contraction. If, as sometimes happens, final o or e
remain unchanged before initial short a, this is called the Pa*ñk*âla
and Prâ*k*ya padav*ri*tti (Sutra 137). If, on the contrary, final o or e
become one (ekîbhavati) with the initial short a, this is called the
Abhinihita sandhi (Sutra 138). While the former, the hiatus of the
Pa*ñk*âla and Eastern schools, is marked by the writers of several MSS.
by the sign <sup>ऽ</sup>, the Abhinihita sandhi, being a sandhi, is not
marked by any sign <span id="fr_38"></span>[a](#fn_29).

I, 3, 12. râ´*g*ati (Aufr. p. 2) instead of râ*g*ati (M. M. vol. i, p.
75) is wrong.

I, 7, 9. ya éka*h* (Aufr. p. 5) should be ya. éka*h* (M. M. vol. i, p.
110), because the relative pronoun is never without an accent. The
relative particle yathâ may be without an accent, if it stands at the
end of a pâda; and though there are exceptions to this rule, yet in
VIII, 21, 5, where Professor Aufrecht gives yathâ, the MSS. are
unanimous in favour of yathâ (M. M. vol. iv, p. 480). See Phi*t*-sutra,
ed. Kielhorn, p. 54.

I, 10, 11. â tû´ (Aufr. p. 7) should be â´ tû´ (M. M. vol. i, p. 139),
because â is never without the accent.

I, 10, 12. *g*úsh*t*â*h*, which Professor Aufrecht specially mentions as
having no final Visarga in the Pada, has the Visarga in all the MSS.,
(Aufr. p. 7, M. M. vol. i. p. 140.)

I, 11, 4. kávir (Aufr. p. 7) should be kavír (M. M. vol. i, p. 143).

I, 22, 8, read râ´dhâ*m*si.

I, 40, 1 and 6. There is no excuse for the accent either on tvémahe or
on vó*k*ema, while sá*k*ân̐ in I, 51, 11, ought to have the accent on the
first syllable.

I, 49, 3. Rosen was right in not eliding the a in divó ántebhya*h*. S 1,
S 2,*S* 3 preserve the initial a, nor does the Prâti*s*âkhya anywhere
provide for its suppression.

I, 54, 8. kshátram (Aufr. p. 46) is a mere misprint for kshatrám.

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

I, 55, 7. vandana*s*rúd (Aufr. p. 47) instead of vandana*s*rud (M. M.
vol. i, p. 514) is wrong.

I, 57, 2. samâ´*s*îta instead of samá*s*îta had been corrected in my
reprint of the first Ma*nd*ala, published at Leipzig. See Bollensen,
Zeitschrift der D. M. G., vol. xxii, p. 626.

I, 61, 7, read vísh*n*u*h*; I, 64, 2, read *s*ú*k*aya*h*; I, 64, 5, read
dhû´taya*h*.

I, 61, 16. Rosen had rightly printed hâriyo*g*anâ with a long â both in
the Sa*m*hitâ and Pada texts, and I ought not to have given the short a
instead. All the MSS., S 1, S 2, S 3, P 1, and P 2, give the long â.
Professor Aufrecht gives the short a in the Pada, which is wrong.

I, 67, 2 (4). vidántîm (M. M. vol. i, p. 595) is perfectly right, as far
as the authority of the MSS. and of Sâya*n*a is concerned, and should
not have been altered to vindántîm (Aufr. p. 57).

I, 72, 2, read vatsám; I, 72, 6, read pasû´ñ; I, 76, 3, read dhákshy; I,
82, 1, read yadâ´.

I, 83, 3. Rosen was right in giving ása*m*yatta*h*. I gave ása*m*yata*h*
on the authority of P 1, but all the other MSS. have tt.

I, 84, 1. indra (Aufr. p. 68) cannot have the accent on the first
syllable, because it does not stand at the beginning of a pâda (M. M.
vol. i, p. 677). The same applies to índra, VI, 41, 4, (Aufr. pt 429)
instead of indra (M. M. vol. iii, p. 734); to ágne, I, 140, 12, (Aufr.
p. 130) instead of agne (M. M. vol. ii, p. 133). In III, 36, 3, on the
contrary, indra, being at the head of a pâda, ought to have the accent
on the first syllable, índra (M. M. vol. ii, p. 855), not indra (Aufr.
p. 249). The same mistake occurs again, III, 36, 10 (Aufr. p. 250); IV,
32, 7, (Aufr. p. 305); IV, 32, 12, (Aufr. p. 305); VIII, 3, 12, (Aufr.
vol. ii, p. 86). In V, 61, 1, nara*h* should have no accent; whereas in
VII, 91, 3, it should have the accent on the first syllable. In VIII, 8,
19, vipanyû should have no accent, and Professor Aufrecht gives it
correctly in the notes, where he has likewise very properly removed the
Avagraha which I had inserted.

I, 88, 1, read yâta (M. M. vol. i, p. 708), not yâtha (Aufr. p. 72).

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

I, 90, 1, read *rig*unîtî´; I, 94, 11, read yavasâ´do (M. M. vol. i, p.
766), not yavasâ´do (Aufr. p. 80).

I, 118, 9. abhibhû´tim (Aufr. p. 105) instead of abhíbhûtim (M. M. vol.
i, p. 957) cannot be right, considering that in all other passages
abhíbhûti has the accent on the second syllable. S 1, S 2, S 3 have the
accent on the i.

I, 128, 4. gh*ri*ta*s*rîr (Aufr. p. 117) instead of gh*ri*ta*s*rî´r
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 52) is wrong.

I, 144, 2, read párîv*ri*tâ*h* (M. M. vol. ii, p. 155) instead of
parî´v*ri*tâ*h* (Aufr. p. 133).

I, 145, 5. Professor Aufrecht (p. 134) gives upamasyâ´m, both in the
Sa*m*hitâ and Pada texts, as having the accent on the last syllable. I
had placed the accent on the penultimate, (Pada, upa-másyâm, vol. ii, p.
161,) and whatever may be the reading of other MSS., this is the only
possible accentuation. S 1, S 2, S 3 have the right accent.

I, 148, 4. pûrû´*n*i (Aufr. p. 136) instead of purû´*n*i (M. M. vol. ii,
p. 170) does not rest, as far as I know, on the authority of any MSS. S
1, S 2, S 3 have purû´*n*i.

I, 151, 7. ga*kkh*atho (Aufr. p. 137) should be gá*kkh*atho (M. M. vol.
ii, p. 181).

I, 161, 12. All the Pada MSS. read prá ábravît, separating the two words
and accentuating each. Though the accent is irregular, yet, considering
the peculiar construction of the verse, in which pra and pro are used as
adverbs rather than as prepositions, I should not venture with Professor
Aufrecht (p. 144) to write prá abravît. The MSS. likewise have â´
á*g*agan, I, 161, 4; and prá ágâ*h*, VIII, 48, 2, not prá agâ*h*, as
Aufrecht gives in his second edition.

I, 163, 11. dhrá*g*îman (Aufr. p. 147) instead of dhrá*g*î*m*ân (M. M.
vol. ii, p. 245) is wrong.

I, 163, 13. gamyâ (Aufr. p. 148) instead of gamyâ´ (M. M. vol. ii, p.
246) is wrong.

I, 164, 17, read páre*n*a (M. M. vol. ii, p. 259) instead of paré*n*a
(Aufr. p. 149).

I, 164, 38. The first *k*ikyú*h* ought to have the accent, and has it in
all the MSS., (Aufr. p. 151, M. M. vol. ii, p. 278.)

I, 165, 5. A mere change of accent may seem a small

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

matter, yet it is frequently of the highest importance in the
interpretation of the Veda. Thus in I, 165, 5, I had, in accordance with
the MSS. S 1, S 2, S 3, printed étân (vol. ii, p. 293) with the accent
on the first syllable. Professor Aufrecht alters this into etâ´n (p.
153), which, no doubt, would be the right form, if it were intended for
the accusative plural of the pronoun, but not if it is meant, as it is
here, for the accusative plural of éta, the speckled deer of the Maruts.

I, 165, 15. yâsish*t*a (Aufr. p. 154) instead of yâsîsh*t*a (M. M. vol.
ii, p. 298) is not supported by any MS.

I, 169, 7, instead of patayánta (Aufr. p. 158), read patáyanta (M. M.
vol. ii, p. 322).

I, 174, 7. kúyâvâ*k*am (Aufr. p. 162) should be kúyavâ*k*am (M. M. vol.
ii, p. 340).

I, 177, 1. yuktâ´, which I had adopted from MS. S 3 (prima manu), is not
supported by other MSS., though P 2 reads yuttkâ´. Professor Aufrecht,
who had retained yuktâ´ in the text, has afterwards corrected it to
yuktvâ´, and in this he was right. In I, 177, 2, gâhi for yâhi is wrong.

I, 188, 4. astri*n*an (Aufr. p. 171) instead of ast*rin*an (M. M. vol.
ii, p. 395) can only be a misprint.

II, 29, 6. kártâd (Aufr. p. 203) instead of kartâ´d (M. M. vol. ii, p.
560) is wrong.

II, 40, 4. *k*akra (Aufr. p. 214) instead of *k*akrá (M. M. vol. ii, p.
614) is wrong.

III, 7, 7. gu*h* (Aufr. p. 226) instead of gú*h* (M. M. vol. ii, p. 666)
is wrong; likewise III, 30, 10, gâ*h* (Aufr. p. 241) instead of gâ´*h*
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 792).

III, 17, 1. i*g*yate (Aufr. p. 232) instead of a*g*yate (M. M. vol. ii,
p. 722) is impossible.

III, 47, 1. Professor Aufrecht (p. 256) puts the nominative índro
instead of the vocative indra, which I had given (vol. ii, p. 902). I
doubt whether any MSS. support that change (S 1, S 2, S 3 have indra),
but it is clear that Sâya*n*a takes indra as a vocative, and likewise
the Nirukta.

III, 50, 2. Professor Aufrecht (p. 258) gives asya, both in the
Sa*m*hitâ and Pada, without the accent on the last syllable. But all the
MSS. that I know (S 1, S 2, S 3, P 1,

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> P 2) give it with
the accent on the last syllable (M. M. vol. ii, p. 912), and this no
doubt is right. The same mistake occurs again in III, 51, 10, (Aufr. p.
259); IV, 5, 11, (Aufr. p. 281); IV, 36, 2, (Aufr. p. 309); V, 12, 3,
(Aufr. p. 337); while in VIII, 103, 9, (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 195) the MSS.
consistently give asya as unaccented, whereas Professor Aufrecht, in
this very passage, places the accent on the last syllable. On the same
page (p. 259) amandan, in the Pada, is a misprint for ámandan.

III, 53, 18. asi (Aufr. p. 262) instead of ási (M. M. vol. ii, p. 934)
is wrong, because hí requires that the accent should remain on ási. S 1,
S 2, S 3, P 1, P 2 have ási.

IV, 4, 7. svá â´yushe (Aufr. p. 279) instead of svá â´yushi (M. M. vol.
iii, p. 37) is not supported by any good MSS., nor required by the sense
of the passage. S 1, S 2, S 3, P 1, P 2 have â´yushi.

IV, 5, 7. árupitam, in the Pada, (Aufr. p. 280) instead of â´rupitam
(M. M. vol. iii, p. 45) is right, as had been shown in the
Prâti*s*âkhya, Sûtra 179, though by a misprint the long â of the
Sa*m*hitâ had been put in the place of the short a of the Pada.

IV, 5, 9. read gaú*h* (M. M. vol. iii, p. 46) instead of gó*h* (Aufr. p.
281).

IV, 15, 2. yâ´ti, with the accent on the first syllable, is supported by
all MSS. against yâti (Aufr. p. 287). The same applies to yâ´ti in IV,
29, 2, and to várante in IV, 31, 9.

IV, 18, 11. amî, without any accent (Aufr. p. 293), instead of amî´
(M. M. vol. iii, p. 105) is wrong, because amî´ is never unaccented.

IV, 21, 9. no, without an accent (Aufr. p. 296), instead of nó (M. M.
vol. iii, p. 120) is wrong.

IV, 26, 3. átithigvam (Aufr. p. 300) instead of atithigvám (M. M. vol.
iii, p. 140) and VI, 47, 22, átithigvasya (Aufr. p. 437) instead of
atithigvásya (M. M. vol. iii, p. 776) are wrong, far atithigvá never
occurs again except with the accent on the last syllable. The MSS. do
not vary. Nor do they vary in the accentuation of kútsa: hence kutsám
(Aufr. p. 300) should be kútsam (M. M. vol. iii p. 139).

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

IV, 36, 6. Professor Aufrecht (p. 309) has altered the accent of
â´vishu*h* into âvishú*h*, but the MSS. are unanimous in favour of
â´vishu*h* (M. M. vol. iii, p. 181).

Again in IV, 41, 9, the MSS. support the accentuation of ágman (M. M.
vol. iii, p. 200), while Professor Aufrecht (p. 313) has altered it to
agman.

IV, 42, 9. ádâ*s*at, being preceded by hí, ought to have the accent;
(Aufrecht, p. 314, has adâ*s*at without the accent.) For the same
reason, V, 29, 3, ávindat (M. M. vol. iii, p. 342) ought not to have
been altered to avindat (Aufr. p. 344).

IV, 50, 4. vyóman is a misprint for vyòman.

V, 15, 5. Professor Aufrecht (p. 338) writes dîrghám instead of dógham
(M. M. vol. iii, p. 314). This, no doubt, was done intentionally, and
not by accident, as we see from the change of accent. But dógham, though
it occurs but once, is supported in this place by all the best MSS., and
has been accepted by Professor Roth in his Dictionary.

V, 34, 4. práyato (Aufr. p. 351) instead of práyatâ (M. M. vol. iii, p.
371) is wrong.

V, 42, 9. visármâ*n*am (Aufr. p. 358) instead of visarmâ´*n*am (M. M.
vol. iii, p. 402) is wrong.

V, 44, 4. parva*n*é (Aufr. p. 360) instead of prava*n*é (M. M. vol. iii,
p. 415) is wrong.

V, 83, 4. vânti (Aufr. p. 389) instead of vâ´nti (M. M. vol. iii, p.
554) is supported by no MSS.

V, 85, 6. âsí*ñk*antî*h* (Aufr. p. 391) instead of âsi*ñk*ántî*h* (M. M.
vol. iii, p. 560) is not supported either by MSS. or by grammar, as
si*ñk* belongs to the Tud-class. On the same grounds isháyanta*h*, VI,
16, 27 (M. M. vol. iii, p. 638), ought not to have been changed to
ishayánta*h* (Aufr. p. 408), nor VI, 24, 7, avakar*s*áyanti (Ni. M. vol.
iii, p. 687) into avakár*s*ayanti (Aufr. p. 418).

VI,. 46, 10, read girva*n*as (M. M. vol. iii, p. 763) instead of
gírva*n*as (Aufr. p. 435).

VI, 60, 10. k*rin*oti (Aufr. p. 450) instead of k*rin*óti (M. M. vol.
iii, p. 839) is wrong.

VII, 40, 4. aryamâ´ â´pa*h* (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 35), in the Pada instead
of aryamâ´ ápa*h* (M. M. vol. iv, p. 81) is wrong.

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

VII, 51, 1. âdityânâ´m (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 40) instead of âdityâ´nâm
(M. M. vol. iv, p. 103) is wrong.

VII, 64, 2. i*l*â´m (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 50) instead of í*l*âm (M. M. vol.
iv, p. 146) is wrong. In the same verse gopâ*h* in the Pada should be
changed in my edition to gopâ.

VII, 66, 5. yó (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 51) instead of yé (M. M. vol. iv, p.
151) is indeed supported by S 3, but evidently untenable on account of
atipíprati.

VII, 72, 3. In abudhran Professor Aufrecht has properly altered the
wrong spelling abudhnan; and, as far as the authority of the best MSS.
is concerned (S 1, S 2, S 3), he is also right in putting a final n,
although Professor Bollensen prefers the dental n; (Zeitschrift der
D. M. G., vol. xxii, p. 599.) The fact is that Vedic MSS. use the
Anusvâra dot for final nasals before all class-letters, and leave it to
us to interpret that dot according to the letter which follows. Before I
felt quite certain on this point, I have in several cases retained the
dot, as given by the MSS., instead of changing it, as I ought to have
done according to my system of writing [Devânagarî](errata.htm#0), into
the corresponding nasal, provided it represents an original n. In I, 71,
1, S 2, S 3 have the dot in a*g*ushran, but S 1 has dental n. In IX, 87,
5, as*ri*gran has the dot; i. e. S 1 has the dot, and n*kh*, dental n
joined to *kh*; S 2 has n*kh* without the dot before the n; S 3 has the
dot, and then *kh*. In IV, 24, 6, the spelling of the Sa*m*hitâ
ávivena*m* tám would leave it doubtful whether we ought to read ávivenan
tám or ávivenam tám; S 1 and S 3 read ávivena*m* tá*m*, but S 2 has
ávivenan tám; P 2 has ávi-venan tá*m*, and P 1 had the same originally,
though a later hand changed it to ávi-vena*m* tá*m*. In IV, 25, 3, on
the contrary, S 1 and S 3 write ávivena*m*; S 2, ávivenam; P i and P 2,
ávi-vena*m*. What is intended is clear enough, viz. ávi-venan in IV, 24,
6; ávi-venam in IV, 25, 3. \[In the new edition ávivenam has been left
in both passages.\]

VII, 73 1. a*s*vinâ (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 56) instead of a*s*vínâ (M. M.
vol. iv, p. 176) is wrong. On the same page, dhísh*n*ye, VII, 72, 3,
should have the accent on the first syllable.

VII, 77, 1. In this verse, which has been so often discussed

<span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (see Kuhn,
Beiträge, vol. iii, p. 472; Böhtlingk and Roth, Dictionary, vol. ii, p.
968; Bollensen, Orient und Occident, vol. ii, p. 463), all the MSS.
which I know, read *k*arâ´yai, and not either *k*arâ´thai nor
*g*arâ´yai.

VIII, 2, 29. kîrí*n*am (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 84) instead of kârí*n*am
(M. M. vol. iv, p. 308) does not rest on the authority of any MSS., nor
is it supported by Sâya*n*a.

VIII, 9, 9. Professor Aufrecht has altered the very important form
â*k*u*k*yuvîmáhi (M. M. vol. iv, p. 389) to â*k*u*k*yavîmáhi (vol. ii,
p. 98). The question is whether this was done intentionally and on the
authority of any MSS. My own MSS. support the form â*k*ukyuvîmáhi, and I
see that Professor Roth accepts this form.

VIII, 32, 14. âyántâram (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 129) instead of âyantâ´ram
(M. M. vol. iv, p. 567) is wrong.

VIII, 47, 15. dushvápnyam (Aufr. vol. ii, p. 151) is not so correct as
du*h*shvápnyam (M. M. vol. iv, p. 660), or, better, dushshvápnyam
(Prâti*s*âkhya, Sûtras 255 and 364), though it is perfectly true that
the MSS. write dushvápnyam.

\[I ought to state that all these errata have been corrected by
Professor Aufrecht in his second edition.\]

In the ninth and tenth Ma*nd*alas I have not to defend myself, and I
need not therefore give a list of the passages where I think that
Professor Aufrecht's text is not supported by the best MSS. My own
edition of these Ma*nd*alas will soon be published, and I need hardly
say that where it differs from Professor Aufrecht's text, I am prepared
to show that I had the best authorities on my side.

Professor Aufrecht writes in the second edition of his Romanised text of
the Rig-veda (p. iv): 'Um den Herren, <span class="margnote">My own
mistakes.</span>die diese Druckfehler in majorem gloriam suam mit so
grosser Schonung hervorgehoben haben, einen Gegendienst zu erweisen,
bemerke ich einige derselben.' Dieser Gegendienst, so gut er gemeint
war, ist leider nicht sehr bedeutend ausgefallen, auch nicht immer in
majorem gloriam Catonis.

In I, 161, 2, Professor Aufrecht objects to *k*aturas k*ri*notana. I
felt doubtful about it, and in the commentary I printed *k*atura*h*
k*rin*otana. In IV, 33, 5, the reading

<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span>

*k*atus kara is sanctioned by the authority of the Prâti*s*âkhya, Sûtra
281, 4.

In I, 181, 5, Aufrecht prefers mathrâ; Sâya*n*a, Böhtlingk and Roth, and
I prefer mathnâ.

In II, II, 10, he has discovered that *g*ûrvît was meant for *g*ûrvât.
Whitney still quotes *g*ûrvît.

In III, 9, 4, he has discovered that apsu should be <sup>ऽ</sup>psu; but
this had been already corrected.

In III, 25, 2, the final a of vaha ought to be long in the Sa*m*hitâ.

In IV, 19, 4, instead of d*rilh*â ni read d*rilh*âni.

In VII, 33, 2, instead of av*rin*îtâ read <sup>ऽ</sup>v*rin*îtâ.

In VII, 35, 13, the Visarga in devagopâ*h* should be deleted.

In VII, 42, 2, the Anusvâra in yu*m*kshvâ should be deleted.

In VIII, 2, 30, the anudâttatara should be shifted from the ultimate to
the penultimate, dadhiré, not dadhire.

In VIII, 51, 3, avishyanta was meant for arishyantam.

In VIII, 55, 5, for na read â. The MSS. vary in both cases.

In IX, 108, 7, in vanakraksha, the kra was printed as *ri*. Professor
Aufrecht might have seen it correctly printed in the index. Sâya*n*a
read vana*ri*ksha.

In X, 28, 11, Professor Aufrecht thinks that the Pada should have
godhâ*h* instead of godhâ. I think godhâ is right, in spite of Professor
Aufrecht's appeal to the silence of the Prâti*s*âkhya. The fact is that
godhâ*h* never occurs, while godhâ occurs in the preceding verse, and
again VIII, 69, 9.

After such a flourish of trumpets, we expected more from Professor
Aufrecht; still we must learn to be grateful even for small mercies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[lvii:a](sbe3207.htm#fr_37) In the same verse,
I, 138, 4, the shu in ó shú tvâ should not be lengthened, for there is
no rule, as far as I can see, in the Prâti*s*âkhya that would require
the lengthening of sú before tvâ. See Prâti*s*âkhya, 495.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[lix:a](sbe3207.htm#fr_38) As to the system or
want of system, according to which the Abhinihita sandhi takes place in
the Sa*m*hitâ, see [p. xlviii](sbe3205.htm#page_xlviii) seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 5](sbe3208)
