[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3208)  [Next](sbe3210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It will be seen from these remarks that many things have to be
considered before one can form an independent judgment as to the exact
view adopted by Sâya*n*a in places where he differs from other
authorities, or as to the exact words in which he clothed his meaning.
Such cases occur again and again. Thus in IX, 86, I find that Professor
Aufrecht ascribes the first ten verses to the Ak*ri*sh*t*as, whereas
Sâya*n*a calls them Âk*ri*sh*t*as. It is perfectly true that the best
MSS. of the Anukrama*n*ikâ have Ak*ri*sh*t*a, it is equally true that
the name of these Ak*ri*sh*t*as is spelt with a short a in the
Hariva*m*sa, 11,533, but an editor of Sâya*n*a's work is not to alter
the occasional mistakes of that learned commentator, and Sâya*n*a
certainly called these poets Âk*ri*sh*t*as.

<span id="page_lxxi">p. lxxi</span>

Verses 21-30 of the same hymn are ascribed by Professor Aufrecht to the
P*ris*niya*h*. Here, again, several MSS. support that reading; and in
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya's commentary, the correction of p*ris*niya*h* into
p*ris*naya*h* is made by a later hand. But Sâya*n*a clearly took
p*ris*naya*h* for a nominative plural of p*ris*ni, and in this case he
certainly was right. The Dictionary of Böhtlingk and Roth quotes the
Mahâbhârata, VII, 8728, in support of the peculiar reading of
p*ris*niya*h*, but the published text gives p*ris*naya*h*. Professor
Benfey, in his list of poets (Ind. Stud. vol. iii, p. 223), gives
p*ris*niyo*g*a as one word, not p*ris*niyogâ, as stated in *th*e
Dictionary of Böhtlingk and Roth, but this is evidently meant for two
words, viz. p*ris*nayo<sup>ऽ</sup>*g*â*h*. However, whether
p*ris*niya*h* or p*ris*naya*h* be the real name of these poets, an
editor of Sâya*n*a is bound to give that reading of the name which
Sâya*n*a believed to be the right one, i. e. p*ris*naya*h* <span
id="fr_44"></span>[a](#fn_35).

Again, in the same hymn, Professor Aufrecht ascribes verses 31-40 to the
Atris. We should then have to read t*ri*tîye<sup>ऽ</sup>traya*h*. But
Sâya*n*a read t*ri*tîye traya*h*, and ascribes verses 31-40 to the three
companies together of the *Ri*shis mentioned before. On this point the
MSS. admit of no doubt, for we read: *k*aturthasya *k*a da*s*ar*k*asya
âk*ri*sh*t*â mâshâ ityâdidvinâmânas trayo ga*n*â drash*t*âra*h*. I do
not say that the other explanation is wrong; I only say that, whether
right or wrong, Sâya*n*a certainly read traya*h*, not atraya*h*; and an
editor of Sâya*n*a has no more right to correct the text, supported by
the best MSS., in the first and second, than in the third of these
passages, all taken from one and the same hymn.

But though I insist so strongly on a strict observance of the rules of
diplomatic criticism with regard to the text <span class="margnote">Old
mistakes in the text.</span>of the Rig-veda, nay, even of Sâya*n*a, I
insist equally strongly on the right of independent criticism, which
ought to begin where diplomatic

<span id="page_lxxii">p. lxxii</span>

criticism ends. Considering the startling antiquity which we can claim
for every letter and accent of our MSS., so far as they are
authenticated by the Prâti*s*âkhya, to say nothing of the passages of
many hymns which are quoted verbatim in the Brâhma*n*as, the
Kalpa-sûtras, the Nirukta, the B*ri*haddevatâ, and the Anukrama*n*îs, I
should deem it reckless to alter one single letter or one single accent
in an edition of the hymns of the Rig-veda. As the text has been handed
down to us, so it should remain; and whatever alterations and
corrections we, the critical Mle*kkh*as of the nineteenth century, have
to propose, should be kept distinct from that time-hallowed inheritance.
Unlikely as it may sound, it is true nevertheless that we, the scholars
of the nineteenth century, are able to point out mistakes in the text of
the Rig-veda which escaped the attention of the most learned among the
native scholars of the sixth century <span class="smallcaps">b.c.</span>
No doubt, these scholars, even if they had perceived such mistakes,
would hardly have ventured to correct the text of their sacred writings.
The authors of the Prâti*s*âkhya had before their eyes or ears a text
ready made, of which they registered every peculiarity, nay, in which
they would note and preserve every single irregularity, even though it
stood alone amidst hundreds of analogous cases. With us the case is
different. Where we see a rule observed in 99 cases, we feel strongly
tempted and sometimes justified in altering the 100th case in accordance
with what we consider to be a general rule. Yet even then I feel
convinced we ought not to do more than place our conjectural readings
below the textus receptus of the Veda,—a text so ancient and venerable
that no scholar of any historical tact or critical taste would venture
to foist into it a conjectural reading, however plausible, nay, however
undeniable.

<span class="margnote">Sthâtú*h* *k*arátham.</span>There can be no
clearer case of corruption in the traditional text of the Rig-veda than,
for instance, in I, 70, 4, where the Pada text reads:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

várdhân yám pûrvî´*h* kshapá*h* ví-rûpâ*h* sthâtú*h* *k*a rátham
*ri*tá-pravîtam.

</div>

All scholars who have touched on this verse, Professors Benfey,
Bollensen, Roth, and others, have pointed out that

<span id="page_lxxiii">p. lxxiii</span>

instead of *k*a rátham, the original poet must have said *k*arátham. The
phrase sthâtú*h* *k*arátham, what stands and moves, occurs several
times. It is evidently an ancient phrase, and hence we can account for
the preservation in it of the old termination of the nom. sing. of
neuters in *ri*, which here, as in the Greek μάρ-τυρ or μάρ-τυς, masc.,
appears as ur or us, while in the ordinary Sanskrit we find *ri* only.
This nom. sing. neut. in us, explains also the common genitives and
ablatives, pitu*h*, mâtu*h*, &c., which stand for pitur-s, mâtur-s. This
phrase sthâtú*h* *k*arátham occurs:

I, 58, 5. sthâtú*h* *k*arátham bhayate patatrí*n*a*h*.

What stands and what moves is afraid of Agni.

I, 68, 1. sthâtú*h* *k*arátham aktû´n ví ûr*n*ot.

He lighted up what stands and what moves during every night.

I, 72, 6. pa*s*û´n ka sthât*rî´*n *k*arátham *k*a pâhi.

Protect the cattle, and what stands and moves!

Here it has been proposed to read sthâtú*h* instead of sthât*rî´*n, and
I confess that this emendation is very plausible. One does not see how
pa*s*û, cattle, could be called immobilia or fixtures, unless the poet
wished to make a distinction between cattle that are kept fastened in
stables, and cattle that are allowed to roam about freely in the
homestead. This distinction is alluded to, for instance, in the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, XI, 8, 3, 2. saurya evaisha pa*s*u*h* syâd iti,
tasmâd etasminn astamite pa*s*avo badhyante; badhnanty ekân
yathâgosh*th*am, eka upasamâyanti.

I, 70, 2. gárbha*h* *k*a sthâtâ´m gárbha*h* *k*aráthâm, (read sthâtrâ´m,
and see Bollensen, Orient and Occident, vol. ii, p. 462.)

He who is within all that stands and all that moves.

The word *k*arátha, if it occurs by itself, means flock, movable
property:

III, 31, 15. â´t ít sâkhi-bhya*h* *k*arátham sám airat.

He brought together, for his friends, the flocks.

VIII, 33, 8. puru-trâ´ *k*arátham dadhe.

He bestowed flocks on many people.

X, 92, 13. prá na*h* pûshâ´ *k*arátham—avatu.

May Pûshan protect our flock!

<span id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span>

Another idiomatic phrase in which sthâtú*h* occurs is sthâtú*h*
*g*ágata*h*, and here sthâtú*h* is really a genitive:

IV, 53, 6. *g*ágata*h* sthâtú*h* k ubháyasya yá*h* va*s*î´.

He who is lord of both, of what is movable and what is immovable.

VI, 50, 7. ví*s*vasya sthâtú*h* *g*ágata*h* *g*ánitrî*h*.

They who created all that stands and moves.

VII, 60, 2. ví*s*vasya sthâtú*h* *g*ágata*h* *k*a gopâ´*h*.

The guardians of all that stands and moves. Cf. X, 63, 8.

I, 159, 3. sthâtú*h* *k*a satyám *g*ágata*h* *k*a dhárma*n*i putrásya
pâtha*h* padám ádvayâvina*h*.

Truly while you uphold all that stands and moves, you protect the home
of the guileless son. Cf. II, 31, 5.

But although I have no doubt that in I, 70, 4, the original poet said
sthâtú*h* *k*arátham, I should be loath to suppress the evidence of the
mistake and alter the Pada text from *k*a rátham to *k*arátham. The very
mistake is instructive, as showing us the kind of misapprehension to
which the collectors of the Vedic text were liable, and enabling us to
judge how far the limits of conjectural criticism may safely be
extended.

A still more extraordinary case of misunderstanding on the part of the
original compilers of the Vedic texts, <span
class="margnote">Uloka.</span>and likewise of the authors of the
Prâti*s*âkhyas, the Niruktas, and other Vedic treatises, has been
pointed out by Professor Kuhn. In an article of his, 'Zur ältesten
Geschichte der Indogermanischen Völker' (Indische Studien, vol. i, p.
351), he made the following observation: 'The Lithuanian laukas, Lett.
lauks, Pruss. laukas, all meaning field, agree exactly with the Sk.
lokas, world, Lat. locus, Low Germ. (in East-Frisia and Oldenburg)
louch, lôch, village. All these words are to be traced back to the Sk.
uru, Gr. εὐρύς, broad, wide. The initial u is lost, as in Goth. rûms, O.
H. G. rûmi, rûmin (Low Germ. rûme, an open uncultivated field in a
forest), and the r changed into l. In support of this derivation it
should be observed that in the Veda loka is frequently preceded by the
particle u, which probably was only separated from it by the
Diaskeuastæ, and that the meaning is

<span id="page_lxxv">p. lxxv</span>

that of open space.' Although this derivation has met with little
favour, I confess that I look upon this remark, excepting only the Latin
locus <span id="fr_45"></span>[a](#fn_36), i. e. stlocus, as one of the
most ingenious of this eminent scholar. The fact is that this particle u
before loka is one of the most puzzling occurrences in the Veda.
Professor Bollensen says that loka never occurs without a preceding u in
the first eight Ma*nd*alas, and this is perfectly true with the
exception of one passage which he has overlooked, VIII, 100, 12, dyaú*h*
dehí lokám vá*g*râya vi-skábhe, Dyu! give room for the lightning to step
forth! Professor Bollensen (l. c. p. 603) reads v*ri*trâ´ya instead of
vá*g*râya, without authority. He objects to dyaú*h* as a vocative, which
should be dyaû´*h*; but dyaú*h* may be dyó*h*, a genitive belonging to
vá*g*râya, in which case we should translate, Make room for the
lightning of Dyu to step forth!

But what is even more important is the fact that the occurrence of this
unaccented u at the beginning of a pâda is against the very rules, or,
at least, runs counter to the very observations which the authors of the
Prâti*s*âkhya have made on the inadmissibility of an unaccented word in
such a place, so that they had to insert a special provision, Prât. 978,
exempting the unaccented u from this observation: anudâttam tu pâdâdau
novar*g*am vidyate padam, 'no unaccented word is found at the beginning
of a pâda except u!' Although I have frequently insisted on the fact
that such statements of the Prâti*s*âkhya are not to be considered as
rules, but simply as more or less general statistical accumulations of
facts actually occurring in the Veda, I have also pointed out that we
are at liberty to found on these collected facts inductive observations
which may assume the character of real rules. Thus, in our case, we can
well understand why there should be none, or, at least, very few
instances, where an unaccented word begins a pâda. We should not begin a
verse with an enclitic particle in any other language either; and as in
Sanskrit a verb at the

<span id="page_lxxvi">p. lxxvi</span>

beginning of a pâda receives ipso facto the accent, and as the same
applies to vocatives, no chance is left for an unaccented word in that
place, except it be a particle. But the one particle that offends
against this general observation is u, and the very word before which
this u causes this metrical offence, is loka. Can any argument be more
tempting in favour of admitting an old form uloka instead of u loka?
Lokám is preceded by u in I, 93, 6; II, 30, 6; (asmín bhayá-sthe
k*rin*utam u lokám, make room for us, grant an escape to us, in this
danger!) IV, 17, 17; VI, 23, 3; 7 (with urúm); 47, 8 (urúm na*h* lokâm,
or ulokâm?); 73, 2; VII, 20, 2; 33, 5 (with urúm); 60, 9 (with urúm);
84, 2 (with urúm); 99, 4 (with urúm); IX, 92, 5; X, 13, 2; 16, 4
(suk*rí*tâm u lokám); 30, 7; 104, 10; 180, 3 (with urúm). Loké is
preceded by u in III, 29, 8; V, 1, 6; lokak*rí*t, IX, 86, 21; X, 133, 1.
In all remaining passages u loká is found at the beginning of a pâda:
loká*h*, III, 37, 11; lokâm, III, 2, 9 (u lokám u dvé (iti) úpa *g*âmím
îyatu*h*); V, 4, II; loka-k*ri*tnúm, VIII, 15, 4; IX, 2, 8. The only
passages in which loka occurs without being preceded by u, are lokám,
VI, 47, 8 (see above); VIII, 100, 12; X, 14, 9; 85, 20 (am*rí*tasya);
lokâ´*h*, IX, 113, 9; lokâ´n, X, 90, 14; loké, IX, 113, 72; X, 85, 24.

It should be remembered that in the Gâthâs the u of words beginning with
urv° does not count metrically (Hübschmann, Ein Zoroastrisches Lied, p.
37), and that in Pâli also uru must be treated as monosyllabic, in such
passages as Mahâv., p. 2, line 5. The same applies to passages in the
Rig-veda, such as I, 138, 3; VII, 39, 3, where the metre requires uru to
be treated as one syllable. In IX, 96, 15, the original reading may have
been urur iva, instead of uru-iva.

Considering all this, I feel as convinced as it is possible to be in
such matters, that in all the passages where u loká occurs and where it
means space, carrière ouverte, freedom, we ought to read uloká; but in
spite of this I could never bring myself to insert this word, of which
neither the authors of the Brâhma*n*as nor the writers of the
Prâti*s*âkhyas or even later grammarians had any idea, into the text. On

<span id="page_lxxvii">p. lxxvii</span>

the contrary, I should here, too, consider it most useful to leave the
traditional reading, and to add the corrections in the margin, in order
that, if these conjectural emendations are in time considered as beyond
the reach of doubt, they may be used as evidence in support of
conjectures which, without such evidence, might seem intolerable in the
eyes of timid critics.

There remains one difficulty about this hypothetical word uloká, which
it is but fair to mention. If it is derived from uru, or, as Professor
Bollensen suggests, from urva*k* or urvak, the change of va into o would
require further support. Neither maghon for maghavan, nor duro*n*a for
dura-va*n*a are strictly analogous cases, because in each we have an a
preceding the va or u. Strictly speaking, uroka presupposes uravaka, as
*s*lóka presupposes *s*ravaka, or óka, house, avaka (from av, not from
u*k*). It should also be mentioned that a compound such as RV. X, 128,
2, urúlokam (scil. antáriksham) is strange, and shows how completely the
origin of loka was forgotten at the time when the hymns of the tenth
Ma*nd*ala were composed. But all this does not persuade us to accept
Ascoli's conjecture (Lezioni di Fonologia Comparata, p. 235), that as
uloga (but not uloka) is a regular Tamil form of loka, uloka in the Veda
might be due to a reaction of the aboriginal dialects on the Vedic
Sanskrit. We want far more evidence before admitting such a reaction
during the Vedic period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[lxxi:a](sbe3209.htm#fr_44) Professor Aufrecht
in his new edition of the text (1877) adopts the more timid reading
p*ris*naya*h*. See also B*ri*hat-Sa*m*hitâ, transl. by Kern, p. 2:
Sikatâ*h* p*ris*nayo gargâ vâlakhilyâ marî*k*ipâ*h*
bh*ri*gavo<sup>ऽ</sup>aṅgirasa*s* *k*aiva sûkshmâ*s* *k*ânye
maharshaya*h*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[lxxv:a](sbe3209.htm#fr_45) On locus, see
Corssen, Krit. Beitr. p. 463, and Aussprache, 2nd ed., p. 810. Corssen
does not derive it from a root stâ or, sthâ, but identifies it with
Goth. strik-s, Engl. stroke, strecke.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 7](sbe3210)
