[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3224)  [Next](sbe3226) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 88.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 6, VARGA 14.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Come hither, Maruts, on your chariots charged with lightning,
resounding with beautiful songs [1](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:1:1), stored
with spears, and winged with horses! Fly [3](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:1:3) to
us like birds, with your best food [2](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:1:2), you
mighty ones!

2\. They come gloriously on their red, or, it may be, on their tawny
horses which hasten their chariots. He who holds the axe
[1](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:2:1) is brilliant like gold;—with the tire
[2](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:2:2) of the chariot they have struck the earth.

3\. On your bodies there are daggers for beauty; may they stir up our
minds [1](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:3:1) as they stir up the forests. For
yourselves, O well-born Maruts, the vigorous (among you) shake
[2](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:3:2) the stone (for distilling Soma).

4\. Days went round you and came back [1](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:4:1), O
hawks, back to this prayer, and to this sacred rite; the Gotamas making
prayer with songs, pushed up the lid of the well (the cloud) for to
drink.

5\. No such hymn [1](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:5:1) was ever known as this
which Gotama sounded for you, O Maruts, when he saw you on golden
wheels, wild boars [2](sbe3225.htm#an_1:88:5:2) rushing about with iron
tusks.

6\. This comforting speech rushes sounding towards you, like the speech
of a suppliant: it rushed freely from our hands as our speeches are wont
to do.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is ascribed to Gotama, the son of Rahûga*n*a. The metre
varies. Verses 1 and 6 are put down as Prastâra-paṅkti, i. e. as 12 + 12
+ 8 + 8. By merely counting the syllables, and dissolving semivowels, it
is just possible to get twenty-four syllables in the first line of
verses 1 and 6. The old metricians must have scanned verse 1:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

â̄ vīd̆yūnmāt-bhī*h* mărŭtā*h* sû̆-ārkaī*h*  
răthēbhī*h* yâ̄ta ̄͡*ri*sh*t*ĭmāt-bhĭ*h* ā*s*vă-pār*n*aī*h*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again verse 6:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ēshâ̄ sy̆â̄ vā*h* mărŭtā*h* ănŭ-bhārtrî̄  
prătī stōbhătĭ vâ̄ghătā*h* nă vâ̄n̆î̄.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the general
character of these lines shows that they were intended for
hendecasyllabics, each ending in a bacchius, though even then they are
not free from irregularities. The first verse would scan:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

â̄ vīdy̆ūnmāt-bhī*h* mărŭtā*h* sŭ-ārkaī*h*  
răthēbhī*h* yâ̄ta ̄͡*ri*sh*t*ĭmāt-(bhĭ*h*) āsvă-pār*n*aī*h*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And verse 6:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ēshâ̄ sy̆â̄, vā*h* mărŭta*h* ̄͡anŭ-bhārtrî̄  
prătī stōbhătĭ vâ̄ghătā*h* nă vâ̄*n*î̄.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our only
difficulty would be the termination bhi*h* of *ri*sh*t*imat-bhi*h*. I
cannot adopt Professor Kuhn's suggestion to drop the Visarga of bhi*h*
and change i into y (Beiträge, vol. iv, p. 198), for this would be a
license without any parallel. It is different with sa*h*, originally sa,
or with feminines in i*h*, where parallel forms in î are intelligible.
The simplest correction would be to read răthēbhī*h* yâ̄ta
̄͡*ri*sh*t*ĭ-mānta*h* ̄͡a*s*vă-pār*n*ai*h*. One might urge in support of
this reading that in all other passages where *ri*sh*t*imat occurs, it
refers to the Maruts themselves, and never to their chariots. Yet the
difficulty remains, how could so simple a reading have been replaced by
a more difficult one?

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

In the two Gâyatrî pâdas which follow I feel equally reluctant to alter.
I therefore scan

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

â̄ vārshīsh*th*ăyâ̄ nă*h* ĭshâ̄ văyā*h* nă pāpt̅̆a̅t̅̆a sŭ-mâ̄yâ̄*h*,

</div>

taking the dactyl of paptata as representing a spondee, and admitting
the exceptionàl bacchius instead of the amphimacer at the end of the
line.

The last line of verse 6 should be scanned:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ăstōbhăyāt v*ri*̆thâ ̄͡âsâ̆m̄ ănū svădhâ̄m găbhāsty̆ō*h*.

</div>

There are two other verses in this hymn where the metre is difficult. In
the last pâda of verse 5 we have seven syllables instead of eleven.
Again, I say, it would be most easy to insert one of the many
tetrasyllabic epithets of the Maruts. But this would have been equally
easy for the collectors of the Veda. Now the authors of the
Anukrama*n*îs distinctly state that this fifth verse is virâ*d*rûpâ,
i. e. that one of its pâdas consists of eight syllables. How they would
have made eight syllables out of vi-dhâvata*h* varâhûn does not appear,
but at all events they knew that last pâda to be imperfect. The rhythm
does not suffer by this omission, as long as we scan vĭ-dhâ̄vătā*h*
vărâ̄hû̄n.

Lastly, there is the third pâda of the second verse, rukma*h* na
*k*itra*h* svadhiti-vân. It would not be possible to get eleven
syllables out of this, unless we admitted vyûha not only in sv̆ădhĭtĭvâ̄n
or sv̆ădhĭtî̄-vâ̄n, but also in *k*ĭtră*h*̄. Kuhn (Beiträge, vol. iv, p.
192) proposes to scan rukmaü na *k*itara*h* svadhitivân. Nothing would
be easier than to insert eshâm after *k*itra*h*, but the question occurs
again, how could eshâm be lost, or why, if by some accident it had been
lost, was not so obvious a correction made by *S*aunaka and Kâtyâyana?

No verse of this hymn occurs in SV., VS., AV., TS., TB.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:88:1:1">1</span>. Alluding to the music of the
Maruts, and not to the splendour of the lightning which is mentioned
before. See Wolf, Beiträge zur Deutschen Mythologie, vol. ii, p. 137.
'Das Ross and den Wagen des Gottes begleitet munterer Hörnerschall,
entweder stösst er selbst ins Horn,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

oder sein Gefolge. Oft vernimmt man auch eine liebliche Musik, der keine
auf Erden gleich kommt (Müllenhof, 582). Das wird das Pfeifen and Heulen
des Sturmes sein, nur in idealisirter Art.' Ibid. p. 158.

Note <span id="an_1:88:1:2">2</span>. Várshish*th*a, which is generally
explained as the superlative of v*ri*ddha, old (Pâ*n*. VI, 4, 157), has
in most passages of the Rig-veda the more general meaning of strong or
excellent: VI, 47, 9. ísham â´ vakshi ishâ´m várshish*th*âm; III, 13, 7
(vásu); III, 26, 8 (rátna); III, 16, 3 (raí); IV, 31, 15; VIII, 46, 24
(*s*ráva*h*); IV, 22, 9 (n*ri*m*n*á); V, 67, 1 (kshatrá); VI, 45, 31
(mûrdhán). In some passages, however, it may be taken in the sense of
oldest (I, 37, 6; V, 7, 1), though by no means necessarily.
Várshish*th*a is derived in reality from v*rí*shan, in the sense of
strong, excellent. See note to I, 85, 12, page
[144](sbe3222.htm#page_144).

Note <span id="an_1:88:1:3">3</span>. Paptata, the second person plural
of the imperative of what is commonly, though without much reason,
called the aorist of the causative of pat. It is curiously like the
Greek πίπτετε, but it has the meaning of flying rather than falling; see
Curtius, Grundzüge, p. 190. Two other forms formed on the same principle
occur in the Rig-veda, papta*h* and paptan:

II, 31, 1. prá yát váya*h* ná páptan.

That they may fly to us like birds.

VI, 63, 6. prá vâm váya*h*—ánu paptan.

May your birds fly after you.

X, 95, 15. púrûrava*h* mâ´ m*ri*thâ*h* mâ´ prá papta*h*.

Purûravas, do not die, do not go away!

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:88:2:1">1</span>. Though svadhiti-vân does not occur
again, it can only mean he who holds the axe, or, it may be, the sword
or the thunderbolt, the latter particularly, if Indra is here intended.
Svadhiti signifies axe:

III, 2, 10. svá-dhitim ná té*g*ase.

They adorned Agni like an axe to shine or to cut.

The svádhiti is used by the butcher, I, 162, 9; 18; 20; and by the
wood-cutter or carpenter, III, 8, 6; 11; X, 89, 7, &c. Roth (s. v.)
takes svadhiti as meaning also a tree,

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

possibly the oak, and he translates svadhitivân in our passage by a
chariot made of the wood of the Svadhiti tree. In RV. IX, 96, 6,
svádhitir vánânâm may well mean 'the strong axe among woods,' the axe
being naturally made of the strongest wood. In V, 32, 10, a devî´
svádhiti*h* is mentioned, possibly the lightning, the companion of Indra
and the Maruts.

Note <span id="an_1:88:2:2">2</span>. The tire of the chariot of the
Maruts is frequently mentioned. It was considered not only as an
essential part of their chariot, but likewise as useful for crushing the
enemy:

V, 52, 9. utá pavyâ´ ráthânâm ádrim bhindanti ó*g*asâ.

They cut the mountain (cloud) with the tire of their chariots.

I, 166, 10. pavíshu kshurâ´*h* ádhi.

On their tires are sharp edges.

In V, 31, 5, tires are mentioned without horses and chariot, which were
turned by Indra against the Dasyus (I, 64, 11). I doubt, however,
whether in India or elsewhere the tires or the wheels of chariots were
ever used as weapons of attack, as detached from the chariot; (see
M. M., On Pavîrava, in Beiträge zur Vergleichenden Sprachforschung, vol.
iii, p. 447.) If we translate the figurative language of the Vedic poets
into matter-of-fact terms, the tires of the chariots of the Maruts may
be rendered by thunderbolts; yet by the poets of the Veda, as by the
ancient people of Germany, thunder was really supposed to be the noise
of the chariot of a god, and it was but a continuation of the same
belief that the sharp wheels of that chariot were supposed to cut and
crush the clouds; (see M. M., loc. cit., p. 444.)

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:88:3:1">1</span>. That the vâ´*s*îs are small
weapons, knives or daggers, we saw before, p. 71. Sâya*n*a here explains
vâ´*s*î by a weapon commonly called âra, or an awl. In X, 101, 10,
vâ´*s*îs are mentioned, made of stone, a*s*man-máyî.

The difficulty begins with the second half. Medhâ´, as here written in
the Pada text, could only be a plural of

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

a neuter medhá, but such a neuter does nowhere exist in the Veda. We
only find the masculine médha, sacrifice, which is out of the question
here, on account of its accent. Hence the passage III, 58, 2, ûrdhvâ´*h*
bhavanti pitárâ-iva médhâ*h*, is of no assistance, unless we alter the
accent. The feminine medhâ´ means will, thought, prayer: I, 18, 6; II,
34, 7; IV, 33, 10; V, 27, 4; 42, 13; VII, 104, 6; VIII, 6, 10; 52, 9;
IX, 9, 9; 26, 3; 32, 6; 65, 16; 107, 25; X, 91, 8. The construction does
not allow us to take medhâ´ as a Vedic instrumental instead of medháyâ,
nor does such a form occur anywhere else in the Rig-veda. Nothing
remains, I believe, but to have recourse to conjecture, and the addition
of a single Visarga in the Pada would remove all difficulty. In the next
line, if tuvi-dyumnâ´sa*h* be the subject, it would signify the priests.
This, however, is again without any warrant from the Rig-veda, where
tuvi-dyumná is always used as an epithet of gods. I therefore take it as
referring to the Maruts, as an adjective in the nominative, following
the vocatives maruta*h* su-*g*âtâ*h*. The conception that the Maruts
stir up the forests is not of unfrequent occurrence in the Rig-veda cf.
I, 171, 3. That ûrdhvá is used of the mind, in the sense of roused, may
be seen in I, 119, 2; 134, I; 144, 1; VII, 64, 4. The idea in the poet's
mind seems to have been that the thunderbolts of the Maruts rouse up men
to prayer as they stir the tops of the forest trees. Ludwig takes medha,
masc., in the sense of lance, comparing it with Icelandic meidhr, but
the two words cannot well be the same. Possibly vana may be meant for
lances: 'May they raise our minds, like lances;' see note to I, 171, 3.

Note <span id="an_1:88:3:2">2</span>. On dhan in the sense of to
agitate, see B. and R. s. v. The shaking of the stone may be the shaking
of the stone for distilling the heavenly Soma or the rain; but adri may
also be meant for the thunderbolt. I now take tuvidyumna for an
adjective referring to the Maruts, because it is a divine rather than a
human epithet. Still, the passage is doubtful.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:88:4:1">1</span>. The first question is, which is
the subject, áhâni

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

or g*rí*dhrâ*h*? If g*rí*dhrâ*h* were the subject, then we should have
to translate it by the eager poets, and take áhâni in the sense of
vi*s*vâ ahâni. The sense then might be: 'Day by day did the eager poets
sing around you this prayer.' There would be several objections,
however, to this rendering. First, g*rí*dhrâ*h*, though metaphorically
applicable to poets, never occurs again as signifying poets or priests.
One passage only could be quoted in support, IX, 97, 57, kaváya*h* ná
g*rí*dhrâ*h* (not g*ri*dhrâ´*h*), like greedy poets. But even here, if
indeed the translation is right, the adjective is explained by kaví, and
does not stand by itself. Secondly, áhâni by itself is never used
adverbially in the sense of day after day. The only similar passage that
might be quoted is III, 34, 10, and that is very doubtful. To take áhâni
as a totally different word, viz. as á + hâni, without ceasing, without
wearying, would be too bold in the present state of Vedic
interpretation. If then we take áhâni as the subject, g*rí*dhrâ*h* would
have to be taken as a vocative, and intended for the Maruts. Now, it is
perfectly true, that by itself g*rí*dhra, hawk, does not occur again as
a name of the Maruts, but *s*yená, hawk, and particularly a strong hawk
(IX, 96, 6), is not only a common simile applied to the Maruts, but is
actually used as one of their names:

VII, 56, 3. abhí sva-pû´bhi*h* mithá*h* vapanta vâ´ta-svanasa*h*
*s*yenâ´*h* asp*ri*dhran.

They plucked each other with their beaks (?), the hawks, rushing like
the wind, strove together.

Agu*h* might be the aorist of gai, to sing, or of gâ, to go:

I, 174, 8. sánâ tâ´ te indra návyâ*h* â´ agu*h*.

New poets, O Indra, sang these thy old deeds.

III, 56, 2. gâ´va*h* â´ agu*h*.

The cows approached.

If then the sense of the first line is, 'Days went and came back to
you,' the next question is whether we are to extend the construction to
the next words, imâ´m dhíyam vârkâryâ´m *k*a devî´m, or whether these
words are to be joined to k*rin*vánta*h*, like bráhma. The meaning of

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

vârkâryâ´ is, of course, unknown. Sâya*n*a's interpretation as 'what is
to be made by means of water' is merely etymological, and does not help
us much. It is true that the object of the hymn, which is addressed to
the Maruts, is rain, and that literally vârkâryâ´ might be explained as
'that the effect of which is rain.' But this is far too artificial a
word for Vedic poets. Possibly there was some other word that had become
unintelligible and which, by a slight change, was turned into vârkâryâ´,
in order to give the meaning of rain-producing. It might have been
*k*arkârya, glorious, or the song of a poet called Vârkara, or, as
Ludwig suggests, V*ri*kâri. The most likely supposition is that
vârkâryâ´ was the name given to some famous hymn, some pæan or song of
triumph belonging to the Gotamas, possibly to some verses of the very
hymn before us. In this case the epithet devî´ would be quite
appropriate, for it is frequently used for a sacred or sacrificial song:
IV, 43, 2: devî´m su-stutím; III, i 8, 3. imâ´m dhíyam *s*ata-séyâya
devî´m. See, however, the note to verse 6.

The purport of the whole line would then be that many days have gone for
the Maruts as well as for the famous hymn once addressed to them by
Gotama, or, in other words, that the Gotamas have long been devoted to
the Maruts, an idea frequently recurring in the hymns of the Veda, and,
in our case, carried on in the next verse, where it is said that the
present hymn is like one that Gotama composed when he saw the Maruts or
spoke of them as wild boars with iron tusks. The pushing up the lid of
the well for to drink, means that they obtained rain from the cloud,
which is here, as before, represented as a covered well.

See another explanation in Haug, Über die ursprüngliche Bedeutung des
Wortes Brahma, 1868, p. 5.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:88:5:1">1</span>. Yó*g*ana commonly means a chariot:

VI, 62, 6. are*n*û-bhi*h* yó*g*anebhi*h* bhu*g*ántâ.

You who possess dustless chariots.

VIII, 72, 6. á*s*va-vat yó*g*anam b*ri*hát.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

The great chariot with horses.

It then became the name for a distance to be accomplished without
unharnessing the horses, just as the Latin jugum, a yoke, then a juger
of land, 'quod uno jugo boum uno die exarari posset,' Pliny XVIII, 3, 3,
9.

In our passage, however, yó*g*ana means a hymn, lit. a composition,
which is clearly its meaning in

VIII, 90, 3. bráhma te indra girva*n*a*h* kriyánte ánatidbhutâ, imâ´
*g*ushasva hari-a*s*va yó*g*anâ índra yâ´ te ámanmahi.

Unequalled prayers are made for thee, praiseworthy Indra; accept these
hymns which we have devised for thee, O Indra with bright horses!

Note <span id="an_1:88:5:2">2</span>. Varâ´hu has here the same meaning
as varâhá, wild boar (VIII, 77, 10; X, 28, 4). It occurs once more, I,
121, 11, as applied to V*ri*tra, who is also called varâhá, I, 61, 7; X,
99, 6. In X, 67, 7, v*rí*sha-bhi*h* varâ´hai*h* (with the accent on the
penultimate) is intended for the Maruts <span
id="fr_105"></span>[a](#fn_96). Except in this passage, varâha has the
accent on the last syllable. In IX, 97, 7, varâhá is applied to Soma.

##### Verse 6.

This last verse is almost unintelligible to me. I give, however, the
various attempts that have been made to explain it.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: This is that praise, Maruts,
which, suited (to your merits), glorifies every one of you. The speech
of the priest has now glorified you, without difficulty, with sacred
verses, since (you have placed) food in our hands.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Dies Lied—Maruts!—das hinter euch
emporstrebt, es klingt zurück gleich eines Beters Stimme. Mühlos schuf
solche Lieder er, entsprechend eurer Arme Kraft. (Note: Der zum Himmel
schallende Lobgesang findet seinen Widerhall (wirklich, 'bebt zurück')
in dem Sturmgeheul

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

der Maruts, welches mit dem Geheul des Betenden verglichen wird.)

<span class="smallcaps">Ludwig</span>: Dises lied, o Marut, euch
unterstützend (aufnemend) als eines priesters braust euch entgegen,
nachbrausen hat es gemacht ohne mühe in (die) der nähe die göttliche
weise (ihrer) arme.

My own translation is to a great extent conjectural. It seems to me from
verse 3, that the poet offers both a hymn of praise and a libation of
Soma. Possibly vârkâryâ in verse 4 might be taken in the sense of
Soma-juice, and be derived from valkala, which in later Sanskrit means
the bark of trees. In that case verse 5 would again refer to the hymn of
Gotama, and verse 6 to the libation which is to accompany it.
Anu-bhartrî´ does not occur again, but it can only mean what supports or
refreshes, and therefore would be applicable to a libation of Soma which
supports the gods. The verb stobhati would well express the rushing
sound of the Soma, as in I, 168, 8, it expresses the rushing noise of
the waters against the fellies of the chariots. The next line adds
little beyond stating that this libation of Soma rushes forth freely
from the hands, the gabhastis being specially mentioned in other
passages where the crushing of the Soma-plant is described:

IX, 71, 3. ádri-bhi*h* sutá*h* pavate gábhastyo*h*.

The Soma squeezed by the stones runs from the hands.

The translation would then be: O Maruts, this comforting draught (of
Soma) rushes towards you, like the speech of a suppliant; it rushed
freely from our hands, as our draughts (of Soma) are wont to do.

On svadhâ´, see [p. 32](sbe3216.htm#page_32).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[177:a](sbe3225.htm#fr_105) See Genthe, Die
Windgottheiten, 186 1, p.14; Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, p. 689. Grimm
mentions eburðrung (boar-throng) as a name of Orion, the star that
betokens storm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 165. To the Maruts and Indra](sbe3226)
