[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esp07)  [Next](esp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076613962X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Extra-Sensory Perception*, by J. B. Rhine, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 2

#### <span class="smallcaps">Historical Background</span>

The evidence reported for Extra-Sensory Perception is very varied in
character, especially if we include the less experimental and more
complex types of phenomena. First of all in importance is the division
of this evidence into perception of mental conditions (telepathy) and of
physical objects (clairvoyance). And, secondly, these may vary as to the
spatial conditions concerned; *i.e.*, the images or objects may be
distant or nearby. Third, there may be a time variable as well, along
with either condition mentioned—the image or objective event may be a
past, present or future one. Fourth might be mentioned the wide range of
experience or objective facts that seems to be perceivable
extra-sensorially; feelings and emotions; various cognitive experiences,
of perceptual or imaginal origin; complex purposes and attitudes or
sentiments, and objective facts of almost any conceivable type. And so
on; the limits of evidential variety are not known because the
principles are not known and recognizable.

There is also a large group of phenomena of parapsychic nature that are
not easily determined to be due to simple E.S.P. They constitute most of
the naturally or spontaneously occurring parapsychic phenomena, such as
veridical dreams and waking hallucinations. For one thing, they not
infrequently carry the suggestion of agency of an incorporeal
personality—as in apparitional monitions, for instance. And, again,
there is often possible question as to whether the senses may not really
be involved and the event be indeed a parapsycho-physical one, as, for
example, in collective and simultaneous hallucinations of a veridical
nature. For these and other reasons, these uncontrolled parapsychical
occurrences are not ideal material for a study into the questions we
have undertaken here to investigate, although they are often most
impressive and interesting. They have served, however, to awaken
attention to the problems and, indeed, to direct interest considerably
beyond our present questions to the other divisions of the
parapsychological field.

In the early years of the Society for Psychical Research in England
there were extensive collections made of reports of spontaneous
parapsychic

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

incidents and systematic study was made of the data obtained. Such
material forms the basis of the two volumes, "Phantasms of the
Living", <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) of Myers' "Human
Personality", <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) and, more recently, of
Osty's "Supernormal Faculties in Man" <span id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9)
and of Dr. Prince's "Human Experiences", B.S.P.R. Bulletins XIV and XX.
In these and other works literally thousands of individual experiences
have been examined, classified and reported. The total effect is quite
impressive in emphasizing the frequency and generality of distribution
of such occurrences among the population; they range in the different
studies from an estimated 1 for every 4 individuals, to 1 in 7 and 1 in
10 for the other larger surveys. Some other good suggestions and
impressions stand out from these huge and laborious compilations;
namely: many instances have seemed to be pure telepathy and have
suggested what is for some students an adequate explanation for all;
many cases of apparitions of the dying coincided with actual death to a
degree significantly beyond chance expectation; friendship accompanied
32% of the spontaneous "telepathic" impressions in the study reported in
"Phantasms of the Living" and family relationship 53%; the occurrence of
such experiences was found to be no more rare among the highly
educated <span id="fr_10"></span>[4](#fn_10), nor even among the
scientific, classes than among the general population—in fact, the
estimate of frequency given by Dr. Prince, based on a questionnaire
study of a *Who's Who* population of 10,000, is the highest we have
had—1 in 4; there are other such points of interest and value. But, in
spite of its considerable value, the survey method does not constitute
the best approach to our particular problems and we will, therefore,
have to refer the reader to the literature cited for any further
interest he may have in the spontaneous occurrences. In any event, a
summary of such data is impossible; a statement of cases studied, with
statistical treatment of frequency and chance expectation, does not do
justice either to the value of such material or to the more likely
errors it is exposed to. The reports are, however, well worth reading in
full, at the same time that they baffle summary statement. Most
fair-minded readers of these collections would, I think, be led, as were
the investigators, to regard them as genuinely evidencing a parapsychic
principle of some sort. But few would agree as to what it is. Hence the
need to control the phenomena, if possible, or at least to approximate
them under conditions of systematic observation; and, if possible, to
vary conditions so as to isolate the factors involved.

Between these spontaneous parapsychic phenomena and the results of more
definitely experimental investigation of the subject, there is an

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

intermediate group of data which seems clearly to evidence an
extrasensory mode of perception. I refer to the results of systematic
observation of clairvoyance mainly in its various forms of private and
professional practise: dowsing, or clairvoyance with the use of the
divining-rod; "psychometry", or clairvoyance with the use of an object
of fixation connected with the situation in question; crystal-gazing,
card-clairvoyance, and the like. If in such practise there are given
facts not known by the recognized means, as many studies claim to show
is true, we have in them somewhat better material for study than in
spontaneous cases, due to the fact that precautions can be taken and
conditions imposed that permit systematic observation and approach to
some degree of true experimentation. Much study has been done on such
material, often with a more or less experimental procedure involved. The
study of the divining-rod and its use in the location of desired
underground substances—water, coal, oil, ores, etc.—has been pushed by
Sir Wm. Barrett almost to the point of clear-cut experiment <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11), and he is convinced that the dowser can,
for instance, parapsychically perceive water, and locate its depth,
direction and strength of flow, and often its duration. But most of the
data on dowsing have been obtained by following the practitioner and
observing the conditions and results. Even this method furnishes a
striking array of evidence.

There have been some apparently very carefully conducted studies
reported on parapsychic sensitives of the type called "psychometric
mediums", who appear to be able to give knowledge, parapsychically
obtained, concerning absent and unknown persons (who may be living or
not) when a token or "object of contact" belonging to the person
concerned is placed in their hands: Dr. Pagenstecher's report <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) of the work of Senora de Z., Prof. Oskar
Fischer's study of Raphael Schermann <span
id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13), Tischner's cases in "Telepathy and
Clairvoyance" <span id="fr_14"></span>[4](#fn_14) under the heading of
(his suggested improvement of the name) "psychoscopy", and Dr. W. F.
Prince's study of Mrs. King. <span id="fr_15"></span>[5](#fn_15) In the
last named of these studies the calculation of the probability on the
chance hypothesis of obtaining the results actually given yields a very
impressive figure. And while I am here classifying this work among the
observational, rather than among the more clearly experimental
investigation, I wish to make clear at once that this is not to belittle
it; for, with the sensitive concerned, it probably was the best

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

way to proceed (certainly so at first) and, in view of the high quality
of the observation and precaution, we may give great confidence to the
work. So that, in so far as the sensitive's work, carefully observed,
can reveal its own nature, this is done. But to discover underlying
principles and inner relations we must vary the sensitive's ways of
performing. We can, perhaps, for the open-minded scientist even answer
our first question (Does E.S.P. occur?) by this intermediate or
systematic observational type of investigation. For that matter, many
intelligent students have been convinced of the existence of another
mode of perception by the spontaneous parapsychic occurrences alone.
There are, however, those more sceptical minds that demand some measure
of experimental manipulation and some artificial control of the
phenomena in question before they venture credence. (For these people
the laboratory is often too much emphasized but there are many of them.)
But to answer our second question, What is the nature of E.S.P., we have
to experiment and doubtless to extend our experimental technique
considerably beyond its present state of development .

When we turn to the more definitely experimental evidence for E.S.P., we
shall see at once the advantages and the dangers of experimentally
following one hypothesis without full recognition of the other possible
hypotheses—perhaps the greatest danger-point in all human thought. The
early experiments grew out of the need to test what appeared to be
non-sensory transference of thought from mind to mind. This was early
given the name of "telepathy" by Frederic Myers and it became for the
English-speaking world, at least, the ruling hypothesis for all
parapsychic perception. And experiments were framed to exclude sensory
and rational cognition, but not any other possible parapsychic
cognition. This is still true to the present day in parapsychic
investigation. Experimental tests for telepathy, as I know them,
invariably fail to exclude the possibilities of clairvoyance. Our own at
first failed to do so.

The early experiments, then, dealt with undifferentiated E.S.P.; either
telepathy or clairvoyance, or both. The fact that they were called
experiments in "thought-transference" or a little later in "telepathy"
merely shows the pre-experimental belief of the investigators. But, in
view of the fact that the foremost need at that stage was to
discriminate rather between E.S.P. in general, on the one hand, and the
sensory and chance hypotheses on the other, the work was of great value.
The experimental design consisted first in the choice of material
rendering computation of chance expectation easy and of making possible
an estimation of the anti-chance value of the deviation from chance;
thus, playing cards, lotto blocks, numerals of a chosen range and the
like, were used, all with known probability in guessing. Second, various
conditions were obtained

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

for the elimination of sensory cues, such as separation by closed doors,
by distance, by silence, by screening, position out of visual field,
etc. Third, the range of thought-types transferable was worked at
somewhat, using tastes, diagrams, pain localization, colors, melodies,
etc. Fourth, the value of hypnotic trance, too, was tested. And there
were other features.

On the whole the early experiments in E.S.P. were admirably conducted
(with the one limitation indicated above) as one would expect from the
array of highly impressive names connected with them. The experiments
with the Creery sisters, for instance, were conducted by Professors
William Barrett, Henry Sidgwick and Balfour Stewart, by Mrs. Henry
Sidgwick, Frederic Myers, Edmund Gurney and Frank Podmore. The Guthrie
experiments, mainly carried out on drawings, led to other scholars being
drawn into the research, among them Oliver Lodge, then a young professor
of Physics at Liverpool, whose discussion of the results seems to me a
masterpiece of scientific judgment. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)
Another lengthy and fruitful series is what we may call the "Smith
Series", so called because Mr. G. A. Smith was concerned in all of them
as the hypnotist. He put the subjects into trance for the experiments
and frequently acted as agent. In these remarkable experiments a wide
variety of thought material for transference was used, and the condition
of separation of agent and percipient by walls and by distance was
instituted. It was found that walls and short distances (10 to 17 feet)
did not prevent the transference, though the results were not so high as
with agent and percipient in the same room. At longer distances the
result was failure. Numbers were used for these tests and calculation of
value from the anti-chance viewpoint was relatively simple.

In all this work the results were sufficiently striking to leave no
doubt as to the exclusion of the hypothesis of chance. Even when the
nature of the material was not such as to permit calculation of
mathematical odds against the chance theory, the percentage of successes
was impressive enough to discourage doubt. The explanation then was
either one of E.S.P. or of some normal mode of perception, involving
conscious or unconscious evasion of the conditions intended to eliminate
the senses. The only seriously proposed alternate hypothesis was that of
"involuntary whispering" suggested by Hansen <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) and Lehmann, psychologists, of Denmark. In
1895 they offered this explanation of the results published in the
*Proceedings* of the S.P.R., claiming to have demonstrated in the
laboratory the adequacy of their view. But after Professors Henry

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sidgwick <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) and William James <span
id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19) pointed out the inapplicability of the
hypothesis to the results in question and exposed its own intrinsic
errors in logic, Professor Lehmann withdrew his theory. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[3](#fn_20) Later, <span id="fr_21"></span>[4](#fn_21)
while insisting upon the applicability of the involuntary whispering
theory to certain of the results, he went so far in the other direction
as to assert that, in the experiments in which agent and percipient were
separated by a door and some distance, there was evidence of another, an
unknown, factor at work and he appears to have accepted telepathy as a
fact under those conditions.

Not all attempts made by investigators to demonstrate " telepathy" in
this early period, the 80's and 90's, however, were so strikingly
successful. Prof. Charles Richet <span id="fr_22"></span>[5](#fn_22) of
Paris in 1884 made 2,927 tests on ordinary individuals guessing card
suits, and got very low results, still, however, above chance by a
margin of 57. This is between 3 and 4 times the probable error, and
slightly under the minimum commonly taken as a significant result. He
made, however, an interesting observation—that those who were worked for
long series of over 100 did not do so well. And if the shorter series
(those of under 100) are taken alone, 1,833 trials give 510 successes,
which is 52 above chance or over 4 times the probable error. Max
Dessoir's experiments <span id="fr_23"></span>[6](#fn_23) with drawings
for material are not nearly so striking as those of the Smith or the
Guthrie series; in fact, to the ordinary judge, they seem very poor.
Yet, when an adequate method of evaluation was developed by Dr. W. F.
Prince (B.S.P.R. Bulletin XVI, pp. 104-114) the drawings become clearly
significant. Large numbers of tests were made on ordinary citizens both
in England and America with a view to getting at the commonness of the "
telepathic" ability. 12,130 trials were made in America, directed by
Professors J. M. Peirce and E. C. Pickering, with results only slightly
over chance expectation. 17,653 were made in England and reported by
Gurney; these gave 347 above chance. This is at a low rate of scoring,
comparatively; but, due to the large number of trials, it is
significant, with odds against the chance explanation of 20 millions to
one. Yet impressive as are such figures, they are small in comparison to
the odds against chance attained in only 497 of the tests made with the
Creery sisters and limited to the condition that none but the
investigators knew the object selected. These 497 trials give odds of
septillions to one against the chance theory. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[7](#fn_24)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

There is a very interesting group of experiments carried out mainly
during the 80's and 90's in France by a number of eminent physicians and
university professors, on a line that implies E.S.P. of some kind, as
interpreted by some of the students of the parapsychic field. They have
to do with hypnotization at a distance, under conditions that exclude
sensory, mnemonic and rational cognition. The earliest case was reported
by Esdaile, a Scotch surgeon in Calcutta. The names of Gibert, Janet,
Hericourt, Dufay, and Dusart are most prominently mentioned in the later
work. Frederic Myers made a study with Janet, with apparently excellent
results—80% successes in 20 trials. Myers concludes that it is due to
telepathy; <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) Janet acknowledges the
facts but refuses to accept Myers's interpretation. He implies that he
has a different view of the experiments but does not even hint to us
what it is. <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) There we have to leave
this most fascinating block of data, until some one else undertakes a
repetition.

In France the Schmoll and Mabire series, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27) in Germany Schrenck-Notzing's, <span
id="fr_28"></span>[4](#fn_28) in America the Rawson <span
id="fr_29"></span>[5](#fn_29) experiments, and in England the Wingfield
series <span id="fr_30"></span>[6](#fn_30) of 3,024 trials on
number-guessing (with successes 10 times the chance expectation) and
about half a dozen others of less importance went on to strengthen the
argument for a function beyond chance, fraud and mal-observation—for a
parapsychical mode of perception. As to what it was, what its relations
might be to physics, to biology, to the rest of mental life, there was
very little discovered. But the fact itself was amply proved over and
over. (For a better and fuller review of the experimental work thus far
mentioned see B.S.P.R. Bulletin XVI, by Dr. Prince.)

Curiously enough, however, the fact seems to require proof over and
over—many, many times. For we find in the 20th century that Bruck, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[7](#fn_31) a physician in Germany, Warcollier <span
id="fr_32"></span>[8](#fn_32) in France, Coover, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[9](#fn_33) and Estabrooks, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[10](#fn_34) psychologists, and the famous novelist,
Upton Sinclair, <span id="fr_35"></span>[11](#fn_35) in America (to
mention only a few), have all produced fresh series of experiments
primarily to answer the first question—Does it occur?—as if it were
still an unsettled question. This will, I predict, be one of the more
amazing facts for the future historian of science. And after reading
Bruck and Warcollier and

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Coover and
Estabrooks and Sinclair, as well as the more numerous and more varied
series that preceded, still the student who would work in the field
today must set out first to prove it all over again! Scientific method
and systematic observation have meant so little that we dare not lean on
them heavily unless we are already prepared, by a priori mental
attitude, to accept their findings.

Yet there has been some progress; if not in conviction, at least in
interest. At least three University laboratories have opened up to the
problems and our own becomes a fourth. Coover and Estabrooks worked in
psychological laboratories, at Stanford and Harvard respectively. The
third laboratory study by Brugmanns <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)
at Groningen (with Professor Heymanns) is a double step forward, for it
aimed to go beyond the first problem of proof and to try to find facts
of natural relationships in the direction mainly of physiological
measurements correlated with success in "telepathy". And the results of
Brugmanns are striking also in proof-value, as well as contributing
something to our knowledge of conditions. The 187 trials yielded 60
successes as against 4 for chance expectation. The conditions for
exclusion of sensory perception were elaborate and appear highly
satisfactory.

The Sinclair book, "Mental Radio", does the great service, first, of
reaching a wider public with very good and seemingly reliable results.
It is rather of the systematic observational type than the more purely
experimental. But there are some good distance experiments and an
interesting introspective report by the percipient, who is Mrs. Sinclair
herself. The exhaustive analysis of the original materials by Dr. Prince
in B.S.P.R. Bulletin XVI adds a great deal to its value, and includes
the independent and confirmatory tests on Mrs. Sinclair made by
Professor William McDougall.

Prof. Coover seems to have regarded his own work as negative and in many
respects it was. But it seems pretty clear that he might have obtained
more positive results and perhaps made considerable contribution by the
very simple device of repeating the tests with those who succeeded best
the first time. Even as it was, his 10,000 tests on "telepathy"
(undifferentiated E.S.P.) and clairvoyance, yielded 294 successes as
against chance expectation of 250 (p. equals 1/40). This deviation of 44
is over 4 times the probable error and would be generally regarded as
statistically significant. Prof. Coover does not appear to have
discovered this contribution which he made to the subject. But, what is
much more important, the bulk of this positive deviation was contributed
by a few of his 100 subjects—eight in number—who were among the highest
in both

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

sets of the experiments—*i.e.*, both in the pure clairvoyance tests and
in the tests where both clairvoyance and telepathy were possible
(loosely called "telepathy"). Of the 12 highest scorers in the "
telepathy" series and the 10 highest of the clairvoyance series, 5 were
the same subjects. This was indeed a doubly valuable discovery, had the
investigator been aware of it. Without a doubt he would then have
carried out the very experiments we have done in this laboratory fifteen
years later. These results of Coover's work, if selected thus, become
tremendously significant—20 times the probable error. Now, this
selection is permissible, of course, only if there is valid reason to
suppose individuals may differ as to their "guessing" ability, which
involves the point in question—since on a chance hypothesis they should
not. But it might well have suggested to Prof. Coover the need for long
and careful testing of these more promising subjects—to ascertain if
they differed permanently. Finding that 5 of the best subjects in either
series were also best in both would suggest to any interested
investigator the possibility of a good clairvoyant being also a good
telepathic percipient—that, or else that in the "telepathic" series it
was really the clairvoyant function that operated. This would have been
a valuable "lead". While, then, Prof. Coover did not prove anything at
all, perhaps, he unwittingly opened up some very interesting
suggestions, which might profitably have been followed up. (Especially
so in view of the generous endowment provided and the ideal laboratory
and library facilities.) <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

Dr. Estabrooks took the same type of subject, the average college
student, and, using playing-cards also, found some evidence of
"telepathic" ability in them. His conditions were excellent for
excluding sense perception. The best points of his work were (1) some
evidence of a lowering of the scoring-rate with progress through a run
of 20 trials, the last 10 yielding less than the first ten. And (2) the
fact that one group ran considerably below chance expectation when asked
to run a second series, at a longer distance than the first. These, too,
are interesting leads had the investigator been able to follow them up.
He explained the decline in the run as due to "fatigue" (presumably of
the "telepathic" function) and the drop below chance in the special
instance as perhaps due to space limitations.

Another variation of E.S.P. research is represented in the inclusion of
other species in the range of "subject material". The more experimental
of the animal parapsychic studies are those by the late Prof.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bechterew, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) eminent Russian psychologist and
physiologist, on Durow's circus dogs, and of Dr. Louisa E. Rhine and
myself, with the horse Lady as subject. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) In both cases a positive conclusion of
"telepathy" was announced, after the investigation. There have been
other cases brought before psychologists, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) however, and for these I will refer the
reader to the review in the report on Lady.

These animal cases have an especial interest for two reasons. One is the
fact that in them the conditions often approximated pure telepathy as
distinguished from the telepathy-with-clairvoyance-just-as-possible type
of experiment which we have been reviewing thus far. Prof. Bechterew
merely thought of the object in the room or in the adjoining room with
which he wanted the dog to perform—*i.e.*, he did not otherwise single
it out. Supposedly it had no other isolation than the mental choice he
exercised. There was thus an inadequate basis for clairvoyance, it would
appear. In the Lady experiments I looked at the blocks, with eyes
screened. This is not so free from objective selection, then, as is the
other case. The second point of interest is the fact that Lady, the
filly, lost her ability to perceive or to be controlled
extra-sensorially (at least, as far as our tests could determine) after
about a year of demonstration, and came to depend upon the rather
obvious movements of the trainer for guidance, movements which, of
course, we had had to eliminate during the earlier production period.
This loss of ability in an E.S.P. subject has had other examples,
notably the several Creery sisters, and Prof. Brugmann's subject, Van
Dam, and perhaps others. It will be of especial interest in connection
with this report.

Another diversion in type of experiment, while we are still dealing with
undifferentiated E.S.P. conditions (though they are still commonly
called "telepathic"), is the condition of distance between agent and
percipient. There was failure under this condition in the Smith series
(except for very short distance) and success in the Sinclair tests. We
have yet to review the Usher and Burt <span
id="fr_41"></span>[4](#fn_41) tests made at a distance of from 120 to
960 miles, yielding in 60 trials with playing cards 4 successes complete
and 14 right in value. This is at a very good rate of scoring but the
number of trials is small for a conclusion. They did much better in the
same room, getting 9 hits in 36 trials. The Miles and Ramsden <span
id="fr_42"></span>[5](#fn_42) long-distance tests were made by having
the percipient, Miss Ramsden, record daily

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and send to Miss Miles her impressions of what the latter was doing at a
[certain](errata.htm#1) hour (7 P.M.). Miss Miles then got objective
records, pictures, etc., for all of her setting that she could. Out of
30 trials, 13 were regarded as successful, barring what would
conceivably be accidental. This series was not very experimental, it is
obvious, but most critics have been impressed by it, in spite of its
difficulty of mathematical evaluation. Another similar series is
reported by Mr. Wales and Miss Samuels, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) and is likewise difficult to judge,
although impressive in its totality.

The trans-Atlantic series conducted by a Paris group directed by M.
Warcollier and a New York group under Prof. Gardner Murphy of Columbia I
have not been able to find in print, but critics who have seen the
results seem to regard it as difficult to evaluate and
inconclusive, <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) as are likewise
regarded the results of the two radio-broadcast experiments in
"telepathy", the first conducted by Dr. Murphy, broadcasting from
Chicago, and the second by Dr. Woolley, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45) from London. The sequel-series of
experiments following the Woolley-broadcast that was carried out by Mr.
S. G. Soal <span id="fr_46"></span>[4](#fn_46) was negative. So we may
say, it appears, that of the reported experiments in "telepathy" with
distance, the short Sinclair-Irwin series of seven drawings made at 30
miles from the agent, is perhaps the best. (See. B.S.P.R. Bulletin XVI,
pp. 9-15.)

This brief sketch is far from complete, even in the mere mention of
titles, so extensive has the literature become. Especially in reference
to continental European work is it incomplete. The work of the Russians,
Dr. Kotik <span id="fr_47"></span>[5](#fn_47) and Dr. Chowrin, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[6](#fn_48) that of the French Dr. Geley on
Ossowiecki, of the German, Dr. von Wasielewski <span
id="fr_49"></span>[7](#fn_49) on Miss von B. (with whom Dr. Tischner
also worked) are examples of omissions. But there is great similarity in
all this work, and we have given, I think, a fair notion of the field
and its advance—or lack of it.

Similarity of work in this field does not mean any extensive following
of the work of others, but rather an ignoring of its conclusions and a
starting all over again "to establish the fact" first of all (a phrase
that is repeated so often that it becomes commonplace after 50 years of
research and almost as many researches; and the same ground is covered,
with many of the same difficulties that others have had and with the
same general degree of success, very often). In 1932, fifty years after
the Creery sisters’ investigation by the S.P.R., it publishes Mr. Soal's
long research

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

made to prove the factuality of "telepathy"—which ended negatively.
There are two points that are worthy of attention in this situation:
first, our evident lack of progress in "establishing the fact" for
society at large; this is obvious, and is the more remarkable in
England, where the most of the work has been done. And, second, in these
recent failures we have strong indication of real lack of progress in
understanding "telepathy"; its requirements and functioning are still so
little understood that we have these long negative series after a
half-century of study.

The following general points seem to stand out as worth noting in the
past contributions from these "telepathy" experiments: first, the
evidence is (to one who labors through it all) overwhelmingly convincing
of some extra-sensory mode of perception. That this includes the
perception of mental states of a wide range of variety is also clear.
That the hypnotic trance is not necessary, but is a possible
"telepathic" working condition, seems also proved. Several interesting
cases of loss of ability with lapse of time are recorded. Some decline
of rate of success with length of the run is suggested by Richet and
Estabrooks. Suggestion is made that certain drugs may help, but the only
evidence is that of Brugmanns, who found improvement with alcohol (30
gms.), but only 29 trials are reported. The agent's greater tendency to
fatigue and headache is referred to by several (Lodge, Guthrie,
Sinclair), and the general need for passivity and serenity on the part
of the percipient. Most of these points are fairly clearly indicated, if
not established.

Strangely enough there has been comparatively little experimental work
on the seemingly simpler phenomenon of clairvoyance. This is, perhaps,
an effect of the large influence that spontaneous occurrences have had
upon the course of parapsychological thinking. These more often seemed
telepathic rather than clairvoyant in nature. Still it is a
[remarkable](errata.htm#2) fact that clairvoyance has been so neglected
that it has never been thought necessary to eliminate it by condition
from telepathy experiments. Consequently all the phenomena of these have
been possibly also clairvoyant in nature. Prof. Coover even used
card-guessing in the presence of the card as a control on the telepathic
series—thus allowing clairvoyance to operate but being so sure it did
not function that the results were taken as chance products. (They were,
however, above, by about twice the p.e.) The same loose condition has
existed in all the telepathy experiments I am acquainted with; but, of
course, with no danger to conclusions so far as concerns the
demonstration of extra-sensory perception. While we have had this
undifferentiated E.S.P. as regularly possible in the so-called
"telepathic" tests, there were some where it seems unlikely that
clairvoyance played much part. In Prof. Brugmann's experiment with Van
Dam, he looked down through a glass-covered hole in the ceiling at

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the blindfolded subject, "willing" the subject's hand to move to a
certain square on a large checkered diagram before him. Here the looking
was objective, of course, and there was an objective record of the
choice to be "willed", also; yet the conspicuous thing was the agent's
act of willing. We can conclude nothing, but in fairness I think we can
say that the mental activity of the agent was probably the guiding
factor, rather than his objective behavior or his record on paper. In
Prof. Bechterew's tests of Durow's dogs, he sometimes did not even look
at the object and we come still closer to pure telepathy
conditions—perhaps close enough. But why not pure telepathy experiments
by definite planning of the conditions?

Of pure clairvoyance we have had a few series of tests, rather similar
to the "telepathy" data in quality and in range. Prof. Richet deserves
credit for the first systematic experimentation in clairvoyance. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) His tests made in Paris in 1888 with
Leonie B. in hypnotic trance, using playing-cards sealed in opaque
envelopes, were very successful. Leonie got 12 cards correct
(probability of 1/52) in 15 trials and in a later series 5 in 25 (after
having been transported to England and back, where a negative series was
carried out). The odds against getting 12 hits in 15 trials on playing
cards on chance alone is given by Richet as 1 quintillion to 1.

There were also the experiments of Dr. Backman <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) of Sweden in the 90's, in which he put his
subjects into hypnotic trance and commanded them to "visit" specified
points at some distance and report what they "saw". They were able to
perceive parapsychically to a degree that, if the report is acceptable,
leaves little doubt of the fact of E.S.P. The exclusion of telepathy is
not as clear-cut as is desirable and his results are, unfortunately, not
capable of definite evaluation. There is not sufficient experimental
character to such observations to enable definite conclusions to be
drawn regarding the successful exclusion of such factors as
infer-ability, guidance by unconsciously given indications, laxity in
observation and coincidence. One does not see in the text, however, any
ground for these alternative explanations.

In 1895 Mrs. Verrall <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52) tested pure
clairvoyance on playing-cards, in conjunction with tests of
hyperaesthesia and its possible functioning in parapsychic tests. She
found that, under her conditions (which deliberately permitted it),
hyperaesthesia of sight and touch could function to a degree, but that
there was something more, presumably clairvoyance.

Tischner reviews Kotik's work on the clairvoyance of his subject Lydia,
carried out in Russia in 1908: Tischner's review is inadequate for a
judgment of the original work; but he states his conviction that some of

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the experiments "are beyond criticism". Tischner's own clairvoyance
tests are not, as they are reported, explainable by any known
alternative hypothesis. One has only the alternative of doubting the
honesty or intellectual balance of the experimenter, and he quotes
several witnesses in support. He used numbers of three or more digits,
or words, written on slips of paper and folded up. He and the several
witnesses testify to the exclusion of all trickery and, since the 78
trials gave 40 successes, the chance theory certainly does not apply.
Tischner was on guard especially against "pellet switching", since the
sensitive claimed to have done this earlier in his career under
different circumstances. Tischner's "psychoscopic" observations
("psychometry") are likewise impressive, as described. Twenty-six
witnessed experiments gave 61.5% positive results.

Miss Jephson published in 1928, the results of 6,000 tests for
clairvoyant perception of suits of playing-cards, made on 240 people,
yielding results that average somewhat above mean chance expectation
and, with the number of trials given, pass well beyond the minimum for
significance. She obtained 1832 hits on suits or 332 above chance
expectation, which would be approximately 14 times the probable error.
Her results in pure clairvoyance compare roughly with those of
Estabrooks on "telepathy"—*i.e.*, with both telepathy and clairvoyance
possible. I quote the following figures of comparison from Miss
Jephson's article:

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Dr. Estabrooks<br />
%</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Miss Jephson<br />
%</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Chance<br />
%</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>Total color right</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>56.5</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>55.1</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>50</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>Total suit right</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>28.5</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>30.5</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>25</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>Early guesses, color right</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>55.7</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>57.9</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>50</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>Early guesses, suit right</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>30.6</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>30.9</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom"><p>25</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It would be very
doubtful then if Estabrooks or, perhaps, if any one had actually
demonstrated pure telepathy, in view of these results. For, if
clairvoyance is possible, it must safely be excluded before telepathy
can be inferred as the operative principle. I feel particularly indebted
to Miss Jephson's work in that it helped to stimulate my own interest in
clairvoyance. A second report in 1931, in conjunction with Messrs. Soal
and Besterman, <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53) does not confirm the
earlier work and its "fatigue-curve" hypothesis. (This last point is
discussed later in this report.)

If the more experimental studies of clairvoyance were regarded as the
only "pure clairvoyance" material, the evidence would not be at all
overwhelming. I think it would be good but in need of much repetition.
Even so, it is far ahead of the definitely experimental evidence for
"pure telepathy", for of such there is nothing on record, to my
knowledge. And, if we accept provisionally the evidence from the
"telepathy" tests in which clairvoyance was not excluded, we may as well
accept the evidence for

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

clairvoyance from "psychometry", in which telepathy (extended and
generalized) is not often excluded. If we do, I am inclined again to
give the odds of weight of evidence in favor of clairvoyance, especially
if we include the dowsing or divination data under this heading. The
long list of first class "psychometric" cases is rather impressive:
Señora de Z., Dr. Prince's Mrs. King, Dr. Osty's Mme. Morel and Mlle. de
Berly, Rafael Schermann, Wasielewski's Miss Von B., Tischner's Mr. H.,
Dr. Geley's Ossowiecki, Paschal Forthuny, to mention some of the more
famous.

With practically no pure telepathy experiments and few pure clairvoyance
tests, we have little or no basis of evidence for a study of relations
between these two phenomena. Kotik's Lydia did both clairvoyance and
telepathy (without excluding clairvoyance, so far as Tischner's review
shows), and Wasielewski and Tischner's Miss Von B. did likewise.
Coover's subjects did card-guessing in their barely significant way,
under the same two conditions, pure clairvoyance and
telepathy-plus-clairvoyance. But we cannot draw any conclusions about
results from such conditions. The need for an experimental separation of
the two is strikingly clear, all the more so since most students of the
subject have had hypothetical views of some kind as to the relationship.
In a very general way the Frenchmen, Richet, Osty and Geley, have
preferred to think telepathy a special case of a general clairvoyance
("cryptesthesia", Richet's term, "metagnomy" Boirac's term). The English
and American students have been slow to recognize clairvoyance, as is
shown by the lack of any definite test of it in those countries until
Miss Jephson's in 1928 and by their long ignoring the need for excluding
it from telepathic experiments. There has been some bias against
clairvoyance in Germany too, as is illustrated by Prof. Oesterreich's
attempt to explain clairvoyant phenomena by telepathy—telepathy expanded
to unlimited dimensions. Barrett and Myers have theories for telepathy,
but not for clairvoyance. Both Myers and Mrs. Sidgwick have suggested
that there are probably connections between the two. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) Tischner and Wasielewski are of the same
mind. <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55)

A final phase of this review concerns the various hypotheses proposed to
explain E.S.P. These fall into two groups in general—physical hypotheses
and non-physical. The physical hypotheses are the more numerous and
popular, as well as the more elaborated. But in a general way they are
all radiant or wave hypotheses, since this is the only physical
principle available as yet for such theorizing. Even Ford's electron
theory becomes as good a wave theory as any, since electrons are
discovered to conduct themselves in the undulatory way.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

A number of attempts have been made to offer hypothetical explanations
for either telepathy or clairvoyance, but very few have tried to explain
both at once. It is this attempt at a joint theory that gives the
peculiar logical difficulty. Some find it easy to suppose brain-waves
for telepathy but they seem to balk at supposing the same sort of waves
to be emanating from all things clairvoyantly perceptible; and well they
might! Others find it easy to suppose a "magnetic", "telluric" or
"rhabdic" emanation or force to be exercised by metals,
waters—substances in general; but they likewise find a large gap between
these forces and the thought-images of a telepathic agent's mind.

The physicist, Sir William Crookes, perhaps the first general theorist
of the field, proposed in 1897 <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) the
theory that telepathy might be due to high frequency vibrations of the
ether generated by molecular action of the brain of the agent and
received by the percipient's. He was conscious of the difficulty his
theory encountered in the inverse-square law of decline of intensity
with distance, but felt that our ignorance might be cloaking some
principle which covers this point of difficulty. Another eminent
physicist, Professor Ostwald, <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57) has
proposed a physical theory for telepathy, offering an energetic theory
which assumes the transformation of known physiological energies into
unknown forms that can be projected through time and space, received by
the percipient and reconverted to known forms. But the great physicist
of "energetics" had no evidence from his science to show that energies
can be projected toward a goal, unless through a material channel. The
energies radiate on a spherical front, so far as we know them. Sir
William Barrett, another physicist, in argument against a physical
theory of telepathy, <span id="fr_58"></span>[3](#fn_58) reminds us that
the radiation theories would require, to reach 1000 feet, 1 million
times the intensity of the transmitted telepathic stimulus that is
required for one foot, and concludes that "it is highly improbable that
telepathy is transmitted by waves radiating in every direction, like
light from a candle." He quotes Myers, Mrs. Sidgwick and other eminent
students as of like opinion concerning telepathy—that it is a psychical,
rather than a physical, phenomenon. Myers was especially opposed to a
physical, and insistent upon a psychical, theory. But of what sort of a
theory a psychical one is we have very little understanding, other than
the fact that it is not physical (*i.e.*, mechanical).

Turning to the more comprehensive theories that embrace both
clairvoyance and telepathy, we find three which are very wide apart in
viewpoint and which will serve here to represent widely different
possible

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

approaches. These are hypotheses suggested by Hyslop, Forel and
Tischner. Hyslop's <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) hypothesis (which
he suggested without advocacy) is the " spirit hypothesis" applied to
telepathy and clairvoyance. The incorporeal personality is supposed in
this hypothesis to be a " carrier" of the mental state or stimulus that
the percipient receives, for both phases of E.S.P. It will be seen at
once that this hypothesis would at best only pass the problem on to a
stage of still greater complexity, since we wonder quite naturally how
the "spirit carrier" obtains his "load", if not by clairvoyance and
telepathy! Which is as bad as ever.

Tischner <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60) invokes a theory of
super-individual or collective mind, which serves as a common reservoir.
He quotes E. von Hartmann as explaining telepathy through "telephonic
connection with the Absolute" and aligns himself with this view. The
connection is, he believes, through the "subconscious mind". This
hypothesis is less definite and, perhaps, less extravagant, as some
would regard it. But, in essence, it leaves us no more advanced toward
explanation than Prof. Hyslop's suggested hypothesis. For we have to
explain the business of "fishing" in the "reservoir" of the absolute or
the collective mind quite as inevitably as if we just omitted all that,
and assumed a direct contact between agent and percipient or object and
clairvoyant. If we should need to bring in these other complications,
"spirits", "reservoirs", etc., as inferred *accessory* factors in
telepathy and clairvoyance, it would be fully acceptable to do so; but
let us not obscure the fact that they do not explain telepathy and
clairvoyance at all. They only complicate it. For all "absolutes" and
"spirits" would have to perceive extra-sensorially themselves. These two
theories, then, leave us as we were.

Ford's theory <span id="fr_61"></span>[3](#fn_61) is a hard-boiled
physical one, an electron-theory. The electrons come either from the
brain of the agent or from the object, and when they come off in certain
complexes they convey to the brain of the percipient the stimulation
which leads to perception. A given "electron-complex" can stimulate a
corresponding "engram-complex" in the percipient's brain, provided the
percipient has previously established such an engram-complex through
experience of the perception in question. This previous set-up is
essential, because there is required the existing engram-complex in the
percipient's brain which through "homophonous and synchronous" vibration
may be aroused by an appropriate electron-complex, and perception
effected. Thus the thought of a card-figure would give off from the
agent's brain the same electron-complex as would the card-figure itself,
both exciting the same engram-complex.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

But one need only remember that substances regularly emitting
electrons—*i.e.*, radioactive—are rare in nature. Physics is, of course,
alert to this phenomenon. And, to secure intensities of the strength
necessary for distance E.S.P. (a million times stronger radiation at a
thousand feet than at one), there would be need for some remarkable
electronic emission (indeed!), which could hardly have escaped
physicists.

On the reception end of the E.S.P. phenomenon there has only been the
vague inference of some hidden sense (cryptesthesia), a "sixth sense",
as Prof. Richet, the leading exponent of this view, has called it. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) The usage is not clear as to whether any
reception whatever would be regarded as sensory, or whether the
selective interception of a special energy pattern by a specialized and
localized organ would be meant. No clarity has yet been achieved on this
important end of the function of E.S.P.

For a summary of the chapter, one may say that the evidence for general
E.S.P. is good but the theories are bad; and our knowledge of the
phenomena needs refinement through variation and improvement of
conditions. We need tests for pure telepathy and more of them for pure
clairvoyance, made under conditions that enable easy evaluation of
significance, provide safe exclusion of other modes of cognition, and
introduce variation enough to suggest the relation of E.S.P. to other
processes and lead to its natural explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[15:1](esp08.htm#fr_7) By Gurney, Myers, and
Podmore; Soc. Psy. Res. (London), 1886.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[15:2](esp08.htm#fr_8) Longmans and Co., London,
1903.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[15:3](esp08.htm#fr_9) Trans. by Stanley DeBrath;
E. P. Dutton, New York, 1923.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[15:4](esp08.htm#fr_10) See *Human Experiences*,
B.S.P.R. Bulletin XIV.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[16:1](esp08.htm#fr_11) See the interesting
contribution in *The Divining-Rod*, Barrett and Besterman, London. Also
Chap. IV, Richet's *Thirty Years of Psychical Research*, Macmillan,
1923. (Trans. by Stanley DeBrath.)

<span id="fn_12"></span>[16:2](esp08.htm#fr_12) A.S.P.R. *Proc*. Vol.
XVI, New York.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[16:3](esp08.htm#fr_13) *Experimente mit Rafael
Schermann*, Urban, Berlin, 1924.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[16:4](esp08.htm#fr_14) Harcourt, Brace and Co.,
New York, 1925.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16:5](esp08.htm#fr_15) A.S.P.R. *Proc*. Vol.
XVIII, New York, 1924, pp. 178-244. Another great case that belongs
perhaps half-way in this department of the subject but is somewhat more
experimental than these is that of Prof. Gilbert Murray, as reported by
Mrs. Verrall, *Proc. S.P.R.* 29: pp. 64-110 and by Mrs. Sidgwick, 34:
pp. 212-274. Prof. Murray usually requires a "point of contact" (a
hand-clasp), but not one connected with the situation in question, and
his work seems to be more telepathic than clairvoyant also, though the
writing and speaking by the agents are required, and we cannot,
therefore, be sure of telepathy.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[18:1](esp08.htm#fr_16) *Proc. S.P.R.* Vol. II,
pp. 189-200, 1884.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18:2](esp08.htm#fr_17) Hansen, F.C.C. and
Lehmann, A., *Uber Unwillkürliches Flüstern*, Phil. stud. 17: pp.
471-530, 1895.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19:1](esp08.htm#fr_18) *Proc. S.P.R.* 12: pp.
298-315, 1896-1897.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19:2](esp08.htm#fr_19) *Psych. Rev.* 3, pp.
198-200, 1896; 4: pp. 654-655, 1897; *Science*, 8: p. 956, 1898.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[19:3](esp08.htm#fr_20) James: Messrs. Lehmann
and Hansen on Telepathy, Science, 9: pp. 654-655, 1899. Prof. Lehmann's
words are: "not yet established (bewiesen)".

<span id="fn_21"></span>[19:4](esp08.htm#fr_21) Lehmann, A., *Aberglaube
und Zauberei*, 2d Ed., Stuttgart, Enke, 1908. This statement is based on
Prof. Coover's Abstract, *Experiments in P.R.*, Stanford, 1917, pp.
33-35.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[19:5](esp08.htm#fr_22) See Abstract, Gurney.
E., *Proc. S.P.R.*, 2: pp. 239-64, 1884.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[19:6](esp08.htm#fr_23) *Phantasms of the
Living*, Vol. II, pp. 642-53, 1885.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[19:7](esp08.htm#fr_24) *Phantasms of the
Living*, Vol. I, p. 25.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[20:1](esp08.htm#fr_25) For a review of this
work consult Myers, *Human Personality*, 2 vols., Vol. 1: p. 568

<span id="fn_26"></span>[20:2](esp08.htm#fr_26) P. 125, Vol. 1, *A
History of Psychology as Autobiography*, Ed. by Murchison, 1930, Clark
University Press.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[20:3](esp08.htm#fr_27) *Proc*. S.P.R. 4: pp.
324-337; 5: pp. 169-215.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[20:4](esp08.htm#fr_28) *Proc*. S.P.R., 7: pp.
3-22. See also Dr. W. F. Prince's review and criticism, B.S.P.R.,
Bulletin XVI, pp. 126-128.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[20:5](esp08.htm#fr_29) *Proc*. S.P.R., XI: pp.
2-17.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[20:6](esp08.htm#fr_30) *Phantasms of the
Living*, I, p. 34, and II, p. 653.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[20:7](esp08.htm#fr_31) *Scientific American*,
May, 1924.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[20:8](esp08.htm#fr_32) *La Télépathie*, Paris,
1921.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[20:9](esp08.htm#fr_33) *Experiments in P.R.*,
Stanford, 1917, p. 640.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[20:10](esp08.htm#fr_34) B.S.P.R., Bulletin V,
p. 28.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[20:11](esp08.htm#fr_35) *Mental Radio*
(Sinclair), Los Angeles, 1930, p. 239.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[21:1](esp08.htm#fr_36) *Compt. Rend. Off. du
Premier Cong. Internat’l des Recherches Psychiques*, 1932, pp. 396-408.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[22:1](esp08.htm#fr_37) In the interest of
completeness perhaps I should mention Dr. Troland's short study of
telepathy made at Harvard in 1916-1917, including only 605 trials with a
probability of ½. It has no significance whatever and was too small a
series to be important. There was also the negative report of an
examination by Prof. Stratton of a man who claimed telepathic powers and
who invited the inquiry. (The control of another person by obscure
signs, *Psych. Rev.* 28: pp. 301-334, 1921.) One can readily see that
Prof Stratton might have been right in his conclusion of sensory
following of signals, but might equally well have been wrong—in having
provided conditions unfavorable for abstraction, as I can see now was
the case. The "internal" field is even more important than the outer in
psychological experimentation.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[23:1](esp08.htm#fr_38) Bechterew, *W.
Zeitschrift f. Psycho-Therapie*, 8: pp. 280-304, 1924.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[23:2](esp08.htm#fr_39) Rhine, J. B. and Louisa
E., *Jour. Abn. and Soc. Psy.*, 23: pp. 449-466, 1929; and 24: pp.
289-292, 1929.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[23:3](esp08.htm#fr_40) The Eberfeld horses were
doubtless best known among these. Krall was convinced that his horses
were capable of telepathy but the demonstration of it has remained too
debatable for definite conviction. Krall's own report in 1927 (*Ztschft
f. Parapsychol.* 21: pp. 150-153) entitled "Denkbüertragung Zwischen
Mensch and Tier", lacks too much in completeness and detail to permit a
safe judgment.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[23:4](esp08.htm#fr_41) *Annal. Sci. Psych.*,
XX: pp. 14-21, and pp. 40-53, 1910.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[23:5](esp08.htm#fr_42) *Proc*. S.P.R., XX I:
pp. 60-93, 1907; XXVII: pp. 279-317, 1914.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[24:1](esp08.htm#fr_43) *Proc*. S.P.R., XXXI:
pp. 124-217, 1920.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[24:2](esp08.htm#fr_44) S. G. Soal, *Proc*.
S.P.R., XL, 1932, p. 168. Dr. W. F. Prince was very noncommittal in his
review, p. 21, B.S.P.R., Bulletin VI, which I take as also an indication
of the inconclusiveness of the experiment.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[24:3](esp08.htm#fr_45) *Proc*. S.P.R., 38: pp.
1-9, 1928.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[24:4](esp08.htm#fr_46) *Proc*. S.P.R., XL, pp.
165-362, 1932.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[24:5](esp08.htm#fr_47) *Die Emanation der
psycho-physischen Energie*. (Munich) 1908.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[24:6](esp08.htm#fr_48) *Expmtl. Untersuchungen
auf dem Gebiete des räumlichen Hellsehens* (Munich) 1909.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[24:7](esp08.htm#fr_49) *Telepathie and
Hellsehen*. (Halle) 1921.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[26:1](esp08.htm#fr_50) *Proc*. S.P.R., VI: pp.
66-83, 1889.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[26:2](esp08.htm#fr_51) *Proc*. S.P.R., VII: pp.
199-220; pp. 370-373.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[26:3](esp08.htm#fr_52) *Proc*. S.P.R., XXXVIII:
pp. 223-271, 1928.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[27:1](esp08.htm#fr_53) *Proc*. S.P.R., XXXIX:
pp. 375-414, 1931.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[28:1](esp08.htm#fr_54) *Proc*. S.P.R., XXXI: p.
377, 1921.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[28:2](esp08.htm#fr_55) Tischner, *loc. cit.*,
p. 206.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[29:1](esp08.htm#fr_56) *Proc*. S.P.R., XII: p.
352, 1897.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[29:2](esp08.htm#fr_57) This mention is based on
Tischner's review, *op. cit.*, p. 206.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[29:3](esp08.htm#fr_58) *Proc*. S.P.R., XXX: pp.
251-260, 1920.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[30:1](esp08.htm#fr_59) *Life after Death*, E.
P. Dutton, New York, 1918; pp. 137-142

<span id="fn_60"></span>[30:2](esp08.htm#fr_60) Op. cit., p. 211.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[30:3](esp08.htm#fr_61) *Jour. fur Psychol. and
Neurol.*, 1918.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[31:1](esp08.htm#fr_62) *Notre Sixieme Sens*,
Editions Montaigne. Paris, 1928.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix to Chapter 2. Mathematics of Probability Used in
Evaluation](esp09)
