[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](esp06)  [Next](esp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/076613962X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Extra-Sensory Perception*, by J. B. Rhine, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

## PART I. GENERAL INTRODUCTION

### CHAPTER 1

#### <span class="smallcaps">Clarification of the Problem</span>

It is logically the first duty in making this report to bring into clear
outline at once the particular field of study in which the work reported
here has been performed, and to clarify at the start the special problem
from this field which we are attempting to help to solve. It may well be
that some readers will not agree with the outline drawn or with the
statement of the problem given; at any rate, it is hoped they will
understand the objective and orientation of the work after following the
clarification, and be better able to evaluate it.

But, in outlining the field in which we are finding our problem, we are
regarding it very tentatively. Since many claims in that field do not at
present warrant great confidence, we are giving a minimum of credence at
every point and are proceeding with extreme caution. The outline itself
will be of use only as a reminder of what we may need to be kept aware
of. It is a background of suggested possibility—so far as this work is
concerned—just impressive enough at most points to justify inquiry; and
conviction, which is quite a separate question, will depend upon the
slow accumulations of inquiry.

We are concerned, of course, with the field of Psychical Research
("Parapsychologie" in Germany and "Métapsychique" among the French). The
general boundary-line that marks it off from other fields of problems
for scientific study is that its phenomena seem, superficially at least,
to escape in a significant way certain laws of the natural world as we
know it through our sciences—laws that we have all come to regard with
relative certainty as holding for all such conditions. Because we tend
to think of our views of nature as complete, we think of any such
apparent exception as almost a direct conflict. It becomes a conflict,
then, in our system of beliefs. However, this does not mean necessarily
a conflict in nature—a fact that is always hard to remember.

The phenomena of this field are not only radical in their aspect of
escaping some acceptedly basic law of our science of nature, but this
evasion or circumvention is always a purposive and intelligent activity,
as of the nature of personality in function; *i.e.*, the "psychic
phenomenon" is characterized by the suggestion of personal agency in
some form. The field of Psychical Research may not be limited otherwise,
I think; and it is, therefore, none too definitely bounded, like most
other fields of (problems for) Science. This personal and purposive
characteristic of "psychic

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

phenomena" would, on the basis of any definition extant—even a
Behaviorist's—bring it clearly within the field of Psychology and, of
course, full into the midst of Experimental Psychology.

Like any other branch of Experimental Psychology, Psychical Research
naturally involves other fields of problems and laws—other Sciences, as
they are artificially divided for the academics. If it is a common
physical law that seems to be evaded, an accepted physiological
principle that seems to be outdone or a well-known pathological law that
seems not to hold—these Sciences are challenged and eventually must
reply. And in their reply they will need to co-operate with Psychical
Research in the inter-relating of their fields for the solution of the
common problem.

At this point it is urgently necessary to insert the statement again,
that the concepts we are dealing with are not necessarily accepted ones.
This outlining involves no expression of conviction of reality behind
any claims for the branches outlined. The recognition accorded is merely
that occurrences reported seriously by intelligent people offer problems
for study. In outlining the field of these problems, we are as careful
to protect against unguarded conviction as a good pathologist is careful
with his deadly test tubes. For a slip in the one case could scarcely be
less terrible to contemplate than in the other.

One naturally outlines the field of Psychical Research on the basis of
the neighboring fields which are most involved; that is, on the basis
the nature of the laws seemingly most clearly evaded in the phenomena.
We find wide over-lapping of these fields very often (since the universe
failed to develop along college-curriculum outlines) and there is
consequent difficulty in any ideally clear-cut division. But at the
present state of research only very broad lines are needed.

It has been customary to lump together the phenomena of the field under
the headings of "Physical" and "Mental", with perhaps "Psychic Healing"
in addition. Under the "physical phenomena", however, are included not
only the seemingly more clear-cut exceptions of accepted physical law,
such as "levitations", "psychic lights", etc., but also what are only
secondarily exceptions to physical law (as this is academically
distinguished), and are primarily physiological law, as for example,"
elongations", "extrusions", "stigmatization" and the like. As the
subject becomes more refined by advance in knowledge there will be
pressing need to clarify these problem-fields. The branch generally
known as "Psychic Healing" would belong in the pathological subdivision
because of its seeming escape from the laws of that science.

Under the "mental" sub-heading of psychic phenomena are some that quite
overlap with the " physical", as in the case of "thought-transference"
at great distances with seeming evasion of the radiation laws covering
the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

decline of intensity with distance. But there are the somewhat purer
cases of the "mental" type, as in perception of objects without sensory
stimulation; *i.e.*, clairvoyance. But even this has its physical side
too, in the fact that apparently all the known ways of making contact
with the object, all the sensorially intercepted energies, are excluded.
Our tacit law that these are essential to perception is evaded. We may
go on to other and still more purely "mental" phenomena. The phenomena
effected through sensitives and purported to have been caused by
extra-somatic agencies, in most of which evidence of the survival of
personality after death is claimed, would, in the feature of survival,
seem to be exceptions to the laws of psycho-physiology covering the role
of the nervous system in mental life.

To designate these branches by acceptable names we will have to wait for
more agreement on the outline and this must await agreement as to
observation of the facts. Tentatively, however, it seems reasonable to
accept some terminology less confused and ambiguous than we are now
accustomed to. The German usage of "parapsychology" for the general
field seems a little more generally appropriate than the others, if we
do not use the prefix as implying that psychical research is outside the
field of psychology—but simply that it is "beside" psychology in the
older and narrower conception. But the German usage of "paraphysical"
for the "physical" and "paraphysiological" for the "physiological"
phenomena of Psychical Research are, I think, not at all consistent with
this use of "parapsychology". They have no reference to the essentially
"psychical" characteristic of all such phenomena. (We could as well call
the psycho-physical phenomena of psychology "physical" instead of
"psycho-physical".) Rather, I think, should we use a term that clearly
implies the fact of their being first of all parapsychological phenomena
and indicate by adding to this term whatever other branch is involved.
With this in view I propose to use the expressions
"parapsycho-physical", "parapsycho-physiological",
"parapsycho-pathological" for these branches and to add on the same
principle any others that are necessary. The "parapsycho—" indicates the
general connection with the field of parapsychology and the rest
specifies the other field jointly concerned. The "psycho" portion of
every term used recalls constantly the connection with psychology, the
fact that a phenomenon of personality is being dealt with. For the more
purely and simply "mental" phenomena of the field, the adjective
"para-psychical" is sufficiently distinguishing; quite as much so,
indeed, as it is to say "psychical" for the less "physical" (*i.e.*,
less "psycho-physical") of the phenomena of present academic psychology.
The viewpoint is that all the phenomena of the field are "psychical" in
some degree. When there is another scientific field very obviously
involved by the apparent

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

evasion of a law of its domain, there is ground then for making a
hyphenated name, as "Parapsycho-physical". Those phenomena not thus
described and given a hyphenated name are the more purely psychical ones
and would be called "parapsychical". We have the following outline,
then, as a tentative working adaptation of the more systematic German
terminology:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Outline of Parapsychology (*i.e.*, Psychical Research) on the basis of
the other fields most involved in the laws seemingly evaded or
transcended.

Parapsychological Phenomena:

A. Parapsychical: Telepathy and clairvoyance, experimental and
spontaneous; dowsing; previsionary and monitory dreams or
hallucinations; "psychometry", veridical "spirit" communication, etc.

B. Parapsycho-physical: Telekinesis, levitation, "psychic lights",
temperature changes, "apports", etc.

C. Parapsycho-physiological: "Materializations", "extrusions",
elongations, stigmatization, extreme body-temperature changes, etc.

D. Parapsycho-pathological: "Possession-pathology"; <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) "psychic healing" of organic disease, beyond
effect of suggestion.

E. \[Parapsycho-literary (and other parapsycho-artistic): Creative
writing or other art, clearly "impossible" as result of natural
training; *e.g.*, Patience Worth, as reported. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) (This may properly be regarded as a
sub-heading of A, also.)\]

</div>

The outline, as thus far developed, deals only with the branching of the
subject on the basis of the types of laws seemingly transcended, and
consequently of the other subject or science involved. When we consider
the other major features of the so-called "psychic phenomena"—namely,
their "psychic" or personality aspect—we find that further outlining is
required to express this feature and that the added lines cut
horizontally across those already indicated. Among the phenomena
reported, corporeality and incorporeality is the principal feature of
personality condition that stands out. That is, the occurrences reported
are purported to be due to incorporeal agencies, called "controls",
"spirits", etc., or else are supposed to be produced by certain
corporeal (or, as we say, "living") agents who are specially sensitive
and capable of these unusual performances. There seem to be four general
cases possible on this principle: one corporeal agent may influence
another, as in telepathy, or the one corporeal may be the only
personality concerned, as in clairvoyance. The incorporeal agency
(claiming to be a disembodied personality surviving

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

death) may influence a corporeal one, as in the so-called "mediumistic"
experiences. Or, fourth, the incorporeal personality may seem to produce
phenomena without the aid of a corporeal one with parapsychological
capacities, as in the seeming "invasions" called "hauntings". This gives
us a small and simple working chart of the field, as it seems to lie in
its more natural outline, from the viewpoints of the two main general
characteristics of the phenomena as a whole. It is, I think, logically
systematized on what seem to be consistent lines, and is capable of much
extension and refinement along the same lines. There is no original
element in it, of course, and the slight reconstruction is not a
conspicuous feature. It is, rather, a restatement of established general
usage that seems convenient. See the diagram below:

A TENTATIVE DIAGRAM OF THE FIELD OF PARAPSYCHOLOGY

Subdivision on basis of fields involved, judged by type of laws
"evaded".

<div align="center">

<table style="width:100%;" data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="93"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Para-<br />
psychical</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Parapsycho-<br />
physical</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Parapsycho-<br />
physiological</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Parapsycho-<br />
pathological</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td rowspan="4" data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Subdivision on basis of the state of the<br />
personalities supposed to be involved—<br />
chiefly as to corporeality.</p></td>
<td rowspan="2" data-valign="top" width="93"><p><em>Corporeal</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Simple<br />
Corporeal<br />
Agency</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>1</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>2</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>3</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>4</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Inter-<br />
Corporeal<br />
Agency</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>5</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>6</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>7</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>8</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td rowspan="2" data-valign="top" width="93"><p><em>Incorporeal</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Incorporeal-<br />
thru-<br />
Corporeal<br />
Agency</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>9</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>10</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>11</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>12</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="94"><p>Simple<br />
Incorporeal<br />
Agency</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>13</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>14</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>15</p></td>
<td data-valign="bottom" width="94"><p>16</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

If it is remembered that we are merely dividing up a field of problems
on the basis of reports of indeterminate value, and not a field of known
facts or laws, the natural hesitation of many readers to accept such a
working scheme will, I think, be much lessened. At least, this outline
gives some system to the reported occurrences and enables us to hold
them in mind as a whole, as the careful worker in the field needs to do.
And it gives this simply on the basis of the two general lines of
reference most characteristic. Such a general view of the field is
essential, I believe, to

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the full evaluation of the work such as is reported here. In so far as
the phenomena, mentioned here in connection with the outline, have been
erroneously reported, the scheme will, of course, have later to be
modified. But there is no reason to object to this or to expect it to be
otherwise, in view of the way it is laid down.

The task of placing the occurrences and evidence types into the diagram
just given is, however, one that I shrink from—since this would be to
discriminate more than I can now do, especially on the question of how
much of a role the supposed incorporeal personality plays in the
reported occurrences, if (of course, we must say) any. Each reader or
student who finds the diagram of help in the direction suggested, can
well place any phenomenon, according to its apparent features as it
occurs or is reported to him. But even though the outline is
recognizedly referring only to apparent phenomenal characteristics, one
hesitates at this stage to do this fitting in of special cases for
others—all the more so since it is so unnecessary. The framework is
there ready for one to use as one will.

We are principally concerned in this report with that part of the
parapsychological field that would be called corporeal parapsychical
phenomena (Areas 1 and 5, in the above diagram). Only indirectly, and
perhaps doubtfully, are the parapsycho-physical and the
parapsycho-physiological divisions invaded. These possible invasions may
have to be regarded when they are more clear; at present the problem
setting, then, is only the parapsychical department, in its definitely
corporeal branch. That is, we are dealing with the occurrences of
parapsychological phenomena that apparently are more purely mental and,
as reported and described, involve only living individuals. This
excludes those phenomena that clearly seem to involve incorporeal,
*i.e.*, "spirit" connections, either as "communicators" or as "controls"
or intermediaries. Accordingly, all mediumistic activities are outside;
"psychometric" work <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) also, insofar as
it is described as the work of controls. But if it is not thus
supposedly spiritistic, it becomes clairvoyance which belongs, then, in
the designated branch. The spontaneous parapsychological occurrences
such as hallucinations, dreams, etc., that are veridical and are purely
psychical (not more obviously parapsycho-physical, etc.), belong here,
too, if not plainly purporting to imply agency of incorporeal
personalities. Automatic expression of extra-normal knowledge (through
ouija-board, planchette, common script, etc.) is regarded in the same
way; *i.e.*, without the appearance of incorporeal personalities
involved, the phenomena belong in the corporeal parapsychical
department.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

If there be any need to justify this laying out of the field at the
beginning, it should be recalled that (assuming for the moment that
these divisions are represented by actual phenomena) the subdivisions
concerned here may be involved in part with all the others. It is almost
certain that, if there be any foundation for this department, its basic
principles penetrate more or less prominently down through the whole
parapsychic column, perhaps to the very bottom. Some lateral spread,
too, may be reasonably expected, one would suppose. A second point is
also strongly urgent; namely, no single problem department can properly
be dealt with in any field—unless not only its boundaries are known,
but—since no boundary really absolutely bounds—what it is that lies
beyond the boundaries. He who studies, then, only one selected
subdivision could not dependably study that in ignorance of what the
field as a whole may be like. For these and other reasons, the place of
the subdivision in the field as a whole has been worked out in this
tentative fashion.

The central and primary problem of the subdivision of the
parapsychological field indicated as Corporeal Parapsychical is: Are
there really dependable evasions of psychological laws (as they are
regarded today) by corporeal personalities? In other words, can we find
persons able to demonstrate the more commonly reported sort of apparent
exception to psychological laws—mainly, cognition of events without the
usual sensory or rational experience required by our habitual concepts
for the knowing act? Is this an actual principle of nature that such
extra-sensory cognition can be done by normal individuals, as is so
often reported?

The question or problem is a rather broad one, not limited to the
perception, extra-sensorially, of mere objects or states, but is
unlimited. It includes the perception of the mental states of other
individuals, the facts of the past and of distant scenes, of sealed
questions or of the "waters under the earth". The future, too, and its
scrutability are within the scope of the general problems; (unless
previsionary parapsychics are cosmological enough in their evasion of
time "laws" to justify a separate branch of "parapsycho-cosmology". At
present, however, the greater economy the better, or our big words will
seem to mean more than the facts they cover.) The manner of the
operation of such parapsychic perception, too, must be broadly viewed in
clarifying the problem; it might be in hypnotic trance or under the
influence of a drug, with the aid of an "object of reference"
(associated in some way with the facts to be perceived), by the use of a
crystal ball, a cup of tea-leaves, the ouija-board or a divining-rod. So
far as the generalized problem goes, these are all included in the broad
question, Is there a human function of extra-sensory perception?

This is the primary question, and once it is answered affirmatively (and
the next chapter will show that there has long been a very considerable

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

amount of valuable evidence available for so answering it), there comes
next the task of exploring for its extent, its natural history, its
duration and intensity in the individual, its racial and biological
origins, history, and value. But central among these, and basic to any
scientific advance in the understanding and application of the principle
concerned, is the logically next problem, What is the nature or more
fundamental explanatory principle of this extra-sensory mode of
perception? All the surveying of small facts will truly help in the
solution of this problem, but without continuous and clear realization
of this major problem itself, the investigator will never get beyond the
mere surveying of small facts.

The problem of the explanation of the simplest parapsychic principle
calls first for a study of inter-relationships within the corporeal
para-psychic branch itself. What relationships can be found between, for
example: clairvoyance, telepathy, dowsing, prevision, etc.? It is
through the development of these inter-phenomenal studies made with
different experimental conditions and correspondingly varying phenomena
that progress in their explanation will be made.

Then, too, the expansion of relationships out into the more reliable
neighboring subdivisions of the field of parapsychology may be very
enlightening as a procedure, at least, whenever there seems to be an
interplay of the extra-sensory perception principle present. The
variation it may undergo in these more foreign applications may be
expected to help to reveal its own peculiarities and properties the
better.

Outward, then, will the course of investigation go to the finding of
still more general relationships of the parapsychic principle to be
explained, to the more common psychological processes—to sensory
perception, to higher cognitive processes, to motivation, integration,
attention. The prevailing uncertainty among psychologists on these,
their own supposedly "known grounds", is, of course, no small handicap,
and we shall have to avoid the peculiar dangers of "school-affinities",
and not map out our own uncertainties by lines that are themselves
hypothetical and in danger of eventual obliteration.

Into the realm of physiology, too, the question must be taken if we hope
to explain perception without the senses. Is the nervous system involved
and, if so, in what way differently from the case of sensory perception?
Do the usual nervous reactions from drugs that affect mental life affect
E.S.P. in a like manner and degree? Is it a dissociation phenomenon or
not? What part of the nervous system is receptive in E.S.P., if any?

Nor may we stop here. Physics has to give answer to several questions
that an understanding of this process requires that we ask. Is the
E.S.P. function an energetic process, as is sensory perception? If not,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

how can we have causation that does work without energy (*i.e.*, "does
work" in evoking responses; it always requires energy to direct energy,
so far as energetics knows)? And, if so, what energy can satisfy the
conditions under which we find that E.S.P. can function, the distance
conditions, time conditions, the material relationships? Do the laws of
radiation mechanics apply, with their distance-intensity formulation?
Can the facts we have of penetration and differential absorption in
connection with E.S.P. be explained by such mechanics? Does the
purposive characteristic of E.S.P. clearly evade or transcend any
mechanics conceivable for radiant energy, or can increased complexity
along with the configurational view construct an energy mechanics
hypothetically able to explain the facts? If forced to concede a new
energy, what can physics do—deny it as a "physical" energy, or more
wisely concede that there is still possibility for growth in the basic
concepts of the field? But now we approach philosophy—*i.e.*, scientific
questions too broad for one academic branch.

Yet need we stop short of philosophy? Certainly the general biology and
evolutionary history, social implications, and general cosmology of
E.S.P. are in line for being ransacked in the pursuit of interesting
co-relationships. Anthropology and comparative religion have suggestive
facts, possibly of considerable interest, if not of value. To say where
the study of the problem will or will not eventually lead us to would be
to anticipate rashly the results of a life-time's research.

It will next be in order to survey the historical background for the
special area we are engaged in investigating, the corporeal
parapsychical; of this, only the experimental work will be dealt with at
any length, since to do this very fully would be to fill a volume in
itself. The objectives in the literature survey are, first, to draw
before the reader at the start some of the better evidence for E.S.P.,
along with the criticisms, and some of the failures, in order to permit
a tentative solution of the first problem; does E.S.P occur? The second
objective of this survey is to sift out the points of value in past work
that will help in solving the second problem of our special branch; what
is the real principle underlying E.S.P.? At the close of the survey
there will be reviewed the hypotheses that have been offered in
explanation of E.S.P. phenomena.

It is the task of the investigation, after contributing independent
proof of E.S.P. as a primary objective and justifying an interest in the
problem of its nature, to go on to discriminate between the different
hypotheses by testing them, and to add to the general factual
accumulation that permits a logical evaluation of them and final choice
among them. In a general way we have gone through this work along those
lines. And it makes some definitely progressive steps, too, toward the
second problem's solution,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the explanation, although we can make no very positive general
conclusions as yet. There is need, I think, at this stage to have a more
exhaustive range of hypotheses for the explanation of E.S.P. and also,
of course, practical proposals for testing them out.

From this discussion, it is clear that, briefly stated, we are seeking
to answer the following questions in this order: Is there E.S.P.
and—What is E.S.P.? The first must obviously first be answered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[8:1](esp07.htm#fr_4) For instances of cures.
using "possession" as a working theory, see Dr. W. F. Prince's report on
page 36 of B.S.P.R. Bulletin VI, and Mrs. Lambert's on page 5, Bulletin
IX, as well as the work of Dr. Titus Bull of New York.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[8:2](esp07.htm#fr_5) Dr. W. F. Prince, *The Case
of Patience Worth*, B.S.P.R., 2nd Ed., 1929, Boston.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[10:1](esp07.htm#fr_6) That is, work done by a
parapsychic sensitive in which, seemingly with the aid of a "token" or
"object of fixation", facts not normally or explainably knowable to the
sensitive are expressed concerning the person, living or dead, to whom
the object belongs—facts unlimited in range and nature. It is a sort of
parapsychic "free association" process. Wherever the term "psychometry"
is applied it has, rather commonly, though not necessarily, a
connotation of "spirit" agency in the process. Otherwise it would be
simple unrestricted parapsychic perception with a "parapsychogenetic"
object present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. Historical Background](esp08)
