[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gm07)  [Next](gm09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Golden Mountain*, by Meyer Levin, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### THE BRIDE IN HER GRAVE

##### A TRUE STORY OF HOW THE BAAL SHEM TOV BROUGHT BACK A BRIDE FROM THE OTHER WORLD

<span class="smallcaps">Soon</span> the whole world knew of the wisdom
and power of the Baal Shem Tov. From all corners of the Carpathians,
followers came to him. Often he went on journeys to far places to which
the Will had called him.

Once on a Wednesday night Rabbi Israel arose and said, "I must go away
for the Sabbath." He went into the barn and harnessed his horse.

Several of his followers sprang after him and begged that he take them
with him. But he allowed only a few of them to come into his wagon.

"Where will we hold Sabbath?" they said.

"In Berlin, in the house of a wealthy Jew."

Though they knew that with swiftest horses it took more than a week to
reach Berlin, they did not question the Rabbi, for the Master was not
confined in the bonds of time or of space.

The Baal Shem let his little horse walk slowly along a byway all that
evening, and at midnight the wagon stopped before a tavern.

"Let us stay here tonight," said Rabbi Israel.

The tavern-keeper welcomed them into his house, for he saw that they
were holy men.

"Perhaps you will honour my house, and remain over Sabbath?" he said.

But Rabbi Israel answered, "We must hold Sabbath in Berlin."

The inn-keeper looked at him, and did not understand. The Rabbi said,
"On Sabbath eve there is to

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

be a wedding in the house of a wealthy Jew of Berlin, and I must be at
the wedding in order to read the service, and bless the bride."

"You must have a wonderful horse," said the tavern-keeper, smiling.

"My little horse will get me there in time," said Rabbi Israel.

"In time for the Sabbath after this one," answered the inn-keeper,
laughing. "Why, Berlin is farther than a hundred miles away. If you were
to travel day and night, sparing neither man nor beast, you might arrive
in time for the Sabbath after this one."

But his words did not trouble the Baal Shem Tov. Rabbi Israel turned to
his followers and said, "You are tired. Let us go to sleep."

 

The tavern-keeper could not sleep that night. He lay awake wondering how
the Rabbi would reach Berlin before the Sabbath fell. "This is Wednesday
night," he said. "Tomorrow is a day, and Friday is only part of a day.
No, I cannot understand it!" At last he said to himself, "I will tell
him I have things to attend to in Berlin, and ask him to take me there."

When the Baal Shem Tov arose in the morning, the tavern-keeper ran to
him saying, "Shall I harness the horse, Rabbi?"

"Not yet," said the Baal Shem Tov. "First we will pray. And after that,
we will eat our breakfast."

"Rabbi," said the inn-keeper, "I have business to do in Berlin. Take me
there with you!"

"When we start, come with us in our wagon," said Rabbi Israel.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

The Master and his followers said the morning prayers, and after that
they sat down around the table. They ate without haste, and while they
ate they discussed the Torah. A problem of judgement arose, and they sat
a long time discussing the problem.

Meanwhile the inn-keeper ran and dressed himself for the journey. When
he was ready, he looked into the room where the Master sat with his
students, and he saw them still absorbed in their discussions.

"Half the day is gone already!" thought the inn-keeper.

He heard Rabbi Israel's words. "Of every good deed we do, a good angel
is born. Of every bad deed, a bad angel is born. In all the deeds of our
daily life we serve God as directly as though our deeds were prayers.
When we eat, when we work, when we sing, when we wash ourselves, we are
praying to God.

"Therefore we should live constantly in highest joy, for everything that
we do is an offer to God.

"And of those things that we do badly, work that we leave half finished,
or thoughts that we leave uncompleted, malformed angels are born. Angels
without heads, angels with no eyes, angels without arms, without hair,
without feet. Therefore no deed should be left unfinished."

The inn-keeper thought, "If that is the way he travels to Berlin, the
angel born of his ride will have perhaps the beginning of a toe, and
nothing else."

But the rabbi and his students remained around the table, talking.

"I will tell you the story of a king," said the Baal Shem Tov. "There
was a very wise king who had built for himself a strange and wonderful
palace. In

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the centre of the palace was a room in which stood the throne. Only one
door led into this room. All through the palace were passageways and
halls and corridors that turned and twisted about and led in every
direction, there were endless walls without openings, and there were
more corridors and more passageways.

"When the palace stood finished, the King sent an order to all of his
lords commanding them to come before him. He sat on his throne and
waited.

"The lords came to the outside of the Palace, and stared in wonder at
the confusion of corridors. They said, 'There is no way to come to the
King!'"

"But the Prince threw open the door saying, 'Here he sits before you!
All ways lead to the King!'"

Then Rabbi Israel added, "So we may find God."

 

In the afternoon, the Baal Shem Tov called the tavern-keeper.

"I will harness the horse at once!" said the tavern-keeper.

"No, not yet. First, we will eat the evening meal." Then the Rabbi and
his students sat down again, and ate largely and well.

As evening came, the rabbi himself went to the barn and harnessed the
horse to the wagon. "Now we will go," he said.

The inn-keeper got into the wagon with them.

"At last I will see what manner of horse he has here," he thought. And
he bound his cloth around his throat, for he thought, "A great wind will
come because of our swift riding."

The little horse began to walk. At first, the tavern-keeper

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

saw, they were going along the same road on which his tavern stood.
Every house along the way he knew, and every tree. But as the darkness
grew like sleep around his eyes, he was no longer sure where he rode.
First, there seemed to be no more houses. Then there seemed to be no
more people. And at last, there seemed to be no more trees. He was
awake, he listened, and yet he could not distinguish the hoofbeats of
the horse. The wagon moved silently through the darkness, smoothly as if
floating on a surface of glass. The air was tender about his face, and
there was a sweet odour in his nostrils.

He thought to himself, "Perhaps I am not here at all!"

Then he felt the chassid who sat next to him, in order to make sure that
this was no vision.

"Where are we going?" he said.

"We are going to Berlin."

"But I do not recognize the road!"

The Baal Shem Tov said, "This is a short way."

 

All night long they rode, and the tavern-keeper saw no light of
habitation, saw nothing but the stars in the velvet sky, and heard
nothing but the voices of the chassidim as they talked of things in the
Torah.

The Rabbi himself spoke of many wonderful things. He spoke of the
prophet Elijah, who wanders about the world, and of how at the time of
Redemption he would bring down Messiah, and then at last the Shechina,
the Glory of the Living God, will cease her wandering, and unite again
with Him.

"No man can hasten the coming of that day," said

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the Master of the Word. "Even the mightiest of Words cannot bring down
that day, as long as evil is among us."

Towards dawn, the inn-keeper began again to hear the hoofbeats of the
horse. Then he felt the wagon jolting on a road. He saw trees, he saw
houses. He saw that they were near a great city. And when they rode into
the city, he saw that it was Berlin.

The tavern-keeper remembered that the Baal Shem Tov had said he was
going to the house of a wealthy Jew to perform a wedding service. But
now instead of driving to the street on which stood the houses of the
rich, the Rabbi stopped before a humble guesthouse and went in there
with his students, and they said their morning prayers, and sat
themselves down at the table.

The tavern-keeper wandered out into the streets. He was restless, and
filled with the news of the marvellous ride he had taken, and he wanted
to find someone to tell of the great wonder.

He came to the street of rich houses. Each house was a veritable palace.
And one of these houses, he saw, was festooned as for a great feast. As
the tavern-keeper stood before this house, the door opened and a young
man came running out of it. Though he ran in great haste, he did not
seem to know where to go, but turned first one way and then the other
way. His face was terribly wrought in grief.

The tavern-keeper saw that the young man was wearing Sabbath clothes and
new shoes. "He is certainly the bridegroom," he thought.

The bridegroom ran up to the tavern-keeper and said, "Where is there a
doctor?"

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

The tavern-keeper seized his arm and cried, "Come, I know of a rabbi who
works wonders!"

But the bridegroom stood still, repeating to himself. "Of what use will
it be? She is dead."

The tavern-keeper could not contain himself, and cried, "The rabbi can
do all things! He came a hundred miles in one night, to perform a
wedding in Berlin!"

The bridegroom said, "The bride is dead."

The tavern-keeper said, "His powers are so great, he can surely raise
people from the dead! Come, I will take you to him!" The bridegroom put
out his hand, and the inn-keeper led him to the Baal Shem Tov.

 

"Tell me what has happened," said the Master.

"Today, I was to have been married," said the man. "Last night there was
a great festival in the house of the bride. All through the feast, she
was joyous, she danced, she was the happiest of all the people in the
house. We danced together at our wedding feast. Then she went up to her
room and slept. And this morning when she awoke and tried to rise, she
fell to the ground, dead."

"Take me to the house," said the Baal Shem Tov.

They came to the beautiful house that was festooned for the wedding.
They went through the ballroom where the feast had been held, they went
up the stairway and came into the maiden's bedroom. There, dressed in a
long white robe, lay the body of the bride. Beside her on the bed lay
the wedding-dress that she had begun to put upon herself.

The Baal Shem leaned over, and looked into the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

face of the girl. Then he said to the women who were in the room, "Dress
her in her shroud." And he said to the men, "Dig a grave for her in the
cemetery." And he said to the groom, "I will go with you to bury the
bride. But you must do everything exactly as I order. Take her
wedding-dress and her ornaments and her wedding-shoes, and bring them to
the grave."

Then the women dressed the maiden for the grave. And when she was ready
to be buried, they put her in a coffin. The bridegroom took her
wedding-dress in his hands, and carried it with him as he walked beside
the coffin.

 

Two grave-diggers had already made a hole in the earth. They
straightened their backs, and prepared to climb out of the hole.

But the Baal Shem Tov called down to them, "Remain there, and do as I
say. Let one of you stand at her head, and the other stand at her feet.
Do not take your eyes from the face of the girl. And if a change comes
over the face of the girl, I will give you a sign. Then lift her, and
help her to rise."

 

They took the maiden as she lay in her shroud, and they put her down
into the earth. They drew the cover away from her face, that the living
might look the last time upon her. Her face was white as her shroud.

They did not throw earth over her body.

The Baal Shem Tov took his stick and leaned upon it, leaning over the
open grave. His eyes looked into the face of the dead maiden. And all
those who were there looked first at the face of the corpse, and then

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

at the living face of the Baal Shem Tov. And as they watched his face,
they saw that he had gone into another world. As they looked into his
eyes, they could almost see what he saw in the other world. They knew
that the Power was come over him, and that he was no longer among them.
They saw his mouth move, and heard him speak words made of sounds they
had never heard before. And none who were there by the grave could ever
remember the Words that he had uttered.

Only the bridegroom kept his eyes upon the face of his beloved.

And after a long while, a shiver coursed through his back. For it seemed
to him that he had seen a tinge of colour, delicate as the brush of an
eyelid, pass upon her cheek.

In that same moment the Baal Shem Tov trembled with mighty force, as a
man trembles who clutches with all his strength to hold back the wheels
of a wagon that would break away and rush downhill. Then Rabbi Israel
straightened himself, and breathed freely. He made a sign to the two
men, and they lifted the girl out of the grave. Her eyes were open. She
looked to her bridegroom, and smiled.

"Dress her in her wedding clothes, and take her under the canopy," said
the Baal Shem Tov. "All that has happened, forget."

With these words, Rabbi Israel started to walk away. But the groom ran
after him and begged him to be the one to say the wedding service.

 

For the wedding, the feast was prepared, greater than ever before. And
the joy in that house was

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

unbounded, for the bride had returned from the dead.

Only, all day long, when they asked of her, "What happened over there?"
she became confused, and answered in a bewildered way, "I do not know. I
do not know who he was!"

 

When the couple stood under the wedding canopy, and the Baal Shem Tov
began to read the wedding service, the bride started joyfully and cried
out, "It is he!"

Rabbi Israel whispered to her, "Be still!" and he finished the service.

But when the blessing was over the bride could no longer contain her
secret. She would not let the Rabbi go away. "It was he who brought me
back from over there!" she said. "I know him by his voice!"

Then, as they sat to eat the wedding meal, the bride told of all that
had happened.

 

The groom had been married once before. His first wife had been the aunt
of this maiden, who was an orphan. The girl had lived happily in their
house.

When the wife became sick, and knew that she was about to die, she
called the girl to her bedside and said, "Promise me that you will never
marry my husband. Otherwise, I cannot die in peace."

The maiden was afraid to make the promise, for she already felt stirring
within her the love for her future groom. But because she could not deny
the wish of the dying woman, she gave the promise that was asked of her.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span id="img_05500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE BRIDE IN HER
GRAVE](tn/05500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05500.jpg)  
THE BRIDE IN HER GRAVE  
</span>

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

Then the woman called her young husband to her bedside and said, "I
cannot die peacefully unless you promise never to marry my niece." In
order that she might die peacefully, he gave her his hand and his word.

But after the dead woman was taken from the house, the man and the girl
were left there together. Each day, they knew their love to be stronger.
At last they could no longer restrain their love, and they agreed to
marry each other.

On the morning of the wedding day, as the maiden arose to put on her
wedding garments, the angry soul of the dead woman came into the house.
She seized the soul of the girl, crying, "You have broken your sacred
promise! Come with me!"

And before the Almighty she demanded the death of the bride.

As the bride was placed in her grave, her soul went up for judgement.
The souls of the two women stood for judgement together. The soul of the
first wife cried, "She has taken my beloved from me!"

And the soul of the maiden cried, "She has taken me from my beloved!"

At that moment, the Baal Shem Tov came up to the court of judgement. He
placed himself between the two souls. "The dead have no right on earth!"
he declared. "The right is with the living!"

He seized the soul of the girl, and drew it away from the soul of the
dead woman. "The bride and groom are not guilty of wrong," he said. "The
promise that they made was given against their wills. Their promise was
made only to give peace to the soul of the dying woman. And now she must
leave them in peace!"

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

The words of Rabbi Israel were judged to be right. And pronouncement was
made, "Let the maiden's soul return to her body."

But the dead woman would not free the soul of the girl. She clung to the
girl's soul with all her might.

"Let her go!" cried the Baal Shem Tov. And then he drew all his strength
together and wrenched the soul of the maiden from the clutches of the
dead woman's soul. "Let her go! Can't you see that the wedding canopy is
waiting!"

That was when the bride returned to the living, and was taken out of her
grave, and dressed in her wedding garments.

<span id="img_05700"></span> ![](img/05700.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rabbi Israel and the Sorcerer](gm09)
