[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gm22)  [Next](gm24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Golden Mountain*, by Meyer Levin, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### THE WANDERING IN HEAVEN

<span class="smallcaps">During</span> the day, the Master served all
living creatures. From far away they came, begging Life of him;
supplicating voices flowed from the mouths of all breathing beings, and
the breath of their suffering reached toward him.

He took of his Power, and divided it among them. Unendingly he gave his
strength out of himself. Unendingly his Faith flowed to them, in answer.

Under the touch of his finger the wounds of the world were healed.

During the day, he served all living creatures. But at night his soul
took freedom. She would no longer remain among the suffering. She shook
off time and space as two imprisoning fetters, and raised herself to the
borders. She shook off the earth from her foot. She tried her wings. And
the Heavens received her.

In Heaven, there is neither time nor space, but infinity and eternity.
Each night the soul went further into infinity, deeper into eternity.
She followed the living path.

But there came one night when a wall of earth stood before the soul,
barring her way. Boundless as had been her flight, so was the barrier
boundless. The living path came against the wall, and died. A dark
finger had put out all the light of all the stars and covered the warmth
of all heaven.

And the wall had a countenance, formless and shadowy, yet it seemed to
the soul to be more familiar than her own self. And the soul recognized
it, for it was the face of the human life that she had left in the
evening, and to which she had to return in the morning, as into a warmed
bed.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

But from the other side of the wall there wakened a sound, a great voice
in the darkness. It was as though the Path lived again on the other side
of the wall, and wakened and spoke:

The Voice of the Unknown spoke:

"Soul, yearning soul, soul of power and of dreams. Soul that seeks for
all things, space and infinity, object and mystery at once! This is the
boundary. Here is the altar of the world. Beyond this boundary, human
life may not pass, for the name of this place is God's Wall.

"Unto this spot reaches variety. Beyond this spot, the Oneness begins.

"Soul that has come unto this silent, impenetrable wall-

"Sever yourself from earthly life, and I will open to you. Or return in
your flight. For whoever has passed beyond me, does not return."

And the Voice sank. And again there was nothing before the soul but the
dim, silent wall.

The soul lifted her head. For the space of an instant she stood, as
though listening to the resounding word, and then she spoke her answer:

"I depart from the—"

In that instant, on earth, a woman leaned over a bed in which lay the
body of a man. She looked, she touched the pale deathlike sleeper. Then
she cried, "Israel!"

Her cry flew straight to Heaven. Her cry was swifter than the spirit of
the stars, swifter than the angel of death. Before that instant was
closed, the cry stood at the end of the Path upon which the soul had
passed

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

so many nights, and the cry put his hand over her shoulder.

Then the soul withheld her words, and looked behind herself. And she
spoke no more. She put her arm about the neck of the messenger, and
returned in her flight.

That was the last time the Master wandered toward Heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Prophecy of the New Year](gm24)
