[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gm39)  [Next](gm41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Golden Mountain*, by Meyer Levin, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

### THE WIND THAT OVERTURNED THE WORLD

##### AND THE KINGDOM OF MONEY-WORSHIPPERS

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> a place beyond the habitations of men
there lived a master of prayer. His house was hidden in the forest;
there was a body of water in his domain, and by the water grew
fruit-laden trees; there he passed his days singing in joyous worship of
Heaven.

Sometimes he would leave his retreat to go into the world of men. He
would approach one person or another, and begin to talk with him. Mostly
he would speak to humble workmen and tradesmen, but rich men, too, had
heard him.

"What do you live for?" he would ask.

Some would answer, "To eat and to drink"; others would answer, "To die";
but the Master would prove to them that man lived only for joy, and that
man owed his joy to Heaven.

"Come with me," he would say, "and I will show you how to live."

One by one he brought people to his place in the forest; they bathed in
the water, they ate of the fruit, they sang, and their worship was
purest joy. The master knew the needs of each of his followers; those
who had been poor were sometimes given garments of gold, and the rich
were happy in beggar's rags.

But in the world of men it came to be known that there was a Master who
caused men to leave their wives and their brothers while they followed
him, so a great cry was set up that the Master must be captured.

This they could not do, for he cleverly disguised

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

himself, once as a merchant, another time as a soldier, and a third time
as a wanderer; no man could tell who he was, until the Master had won
the man to his will.

And already among the Master's followers there were some who lived so
perfectly in his ways that they too went among men, and brought away
people to live as they lived.

In that time there was a strange kingdom inhabited by a people who
believed only in riches. Among them, a man was judged according to the
sum of money that he possessed. Each year, each citizen would tell the
measure of his possessions, and accordingly receive his rank. Those who
had no money, or very little, might not even call themselves men, but
were ranked as beasts and birds: some were dogs, some cattle, some
mules, and they had to serve those who had gold. The richer might call
themselves men, and if they had a great sum of money they were noblemen,
and if they had a still greater sum they were kings.

There, no one had any thought but to get riches, thus a dog wanted to
become a horse, and a horse a lion, and a lion a man, and a man a
nobleman, and a nobleman a king. They knew no right or wrong, except the
right of riches, so that the country was filled with thieves and bandits
who sought to become kings by stealing money. The noblemen and kings
employed great armies of men-beasts as soldiers to protect their
treasuries, but nevertheless the land was filled with theft and
violence.

When the Master's followers heard of that country they said, "Let us go
there and see if we can win the people from their folly." So a band of
them came to the land where money was worshipped.

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

They could not find anyone who would stop and listen to them, but at
last they spoke to a poor little creature huddled naked in the street.
He was not even a man, but was of the rank of a sparrow.

As they began to speak of the folly of riches, he cried, "I have no time
to listen to you!"

"What have you to do?" they asked.

"I must prepare to go on a journey, for we have heard of a land where
gold may be made out of the earth!" he said. "There I too may become a
king, or even a god, according to our laws. Who knows, I may yet win the
rank of a star, and I may become that supreme being, the moon. For it is
the moon, you know, that makes gold on earth, and if I get enough gold
out of the earth I may become the moon, and then I can make all the
earth into gold!"

"Where is that land?" they asked of him.

"It is among high mountains, far from the other peoples of the world. We
will build our cities on the peaks of those mountains, and make strong
walls so that none may enter and steal our gold, and there will be but
one secret path upon each mountain leading to each of our cities. And
there I, too, may become a god!"

With these words he ran from them, and they saw that all the people were
leaving the city.

The disciples returned to their Master and told him of the kingdom of
folly where rich men called themselves stars and moons and even gods.
The Master cried, "I had feared that they would call themselves gods!"
And he determined to go to the new domain of the money-worshippers and
try to rid them of their folly.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

He came to the guards who stood at the foot of the mountains, and began
to speak of the folly of worshipping riches. But the guards, who were
only of the rank of hounds and wolves, were filled with the desire to
get gold and become men; they could not listen to the Master, but could
only stare at the portraits of their kings and gods which they always
carried about with them, for the love of riches was grown so deep that
they could not imagine a world where things might be otherwise.

Then, seeing that it was of no use to speak with the guards, the Master
went by them; he passed through the secret path up the mountain, and
came into the city.

In that city were many merchants who often journeyed through the world
to trade with other peoples, and on such voyages they had heard of a
Master who stole men from their accustomed lives but could not himself
be caught. And now as the Master went up to one man and another in that
city, and spoke, he found none who would hear him, for their folly was
so deeply grown; nevertheless it was soon whispered that the Master of
dangerous words was come into the city.

"How did he come here?" they cried, but none could tell. And he was so
cleverly disguised that he could not be caught.

Meanwhile these same merchants brought news of a great warrior who went
from one nation to another, conquering. It was his custom when he came
within fifty miles of a city to send his warriors with a message
demanding surrender. If the people submitted to his will he did their
city no harm, but marched further; but if the city would not surrender,
he made war, and slaughtered its people.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

"This same conqueror is coming toward our mountains!" the merchants
cried; and all the money-worshippers were terrified that he would take
away their riches. But the merchants said, "It is not gold that he
seeks, only power over the world." Then they were afraid for their
lives, for they could not surrender their city to an infidel who did not
believe in riches, and if they did not surrender their city, he would
kill them all!

They prayed to their rich men-gods, and they took little beast-men and
bird-men and burned them upon altars before these gods; but the
sacrifices were of no avail; the warrior came nearer to their kingdom.

"Where shall we turn for help?" they cried. Then one merchant, who had
travelled far, said, "There is a land where every man is a god. Surely
they can help us." And he told of a country whose people were so rich
that the poorest among them was rich enough according to the measures of
the money-worshippers to be a god. "Even their steeds," he said, "are of
the degree of angels, for their mounts are studded with jewels so rich
as to make them of angel's rank. Let us send emissaries to those gods
and beg them to help us."

 

The Master heard of their plan, and he thought, "I will go once more to
the mountain cities and try to draw the people away from their folly."
Then he came again and began to speak with a guard, but the guard could
talk of nothing but the terrible Conqueror.

"Have you no power against him?" the Master said.

"We have sent emissaries to the land where men

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

are gods, and those gods will help us," the guard said.

Then the Master laughed. "But they are only men like yourselves!" he
exclaimed, "and they cannot help you at all. Leave off your foolish talk
of gods, for there is only one God, and rich and poor are alike to him,
and only he can help you against the Conqueror."

At first the guard would not listen to him, but as he continued to
speak, the guard said, "And what if I listen to you, I am only one."
Then the Master was pleased, and he went to another guard, and talked to
him until that guard said, "And what if I listen to you, I am only one."
So he went until he had spoken to all the guards and they had answered
him. Then he went into the city, and after he had talked for a long
while to a man in the city, the man also said, "And what if I listen to
you, I am only one." Thus, because the people were terribly afraid of
the Conqueror, the Master was able to make them listen to him. But each
time they spoke of the Conqueror, he said, "What Conqueror? Can it be
that same Hero whom I knew at the court of the king?"

At last it came to the ears of the gods who ruled the city that the
famous Master was among them, talking to the people. They ordered that
he be captured and brought before them. And though he disguised himself
in many different ways, he was caught and brought before the gods, and
to them also he said, "What folly it is to send to the kingdom of gods
for help. They are only men like yourselves, and can do no more than
yourselves, for no man can stand before the Conqueror."

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

"What do you know of him?" they asked.

"I know," he said. "For there was a Hero in the court of a King whom I
served. That King possessed a marvellous image made in the form of a
Hand, perfectly made with all five fingers and with the marking of the
faint and the deep lines that are found on the human hand, and by these
markings one might see the form of every land in the world, as it had
been from the beginning of creation, and as it will be at the end of
time; and on that Hand one might see all that would happen to each
country and each city, and to every man, for the lines and the markings
upon the Hand were signs by which one might read; and the rivers and
waters of all places were shown there, and the highways that went from
one place to another, and even the hidden ways were shown there, so that
from that Hand I was able to know the secret path into your own city,
and by that Hand I know the secret paths into all your other cities, and
I know the ways from this world into other worlds, and I know the ways
that lead up into the heavens, for there is one way by which Elijah went
from the earth to heaven, and there is another way that Moses went, and
Henoch went by still another path: and they were all marked upon that
Hand.

"There, too, one might see the fate of cities as they were, and are, and
shall be; I have seen Sodom as it was before it fell, and as it is now;
and I have seen your city, and so I have seen your emissaries go out to
the city where all men are gods, and I have seen that your emissaries
and the men of that city too will come to a woeful end."

When the elders heard him speak in this way they

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

thought, "Surely no man can have imagined such a thing, and it must all
be true." They looked on their own hands, and saw that they were covered
with lines and mysterious markings.

"Bring us to the King who possesses the wondrous Hand!" they cried.
"Perhaps he will show us where to find gold!"

Then the Master smiled. "Still you can think of nothing but gold!" he
said. "Think rather of how to save yourselves, for gold is of no worth
to that King."

But they cried, "Nevertheless, bring us to him, and we will believe as
you believe."

Then the Master said, "I do not know myself where the King is to be
found, and I will tell you why that is so. Once I lived in the court of
this King; he had a queen, and an only daughter, and the King sought a
husband for his daughter.

"Now in the King's court there were six ministers: the Sage, who was the
master of all wisdom and the keeper of the marvellous Hand; the
Counsellor, who was the master of words and melodies; the Companion, who
was the dear friend of the King, and each carried with him the portrait
of the other and looked upon it when they were separate, for in each
portrait was such a power that to look upon it was to grow love for him
that was pictured there; the fourth minister was the Treasurer in whose
keep were the staff of jewels and the cap of precious stones and all the
treasures of the King; the fifth minister was the Warrior, and to him
the King had given the marvellous Sword, for this Sword had three
powers: if it were but raised against the enemy, all the leaders of the

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

enemy fled, but if the army of the enemy tried to do battle without its
leaders, one had but to lean the sword sidewards, and the enemy all fell
dead, and if it was leaned to the other side the enemies withered, and
their skins dried and fell from them; and I, the Master of Prayer, was
the King's sixth minister.

"To each of us the King had shown the secret place where we might
replenish our innermost power, for the source of each sort of strength
was marked upon that wondrous Hand; then each day we would retire, each
minister to his place, to replenish his innermost power. The Sage went
one way to the source of wisdom, and the Counsellor went another way to
the source of the word, the Treasurer went to the source of riches, the
Hero to the source of strength, and I went my way to the source of
prayer.

"One day the King asked of me, 'Whom shall I choose as husband for my
daughter? 'Then I said, Let her marry the Warrior!'

"The King was pleased at my answer, and the Daughter and the Hero were
married. Then a boy child was born to them who was marvellously
beautiful and so wise that before he could speak he understood all
things, and this anyone might see, for when a jest was spoken, he
laughed.

"But one day when we had all gone away from the palace, each minister to
the source of his power, there came a whirlwind that overturned the
world, making desert where ocean had been, and turning the dry land into
sea. The wind came into the King's palace, but did not move a feather
from its place. It went directly to the room where the Princess sat with
her Babe, snatched the child from the arms of its

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

mother, and fled. The Princess ran after the wind, seeking her child.
And so she ran, and no one knew whither. Then the Queen ran after the
Princess, and lost sight of her, and ran another way, and no one knew
whither. And after the Queen, the King ran, and no one knew whither.

"When we returned, each man from his own place, we found no one in the
palace; then each man set out another way in search of the King and his
kin. The wondrous Hand was gone, for the whirlwind had overturned all
things, and not one of us could find his way again to the place of the
source of his power, yet each of the ministers still had in him a power
that was more than that of any other man in the world. Therefore if this
Conqueror is that same Hero of our kingdom, no one can stand against
him."

When the gods of the money-worshippers heard these words they would not
let the Master leave them, for they feared the Conqueror.

Soon the Warrior was fifty miles from the city; then he sent his
messengers to demand that the city surrender. The money-worshippers ran
to the Master and said, "If this is indeed your friend the Hero, can you
not help us?"

The Master asked them, "Will not your riches help you?"

"He refuses riches," they said.

Then the Master decided to go and see whether the Conqueror was indeed
his friend the Hero. He went out to the invading army and spoke to one
of the warriors. "Who is your leader?" he asked, "and how did he come
among you?"

"That is a strange story," the warrior replied. "For

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

once there was a whirlwind that upset an entire kingdom, and made desert
into ocean and the sea into dry land. After the wind had passed, all the
people came together, but their King was gone. So they asked, 'How shall
we choose a king?' And they asked again, 'What quality is in a king,
more than in any other man?'

"Some said, 'Honour! For even the dead, who have no use for food, or
gold, or beautiful garments, still demand that honour be paid to their
memory.' Then they who sought honour in a king formed a band and went
off together. On their way they met a caravan of gypsies; an aged man
was being carried at the head of the caravan. He was blind, and crooked,
and his voice was harsh, and he was angry with his bearers; though he
cursed them aloud, his followers honoured him, for of all his brothers
and sisters and their many descendants he was the eldest, and therefore
the head of their tribe. When the people saw what great homage was paid
to the gypsy, they said to him, 'Be our king!' So he growled and cursed
them also, and they went after him, and found a land suitable to them,
and settled there to serve their king.

"But another part of the people declared that not honour, but death was
the greatest of all things, for all men, and beasts, and even the trees
and the fruit upon the trees ended in death; so they sought a murderer
to be their king. They heard a terrified screaming and asked, 'What has
happened?' 'A man has killed his father and his mother!' they were told.
'Such a man must be the greatest of murderers!' they cried, and they
made him their king. They sought a land between two mountains, where
thieves and bandits

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

dwelt; there they lived, while the murderer ruled over them.

"Some said, a king should be more delicate than all other people, and so
they went to seek for a king who did not eat the foods that other people
ate. Yet others said, 'Men should multiply on earth, and because of
beauty, children are born.' So they sought for a beautiful woman to rule
over them. Still others said, 'It is by his power of speech that man is
different from the beasts '; and they sought for a marvellous speaker,
and in a market-place they found a madman who talked to himself in seven
languages, and never stopped talking. Him they made king.

"There were still others among us who said that joy is the greatest
thing in the world, and they found a drunkard in a dirty shirt, he lay
in the road and lifted a bottle of wine to his mouth, and he sang; so
they made him their king, and they went to a land where grape-vines
grew, and settled in that land.

"Some sought for a wise man to rule over them; and at last there were
those who said that strength is the greatest of all things among men. I
was of that group. We went until we found a giant who could eat an ox
and drink a barrel of ale at a single meal, and him we made our king.
Wherever we passed, people fled before us. But one day there came a Hero
who did not run from us, instead he went among us and drew his sword,
then our warriors fled from him, and our carts were tumbled from the
highway, and our king turned and ran. So we went up to the Hero and said
to him, 'Be our king!' He became our king, and set out to conquer the
world. It is not to rule the world that he seeks, but something
otherwise. And

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

when a city will not surrender to him, he lifts his sword. And this
sword has three powers—"

Then the Master knew that the Hero was indeed his old friend, and he
sent his name to the Hero. The Hero called for him, he went to the
Hero's tent, where with great joy they recognized each other, and cried,
"At last we are come together again!"

But after a moment the Warrior asked the Master, "Have you found any of
our old companions?"

The Master said, "I have sought everywhere, and I came upon the places
where all of them had passed, but I found none of them. One day I went
by a hill, and the hill was covered with green grass, and at the top of
the hill there was a golden shrine as if the sinking sun had come to
rest and remained there; I went up the hill, and found the King's crown
lying there, and the winds moved slowly about the hilltop and murmured a
majestic melody; but the King was not there, he had passed, and I could
not find him. On another day I walked across a dreary waste land where
there was no tree, or bush, or blade of grass, and all the earth was
parched; then I saw a tiny drop of blood upon the ground, and then
another, and each drop was like a tear; then I came to a pool of blood,
and faintly, as if from the bottom of the pool, I heard the chanting of
a dirge; then I knew that the Queen had passed that way and wept tears
of blood for the loss of her loved ones, but I could not find her there.

"I went further, and I came to a fair meadow, and in the meadow was a
tiny stream that was as white as lamb's wool; and when I came near I saw
that it was a stream of milk, and it made a murmuring sound as

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

it flowed, a sound like the humming of a lullaby. Then I knew that the
Princess had passed that way, and I sought for her but could not find
her.

"At last I came to a desert, and in the sands were the footprints of a
child's naked feet, and as I went I saw something that glittered like a
sun-ray in the sand; I stooped, and found a golden hair of the child.
And all about me, in the still air, there hovered a breath of sound, as
of a child singing in the womb. Then I sought for the child, but could
not find him anywhere.

"And so I passed the places of all the King's ministers; I passed a sea
of wine, where the King's Friend had spoken beautiful words; I passed a
forest where every bird spoke, and I knew the Counsellor had been there;
and I passed a stone upon which the Sage had graven the image of the
Hand that held the past and future of the world; I walked upon a heap of
pebbles that blazed like a fiery wheel, and I saw that the pebbles were
jewels, and knew that the King's Treasurer had been in that place; and I
came to a wilderness where a lone tree stood, and at the foot of the
tree the earth was wounded as by the stab of a great sword, and from
that opening there came a martial song of war; then I knew that you had
passed that way, but I did not find you there."

The Hero answered, "I too passed over all those places, and in the
desert I gathered seven hairs of the child, and they have all the
colours of the rainbow. So I sat there, and took pleasure in looking
upon the child's hairs. I remained there for a long time, and did not
eat. But at last I was very hungry, and I arose, and went, but forgot my
staff there."

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

"I saw your staff, and knew you had been in that place, too," said the
Master.

"From there, I went on until I came to a number of people who made me
their king. Then I went out to conquer the world, but it is not because
I desire to rule the world, only that I hope to find the Princess, and
our Child, and the King and Queen and all our company."

Then the Master remembered his mission and said, "What can we do with
the people of this city? They are fallen into a terrible error, for they
worship only riches."

At this, the Hero shook his head. "I once heard the King declare that
men may be rid of any error, except the worship of gold," he said. "And
the only way to rid them of the worship of gold is the way of the
Sword."

Then the Master asked of the Hero, "Do not attack them at once, but give
them yet a while, for they have sent me to you."

Because of his friendship for the Master, the Hero set aside a number of
days’ respite for the city; then the two friends arranged signs by which
they would send messages to each other, and the Master went on his way.

As he went, he saw a number of people on the road; they were carrying
many large tomes, and they were wrapped in prayer-shawls, and as they
went they sang in praise of heaven. At this, the Master was startled, so
he began to pray. He stood and prayed, and they stood and prayed; but at
last the people said to him, "Who are you?" And he said to them, "Who
are you?"

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

They answered, "When the whirlwind came over the world, and the people
divided to seek kings for themselves, we were those who declared that
holiness was the greatest of all things, and therefore we seek a master
of prayer to be our king."

And when they heard him pray, their eyes were opened to all the
mysteries, and they saw that he was a great man learned in the Torah,
and they said, "Be our king!" So the Master became their king, and went
with them.

 

Meanwhile the money-worshippers returned to their old ways and
sacrificed beast-men to their men-gods; but no help came against the
Warrior. The days passed, and the time he had given them was nearly
gone. So they decided that they would do as they had planned to do at
first, and send for help to that rich land where every man was a god.
They chose seven of their own gods, and sent them on their way. But as
the emissaries went on the road, they saw a man walking. The staff that
he carried was encrusted with jewels so costly that it alone was worth
more than any of their gods, and the man wore a cap covered with
diamonds that were worth, to them, all the stars in heaven. The men-gods
fell down to his feet, and desired to sacrifice themselves for him, but
he would not permit them to do so. Instead, he took them up on a hill
and showed them the treasures that were there, for he was the King's
Treasurer. When the money-worshippers saw the treasures, they cried,
"You are the god of gods!" And they decided that there was no need for
them to go to the country where all men were gods, for surely the god of
gods alone could help

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

them. So they said to him, "Will you come to our city and be our king of
kings?" He went with them, and when he came into the city he would not
allow any sacrifices to be made to him. But when they told him of the
Conqueror who threatened the city, he cried, "Perhaps it is the Hero
whom I knew in olden times!" Then the Treasurer went out to the invading
army, and asked to be taken to the Hero.

When the Treasurer and Hero met, they recognized each other, and
rejoiced, and the Hero cried, "The Master of Prayer has been here too!"
Then they told each other how they had sought each other, and the
Treasurer said, "I, too, passed over the places where all our friends
had been; only your place, and the place of the Master, I never found."

And at last they remembered to speak of the city of money-worshippers.
"There is only one way to cure them," the Hero repeated, "and that is
the way of the Sword."

"Give them a little more time," the Treasurer asked. So the Hero gave
them more time, and the Treasurer returned to the city and spoke again
to the people, trying to draw them out of their error.

And this time the money-worshippers listened, for when the Master had
spoken against riches they had thought him mad, but now it was their own
god of gods who spoke as the Master had spoken, and they thought,
"Perhaps these strangers are not mad"; and they said to him, "If our way
is wrong, show us a way out of it."

Then the Treasurer told them of the marvellous Sword and said, "You must
go the way of the Sword, and there you will be healed."

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

Again the richest men of the city were chosen, to go with the Treasurer
in search of the way of the Sword. They dressed themselves in their
costliest garments, all overhung with gold and silver, and started upon
their journey. But first the Treasurer went secretly to the Hero and
said, "I am taking them on a journey, but I hope on the way to find the
King, and all our companions."

"Let me go with you, then!" said the Hero. And he disguised himself so
that the rich men might not be frightened at having the Warrior amongst
them; and then he sent a message to the Master telling him of the
journey. The Master came hastily, saying, "Let me, too, go with you;
perhaps we will find the King and all the court." They took him with
them, while all the people of the Master's land prayed for the success
of the journey.

So they went, and they came to the borders of a kingdom; a watcher stood
on the road. "What sort of kingdom is this?" they asked of him.

"This is the kingdom of the wise," he said. "For when the whirlwind
upset the world, we were those who said that the greatest of all things
is wisdom, and we sought a sage to rule over us. One knew the ways of
the stars, and another could see into the waters, but at last we found a
man who sat upon a stone, and studied his own hand.

"'What wisdom have you?'" we asked of him. And he answered, 'Only the
wisdom that is within my own soul.' So we made him our king."

Then the Master, the Hero, the Treasurer, and their seven rich
companions, were taken to the hall of Wisdom, and the king upon the
throne was truly their friend the Sage. There was great joy amongst

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

them, and then they spoke of all the others that had not been found, and
then they spoke of their journey.

"We seek a way to rid these men of the folly of money-worship," the
Treasurer said, "for I am the king of their kingdom."

"We are all fallen into folly," the Sage replied. "Some worship honour,
some worship lust, and some worship death itself; and even we who
worship wisdom have fallen into unbelief and empty questioning. But of
all these follies men can be healed, except only the folly of gold."

Then he too went with them to find the way of the Sword, while they
said, "Have you no longer that marvellous Hand upon which all the ways
were shown?" The Sage answered, "I have the Hand, but I know that its
secret is for the King alone to read, and since the King is lost I do
not look upon the thing itself, but I have made an image of the Hand,
which guides me."

They came to a land where men stood and spoke with each other. And men
came eagerly towards them, saying, "We are the people who sought a
Master of Words for our king. At first we crowned a madman who babbled
in many languages, but then we heard a man who stood in the forest. He
spoke, and the birds and the stones and the trees heard him, and
answered. He sang, and they answered his song. So we said to him, 'Be
our king,' and now he rules over us." Indeed, this was the King's
Counsellor, and he went with the others.

They continued on their journey, and came to another kingdom, and found
a soldier asleep; they wakened him and asked, "Who is your king?"

"We had a king whom we found drunk in the

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

road," he said; "but afterwards we came to a man who stood by a sea of
wine. We asked him to be our king."

The Sage knew at once that the sea of wine must have been made by the
King's Friend. So they came to him, and knew him, and he was filled with
joy. "Let me go with you," he cried. "Perhaps we will find the others of
the court."

Then they came to another land, where they found the watchman lying with
a woman. "This is the land of beauty," he told them, "and our queen is a
beautiful woman. For one day in the wilderness we came upon a woman so
beautiful that the very trees bowed their fruit to her hand. But her
beauty was sorrowful, and she sat very still with her head bowed, and
sang a lullaby, while from her breasts there flowed a stream of purest
milk. Then we begged her, 'Be our queen!' So she rules over us, but no
man may approach her, for she awaits her true husband, and mourns the
loss of her child."

They knew that the watchman spoke of the Princess, and they hastened to
the court. The Hero took her in his arms, for he had found his wife, and
they rejoiced together. The people of that kingdom desired him to be
their king, and remain with them, but the Hero and the Princess said,
"We must go and seek our Child."

They went with the others, and came to a kingdom where there were no
watchmen. A man stood singing, and they asked of him, "Who is your
king?"

"We are those who sought a king more pure than all other men," he told
them. "And we said, 'We shall know his purity by the food upon which he

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

lives.' At last we came upon a stream of milk, and by the stream there
sat a Child, and he fed only upon the milk. We made him our king, and
our king is a one-year-old babe!"

They ran at once to see the Child, and they knew him, and he knew them,
for he was wondrous wise; then the mother and the father and the child
rejoiced with one another, and the ministers rejoiced, and the rich men
were happy, though they did not know for what.

But the King and the Queen had not yet been found, and all the company
went forth on the quest, and they took the Child with them.

There was a land between two mountains, where watchmen stood in black
armour, and would not let them pass.

"Who is your king?" the Warrior asked.

"We are of those who chose death as the end of all things, and for our
king we took a man who had murdered his mother and father. But
afterwards we found a woman who stood by a sea of blood, and moaned, and
we said, 'Surely she has died more deaths than he.' So we killed our
king, and we asked the woman to rule over us."

They went into the dungeon of death, and when the Queen saw them she
cast aside her black veils, all but one heaviest, for "My husband has
not been found," she said.

The Queen went with them, and they came to a land that was fair and
green. A shepherd stood on a hill, and they asked of him, "Who is your
king?"

"We are of those who chose honour as the greatest of all things, and at
first an old gypsy ruled over us,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

but one day we came to this hill, and upon the hill there was seated an
old man. His beard was white, and the wind went softly about his hair.
There was a crown upon his head, and his aspect was of such wondrous
peace and dignity that a wild faun came and knelt to him and kissed his
hand."

"We said, 'Be our king!' and he rules over us."

Then they came to the top of the hill, and the King was truly their
King, and so the holy court was come together again, and there was joy
on earth and in heaven; and the rich men saw, and wondered.

Then each minister told the King of the errors of his people, and the
King sent the Master to bring the peoples out of their strange errors;
but there was no way to help those who worshipped money.

At last the Hero reminded the King, "I once heard the King say that
there was only one way to bring men out of the error of riches, and that
was the way of the Sword."

"That is true," said the King. "You must go the way of the Sword, and
there you will find a path that turns and leads to a flaming mountain.
But the flaming mountain is invisible, and on its top there lives a lion
who comes down and falls upon the flocks, and kills and eats the sheep
and the goats. From there you must go onward on another path, and you
will come to the place where the daintiest of foods are prepared. It is
far from the mountain, and yet it is fed by the fire of the mountain,
for there is no fire in the hearth; and the hearth, too, is invisible,
but you will know it by the two great birds who stand and fan the fire
with the beating of their wings, making it rise or shrink according to
the need. There, the daintiest of foods

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

are prepared, and only in those foods is the power to make men forget
the folly of gold. So you must lead them against the wind, that they may
scent the wonderful odour of these foods, and when they taste of the
food, they will forget riches."

The Hero led the band of rich men, and at last they scented the odour of
the food. "Let us eat some of that food!" they cried. Then he turned
them and led them with the wind, and they began to smell a terrible
odour instead, and asked, "What is that horrible stench?" He turned them
again and led them against the wind, so they caught the beautiful
delicate odour of the foods, and they cried, "Let us only taste that
delicious food!" But he turned them once more, and the putrid stench
came to their nostrils, and they ran, but the stench grew. "Where can it
come from?" they asked.

"You see that there is nothing near you that can have so bad an odour,"
the Hero said, "and since you are running, and the odour remains with
you, it must be something upon yourselves that smells so ill!"

He turned them against the wind, and this time he led them into the cave
of wonderful delicacies, and gave them to eat of the foods.

As soon as they had tasted the delicacies, the rich men knew that it was
their own gold and silver that had smelled so ill, and they began to
throw their gold and silver garments from them. They swiftly hurled away
all the money and jewels they had in their pockets, and tore diamonds
from their clothes, and rings from their fingers; and the more they ate
of the wonderful food, the more ashamed they became of riches, and
whoever had a gulden or a penny left

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

threw it from him; some even buried their faces in the earth, while
others tried to bury themselves alive to be free of the filth of money,
and a few tore at their own skins to remove the odour of gold from
themselves; for the food that they ate possessed so great a power of
truth that the more money a man had, the greater was his shame.

The Hero saw, and prevented them from tearing themselves to pieces and
from burying themselves alive; and when they had thoroughly cleansed
themselves of their riches he said to them, "Come, let us go home! Now
you have no more need to fear the Conqueror, so know that I myself am
that dreaded warrior!"

Then they took with them enough of the wonderful delicacies for all
their people, and they returned home to their kingdom, and gave morsels
of the food to all the people to eat. At once the rich men who were
called gods and kings and princes threw their gold from them, and buried
their heads in the ground in shame, and the little men who were called
beasts and birds were also ashamed, and threw away their pennies.

When they had all been cleansed of their error, the Master came, and
brought them forgiveness. Then the King and his Court were assembled
once more, and the King ruled over the earth, and the secret ways were
opened again, and each of the ministers returned to his place to renew
his strength at its source; and all the peoples of the earth gave over
their foolishness and lived in righteousness and peace, singing to
Heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seven Beggars](gm41)
