[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](ncm1) [Next](ncm3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

## Preface

 Though I had planned not to appear except as a recording agent in this
publication of my work of seventeen years, I have been told that it is
necessary to give some account of the origin and reason for my interest
in the work. I used to go camping in the Navajo region and from guides
and other campers heard of Navajo Yehbechai and so-called Fire Dance
ceremonies, so with two friends went on horseback from Fort Defiance,
Arizona, to Cuba, New Mexico, particularly for the purpose of seeing
some ceremonies.

 In those days it was almost a matter of luck if one ever could find out
about the ceremonies and I was surprised to find that most of the
traders, though some had lived long among the Indians, liked them and
spoke Navajo, knew nothing and cared less about their religion; and
among the school teachers this was the usual attitude. We happened on a
Yehbechai near Chin Lee, then crossed the Chuskai mountains and came
down to Newcomb, a small trading-post facing the desert with its only
link to civilization a poor dirt road practically impassable when it
rained. Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Newcomb gave us two little rooms, and we
found they were alive to the value of Indian life around them in its
religious aspect. They were very much devoted to Klah, a Medicine Man,
grandson of Narbona, the great chief whom our soldiers killed under a
flag of truce in 1847. Klah, who lived close by, had shown his kindness
to the Newcombs on many occasions, coming over to protect Mrs. Newcomb
from molestation when Mr. Newcomb was away, and being willing that they
should see his ceremonies, as he trusted them not to <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> interfere. At that time the Indians were much
afraid of the attitude of the white people which was unsympathetic to
their worship and religion.

 I went with the Newcombs to a Yehbechai and met Klah, who was
officiating. At that time he had begun to make his sandpainting
blankets, weaving them himself, making usually one or two a year to
support himself, and also to record the sandpaintings. As he said to Mr.
Newcomb he knew that the Navajo boys should go to school and learn to
read and to speak English, but that when they had been to school they
could not remember the religious myths, sandpaintings and ritual, and so
he was beginning to record them. He was teaching a nephew his Yehbechai,
but had no other student to whom he could pass on his knowledge. He knew
the myth of the Mountain Chant and its ritual, but did not give the
ceremony. He knew the Hail Chant completely and this died with him. He
also gave the Blessing Chant and the Wind Chant and knew the complete
Creation Myth. I saw him later at the Newcombs and began to ask him
questions about the Fire Dance which I had seen, thanks to his giving me
the date of it. He asked me why I questioned him, and I said truly that
I was interested in religion. I had to communicate through an
interpreter always, but we were friends almost at once.

 He told me some nice little stories but I felt they were superficial.
Then he said he wanted me to make phonograph records of his songs, for
he was a great singer as a Medicine Man must be, since almost all the
ceremonies consist of songs or chants; (there are eight hundred for the
Creation Myth, and four hundred and forty for the Hail Chant).

 Later he came to my house at Alcalde where I had secured a recording
machine and some one to run it, but there was a delay, and suddenly one
day he said, “I will tell you a story if you are not afraid to take it,
for the only man who has recorded one of our myths” (Matthews,
twenty-five or more years ago) “was paralyzed after taking it.” I said I
was not afraid, <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> and got an interpreter,
and we began. Mr. Newcomb wrote and I asked questions and checked any
uncertainties through the interpreter. This has been my usual technique,
except that often I have done the writing. This first story was the myth
of Tsilthkehje, the Mountain Chant.

 You cannot hurry the story nor ask too many questions as if it has a
very definite pattern, and when after eight days’ work it was finished,
Klah said, “tell her that every word of this is true.” He told this in
May when there may be thunder, and the Navajos are not supposed to tell
the myths except after the first frost. Their feeling seems to be that
they are releasing so much power that it is not safe when thunder is
possible. Klah, being so powerful and naturally fearless, took the risk,
and the reason he was afraid for me and for Arthur Newcomb was that we
were unprotected; so after talking for four days he said he must go back
to his home to get something to protect us, and Arthur took him
back—three hundred and forty miles. When the story was finished he asked
us to inhale some incense and eat some medicine-substance to protect us,
and this we did. He gave me some of these two medicines which I was to
take every six months.

 Next Fall, when I went by invitation to a Yehbechai given by him, he
watched to see if I was well, and since no harm had come to the tribe,
he felt that all was well and was willing to show me more, and to tell
me his other myths.

 He eventually told them all to me; the Creation Myth out in Santa
Barbara, for I knew that he longed to see the western ocean where
Estsan-ah-tlehay, The Changing Woman, lives, and later he visited me in
Maine so as to see the eastern sea. I grew to respect and love him for
his real goodness, generosity—and holiness, for there is no other word
for it. He never had married, having spent twenty-five years studying
not only the ceremonies he gave, but all the medicine lore of the tribe.
He helped at least eight of his nieces and nephews with money and goods.
When the Newcombs first settled at <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> Nava
(as the Newcomb trading-post used to be called), half-way between Gallup
and Shiprock, Klah was counted one of the rich men there with many
sheep. He had his final initiation ceremony shortly after, when he
reached as high rank as possible in his religion, and at that ceremony
he gave away most of his goods. When I knew him he never kept anything
for himself. It was hard to see him almost in rags at his ceremonies,
but what was given him he seldom kept, passing it on to someone who
needed it.

 When a district nurse came to the day school his attitude was perfectly
friendly and cooperative, and at one time when his favorite niece was
bitten by a rattler while he was away, and she was treated by the nurse,
he was delighted, but held a ceremony later over the niece to clear her
mind of the snake fear. At another ceremony the nurse brought cough
medicine and dosed Klah and the patient during the ceremony, also to his
delight. He was teaching his Yehbechai ceremony to his nephew Beyal, but
to Klah’s great grief Beyal died about five years ago and Klah was too
old to teach another nephew, for he wanted as pupil a boy of not more
than six years who had never been to school, as he found that after
schooling they had not the capacity to memorize the long songs, prayers
and myths. Later he gave the Hail ceremony so that I could see and
record it, and sang the songs for recording—there are four hundred and
forty of them.

 After I had recorded his great ceremonies and myths I went on to other
Medicine Men and always found that when I told them of Klah and the idea
of the Museum to keep the records safe for their people and mine, and of
the ceremonies I had already seen, they were willing to tell their myths
and show me what I needed to know. When they saw Mrs. Newcomb’s
sandpainting copies and found she also was really seeking for the
absolutely correct version, they were anxious that their own
sandpainting should be in her collection. Of course we both paid for the
time occupied in working with us, as was <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
only fair, and in the case of myths this was often a matter of many
days’ hard work. All the community of Nava finally became interested in
helping us and took pride in the completeness of our knowledge and would
show off Mrs. Newcomb’s knowledge of sandpaintings to visiting Medicine
Men. I admired their attitude very much; no jealousy—only a joy in
finding understanding and sympathy from white people in the thing they
cared for the most.

 I have traveled all over the Reservation trying to get in touch with
the older Medicine Men who knew the big fundamental ceremonies, for I
felt, and time proves me right, that I must work as fast as possible if
I was to record the old pure material. Now with school boys carrying on,
the ceremonies are tending to grow shorter and simpler, and that has
been happening for years—the sandpaintings grow smaller and the myth,
which is the last thing to be learned by a student, is forgotten. Mrs.
Newcomb and I were very lucky to have come in touch first with one of
the great men of the tribe, who was not only that, but a real student of
his religion. Our civilization and miracles he took simply without much
wonder, as his mind was occupied with his religion and helping his
people. It was wonderful to travel with him, as he knew the ceremonial
names and legends of all the mountains, rivers and places, and the uses
and associations of plants and stones. Everything was the outward form
of the spirit world that was very real to him. He became continually
more deeply interested in the idea of the recording of his religion, and
showed and told me more each year. He also helped Mrs. Newcomb to make a
beginning of her magnificent collection of sandpaintings by telling her
when and where ceremonies were being given, and explaining her purpose
to the other Medicine Men. Often he would arrange that a ceremony should
be given for one of his family or clan, and Mrs. Newcomb and I were
welcome, as we were sponsored by Klah, and brought appropriate gifts of
tobacco or food, and sometimes I would undertake to bring the needed
<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> Medicine Man if he lived far off. Klah
always knew the Medicine Men who were most respected in their form of
ceremonies, and without Klah neither Mrs. Newcomb nor I could have begun
nor carried on our work.

 My purpose through all the work had been to establish a Museum to
contain all the material we had collected, as well as all available
material collected or published by others, for the use of future
students of Navajo religion, art, and culture. The idea of making a
building based upon the Navajo ceremonial Hogahn, as designed by the
architect, Mr. Wm. P. Henderson, had Klah’s strong approval from the
beginning—he was frequently consulted as to details of symbolism in the
permanent decorations—and he said he wanted his medicine to be kept
there after his death. Klah died within the year in which the actual
building was begun, but the Hogahn Beyin, House Blessing, was held as he
desired by members of his family, and to me his spirit is always an
inspiration to carry on what was as much his work as it is mine.

*Mary C. Wheelwright.  *

 

Alcalde, New Mexico.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ncm3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
