[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](ncm6) [Next](ncm9)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

## NOTES ON APPROXIMATE LOCATIONS WHERE NAVAJO CEREMONIES ARE NOW GIVEN

 It has been suggested that it would be interesting to students of
Navajo customs to have a list of the major types of ceremonies with the
locations on the reservation where they seem to be most often given
today. Sometimes the location coincides with the region mentioned in the
myth of the ceremony, and where this occurs I will mention it. These
notes are merely from my personal observation.

 1. *TLEJI*—N<span class="small">IGHT</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>, usually called the YEHBECHAI. In Klah’s
version of the myth (and he was considered a great expert in this Chant)
the myth centered in a canyon north of the Jemez Mountains and also in
the Canyon de Chelly. It is now the most popular of the complete
ceremonies and is given all over Navajoland, wherever there is a priest
who knows it and the people have sufficient wealth to support a nine-day
ceremony.

 2. *TSILTHKEHJI*—M<span class="small">OUNTAIN</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth begins in the Apache country near
Stinking Lake but the present ceremonies are given all over the
reservation wherever there is a priest of it and enough wealth to carry
through a nine-day ceremony.

 3. *ATSAH*—E<span class="small">AGLE</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth is centered on Tsoll-tsilth (Mt.
Taylor). If any ceremonies are still given they are probably in that
region.

 4. *YOHE*—B<span class="small">EAD</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth and most of the ceremonies coincide
in location centering in the region near the Chuskai Mountains and along
the San Juan River. Not often given.

 5. *NILTHCHIJI*—W<span class="small">IND</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth centers in the region between the
Chuskai and Jemez Mountains. The many <span id="page_208">p. 208</span>
forms of ceremonies seem to be mostly given in that region and also
north along the San Juan River westward.

 6. *HOZHONE*—B<span class="small">EAUTY</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth of this branches off from the
Tsilthkehji or Mountain Chant which tells of two sisters, one of whom
married the Bear and began the Mountain Chant myth. The other, who
married the Snake and started the Beauty Chant, went southward toward
the Hopi country where they developed the snake ceremony. The present
ceremonies seem to follow the same path from near the north of Chuskai
Mountains to the country near Ganado.

 7. *N’DLOHE*—H<span class="small">AIL</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth centers on the east slope of the
Chuskai Mountains and the last priest of it was Klah who lived at
Newcomb in that same region. Ceremony now extinct.

 8. *TOHE*—W<span class="small">ATER</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. One long myth of this Chant begins in Chaco
Canyon and ends along the San Juan River, but may have a mixture in it
of Etsosi (Feather Chant). At one point it branches into the Tleji myth
and the first sandpainting of the Tleji myth of the whirling logs
apparently shows this connection. Another myth is centered farther west
near the Hopi country and the only place where it has been given lately
is between Keams Canyon and Winslow. Nearly extinct.

 9. *ETSOSI*—F<span class="small">EATHER</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth begins at the Pacific Ocean and then
goes to a place in the north section of the Navajo country, and at
present the ceremonies seem to connect with that region. Nearly extinct.

 10. *N’DAH*—formerly called *ANADJI*—now popularly called “SQUAW
DANCE.” The myth goes back to the scalp dance given by the gods to
celebrate the destruction of the monsters who were destroying mankind.
The ceremony now given all over the reservation.

 11. *MAH-IH*—C<span class="small">OYOTE</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth begins at the Pacific Ocean and goes
to Canyon de Chelly and farther north. The <span id="page_209">p.
209</span> ceremonies now are given near Canyon de Chelly and southwest
from there. Nearly extinct.

 12. *WILLACHEE*—R<span class="small">ED</span> A<span
class="small">NT</span> C<span class="small">HANT</span>. The myth
centers in the country near that of the Hopis and the ceremony is given
there, but also in other parts of Navajoland.

 13. *BESHE*—K<span class="small">NIFE</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth stems from the Tleji. I have never
heard of a ceremony though I have seen a rite of it in connection with
the Shooting Chant.

 14. *NAHTOHE*—S<span class="small">HOOTING</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. The myth begins in a form of the creation
story. After the emergence on this earth it centers near the Chuskai
Mountains. This is one of the most widespread and popular of the present
day ceremonies and has many forms. Given in the form of Tsilthkehji
Nahtohe, a combination with the Mountain Chant, it is a nine-day
ceremony with a Fire Dance at the end.

 15. *TSAHA*—A<span class="small">WL</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. I have no information on this except that it
once existed.

 16. *HANELTHNAYHE*. The myth of this form of creation as collected by
Father Berard Haile emphasizes the powers of evil. In the many smaller
versions there is a similar emphasis against witchcraft. The myth seems
to center in the north towards Taos. Ceremony is very short now.

 17. *HOZHONJI*—B<span class="small">LESSING</span> C<span
class="small">HANT</span>. This is given as a separate ceremony with
sandpaintings all over the reservation. It has decreased in length from
a much more important and elaborate ritual to usually not more than a
three-day ceremony. Certain parts of the Blessing Chant are used in
connection with many other ceremonies.

 18. *SONTSOJI*—B<span class="small">IG</span> S<span
class="small">TAR</span> C<span class="small">HANT</span>. The myth
naturally is much concerned with the sky but begins near the Chuskai
Mountains and at present centers mostly on the west slope of these
mountains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ncm9)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
