[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg06)  [Next](csg08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### IN THE "MITCHELL PAPERS"

THE diplomatic correspondence which forms almost the whole of this paper
is practically an appendix to the last chapter. The details given are
interesting and important links in that chain of events which brought M.
de St. Germain to England. Chance, good-fortune, or some beneficent
power gave the clue to these hidden records.

The "Mitchell Papers," in which these interesting letters have been so
long concealed, have never yet been entirely published. It appears that
George III. requested that these documents should not be made public
during his life, and they were accordingly consigned to the personal
care of Mr. Planta, Keeper of the British Museum.

This correspondence was bought by the Trustees of the Museum from Sir
William Forbes, the heir of Sir Andrew Mitchell, who had been Envoy at
Berlin during the time that all these events took place. A certain
portion of the record of his diplomatic career was published by Mr.
Bisset in 1850; no mention, however, was made of M. de

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> St. Germain, and
the letters which treated of him were unnoticed.

There appears, curiously enough, to have been a "conspiracy of silence"
amongst the diplomatists and writers of this period and later, for it is
a constantly recurring experience to find all reference to our
philosopher carefully excluded, even in cases where the original sources
contain much information about him.

A striking instance of such omission is found by searching the different
editions of works in which M. de St. Germain is mentioned; the later
editions usually exclude the information given in the earlier ones.
Notably may this be seen in a work <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57)
already referred to, by Dr. Carl von Weber, Keeper of the Saxon Archives
in Dresden. In the first edition of this work there is a long article on
M. de St. Germain, which is not to be found in the later editions of
these volumes. Instances might be easily multiplied of this steady
omission wherever possible.

Now the Foreign Office records contain a voluminous correspondence,
which is by permission at length being gathered together; this includes
the letters of Prince Galitzin, who was at the period Russian Minister
in England. All the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

correspondence is marked "secret," and can only be seen when sanctioned.

The British Museum records have no such restrictions, hence the
documents which make up this paper have been copied without delay. The
first letter appears to show that Lord Holdernesse already knew of M. de
St. Germain, but no facts have so far been found on this point. The
language is quaint, and the style somewhat heavy, but the contents
present a page of history well worth our study.

It must be remembered that the mission undertaken by the Comte de St.
Germain was a secret one, and that he had to disguise how far he was in
the confidence of Louis XV.; with this point in mind it will be easier
to understand the difficulties in which he was involved. Turning now to
the documents, we find that the first letter is from General Yorke.

MITCHELL PAPERS, VOL. XV.

LD. HOLDERNESSE'S DESPATCHES, etc. 1760; 6818, PLUT. P. L., CLXVIII. 1.
(12).

*Copy of General Yorke's letter to the Earl of Holdernesse; Hague,
March* 14*th*, 1760. I*n Lord Holdernesse's of the* 21*st*, 1760.
*Secret*.

"*Hague, March* 14*th*, 1760.

"MY LORD,

"My present situation is so very delicate,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

that I am sensible I stand in need of the utmost indulgence, which I
hope I shall continue to find from His Majesty's unbounded goodness, and
that your Lordship is convinced that whatever I say, or do, has no other
motive but the advantage of the King's service. As it has pleased His
Majesty to convey to France His sentiments in general upon the situation
of affairs in Europe, and to express by me His wishes for restoring the
public tranquillity, I suppose the Court of Versailles imagines the same
channel may be the proper one for addressing itself to that of England.
This is, at least, the most natural way of accounting for the pains
taken by France to employ anybody to talk to me.

"Your Lordship knows the history of that extraordinary man, known by the
name of Count St. Germain, who resided some time in England where he did
nothing; and has within these two or three years resided in France where
he has been upon the most familiar footing with the French King, Madame
Pompadour, M. de Belle-isle, etc.; which has procured him a grant of the
Royal Castle of Chambord, <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) and has
enabled him to make a certain figure in that country.

"He appeared, for some days, at Amsterdam where he was much caressed and
talked of, and upon the marriage of Princess Caroline alighted

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

at the Hague. The same curiosity created the same attention to him here.
His volubility of tongue furnished him with hearers; his freedom upon
all subjects, all kinds of suppositions--among which his being sent
about Peace not the least.

"M. d’Affry treats him with respect and attention but is very jealous of
him and did not so much as renew my acquaintance with him. He called,
however, at my door. I returned his visit; and yesterday he desired to
speak with me in the afternoon, but did not come as he appointed, and
therefore he renewed his application this morning and was admitted. He
began immediately to run on about the bad state of France--their want of
Peace--their desire to make it, and his own particular ambition to
contribute to an event so desirable for humanity in general; he ran on
about his predilection for England and Prussia which he pretended at
present made him a good friend to France.

"As I knew so much of this man, and did not choose to enter into
conversation without being better informed, I affected at first to be
very grave and dry--told him that those affairs were too delicate to be
treated between persons who had no vocation and therefore desired to
know what he meant. I suppose this style was irksome to him, for
immediately afterwards he produced

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

to me, by way of credentials, two letters from Marshal Belleisle, one
dated the 4th, the other the 26th of February. In the first he sends him
the French King's passport *en blanc* for him to fill up; in the second
he expresses great impatience to hear from him, and in both runs out in
praises of his zeal, his ability, and the hopes that are founded upon
what he is gone about. I have no doubt of the authenticity of those
letters.

"After perusing them, and some commonplace compliments, I asked him to
explain himself, which he did as follows:--the King, the Dauphin, Madame
Pompadour, and all the Court and Nation, except the Duke Choiseul and
Mr. Berrier, desire peace with England. They can't do otherwise, for
their interior requires it. They want to know the real sentiments of
England, they wish to make up matters with some honour. M. d’Affry is
not in the secret, and the Duke Choiseul is so Austrian that he does not
tell all he receives; but that signifies nothing, for he will be turned
out. Madame Pompadour is not Austrian, but is not firm, because she does
not know what to trust to; if she is sure of Peace, she will become so.
It is she, and the Marshal Belleisle, with the French King's knowledge,
who send St. Germain as the forlorn hope. Spain is not relied upon; that
is a turn given by the Duke Choiseul, and they don't pretend to expect

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

much good from that quarter. This, and much more, was advanced by this
political Adventurer. I felt myself in a great doubt whether I should
enter into conversation; but as I am convinced he is really sent, as he
says, I thought I should not be disapproved if I talked in general
terms. I therefore told him that the King's desire for Peace was
sincere, and there could be no doubt of it, since we had made the
proposal in the middle of our success which had much increased since;
that with our Allies, the affair was easy, without them impossible; and
that France knew our situation too well, to want such information from
me; that as to particulars, we must be convinced of their desire, before
they could be touched upon, and that, besides, I was not informed; I
talked of the dependence of France upon the two Empresses, and the
disagreeable prospect before them even if the King of Prussia was
unfortunate, but declined going any farther than the most general,
though the most positive, assurance of a desire for Peace on His
Majesty's part.

"As the conversation grew more animated I asked him what France had felt
the most for in her losses, whether it was Canada? No, he said, for they
felt it had cost them thirty-six millions, and brought them no return.
Guadaloupe? They would never stop the Peace for that, as they

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

would have sugar enough without it. The East Indies? That he said was
the same place, as it was connected with all their money affairs. I
asked him what they said of Dunkirk? He made no difficulty to demolish
it, and that I might depend upon it. He then asked me what we thought
about Minorca? I answered, that we had forgot it, at least, nobody ever
mentioned it; that, says he, I have told them over and over again, and
they are embarrassed with the expense.

"This is the material part of what passed in the course of three hours'
conversation which I promised to relate; he begged the secret might be
kept, and he should go to Amsterdam, and to Rotterdam, till he knew
whether I had any answer; which I neither encouraged, nor discouraged
him from expecting.

"I humbly hope His Majesty will not disapprove what I have done; it is
not easy to conduct oneself under such circumstances, though I can as
easily break off all intercourse as I have taken it up.

"The King seemed desirous to open the door for Peace, and France seems
in great want of it; the opportunity looks favourable, and I shall wait
for orders before I stir a step farther. A General Congress seems not to
their taste, and they seem willing to go farther than they care

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

to say, but they would be glad of some offer; and H. M. C. M., and the
Lady, are a little indolent in taking a resolution.

"I have, etc.

"J. YORKE."

It is clear that the English Envoy found himself in a difficult
position; the credentials of the Comte de St. Germain were sufficiently
good to ensure a hearing, but he was not an accredited Minister. George
II. seems to have understood the complication to some extent, as it
would appear from the answer sent at his command, by Lord Holdernesse,
which runs as follows:

*Copy of letter from the Earl of Holdernesse to Major-General Yorke.
Secret*.

"*Whitehall, March* 21*st*, 1760.

"SIR,

"I have the pleasure to acquaint you that His Majesty entirely approves
your conduct in the conversation you had with Count St. Germain, of
which you give an account in your secret letter of the 14th.

"The King particularly applauds your caution of not entering into
conversation with him, till he produced two letters from Marshal
Belleisle, which you rightly observe were a sort of credential; as you
talked to him only in general

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

terms, and in a way conformable to your former instructions, no
detriment could arise to His Majesty's service were everything you said
publicly known.

"His Majesty does not think it unlikely that Count St. Germain may
really have been authorised (perhaps even with the knowledge of His Most
Christian Majesty) by some Persons of weight in the Councils of France
to talk as he has done, and no matter what the channel is if a desirable
end can be obtained by it. But there is no venturing farther
conversations between one of the King's accredited Ministers and such a
person as this St. Germain is, according to his present appearance. What
you say will be authentic; whereas, St. Germain will be disavowed with
very little ceremony whenever the Court of France finds it convenient.
And by his own account his commission is not only unknown to the French
Ambassador at the Hague, but even to the Minister for Foreign Affairs at
Versailles, who, though threatened with the same fate that befel the
Cardinal Bernis, is still the apparent Minister.

"It is therefore His Majesty's pleasure that you should acquaint Count
St. Germain that in answer to the letters you wrote me in consequence of
your conversation with him, you are directed to say, that you cannot
talk with him

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

upon such interesting subjects unless he produces some authentic proof
of his being really employed with the knowledge and consent of His Most
Christian Majesty. But at the same time you may add, that the King, ever
ready to prove the sincerity and purity of his intentions to prevent the
farther effusion of Christian blood, will be ready to open Himself on
the conditions of a Peace, if the Court of France will employ a person
duly authorised to negotiate on that subject; provided always, that it
be previously explained and understood, that in case the two Crowns
shall come to agree on the terms of their Peace, that the Court of
France shall expressly and confidentially agree that His Majesty's
Allies, and *nommément* the King of Prussia, are to be comprehended in
the *accomodement à faire*.

"It is unnecessary to add that England will never so much as hear any
*Pourparlers* of a Peace which is not to comprehend His Majesty as
Elector.

"I am, etc.,

"HOLDERNESSE."

In a passage quoted from the Memoirs of Baron de Gleichen (THEOSOPHICAL
REVIEW, xxii., 45), we have seen with how little ceremony M. de St.
Germain was thrown over at the King's Council, and Lord Holdernesse
spoke truly when writing:

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "What you will say
will be authentic; whereas St. Germain will be disavowed with very
little ceremony whenever the Court of France finds it convenient."

The next letter from General Yorke shows that the Duc de Choiseul was
working against this much desired peace.

*Copy of letter from Major-General Yorke to the Earl of Holderness.
Secret*.

"*Hague, April* 4*th*, 1760.

"MY LORD,

"The credit of my political Adventurer, M. de St. Germain, does not seem
to have gained ground since my last; and the Duc de Choiseul seems so
much set upon discrediting him that he takes true pains to prevent his
meddling in any affairs. I have not seen him since our second interview,
and I thought it more prudent to let him alone till he produces
something more authentic, comformable to the tenor of the orders I had
received; he is, however, still here.

"The Duc de Choiseul has, however, acquainted M. d’Affry that he should
again renew to him peremptorily to meddle in nothing which related to
the political affairs of France, and accompanied this order with a
menace of the consequence if he did. Madame de Pompadour is not pleased
with him neither for insinuating things against

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> M. d’Affry, of
which, either from inclination or apprehension, she has acquainted the
Duc de Choiseul. So that he has acquired an enemy more than he had.
Marshal Belleisle, too, had wrote to him under M. d’Affry's cover, but
in civil terms, thanking him for his zeal and activity, but telling him,
at the same time, that as the French King had an Ambassador at the Hague
in whom he placed his confidence, he might safely communicate to him
what he thought was for the service of France; the tone of Marshal
Belleisle's letters shows that he had been more connected with St.
Germain than the Duc de Choiseul, who is outrageous against him and
seems to have the upper hand.

"In all this correspondence, however, there has appeared as yet nothing
about St. Germain and me. The whole relates to the affairs of Holland,
the insinuations St. Germain had made of the wrong measures they took
here, and the bad hands they were in; I take it for granted, however,
that as the Duc de Choiseul has got the better of him in one instance,
he will be able to do it in all the others, especially as in that
Minister's letter to M. d’Affry, he desires him to forewarn all the
Foreign Ministers from listening to him, as the Court might lose all
credit and confidence either about Peace or War, if such a man gained
any credit.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

"A person of consequence, to whom M. d’Affry showed all the letters,
gave me this account, to whom he added, Who knows what he may have said
to Mr. Yorke, as I know he has been to wait upon him. M. d’Affry told
this person likewise, that he was fully authorised to receive any
proposals from England, and that France having the worst of the quarrel
could not make the first proposals; that he had opened himself to me, as
far as could be expected at first, but that as I had taken no notice of
him since, they imagined England went back.

"I won't pretend to draw any other conclusion from all this except that
they seem still cramped with the unnatural connexion of Vienna which the
Duc de Choiseul has still credit enough to support, and consequently, as
long as that prevails, we cannot expect anything but chicanes and delays
in the negotiations; they have been repeatedly told that His Majesty
cannot and will not treat but in conjunction with his Ally; the King of
Prussia is to be excluded, from whence it is reasonable to conclude that
they will try their chance in war once more, tho’ Those who govern seem
inclined to keep the door open for coming back again if necessary.

"I have the honour to be, etc.,

"JOSEPH YORKE."

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

In some of this correspondence there are long passages in cipher
(numerals), to which there is no key for the public. It is impossible,
therefore, to know whether the written words contain the exact meaning
or not. Space will not permit the whole correspondence to appear, so we
must pass on to a letter from Lord Holdernesse to Mr. Mitchell, the
English Envoy in Prussia.

*The Earl of Holdernesse. R. 17th, May at Meissen* (*by a Prussian
Messenger*). <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59)

"*Whitehall, May* 6*th*, 1760.

"SIR,

"You will have learnt by several of my late letters, all that has passed
between General Yorke and Count St. Germain at the Hague, and I am
persuaded General Yorke will not have failed to inform you as well of
the formal disavowal he has met with from M. de Choiseul as of his
resolution to come into England in order to avoid the further resentment
of the French Minister.

"Accordingly he arrived here some days ago.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But as it was
evident that he was not authorised, even by that part of the French
Ministry in whose name he pretended to talk, as his *séjour* here could
be of no use, and might be attended by disagreeable consequences, it was
thought proper to seize him upon his arrival here. His examination has
produced nothing very material. His conduct and language are artful,
with an odd mixture which it is difficult to define.

"Upon the whole it has been thought most advisable not to suffer him to
remain in England, and he set out accordingly on Saturday morning last
with an intention to take shelter in some part of his Prussian Majesty's
Dominions, doubting whether he would be safe in Holland. At his earnest
and repeated request he saw Baron Knyphausen during his confinement, but
none of the King's Servants saw him.

"The King thought it right you should be informed of this transaction;
it is the King's pleasure you should communicate the substance of this
letter to his Prussian Majesty.

"I am, with great truth and regard, Sir,  
"Your most obedient and humble Servant,

"HOLDERNESSE.

"MR. MITCHELL."

There is a mystery about this visit of M. de St. Germain to England
which is not solved by

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the letter of Lord Holdernesse. Even if he did leave at once, his return
must have been almost immediate, since the newspapers and magazines of
the period comment on his arrival in May and June, 1760.

In the *London Chronicle*, June 3rd, 1760, there is a long account of
his arrival in England, speaking of him in favourable terms. There are
hints to be found in various places that he did not really leave; but so
far the actual facts of what occurred are not quite clear. There is more
yet to be learned in this curious bye-way of European politics.

Peace appears more difficult to arrange than war, and the personal
desires of the French Ministers blocked the way of this mission.
Difficult indeed must have been the undertaking for the Comte de St.
Germain, k thankless the work; at every turn he met opposition, and
could not count on support. All this forms a deeply interesting study,
but we must now pass on to the mystical and philosophical side of this
little understood life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[112:1](csg07.htm#fr_57) WEBER (Dr. Carl von),
*Aus vier Jahrhunderten. Mittheilungen aus dem Haupt-Staats-Archive zu
Dresden*, Leipzig, 1857.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[114:1](csg07.htm#fr_58) An Apartment in the
Castle: v. Appendix I.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[125:1](csg07.htm#fr_59) This letter from Lord
Holdernesse is to Mr. Mitchell, who was the English Representative at
the Prussian Court. From this it appears that M. de St. Germain was
taken in custody on arriving in England; and Lord Holdernesse sends word
to this effect to the Prussian King. This Baron Knyphausen has been
already mentioned as a friend of M. de St. Germain by Mons. Dieudonné
Thiébault (Mes Souvenirs de vingt ans de séjour à Berlin, vol. iv., p.
83, 3rd ed., Paris, 1813), who gives an account of their meeting in
Berlin at a much later date.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Masonic Tradition](csg08)
