[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg04)  [Next](csg06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### TRAGICAL PROPHECIES

THE most deeply interesting of all the incidents recorded in this diary
of Madame d’Adhémar are those which show how M. de St.--Germain strove
to warn the Royal Family of the evils which were overshadowing it. He
had evidently watched over the unfortunate young Queen from the time of
her entry into France. He was the "mysterious adviser" of whom mention
is frequently made.

He it was who strove to make the King and Queen understand that M. de
Maurepas and their other advisers were wrecking their kingdom. The
friend of Royalty, he was yet the one most accused by the Abbé Barruel
of leading the Revolution. "Time proves all," and time has allowed the
accuser to sink into a well-deserved oblivion, while the accused stands
out as true friend and true prophet. Let the voice of the dead woman
bear its own witness:--

"The future was darkening; we were nearing the terrible catastrophe
which was about to overwhelm France. The abyss was at our feet; yet
averting our heads, struck with a fatal blindness,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

we hurried from *fête* to *fête*, from pleasure to pleasure. It was like
a kind of frenzy which thrust us gaily on to our destruction. Alas! how
can a storm be controlled when one sees it not?

"Meanwhile, from time to time, some troubled or observant minds tried to
snatch us from this fatal security. I have already said that the Comte
de St.--Germain had tried to unseal the eyes of Their Majesties, by
making them perceive the approach of danger; but M. de Maurepas, not
wishing the salvation of the country to come from any one but himself,
ousted the thaumaturgist, and he re-appeared no more." <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

The date at which these events were taking place was 1788; the final
crash, however, did not culminate until 1793. Madame d’Adhémar is
reviewing events and does not in every case put the exact date. The
attacks upon the King and Throne were increasing in violence and
bitterness year by year, owing to the fatal blindness already alluded to
by our writer. The frivolity of the Court increased *pari passu* with
the hatred of its enemies. The unfortunate Queen, indeed, did make
efforts to understand the condition of affairs, but in vain. Madame
d’Adhémar gives some of the details as follows:

"I cannot refrain from copying here, in order

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

to give an idea of these sad debates \[in the National Assembly\], a
letter written by M. de Sallier, parliamentary adviser to the *Chambres
de Requêtes*, and addressed to one of his friends, a member of the
parliament at Toulouse. . . . This account was spread abroad and read
with avidity; many copies of it were circulated in Paris. Before the
original reached Toulouse, it was spoken of in the drawing-room of the
Duchesse de Polignac.

"The Queen, turning to me, asked me if I had read it, and requested me
to procure it for her. This request caused me real embarrassment; I
wished to obey Her Majesty, and at the same time I feared to displease
the ruling Minister; however my attachment to the Queen prevailed.

"Marie-Antoinette read the article in my presence, and then sighing,
'Ah! Madame d’Adhémar,' she said, 'how painful all these attacks on the
authority of the King are to me! We are walking on dangerous ground; I
begin to believe that your Comte de St.--Germain was right. We were
wrong not to listen to him, but M. de Maurepas imposed a skilful and
despotic dictatorship upon us. To what are we coming? <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

". . . The Queen sent for me, and I hastened to her sacred order. She
held a letter in her

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

hand. 'Madame d’Adhémar,' she said, 'here is another missive from my
unknown. Have you not heard people talking again of the Comte de
St.--Germain?'

"'No,' I replied; 'I have not seen him, and nothing has reached me from
him.'

"'This time,' added the Queen, 'the oracle has used the language which
becomes him, the epistle is in verse; it may be bad, but it is not very
cheering. You shall read it at your leisure, for I have promised an
audience to the Abbé de Ballivières. I wish that my friends could live
on good terms!'

"'Especially,' I ventured to add, 'as their enemies triumph in their
quarrels.'

"'The unknown says the same as you do; but who is wrong or right?'

"'The Queen may satisfy both parties by means of the first two vacant
Bishoprics.'

"'You are mistaken; the King will give the episcopal mitre neither to
the Abbé d’Erse nor to the Abbé de Ballivières. The protectors of these
gentlemen and our Abbé will believe that the ill-will is on my side; you
might, since you are compared to the heroes of Ariosto (the speech of
the Baroness de Staël had occurred to the Queen), play the part of
peace-maker of the good King Sobrir; behold the Countess Diana, make her
listen to reason.'

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

"'I will talk reason to her,' said I, trying to laugh in order to dispel
the melancholy of the Queen.

"'Diana is a spoilt child,' replied Her Majesty, 'however, she loves her
friends.'

"'Yes, Madam, even to showing herself implacable to their enemies! I
will obey the Queen.'

"They came to inform Marie-Antoinette that the Abbé de Ballivières had
arrived according to her command. I passed into the small closet, where
having asked Madame Campan for pen, ink, and paper, I copied the
following passage, obscure then, but which afterwards became only too
clear.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'The time is fast approaching when imprudent
France,  
Surrounded by misfortune she might have spared herself,  
Will call to mind such hell as Dante painted.  
This day, O Queen! is near, no more can doubt remain,  
A hydra vile and cowardly, with his enormous horns  
Will carry off the altar, throne, and Themis;  
In place of common sense, madness incredible  
Will reign, and all be lawful to the wicked.  
Yea! Falling shall we see sceptre, censer, scales,  
Towers and escutcheons, even the white flag:  
Henceforth will all be fraud, murders and violence,  
Which we shall find instead of sweet repose.  
Great streams of blood are flowing in each town;  
Sobs only do I hear, and exiles see!  
On all sides civil discord loudly roars,  
And uttering cries on all sides virtue flees,  
As from the assembly votes of death arise.  
Great God! who can reply to murderous judges?  
And on what brows august I see the sword descend! <span id="page_79">p.
79</span>  
What monsters treated as the peers of heroes!  
Oppressors, oppressed, victors, vanquished . . .  
The storm reaches you all in turn, in this common wreck,  
What crimes, what evils, what appalling guilt,  
Menace the subjects, as the potentates!  
And more than one usurper triumphs in command,  
More than one heart misled is humbled and repents.  
At last, closing the abyss and born from a black tomb  
There rises a young lily, more happy, and more fair.'</span>

</div>

"These prophetic verses, written by a pen we already knew, astonished
me. I racked my brains to guess their meaning; for how could I believe
that it was their simplest meaning that I ought to give them! How
imagine, for instance, that it was the King and Queen who would die a
violent death, and as the result of iniquitous sentences? We could not,
in 1788, have such clear sight; it was an impossibility.

"When I returned to the Queen, and no indiscreet person could listen,
she said:--

"'What do you make of these threatening verses?'

"'They are dismaying! But they cannot affect your Majesty. People do say
incredible things, follies; if, however, the prophetic words turn out to
be true, they will concern our posterity.'

"'Pray heaven you speak truly, Madame d’Adhémar,' replied the Queen;
'however, these are strange experiences. Who is this personage who has
taken an interest in me for so many

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

years without making himself known, without seeking any reward, and who
yet has always told me the truth? He now warns me of the overthrow of
everything that exists and, if he gives a gleam of hope, it is so
distant that I may not reach it.'

"I strove to comfort the Queen; above all, I told her, she must make her
friends live on good terms with each other, and not let their private
quarrels be known outside. Marie-Antoinette answered me in these
memorable words:--

"'You fancy that I possess credit or power in our Salon. You are
mistaken; I had the misfortune to believe that a Queen was permitted to
have friends. The consequence is that all try to rule me, or to use me
for their own personal advantage. I am the centre of a crowd of
intrigues, which I have difficulty in avoiding. Everyone complains of my
ingratitude. This is not the *rôle* of a Queen of France. There is a
very fine verse which I apply to myself, making a change in the reading:
"Kings are condemned to magnificence." I should say with more reason:
"Kings are condemned to be weary in utter loneliness."

"'So I should act were I to begin my career again.'" <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

Madame d’Adhémar does not give any very

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

definite dates in her diary, and it is chiefly by the historical
episodes, which led up to the final crash, that we are able to mark the
passage of time. Passing on from the general events, deeply interesting
in themselves, but not bearing on the Comte de St. Germain, we come to
the proscription which was passed against the Royalists in 1789, and
once more the unfortunate Queen received a warning from her unknown
adviser, whose advice alas! fell on ears too weak to understand. Hearing
of the proceedings against the Polignacs, Marie-Antoinette sent to warn
the Duchess about her approaching fall. Madame d’Adhémar graphically
tells the tale as follows:--

"I arose, and showing the pain that this commission gave me, I went off
to Madame de Polignac. I could have wished to find her alone. I met
there the Duke, her husband, her sister-in-law, the Count de Vaudreuil
and M. l’Abbé de Ballivières. On seeing my solemn look when I entered,
my swollen eyes still wet with the tears that had mingled with those of
the Queen, they felt that I had come for a sad reason; the Duchess held
out her hand to me.

"'What have you to tell me?' she said; 'I am prepared for every
misfortune.'

"'Not,' said I, 'for that which is about to burst upon you. Alas! my
sweet friend, bear it with resignation and courage. . . .'

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

"These words died away on my lips, and the Countess, taking up the
words, said:--

"'You are causing my sister a thousand sufferings by your reticence.
Well, Madame, what is the matter?'

"'The Queen,' I said, 'in order to avoid the proscription that threatens
you--you and yours--wishes you to go for some months to Vienna.'

"'The Queen drives me away, and you come to tell me!' cried the Duchess,
rising.

"'Unjust friend!' I answered, 'let me tell you all that remains to be
told.'

"Then I went on and repeated word for word what Marie-Antoinette had
charged me to tell her.

"There were more cries, more tears, more despairings; I did not know to
whom to listen; M. de Vaudreuil showed no more firmness than the
Polignacs.

"'Alas!' said the Duchess, 'it is my duty to obey, I will certainly
depart, since the Queen wills it; but will she not permit me to repeat
verbally my gratitude for her innumerable kindnesses?'

"'Never,' said I, 'did she think of your going before she had consoled
you; go then to her chamber, her reception will make amends to you for
this apparent disfavour.'

"The Duchess begged me to accompany her,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and I consented. My heart was broken at the sad interview between these
friends who loved each other so warmly. It was a flood of complaints,
tears, sighs; they embraced each other so closely that they could not
tear themselves apart; it was truly pitiful to see.

"At this moment a letter was brought to the Queen, curiously sealed; she
glanced at it, shuddered as she looked at me, and said: 'It is from our
unknown.'

"'In truth,' said I, 'it seemed strange to me that he should have
remained quiet in such circumstances as these; besides, he has only
anticipated me.'

"Madame de Polignac from her expression appeared eager to know what was
so familiar to me.

"A sign that I made let the Queen know this. Her Majesty then proceeded
to say:

"'From the time of my arrival in France, and in every important event in
which my interests have been concerned, a mysterious protector has
disclosed what I had to fear; I have told you something of it, and
to-day I doubt not that he is advising me what to do.'

"'Here, Madame d’Adhémar,' she said to me, 'read this letter; your eyes
are less tired than Madame de Polignac's and mine.'

"Alas! the Queen referred to the tears that

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

she never ceased to shed. I took the paper and having opened the
envelope I read what follows.

 

"'Madame--I have been a Cassandra; my words have fallen on your ears in
vain, and you have reached the period of which I informed you. It is no
longer a question of tacking but of meeting the storm with thundering
energy; in order to do this and to increase your strength, you must
separate yourself from the persons whom you most love so as to remove
all pretext from the rebels. Moreover these persons run the risk of
their lives; all the Polignacs and their friends are doomed to death and
are pointed out to the assassins who have just murdered the officers of
the Bastille and the provost of the merchants. The Comte d’Artois will
perish; they thirst for his blood; let him take heed to it. I hasten to
tell you this, later on I will communicate further with you about it.'

 

"We were in the stupor which such a menace inevitably causes, when the
Comte d’Artois was announced. We all started, and he himself was
astounded. He was questioned, and, unable to keep silence, he told us
that the Duc de Liancourt had just told him as well as the King, that
the men of the Revolution, in order to consolidate it, had made up their
minds to take his life (that of the Comte d’Artois), and that of the
Duchesse

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

de Polignac, and of the Duc, and also the lives of Messieurs de
Vaudreuil, de Vermont, de Guiche, of the Ducs de Broglie, de la
Vauguyon, de Castries, the Baron de Breteuil, Messieurs de Villedeuil,
d’Amecourt, des Polastrons--in a word a real proscription. . . . <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

"On returning home, a note was given to me, thus worded:--

 

"'All is lost, Countess! This sun is the last which will set on the
monarchy; to-morrow it will exist no more, chaos will prevail, anarchy
unequalled. You know all I have tried to do to give affairs a different
turn; I have been scorned; now it is too late.

"'. . . Keep yourself in retirement, I will watch over you; be prudent,
and you will survive the tempest that will have beaten down all. I
resist the desire that I have to see you; what should we say to each
other? You would ask of me the impossible; I can do nothing for the
King, nothing for the Queen, nothing for the Royal Family, nothing even
for the Duc d’Orléans, who will be triumphant to-morrow, and who, all in
due course, will cross the Capitol to be thrown from the top of the
Tarpeian rock. Nevertheless, if you would care very much to meet with an
old friend, go to the eight o'clock Mass at the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Récollets*, and
enter the second chapel on the right hand.

"'I have the honour to be . . .

"'COMTE DE ST.--GERMAIN.'

 

"At this name, already guessed, a cry of surprise escaped me; he still
living, he who was said to have died in 1784, and whom I had not heard
spoken of for long years past--he had suddenly re-appeared, and at what
a moment, what an epoch! Why had he come to France? Was he then never to
have done with life? For I knew some old people who had seen him bearing
the stamp of forty or fifty years of age, and that at the beginning of
the eighteenth century!

"It was one o'clock at night when I read his letter; the hour for the
*rendez-vous* was early, so I went to bed; I slept little, frightful
dreams tormented me and, in their hideous grotesqueness, I beheld the
future, without however understanding it. As day dawned, I arose worn
out. I had ordered my butler to bring me some very strong coffee, and I
took two cups of it, which revived me. At half past seven I summoned a
sedan chair, and, followed by my confidential old servant, I repaired to
the *Récollets*.

"The church was empty; I posted my Laroche as sentinel and I entered the
chapel named; soon after, and almost before I had collected my

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

thoughts in the presence of God, behold a man approaching. . . . It was
himself in person. . . . Yes! with the same countenance as in 1760,
while mine was covered with furrows and marks of decrepitude. . . . I
stood impressed by it; he smiled at me, came forward, took my hand,
kissed it gallantly. I was so troubled that I allowed him to do it in
spite of the sanctity of the place.

"'There you are!' I said. 'Where have you come from?'

"'I am come from China and Japan. . . .'

"'Or rather from the other world!'

"'Yes, indeed, pretty nearly so! Ah! Madame, *down there* (I underline
the expression) nothing is so strange as what happens here. How is the
monarchy of Louis XIV. disposed of? You who did not see it cannot make
the comparison, but I. . . .'

"'I have caught you, man of yesterday!'

"'Who does not know the history of this great reign? And Cardinal
Richelieu, if he were reborn, it would send him mad. What! not rule!
What did I tell you, and the Queen too? that M. de Maurepas would let
everything be lost, because he compromised everything. I was Cassandra,
or a prophet of evil, and now how do you stand?'

"'Ah! Comte, your wisdom will be useless.'

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

"'Madame, he who sows the wind reaps the whirlwind. Jesus said so in the
Gospel, perhaps not before me, but at any rate His words remain written,
and people could only have profited by mine.'

"'Again!' I said, trying to smile, but he without replying to my
exclamation said:--

"'I have written it to you, *I can do nothing, my hands are tied by a
stronger than myself*. There are periods of time when to retreat is
impossible, others when He has pronounced and the decree will be
executed. *Into this we are entering*.' <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

"'Will you see the Queen?'

"'No, she is doomed.'

"'Doomed! To what?'

"'To death!'

"Oh, this time I could not keep back a cry, I rose on my seat, my hands
repulsed the Comte, and in a trembling voice I said:

"'And you too! you! what, you too!'

"'Yes, I------I, like Cazotte.'

"'You know. . . .'

"'What you do not even suspect. Return to the Palace, go and tell the
Queen to take heed to herself, that this day will be fatal to her; there
is a plot, murder is premeditated.'

"'You fill me with horror, but the Comte d’Estaing has promised.'

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

"'He will take fright, and will hide himself.'

"'But M. de Lafayette. . . .'

"'A balloon puffed out with wind! Even now they are settling what to do
with him, whether he shall be instrument or victim; by noon all will be
decided.'

"'Monsieur,' I said, 'you could render great services to our Sovereigns
if you would.'

"'And if I cannot?'

"'How?'

"'Yes; if I cannot? I thought I should not be listened to. The hour of
repose is past, and the decrees of Providence must be fulfilled.'

"'In plain words, what do they want?'

"'The complete ruin of the Bourbons; they will expel them from all the
thrones they occupy, and in less than a century they will return to the
rank of simple private individuals in their different branches.'

"'And France?'

"'Kingdom, Republic, Empire, mixed Governments, tormented, agitated,
torn; from clever tyrants she will pass to others who are ambitious
without merit. She will be divided, parcelled out, cut up; and these are
no pleonasms that I use, the coming times will bring about the overthrow
of the Empire; pride will sway or abolish distinctions, not from virtue
but from vanity, and it is through vanity that they will come back

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

to them. The French, like children playing with handcuffs and slings,
will play with titles, honours, ribbons; everything will be a toy to
them, even to the shoulder-belt of the National Guard; the greedy will
devour the finances. Some fifty millions now form a deficit, in the name
of which the Revolution is made. Well! under the dictatorship of the
philanthropists, the rhetoricians, the fine talkers, the State debt will
exceed several thousand millions!'

"'You are a terrible prophet! When shall I see you again?'

"'Five times more; do not wish for the sixth.'

"I confess that a conversation so solemn, so gloomy, so terrifying,
inspired me with little wish to continue it. M. de St.--Germain
oppressed my heart like a night-mare, it is strange how much we change
with age, how we look with indifference, even disgust, on those whose
presence formerly charmed us. I found myself in this condition under
present circumstances; besides, the immediate danger of the Queen
pie-occupied me. I did not sufficiently urge the Count, perhaps if I had
entreated him he would have come to her; there was a pause, and then,
resuming the conversation:--

"'Do not let me detain you longer,' he said; 'there is already
disturbance in the city. I am like Athalie, *I wished to see and I have
seen*. Now

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will take up my
part again and leave you I have a journey to take to Sweden; a great
crime is brewing there, I am going to try to prevent it. His Majesty
Gustavus III. interests me, he is worth more than his renown.'

"'And he is menaced?'

"'Yes; no longer will "happy as a king" be said, and still less as a
queen.'

"'Farewell, then, Monsieur; in truth I wish I had not listened to you.'

"'Thus it is ever with us truthful people; deceivers are welcomed, but
fie upon whoever says that which will come to pass! Farewell, Madame;
*au revoir!*'

"He departed; I remained absorbed in deep meditation, not knowing
whether I ought to inform the Queen of this visit or not; I decided to
wait till the end of the week, and to keep silence if it teemed with
misfortunes. I arose at last and when I had found Laroche again I asked
him if he had seen the Comte de St.--Germain as he went out.'

"'The Minister, Madame?'

"'No, he has long been dead; the other.'

"'Ah! the clever conjuror?'

"'No, Madame; did Madame la Comtesse meet him?

"'He went out just now, he passed close to You.'

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

"'I must have been distracted, for I did not notice him.'

"'It is impossible, Laroche, you are joking.'

"'The worse the times are the more respectful I am to Madame.'

"'What! by this door--close to you--he has passed?'

"'I do not mean to deny it, but he did not strike my eye.'

"'Then he had made himself invisible! I am lost in astonishment'." <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

These are the last words that the Countess d’Adhémar writes in
connection with the Comte de St. Germain or that friend who had tried so
vainly to save them from the storm which was then raging on all sides.
One important note which has been already noticed may, however, here
again be fitly quoted. It is evidently from the pen of the biographer
that we get this important little memo, which is as follows:

"Note written by the hand of the Countess, fastened with a pin to the
original MS. and dated the 12th May, 1821. She died in 1822. "I saw M.
de St. Germain again, and always to my unspeakable surprise: at the
assassination of the Queen; at the coming of the 18th Brumaire; the day
following the death of the Duc d’Enghien; in the month of January, 1813;
and on the eve of

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the murder of the Duc de Berri. I await the sixth visit when God
wills.'"

Thus does a voice from the dead contradict the malicious diatribes made
against this teacher, and also refute the unfounded assertions about his
death in 1784, made by Dr. Biester of Berlin, which have been already
fully noted. Perhaps the most interesting passages are those which give
the utterances of the Comte de St. Germain with regard to the future of
France. It is now a hundred and thirty years since those words were
uttered, and we can see that they have been accurately correct in every
detail. The Bourbons are now but a private family. The honour of France
has been wrecked by those who had arrogated to themselves positions of
honour and trust, in which their moral characters were not able to stand
the strain; cases may be cited as instances illustrating, but too
clearly, the truth of the sorrowful forecast made by the Mystic
Messenger of the last century. He might have fitly quoted the words of
the Prophet forerunner, "I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness." <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) But, alas for France,
neither prophecies nor warnings availed her; slowly and sadly has the
wheel of her life turned round, proving the veracity and accuracy of
that prophet who was sent to warn her of the doom to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[75:1](csg05.htm#fr_35) ADHÉMAR, *op. cit.*,
iv., 1.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[76:1](csg05.htm#fr_36) ADHÉMAR, *op. cit.*,
iv., p. 63.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[80:1](csg05.htm#fr_37) ADHÉMAR, *op. cit.*,
iv., pp. 74-97. The date here mentioned is 1788.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[85:1](csg05.htm#fr_38) ADHÉMAR, *op. cit.*,
iv., pp. 189-193.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[88:1](csg05.htm#fr_39) The italics are in the
original.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[92:1](csg05.htm#fr_40) ADHÉMAR, *op. cit.*,
iv., pp. 254-261.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[93:1](csg05.htm#fr_41) *Isaiah*, xl. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Political Work](csg06)
