[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050708)  [Next](1050710) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1 \[I.\]—Depraved Eloquence an
Injurious Accomplishment.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.i-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.v.i-p2.1"></span>There</span> have reached me the two books of
Vincentius Victor, which he addressed in writing to your Holiness; they
have been forwarded to me by our brother Renatus, a layman indeed, but a
person who has a prudent and religious care about the faith both of
himself and of all he loves. On reading these books, I saw that their
author was a man of great resources in speech, of which he had enough,
and more than enough; but that on the subjects of which he wished to
teach, he was as yet insufficiently instructed. If, however, by the
gracious gift of the Lord this qualification were also conferred upon
him, he would be serviceable to many. For he possesses in no slight
degree the faculty of explaining and beautifying what he thinks; all
that is wanted is, that he should first take care to think rightly.
Depraved eloquence is a hurtful accomplishment; for to persons of
inadequate information it always carries the appearance of truth in its
readiness of speech. I know not, indeed, how you received his books; but
if I am correctly informed, you are said, after reading them, to have
been so greatly overjoyed, that you (though an elderly man and a
presbyter) kissed the face of this youthful layman, and thanked him for
having taught you what you had been previously ignorant of. Now, in this
conduct of yours I do not disapprove of your humility; indeed, I rather
commend it; for it was not the man whom you praised, but the truth
itself which deigned to speak to you through him: only I wish you were
able to point out to me what was the truth which you received through
him. I should, therefore, be glad if you would show me, in your answer
to this letter, what it was he taught you. Be it far from me to be
ashamed to learn from a presbyter, since you did not blush to be
instructed by a layman, in proclaiming and imitating your humble
conduct, if the lessons were only true in which you received
instruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1050710)
