[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050572)  [Next](1050574) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.v.viii"></span>

<span id="xvi.v.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.v.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8 \[VII.\]—The Evil of Lust Does Not
Take Away the Good of Marriage.</span>

<span id="xvi.v.viii-p2"></span>Forasmuch, then, as the good of marriage
could not be lost by the addition of this evil, some imprudent persons
suppose that this is not an added evil, but something which appertains
to the original good. A distinction, however, occurs not only to subtle
reason, but even to the most ordinary natural judgment, which was both
apparent in the case of the first man and woman, and also holds good
still in the case of married persons to-day. What they afterward
effected in propagation,—that is the good of marriage; but what they
first veiled through shame,—that is the evil of concupiscence, which
everywhere shuns sight, and in its shame seeks privacy. Since,
therefore, marriage effects some good even out of that evil, it has
whereof to glory; <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="xvi.v.viii-Page_267"></span>but since the good cannot be effected
without the evil, it has reason for feeling shame. The case may be
illustrated by the example of a lame man. Suppose him to attain to some
good object by limping after it, then, on the one hand, the attainment
itself is not evil because of the evil of the man’s lameness; nor, on
the other hand, is the lameness good because of the goodness of the
attainment. So, on the same principle, we ought not to condemn marriage
because of the evil of lust; nor must we praise lust because of the good
of marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050574)
