[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050648)  [Next](1050650) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xliii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 42.—The Pelagians Try to Get Rid
of Original Sin by Their Praise of God’s Works; Marriage, in Its Nature
and by Its Institution, is Not the Cause of Sin.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xliii-p2"></span>I have an answer ready for all this;
but before I give it, I wish the reader carefully to notice, that the
result of the opinions of these persons is, that no Saviour is necessary
for infants, whom they deem to be entirely without any sins to be saved
from. This vast perversion of the truth, so hostile to God’s great
grace, which is given through our Lord Jesus Christ, who “came to seek
and to save what was lost,” <span id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282)
tries to insinuate its way into the hearts of the unintelligent by
eulogizing the works of God; that is, by its eulogy of human nature, of
human seed, of marriage, of sexual intercourse, of the fruits of
matrimony—which are all of them good things. I will not say that he adds
the praise of lust; because he too is ashamed even to name it, so that
it is something else, and not *it*, which he seems to praise. By this
method of his, not distinguishing between the evils which have accrued
to nature and the goodness of nature’s very self, he does not, indeed,
show it to be sound (because that is untrue), but he does not permit its
diseased condition to be healed. And, therefore, that first proposition
of ours, to the effect that the good thing, even the human being, which
is born of adultery, does not excuse the sin of adulterous connection,
he allows to be true; and this point, which occasions no question to
arise between us, he even defends and strengthens (as he well may) by
his similitude of the thief who sows the seed which he stole, and out of
which there arises a really good harvest. Our other proposition,
however, that “the good of marriage cannot be blamed for the original
sin which is derived from it,” he will not admit to be true; if, indeed,
he assented to it, he would not be a Pelagian heretic, but a catholic
Christian. “Certainly,” says he, “if evil arises from marriage, it may
be blamed, nay, cannot be excused; and you place its work and fruit
under the devil’s power, because everything which is <span
id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span id="xvi.vi.xliii-Page_300"></span>the
cause of evil is itself without good.” And in addition to this, he
contrived other arguments to show that good could not possibly be the
cause of evil; and from this he drew the inference, that marriage, which
is a good, is not the cause of evil; and that consequently from it no
man could be born in a sinful state, and having need of a Saviour: just
as if we said that marriage is the cause of sin, though it is true that
the human being which is born in wedlock is not born without sin.
Marriage was instituted not for the purpose of sinning, but of producing
children. Accordingly the Lord’s blessing on the married state ran thus:
“Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.” <span
id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) The sin, however, which is derived
to children from marriage does not belong to marriage, but to the evil
which accrues to the human agents, from whose union marriage comes into
being. The truth is, both the evil of shameful lust can exist without
marriage, and marriage might have been without it. It appertains,
however, to the condition of the body (not of that life, but) of this
death, that marriage cannot exist without it though it may exist without
marriage. Of course that lust of the flesh which causes shame has
existence out of the married state, whenever it urges men to the
commission of adultery, chambering and uncleanness, so utterly hostile
to the purity of marriage; or again, when it does not commit any of
these things, because the human agent gives no permission or assent to
their commission, but still rises and is set in motion and creates
disturbance, and (especially in dreams) effects the likeness of its own
veritable work, and reaches the end of its own emotion. Well, now, this
is an evil which is not even in the married state actually an evil of
marriage; but it has this apparatus all ready in the body of this death,
even against its own will, which is indispensable no doubt for the
accomplishment of that which it does will. The evil in question,
therefore, does not accrue to marriage from its own institution, which
was blessed; but entirely from the circumstance that sin entered into
the world by one man, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all
men, for in him all sinned. <span id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[299:2283](1050649.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xliii-p3"></span> [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[300:2284](1050649.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xliii-p4"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[300:2285](1050649.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xliii-p5"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.vi.xliii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](1050650)
