[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050049)  [Next](1050051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32.—The Case of Certain Idiots and
Simpletons.</span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p2"></span>Now a good deal may be said of men’s
strange vocations,—either such as we have read about, or have
experienced ourselves,—which go to overthrow the opinion of those
persons who think that, previous to the possession of their bodies,
men’s souls passed through certain lives peculiar to themselves, in
which they must come to this, and experience in the present life either
good or evil, according to the difference of their individual deserts.
My anxiety, however, to bring this work to an end does not permit me to
dwell longer on these topics. But on one point, which among many I have
found to be a very strange one, I will not be silent. If we follow those
persons who suppose that souls are oppressed with earthly bodies in a
greater or a less degree of grossness, according to the deserts of the
life which had been passed in celestial bodies previous to the
assumption of the present one, who would not affirm that those had
sinned previous to this life with an especial amount of enormity, who
deserve so to lose all mental light, that they are born with faculties
akin to brute animals,—who are (I will not say most slow in intellect,
for this is very commonly said of others also, but) so silly as to make
a show of their fatuity for the amusement of clever people, even with
idiotic gestures, <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) and whom the
vulgar call, by a name, derived from the Greek, *Moriones?* <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) And yet there was once a certain
person of this class, who was so Christian, that although he was patient
to the degree of strange folly with any amount of injury to himself, he
was yet so impatient of any insult to the name of Christ, or, in his own
person, to the religion with which he was imbued, that he could never
refrain, whenever his gay and clever audience proceeded to blaspheme the
sacred name, as they sometimes would in order to provoke his patience,
from pelting them with stones; and on these occasions he would show no
favour even to persons of rank. Well, now, such persons are
predestinated and brought into being, as I suppose, in order that those
who are able should understand that God’s grace and the Spirit, “which
bloweth where it listeth,” <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) does
not pass over any kind of capacity in the sons of mercy, nor in like
manner does it pass over any kind of capacity in the children of
Gehenna, so that “he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) They, however, who affirm that souls
severally receive different earthly bodies, more or less gross according
to the merits of their former life, and that their abilities as men vary
according to the self-same merits, so that some minds are sharper and
others more obtuse, and that the grace of God is also dispensed for
<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="x.iii.xxxii-Page_28"></span>the liberation of men from their sins
according to the deserts of their former existence:—what will they have
to say about this man? How will they be able to attribute to him a
previous life of so disgraceful a character that he deserved to be born
an idiot, and at the same time of so highly meritorious a character as
to entitle him to a preference in the award of the grace of Christ over
many men of the acutest intellect?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[27:307](1050050.htm#fr_306) <span
id="x.iii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p3"></span> We here follow the reading *cerriti*;
other readings are,—*curati* (with studied folly), *cirrati* (with
effeminate foppery), and *citrati* (decking themselves with *citrus*
leaves).

<span id="fn_307"></span>[27:308](1050050.htm#fr_307) <span
id="x.iii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p4"></span> That is, “fools,” from the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.iii.xxxii-p4.1"></span>μωρός</span>

<span id="fn_308"></span>[27:309](1050050.htm#fr_308) <span
id="x.iii.xxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p5"></span> [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[27:310](1050050.htm#fr_309) <span
id="x.iii.xxxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="x.iii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1050051)
