[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050489)  [Next](1050491) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 35 \[XXXII.\]—Pelagius Believes
that Infants Have No Sin to Be Remitted in Baptism.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.xxxv-p2"></span>But Pelagius would have the reader pass
from this letter to the book which states his belief. This he has made
mention of to yourselves, and in it he has discoursed a good deal on
points about which no question was raised as to his views. Let us,
however, look simply at the subjects about which our own controversy
with them is concerned. Having, then terminated a discussion which he
had conducted to his heart’s content,—from the Unity of the Trinity to
the resurrection of the flesh, on which nobody was questioning him,—he
goes on to say: “We hold likewise one baptism, which we aver ought to be
administered to infants in the same sacramental formula as it is to
adults.” Well, now, you have yourselves affirmed that you heard him
admit at least as much as this in your presence. What, however, is the
use of his saying that the sacrament of baptism is administered to
children “in the same words as it is to adults,” when our inquiry
concerns the thing, not merely the words? It is a more important matter,
that (as you write) with his own mouth he replied to your own question,
that “infants receive baptism for the remission of sins.” For he did not
say here, too, “in words of remission of sins,” but he acknowledged that
they are baptized for the remission itself; and yet for all this, if you
were to ask him what the sin is which he supposes to be remitted to
them, he would contend that they had none whatever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](1050491)
