[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050718)  [Next](1050720) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.xi"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11 \[VII.\]—Victor Implies that the
Soul Had a “State” And “Merit” Before Incarnation.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.xi-p2"></span>Would you hesitate yourself to reprobate
what he has said concerning the soul? “You will not have it,” he says,
“that the soul contracts from the sinful flesh the health, to which holy
<span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="xvii.v.xi-Page_336"></span>state you can see it in due course pass
by means of the flesh, so as to amend its state through that by which it
had lost its merit? Or is it because baptism washes the body that what
is believed to be conferred by baptism does not pass on to the soul or
spirit? It is only right, therefore, that the soul should, by means of
the flesh, repair that old condition which it had seemed to have
gradually lost through the flesh, in order that it may begin a
regenerate state by means of that whereby it had deserved to be
polluted.” <span id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408) Now, do observe
how grave an error this teacher has fallen into! He says that “the soul
repairs its condition by means of the flesh through which it had lost
its merit.” The soul, then, must have possessed some state and some good
merit previous to the flesh, which he would have that it recovers
through the flesh, when the flesh is cleansed in the laver of
regeneration. Therefore, previous to the flesh, the soul had lived
somewhere in a good state and merit, which state and merit it lost when
it came into the flesh. His words are, “that the soul repairs by means
of the flesh that primitive condition which it had seemed to have
gradually lost through the flesh.” The soul, then, possessed before the
flesh, an ancient condition (for his term “*primitive*” describes the
antiquity of the state); and what could that ancient condition have
possibly been, but a blessed and laudable state? Now, he avers that this
happiness is recovered through the sacrament of baptism, although he
will not admit that the soul derives its origin through propagation from
that soul which was once manifestly happy in paradise. How is it, then,
that in another passage he says that “he constantly affirms of the soul
that it exists not by propagation, nor comes out of nothing, nor exists
by its own self, nor previous to the body”? You see how in this place he
insists that souls do exist prior to the body somewhere or other, and
that in so happy a state that the same happiness is restored to them by
means of baptism. But, as if forgetful of his own views, he goes on to
speak of its “beginning a regenerate state by means of that,” meaning
the flesh, “whereby it had deserved to be polluted.” In a previous
statement he had indicated some good desert which had been lost by means
of the flesh; now, however, he speaks of some evil desert, by means of
which it had happened that the soul had to come, or be sent, into the
flesh; for his words are, “By which it had deserved to be polluted;” and
if it deserved to be polluted, its merits could not, of course, have
been good. Pray let him tell us what sin it had committed previous to
its pollution by the flesh, in consequence of which it merited such
pollution by the flesh. Let him, if he can, explain to us a matter which
is utterly beyond his power, because it is certainly far above his reach
to discover what to tell us on this subject which shall be true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[336:2409](1050719.htm#fr_2408) <span
id="xvii.v.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xi-p3"></span> See below, Book iii. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1050720)
