[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050659)  [Next](1050661) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.liv"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.liv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.liv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53 \[XXXI.\]—Concupiscence Need Not
Have Been Necessary for Fruitfulness.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.liv-p2"></span>He says: “Therefore that marriage which
might have been without concupiscence, without bodily motion, without
necessity for sexual organs—to use your own statement—is pronounced by
you to be laudable; whereas such marriages as are now enacted are,
according to <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.liv-Page_305"></span>your decision, the invention of the
devil. Those, therefore, whose institution was possible in your dreams,
you deliberately assert to be good, while those which Holy Scripture
intends, when it says, ‘Therefore shall a man leave his father and his
mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one
flesh,’ <span id="fr_2321"></span>[2322](#fn_2321) you pronounce to be
diabolical evils, worthy, in short, to be called a pest, not matrimony.”
It is not to be wondered at, that these Pelagian opponents of mine try
to twist my words to any meaning they wish them to bear, when it has
been their custom to do the same thing with the Holy Scriptures, and not
simply in obscure passages, but where their testimony is clear and
plain: a custom, indeed, which is followed by all other heretics. Now
who could make such an assertion, as that it was possible for marriages
to be “without bodily motion, without necessity for sexual organs”? For
God made the sexes; because, as it is written, “He created them male and
female.” <span id="fr_2322"></span>[2323](#fn_2322) But how could it
possibly happen, that they who were to be united together, and by the
very union were to beget children, were not to move their bodies, when,
of course, there can be no bodily contact of one person with another if
bodily motion be not resorted to? The question before us, then, is not
about the motion of bodies, without which there could not be sexual
intercourse; but about the shameful motion of the organs of generation,
which certainly could be absent, and yet the fructifying connection be
still not wanting, if the organs of generation were not obedient to
lust, but simply to the will, like the other members of the body. Is it
not even now the case, in “the body of this death,” that a command is
given to the foot, the arm, the finger, the lip, or the tongue, and they
are instantly set in motion at this intimation of our will? And (to take
a still more wonderful case) even the liquid contained in the urinary
vessels obeys the command to flow from us at our pleasure, and when we
are not pressed with its overflow; while the vessels, also, which
contain the liquid, discharge without difficulty, if they are in a
healthy state, the office assigned them by our will of propelling,
pressing out, and ejecting their contents. With how much greater ease
and quietness, then, if the generative organs of our body were
compliant, would natural motion ensue, and human conception be effected;
except in the instance of those persons who violate natural order, and
by a righteous retribution are punished with the intractability of these
members and organs! This punishment is felt by the chaste and pure, who,
without doubt, would rather beget children by mere natural desire than
by voluptuous pruriency; while unchaste persons, who are impelled by
this diseased passion, and bestow their love upon harlots as well as
wives, are excited by a still heavier mental remorse in consequence of
this carnal chastisement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2321"></span>[305:2322](1050660.htm#fr_2321) <span
id="xvi.vi.liv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.liv-p3"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="xvi.vi.liv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2322"></span>[305:2323](1050660.htm#fr_2322) <span
id="xvi.vi.liv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.liv-p4"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="xvi.vi.liv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1050661)
