[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050122)  [Next](1050124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="x.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34 \[XX.\]—(4) That No Man, with the
Exception of Christ, Has Ever Lived, or Can Live Without Sin. <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) </span>

<span id="x.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>\[*4th.*\] There now remains our fourth
point, after the explanation of which, as God shall help us, this
lengthened treatise of ours may at last be brought to an end. It is
this: Whether the man who never has had sin or is to have it, not merely
is now living as one of the sons of men, but even could ever have
existed at any time, or will yet in time to come exist? Now it is
altogether most <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="x.iv.xxxiv-Page_58"></span>certain that such a man neither does now
live, nor has lived, nor ever will live, except the one only Mediator
between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. We have already said a good
deal on this subject in our remarks on the baptism of infants; for if
these have no sin, not only are there at present, but also there have
been, and there will be, persons innumerable without sin. Now if the
point which we treated of under the second head be truly substantiated,
that there is in fact no man without sin, <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) then of course not even infants are
without sin. From which the conclusion arises, that even supposing a man
could possibly exist in the present life so far advanced in virtue as to
have reached the perfect fulness of holy living which is absolutely free
from sin, he still must have been undoubtedly a sinner previously, and
have been converted from the sinful state to this subsequent newness of
life. Now when we were discussing the second head, a different question
was before us from that which is before us under this fourth head. For
then the point we had to consider was, Whether any man in this life
could ever attain to such perfection as to be absolutely without sin by
the grace of God, by the hearty desire of his own will? whereas the
question now proposed in this fourth place is, Whether there be among
the sons of men, or could possibly ever have been, or yet ever can be, a
man who has not indeed emerged out of sin and attained to perfect
righteousness, but has never, at any time whatever, been under the
bondage of sin? If, therefore, the remarks are true which we have made
at so great length concerning infants, there neither is, has been, nor
will be, among the sons of men any such man, except the one Mediator, in
whom there accrues to us propitiation and justification through which we
have reconciliation with God, by the termination of the enmity produced
by our sins. It will therefore be not unsuitable to retrace a few
considerations, so far as the present subject seems to require, from the
very commencement of the human race, in order that they may inform and
strengthen the reader’s mind in answer to some objections which may
possibly disturb him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_585"></span>[57:586](1050123.htm#fr_585) <span
id="x.iv.xxxiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span> See above, chs. 7, 8, 26.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[58:587](1050123.htm#fr_586) <span
id="x.iv.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv.xxxiv-p4"></span> See above, chs. 8, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1050124)
