[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050725)  [Next](1050727) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18 \[XIII.\]—Victor’s Dilemma and
Fall.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.xviii-p2"></span>For he is hemmed in within terrible
straits by those who make the natural inquiry: “Why has God visited on
the soul so unjust a punishment as to have willed to relegate it into a
body of sin, since by its consorting with the flesh that began to be
sinful, which else could not have been sinful?” For, of course, they
say: “The soul could not have been sinful, if God had not commingled it
in the participation of sinful flesh.” Well, this opponent of mine was
unable to discover the justice of God’s doing this, especially in
consequence of the eternal damnation of infants who die without the
remission of original sin by baptism; and his inability was equally
great in finding out why the good and righteous God both bound the souls
of infants, who He foresaw would derive no advantage from the sacrament
of Christian grace, with the chain of original sin, by sending them into
the body which they derive from Adam,—the souls them<span
id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="xvii.v.xviii-Page_340"></span>selves being free from all taint of
propagation,—and by this means also made them amenable to eternal
damnation. No less was he unwilling to admit that these very souls
likewise derived their sinful origin from that one primeval soul. And so
he preferred escaping by a miserable shipwreck of faith, rather than to
furl his sails and steady his oars, in the voyage of his controversy,
and by such prudent counsel check the fatal rashness of his course.
Worthless in his youthful eye was our aged caution; just as if this most
troublesome and perilous question of his was more in need of a torrent
of eloquence than the counsel of prudence. And this was foreseen even by
himself, but to no purpose; for, as if to set forth the points which
were objected to him by his opponents, he says: “After them other
reproachful censures are added to the querulous murmurings of those who
rail against us; and, as if tossed about in a whirlwind, we are dashed
repeatedly among huge rocks.” After saying this, he propounded for
himself the very dangerous question, which we have already treated,
wherein he has wrecked the catholic faith, unless by a real repentance
he shall have repaired the faith which he had shattered. That whirlwind
and those rocks I have myself avoided,unwilling to entrust my frail
barque to their dangers; and when writing on this subject I have
expressed myself in such a way as rather to explain the grounds of my
hesitancy, than to exhibit the rashness of presumption. <span
id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424) This little work of mine excited
his derision, when he met with it at your house, and in utter
recklessness he flung himself upon the reef: he showed more spirit than
wisdom in his conduct. To what lengths, however, that over-confidence of
his led him, I suppose that you can now yourself perceive. But I give
heartier thanks to God, since you even before this descried it. For all
the while he was refusing to check his headlong career, when the issue
of his course was still in doubt, he alighted on his miserable
enterprise, and maintained that God, in the case of infants who died
without Christian regeneration, conferred upon them paradise at once,
and ultimately the kingdom of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[340:2425](1050726.htm#fr_2424) <span
id="xvii.v.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xviii-p3"></span> See Augustin’s treatises, *On Free
Will*, iii. 21; *On the Merits of Sins*, ii. (last chapter); *Letter*
(166) *to Jerome*, and (190) *to Optatus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1050727)
