[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050537)  [Next](1050539) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27 \[XXIII.\]—On Questions Outside
the Faith—What They Are, and Instances of the Same.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>But he is greatly mistaken in this
opinion. The questions which he supposes to be outside the faith are of
a very different character from those in which, without any detriment to
the faith whereby we are Christians, there exists either an ignorance of
the real fact, and a consequent suspension of any fixed opinion, or else
a conjectural view of the case, which, owing to the infirmity of human
thought, issues in conceptions at variance with truth: as when a
question arises about the description and locality of that Paradise
where God placed man whom He formed out of the ground, without any
disturbance, however, of the Christian belief that there undoubtedly is
such a Paradise; or as when it is asked where Elijah is at the present
moment, and where Enoch—whether in this Paradise or in some other place,
although we doubt not of their existing still in the same bodies in
which they were born; or as when one inquires whether it was in the body
or out of the body that the apostle was caught up to the third
heaven,—an inquiry, however, which betokens great lack of modesty on the
part of those who would fain know what he who is the subject of the
mystery itself expressly declares his ignorance of, <span
id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) without impairing his own belief of
the fact; or as when the question is started, how many are those
heavens, to the “third” of which he tells us that he was caught up; or
whether the elements of this visible world are four or more; what it is
which causes those eclipses of the sun or the moon which astronomers are
in the habit of foretelling for certain appointed seasons; why, again,
men of ancient times lived to the age which Holy Scripture assigns to
them; and whether the period of their puberty, when they begat their
first son, was postponed to an older age, proportioned to their longer
life; or where Methuselah could possibly have lived, since he was not in
the Ark, inasmuch as (according to the chronological notes of most
copies of the Scripture, both Greek and Latin) he is found to have
survived the deluge; or whether we must follow the order of the fewer
copies—and they happen to be extremely few—which so arrange the years as
to show that he died before the deluge. Now who does not feel, amidst
the various and innumerable questions of this sort, which relate either
to God’s most hidden operations or to most obscure passages of the
Scriptures, and which it is difficult to embrace and define in any
certain way, that ignorance may on many points be compatible with sound
Christian faith, and that occasionally erroneous opinion may be
entertained without any room for the imputation of heretical doctrine?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[245:1957](1050538.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="xv.iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvii-p3"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="xv.iv.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1050539)
