[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050228)  [Next](1050230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.lvi"></span>

<span id="xi.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xi.lvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53 \[XXXI.\]—Volition and
Ability.</span>

<span id="xi.lvi-p2"></span>Some one will ask whether the faith itself,
in which seems to be the beginning either of salvation, or of that
series leading to salvation which I have just mentioned, is placed in
our power. We shall see more easily, if we first examine with some care
what “our power” means. Since, then, there are two things,—will and
ability; it follows that not every one that has the will has therefore
the ability also, nor has every one that possesses the ability the will
also; for as we sometimes will what we cannot do, so also we sometimes
can do what we do not will. From the words themselves when sufficiently
considered, we shall detect, in the very ring of the terms, the
derivation of volition from willingness, and of *ability* from
ableness. <span id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) Therefore, even as
the man who wishes has volition, so also the man who can has ability.
But in order that a thing may be done by ability, the volition must be
present. For no man is usually said to do a thing with ability if he did
it unwillingly. Although, at the same time, if we observe more
precisely, even what a man is compelled to do unwillingly, he does, if
he does it, by his volition; only he is said to be an unwilling agent,
or to act against his will, because he would prefer some other thing. He
is compelled, indeed, by some unfortunate influence, to do what he does
under compulsion, wishing to escape it or to remove it out of his way.
For if his volition be so strong that he prefers not doing this to not
suffering that, then beyond doubt he resists the compelling influence,
and does it not. And accordingly, if he does it, it is not with a full
and free will, but yet it is not without will that he does it; and
inasmuch as the volition is followed by its effect, we cannot say that
he lacked the ability to do it. If, indeed, he willed to do it, yielding
to compulsion, but could not, although we should allow that a coerced
will was present, we should yet say that ability was absent. But when he
did not do the thing because he was unwilling, then of course the
ability was present, but the volition was absent, since he did it not,
by his resistance to the compelling influence. Hence it is that even
they who compel, or who persuade, are accustomed to say, Why don’t you
do what you have in your ability, in order to avoid this evil? While
they who are utterly unable to do what they are compelled to do, because
they are supposed to be able usually answer by excusing themselves, and
say, I would do it if it were in my ability. What then do we ask more,
since we call that ability when to the volition is added the faculty of
doing? Accordingly, every one is said to have that in his ability which
he does if he likes, and does not if he dislikes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[106:1005](1050229.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="xi.lvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.lvi-p3"></span> \[That is, in the Latin, “voluntas”
(*choice, will, volition*) comes from *velle* (to *wish, desire,
determine*), and “potestas” (*power, ability*) from “posse” (*to be
able*).—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1050230)
