[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050431)  [Next](1050433) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.li"></span>

<span id="xiv.li-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.li-p1.1"></span>Chapter 47 \[XXIII.\]—Pelagius’ Book, Which Was
Sent by Timasius and Jacobus to Augustin, Was Answered by the Latter in
His Work “On Nature and Grace.”</span>

<span id="xiv.li-p2"></span>But when there was actually placed in my
hands, by those faithful servants of God and honourable men, Timasius
and Jacobus, the treatise in which Pelagius dealt with the question of
God’s grace, it became very evident to me—too evident, indeed, to admit
of any further doubt—how hostile to salvation by Christ was his
poisonous perversion of the truth. He treated the subject in the shape
of an objection started, as if by an opponent, in his own terms against
himself; for he was already suffering a good deal of obloquy from his
opinions on the question, which he now appeared to solve for himself in
no other way than by simply describing the grace of God as nature
created with a free will, occasionally combining therewith either the
help of the law, or even the remission of sins; although these
additional admissions were not plainly made, but only sparingly
suggested by him. And yet, even under these circumstances, I refrained
from inserting Pelagius’ name in my work, wherein I refuted this book of
his; for I still thought that I should render a prompter assistance to
the truth if I continued to preserve a friendly relation to him, and so
to spare his personal feelings, while at the same time I showed no
mercy, as I was bound not to show it, to the productions of his pen.
Hence, I must say, I now feel some annoyance, that in this trial he
somewhere said: “I anathematize those who hold these opinions, or have
at any time held them.” He might have been contented with saying,
“*Those who hold these opinions*,” which we should have regarded in the
light of a self-censure; but when he went on to say, “*Or have at any
time held them,*” in the first place, how could he dare to condemn so
unjustly those harmless persons who no longer hold the errors, which
they had learnt either from others, or actually from himself? And, in
the second place, who among all those persons that were aware of the
fact of his not only having held the opinions in question, but of his
having taught them, could help suspecting, and not unreasonably, that he
must have acted insincerely in condemning those who now hold those
opinions, seeing that he did not hesitate to condemn in the same strain
and at the same moment those also who had at any time previously held
them, when they would be sure to remember that they had no less a person
than himself as their instructor in these errors? There are, for
instance, such persons as Timasius and Jacobus, to say nothing of any
others. How can he with unblushing face look at them, his <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span id="xiv.li-Page_204"></span>dear
friends (who have never relinquished their love of him) and his former
disciples? These are the persons to whom I addressed the work in which I
replied to the statements of his book. I think I ought not to pass over
in silence the style and tone which they observed towards me in their
correspondence, and I have here added a letter of theirs as a sample.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](1050433)
