[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050132)  [Next](1050134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iv.xliv"></span>

<span id="x.iv.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iv.xliv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 44.—An Objection of the
Pelagians.</span>

<span id="x.iv.xliv-p2"></span>Nor do they fail to see this point, that
his own sins are no detriment to the parent after his conversion; they
therefore raise the question: “How much more impossible is it that they
should be a hinderance to his son?” But they who thus think do not
attend to this consideration, that as his own sins are not injurious to
the father for the very reason that he is born again of the Spirit, so
in the case of his son, unless he be in the same manner born again, the
sins which he derived from his father will prove injurious to him.
Because even renewed parents beget children, not out of the first-fruits
of their renewed condition, but carnally out of the remains of the old
nature; and the children who are thus the offspring of their parents’
remaining old nature, and are born in sinful flesh, escape from the
condemnation which is due to the old man by the sacrament of spiritual
regeneration and renewal. Now this is a consideration which, on account
of the controversies that have arisen, and may still arise, on this
subject, we ought to keep in our view and memory,—that a full and
perfect remission of sins takes place only in baptism, that the
character of the actual man does not at once undergo a total change, but
that the first-fruits of the Spirit in such as walk worthily change the
old carnal nature into one of like character by a process of renewal,
which increases day by day, until the entire old nature is so renovated
that the very weakness of the natural body attains to the strength and
incorruptibility of the spiritual body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](1050134)
