[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050832)  [Next](1050834) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34 \[XVII.\]—Whether There
Could Be Sensual Appetite in Paradise Before the Fall.</span>

<span id="xviii.iii.xxxiv-p2"></span>But, while maintaining, ye
Pelagians, the honourableness and fruitfulness of marriage, determine,
if nobody had sinned, what you would wish to consider the life of those
people in Paradise, and choose one of these four things. For beyond a
doubt, either as often as ever they pleased they would have had
intercourse; or they would bridle lust when intercourse was not
necessary; or lust would arise at the summons of will, just at the time
when chaste prudence would have perceived beforehand that intercourse
was necessary; or, with no lust existing at all, as every other member
served for its own work, so for its own work the organs of generation
also would obey the commands of those that willed, without any
difficulty. Of these four suppositions, choose which you please; but I
think you will reject the two former, in which lust is either obeyed or
resisted. For the first one would not be in accordance with so great a
virtue, and the second not in harmony with so great a happiness. For be
the idea far from us, that the glory of so great a blessedness as that
should either be most basely enslaved by always following a preceding
lust, or, by resisting it, should not enjoy the most abounding peace.
Away, I say, with the thought that that mind should either be gratified
by consenting to satisfy the concupiscence of the flesh, arising not
opportunely for the sake of procreation, but with unregulated
excitement, or that that quiet should find it necessary to restrain it
by refusing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1050834)
