[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050704)  [Next](1050706) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—Augustin Has No Objection to
the Opinion About the Propagation of Souls Being Refuted, and that About
Their Insufflation Being Maintained.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>As for the opinion, that new souls
are created by inbreathing without being propagated, we certainly do not
in the least object to its maintenance,—only let it be by persons who
have succeeded in discovering some new evidence, either in the canonical
Scriptures, in the shape of unambiguous testimony towards the solution
of a most knotty question, or else in their own reasonings, such as
shall not be opposed to catholic truth, but not by such persons as this
man has shown himself to be. Unable to find anything worth saying, and
at the same time unwilling to suspend his disputatious propensity,
without measuring his strength at all, in order to avoid saying nothing,
he boldly affirmed that “the soul deserved to be polluted by the flesh,”
and that “the soul deserved to become sinful;” though previous to its
incarnation he was unable to discover any merit in it, whether good or
evil. Moreover, that “in infants departing from the body without baptism
original sin may be remitted, and that the sacrifice of Christ’s body
must be offered for them,” who have not been incorporated into Christ
through His sacraments in His Church, and that “they, quitting this
present life without the laver of regeneration, not only can go to rest,
but can even attain to the kingdom of heaven.” He has propounded a good
many other absurdities, which it would be evidently tedious to collect
together, and to consider in this treatise. If the doctrine of the
propagation of souls is false, may its refutation not be the work of
such disputants; and may the defence of the rival principle of the
insufflation of new souls in every creative act, proceed from better
hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1050706)
