[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050032)  [Next](1050034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15 \[XII.\]—The One Sin Common to All
Men.</span>

<span id="x.iii.xv-p2"></span>But observe more attentively what he says,
that “through the offence of one, many are dead.” For why should it be
on account of the sin of one, and not rather on account of their own
sins, if this passage is to be understood of *imitation*, and not of
*propagation?* <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) But mark what
follows: “And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the grace is of many offences
unto justification.” <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) Now let
them tell us, where there is room in these words for *imitation*. “By
one,” says he, “to condemnation.” By one what except one sin? This,
indeed, he clearly implies in the words which he adds: “But the grace is
of many offences unto justification.” Why, indeed, is the judgment from
one offence to condemnation, while the grace is from many offences to
justification? If original sin is a nullity, would it not follow, that
not only grace withdraws men from many offences to justification, but
judgment leads them to condemnation from many offences likewise? For
assuredly grace does not condone many offences, without judgment in like
manner having many offences to condemn. Else, if men are involved in
condemnation because of one offence, on the ground that all the offences
which are condemned were committed in imitation of that one offence;
there is the same reason why men should also be regarded as withdrawn
from one offence unto justification, inasmuch as all the offences which
are remitted to the justified were committed in imitation of that one
offence. But this most certainly was not the apostle’s meaning, when he
said: “The judgment, indeed, was from *one* offence unto condemnation,
but the grace was from *many* offences unto justification.” We on our
side, indeed, can understand the apostle, and see that judgment is
predicated of one offence unto condemnation entirely on the ground that,
even if there were in men nothing but original sin, it would be
sufficient for their condemnation. For however much heavier will be
their condemnation who have added their own sins to <span
id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="x.iii.xv-Page_21"></span>the
original offence (and it will be the more severe in individual cases, in
proportion to the sins of individuals); still, even that sin alone which
was originally derived unto men not only excludes from the kingdom of
God, which infants are unable to enter (as they themselves allow),
unless they have received the grace of Christ before they die, but also
alienates from salvation and everlasting life, which cannot be anything
else than the kingdom of God, to which fellowship with Christ alone
introduces us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[20:258](1050033.htm#fr_257) <span
id="x.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xv-p3"></span> See note to last word of ch. 11.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[20:259](1050033.htm#fr_258) <span
id="x.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xv-p4"></span> [Rom. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016)<span id="x.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1050034)
