[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050351)  [Next](1050353) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xx"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—(16.) The Sixteenth
Breviate.</span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p2"></span>XVI. After all these disputations, their
author introduces himself in person as arguing with another, and
represents himself as under examination, and as being addressed by his
examiner: “Show me the man who is without sin.” He answers: “I show you
one who is able to be without sin.” His examiner then says to him: “And
who is he?” He answers: “You are the man.” “But if,” he adds, “you were
to say, ‘I, at any rate, cannot be without sin,’ then you must answer
me, ‘Whose fault is that?’ If you then were to say, ‘My own fault,’ you
must be further asked, ‘And how is it your fault, if you cannot be
without sin?’” He again represents himself as under examination, and
thus accosted: “Are you yourself without sin, who say that a man can be
without sin?” And he answers: “Whose fault is it that I am not without
sin? But if,” continues he, “he had said in reply, ‘The fault is your
own;’ then the answer would be, ‘How *my* fault, when I am unable to be
without sin?’” Now our answer to all this running argument is, that no
controversy ought to have been raised between them about such words as
these; because he nowhere ventures to affirm that a man (either any one
else, or himself) is without sin, but he merely said in reply that he
*can be*,—a position which we do not ourselves deny. Only the question
arises, when can he, and through whom can he? If at the present time,
then by no faithful soul which is enclosed within the body of this death
must this prayer be offered, or such words as these be spoken, “Forgive
us our debts, as we forgive our debtors,” <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) since in holy baptism all past
debts have been already forgiven. But whoever tries to persuade us that
such a prayer is not proper for faithful members of Christ, does in fact
acknowledge nothing else than that he is not himself a Christian. If,
again, it is through himself that a man is able to live without sin,
then did Christ die in vain. But “Christ is not dead in vain.” No man,
therefore, can be without sin, even if he wish it, unless he be assisted
by the grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And that this
perfection may be attained, there is even now a training carried on in
growing \[Christians,\] and there will be by all means a completion
made, after the conflict with death is spent, and love, which is now
cherished by the operation of faith and hope, shall be perfected in the
fruition of sight and possession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[164:1409](1050352.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="xiii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p3"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="xiii.xx-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 17](1050353)
