[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050788)  [Next](1050790) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33.—The Phenix After Death
Coming to Life Again.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxiii-p2"></span>Now, what you say about the phenix
has nothing whatever to do with the subject before us. For the phenix
symbolizes the resurrection of the body; it does not do away with the
sex of souls; if indeed, as is thought, he is born afresh after his
death. I suppose, however, that you thought your discourse would not be
sufficiently plausible unless you declaimed a good deal about the
phenix, after the fashion of young people. Now do you find in the body
of your bird male organs of generation and not a male bird; or female
ones, and not a female? But, I beg of you, reflect on what it is you
say,—what theory you are trying to construct, and to recommend for our
acceptance. You say that the soul, spread through all the limbs of the
body, grew stiff by congelation, and received the entire shape of the
whole body from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet, and from
the inmost marrow to the skin’s outward surface. At this rate it must
have received, in the case of a female body, all the inner appurtenances
of a woman’s body, and yet not be a woman! Why, pray, are all the
members feminine in a true living body, and yet the whole no woman? And
why all be male, and the result not a man? Who can be so presumptuous as
to believe, and profess, and teach all this? Is it that souls never
generate? Then, of course, mules and she-mules are not male and female.
Is it that souls without bodies of flesh would be unable to cohabit?
Well, but this deprivation is shared by castrated men; and yet, although
both the process and the motion be taken from them, their sex is not
removed—some slender remnant of their male members being still left to
them. Nobody ever said that a eunuch is not a male. What now becomes of
your opinion, that the souls even of eunuchs have the generative organs
unimpaired, and that these organs will remain entire, on your principle,
in their souls, even when they are clean removed from their bodily
structure? For you say, the soul knows how to withdraw itself when that
part of the flesh begins to be cut off, so that the form which has been
removed when amputated is not lost; but although spread over it by
condensation, it retires by an extremely rapid movement, and so buries
itself within as to be kept quite safe; yet that cannot, forsooth, be a
male in the other world which carries with it thither the whole
appendage of male organs of generation, and which, if it had not even
other signs in the body, was a male by reason of those organs alone.
These opinions, my son, have no truth in them; if you will not allow
that there is sex in the soul, there cannot be a body either.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1050790)
