[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050392)  [Next](1050394) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—The Same Continued.</span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p2"></span>This being the case, how must God’s
children, who have learned the truth of all this and rejoice at being
ruled and led by the Spirit of God, have been affected when they heard
or read that Pelagius had declared in writing that “all men are governed
by their own will, and that every one is submitted to his own desire?”
And yet, when questioned by the bishops, he fully perceived what an evil
impression these words of his might produce, and told them in answer
that “he had made such an assertion in the interest of free
will,”—adding at once, “God is its helper whenever it chooses good;
whilst man is himself in fault when he sins, as being under the
influence of a free will.” Although the pious judges approved of this
sentiment also, they were unwilling to consider or examine how
incautiously he had written, or indeed in what sense he had employed the
words found in his book. They thought it was enough that he had made
such a confession concerning free will, as to admit that God helped the
man who chose the good, whereas the man who sinned was himself to blame,
his own will sufficing for him in this direction. According to this, God
rules those whom He assists in their choice of the good. So far, then,
as they rule anything themselves, they rule it rightly, since they
themselves are ruled by Him who is right and good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050394)
