[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050661)  [Next](1050663) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.lvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.lvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 55 \[XXXIII.\]—Lust is a Disease;
The Word “Passion” In the Ecclesiastical Sense.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lvi-p2"></span>He then passes on from those who are
united in marriage to those who are born of it. It is in relation to
these that we have to encounter the most laborious discussions with the
new heretics in connection with our subject. Impelled by some hidden
instinct from God, he makes avowals which go far to untie the whole
knot. For in his desire to raise greater odium against us, because we
had said that infants are born in sin even of lawful wedlock, he makes
the following observation: “You assert that they, indeed, who have not
been ever born might possibly have been good; those, however, who have
peopled the world, and for whom Christ died, you decide to be the work
of the devil, born in a disordered state, and guilty from the beginning.
Therefore,” he continues, “I have shown that you are doing nothing else
than denying that God is the Creator of the men who actually exist.” I
beg to say, that I declare none but God to be the Creator of all men,
however true it be that all are born in sin, and must perish unless born
again. It was, indeed, the sinful corruption which had been sown in them
by the devil’s persuasion that became the means of their being born in
sin; not the created nature of which men are composed. Shameful lust,
however, could not excite our members, except at our own will, if it
were not a disease. Nor would even the lawful and honourable cohabiting
of husband and wife raise a blush, with avoidance of any eye and desire
of secrecy, if there were not a diseased condition about it. Moreover,
the apostle would not prohibit the possession of wives in this disease,
did not disease exist in it. The phrase in the Greek text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.vi.lvi-p2.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.vi.lvi-p2.2"></span>ν πάθει
ἐπιθυμίας</span>, is by some rendered in Latin, *in morbo desiderii* vel
*concupiscentiæ*, in the disease of desire or of concupiscence; by
others, however, *in passione concupiscentiæ*, in the passion of
concupiscence; or however it is found otherwise in different copies: at
any rate, the Latin equivalent *passio* (passion), especially in the
ecclesiastical use, is usually understood as a term of censure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 56](1050663)
