[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050521)  [Next](1050523) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11 \[X.\]—How that Pelagius Deceived
the Synod of Palestine.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xi-p2"></span>Now I pray you carefully to observe by
what evidence Pelagius is shown to have deceived his judges in
Palestine, not to mention other points, on this very question of the
baptism of infants, lest we should seem to any one to have used calumny
and suspicion, rather than to have ascertained the certain fact, when we
alleged that Pelagius concealed the opinion which Cœlestius expressed
with greater frankness, while at the same time he actually entertained
the same views. Now, from what has been stated above, it has been
clearly seen that Cœlestius refused to condemn the assertion that
“Adam’s sin injured only himself, and not the human race, and that
infants at their birth are in the same state that Adam was before the
transgression,” because he saw that, if he condemned these propositions,
he would affirm that there was in infants a transmission of sin from
Adam. When, however, it was objected to Pelagius that he was of one mind
with Cœlestius on this point, he condemned the words without hesitation.
I am quite aware that you have read all this before. Since, however, we
are not writing this account for you alone, we proceed to transcribe the
very words of the synodal acts, lest the reader should be unwilling
either to turn to the record for himself, or if he does not possess it,
take the trouble to procure a copy. Here, then, are the words:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1050523)
