[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050932)  [Next](1050934) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="xix.iii.ii-Page_439"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xix.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Letter II.</span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p2"></span>\[*The 215th of Augustin’s Epistles.*\]

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p3"></span>To my very dear lord and most honoured
brother among the members of Christ, Valentinus, and to the brethren
that are with you, Augustin sends greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c16"><span
id="xix.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>That</span> Cresconius and Felix, and
another Felix, the servants of God, who came to us from your
brotherhood, have spent Easter with us is known to your Love. <span
id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936) We have detained them somewhile
longer in order that they might return to you better instructed against
the new Pelagian heretics, into whose error every one falls who supposes
that it is according to any human merits that the grace of God is given
to us, which alone delivers a man through Jesus Christ our Lord. But he,
too, is no less in error who thinks that, when the Lord shall come to
judgment, a man is not judged according to his works who has been able
to use throughout his life free choice of will. For only infants, who
have not yet done any works of their own, either good or bad, will be
condemned on account of original sin alone, when they have not been
delivered by the Saviour’s grace in the laver of regeneration. As for
all others who, in the use of their free will, have added to original
sin, sins of their own commission, but who have not been delivered by
God’s grace from the power of darkness and removed into the kingdom of
Christ, they will receive judgment according to the deserts not of their
original sin only, but also of the acts of their own will. The good,
indeed, shall receive their reward according to the merits of their own
good-will, but then they received this very good-will through the grace
of God; and thus is accomplished that sentence of Scripture,
“Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man
that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile: but glory,
honour, and peace to every man that worketh good; to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile.” <span id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937)

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p7"></span>2. Touching the very difficult question
of will and grace, I have felt no need of treating it further in this
letter, having given them another letter also when they were about to
return in greater haste. I have written a book likewise for you, <span
id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938) and if you, by the Lord’s help,
read it, and have a lively understanding of it, I think that no further
dissension on this subject will arise among you. They take with them
other documents besides, which, as we supposed, ought to be sent to you,
in order that from these you may ascertain what means the catholic
Church has adopted for repelling, in God’s mercy, the poison of the
Pelagian heresy. For the letters to Pope Innocent, Bishop of Rome, from
the Council of the province of Carthage, and from the Council of
Numidia, and one written with exceeding care by five bishops, and what
he wrote back to these three; our letter also to Pope Zosimus about the
African Council, and his answer addressed to all bishops throughout the
world; and a brief constitution, which we drew up against the error
itself at a later plenary Council of all Africa; and the above-mentioned
book of mine, which I have just written for you,—all these we have both
read over with them, while they were with us, and have now despatched by
their hands to you. <span id="fr_2939"></span>[2940](#fn_2939)

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p10"></span>3. Furthermore, we have read to them
the work of the most blessed martyr Cyprian on the Lord’s Prayer, and
have pointed out to them how He taught that all things pertaining to our
morals, which constitute right living, must be sought from our Father
which is in heaven, lest, by presuming on free will, we fall from divine
grace. From the same treatise we have also shown them how the same
glorious martyr has taught us that it behoves us to pray even for our
enemies who have not yet believed in Christ, that they may believe;
which would of course be all in vain unless the Church believed that
even the evil and unbelieving wills of men might, by the grace of God,
be converted to good. This book of St. Cyprian, however, we have not
sent you, because they told us that you possessed it among yourselves
already. My letter, also, which had been sent to Sixtus, presbyter of
the Church at Rome <span id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940) and which
they brought with them to us, we read over with them, and pointed out
how that it had been written in opposition to those who say that God’s
grace is bestowed according to our merits,—that is to say, in opposition
to the same Pelagians.

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p12"></span>4. As far, then, as lay in our power,
we have used our influence with them, as both your brethren and our own,
with a view to their persevering in the soundness of the catholic faith,
which neither denies free will whether for an evil or a good life, nor
attributes to it so much power that it can avail anything without God’s
grace, whether that it may be changed from evil to good, or that it may
persevere in the pursuit of good, or that it may attain to eternal good
when there is no further fear of failure. To yourselves, too, my most
dearly beloved, I also, in this letter, give the same exhortation which
the apostle addresses to us all, “not to think <span id="page_440">p.
440</span> <span id="xix.iii.ii-Page_440"></span>of yourselves more
highly than you ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God
hath dealt to every man the measure of faith.” <span
id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941)

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p14"></span>5. Mark well the counsel which the Holy
Ghost gives us by Solomon: “Make straight paths for thy feet, and order
thy ways aright. Turn not aside to the right hand nor to the left, but
turn away thy foot from the evil way; for the Lord knoweth the ways on
the right hand, but those on the left are perverse. He will make thy
ways straight, and will direct thy steps in peace.” <span
id="fr_2942"></span>[2943](#fn_2942) Now consider, my brethren, that in
these words of Holy Scripture, if there were no free will, it would not
be said, “Make straight paths for thy feet, and order thy ways; turn not
aside to the right hand, nor to the left.” Nor yet, were this possible
for us to achieve without the grace of God, would it be afterwards
added, “He will make thy ways straight, and will direct thy steps in
peace.”

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p16"></span>6. Decline, therefore, neither to the
right hand nor to the left, although the paths on the right hand are
praised, and those on the left hand are blamed. This is why he added,
“Turn away thy foot from the evil way,”—that is, from the left-hand
path. This he makes manifest in the following words, saying, “For the
Lord knoweth the ways on the right hand; but those on the left are
perverse.” In those ways we ought surely to walk which the Lord knows;
and it is of these that we read in the Psalm, “The Lord knoweth the way
of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall perish;” <span
id="fr_2943"></span>[2944](#fn_2943) for this way, which is on the left
hand, the Lord does not know. As He will also say at last to such as are
placed on His left hand at the day of judgment: “I know you not.” <span
id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944) Now what is that which He knows
not, who knows all things, both good and evil, in man? But what is the
meaning of the words, “I know you not,” unless it be that you are now
such as I never made you? Precisely as that passage runs, which is
spoken of the Lord Jesus Christ, that “He knew no sin.” <span
id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945) How knew it not, except that He had
never made it? And, therefore, how is to be understood the passage, “The
ways which are on the right hand the Lord knoweth,” except in the sense
that He made those ways Himself,—even “the paths of the righteous,”
which no doubt are “those good works that God,” as the apostle tells us,
“hath before ordained that we should walk in them”? <span
id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946) Whereas the left-hand ways—those
perverse paths of the unrighteous—He truly knows nothing of, because He
never made them for man, but man made them for himself. Wherefore He
says, “The perverse ways of the wicked I utterly abhor; they are on the
left hand.”

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p21"></span>7. But the reply is made: Why did He
say, “Turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left,” when he
clearly ought rather to have said, Keep to the right hand, and turn not
off to the left, if the right-hand paths are good? Why, do we think,
except this, that the paths on the right hand are so good that it is not
good to turn off from them, even to the right? For that man, indeed, is
to be understood as declining to the right who chooses to attribute to
himself, and not to God, even those good works which appertain to
right-hand ways. Hence it was that after saying, “For the Lord knoweth
the ways on the right hand, but those on the left hand are perverse,” as
if the objection were raised to Him, Wherefore, then, do you not wish us
to turn aside to the right? He immediately added as follows: “He will
Himself make thy paths straight, and will direct thy ways in peace.”
Understand, therefore, the precept, “Make straight paths for thy feet,
and order thy ways aright,” in such a sense as to know that whenever you
do all this, it is the Lord God who enables you to do it. Then you will
not turn off to the right, although you are walking in right-hand paths,
not trusting in your own strength; and He will Himself be your strength,
who will make straight paths for your feet, and will direct your ways in
peace.

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p22"></span>8. Wherefore, most dearly beloved,
whosoever says, My will suffices for me to perform good works, declines
to the right. But, on the other hand, they who think that a good way of
life should be forsaken, when they hear God’s grace so preached as to
lead to the supposition and belief that it of itself makes men’s wills
from evil to good, and it even of itself keeps them what it has made
them; and who, as the result of this opinion, go on to say, “Let us do
evil that good may come,” <span id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947)
—these persons decline to the left. This is the reason why he said to
you, “Turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left;” in other
words, do not uphold free will in such wise as to attribute good works
to it without the grace of God, nor so defend and maintain grace as if,
by reason of it, you may love evil works in security and safety,—which
may God’s grace itself avert from you! Now it was the words of such as
these which the apostle had in view when he said, “What shall we say,
then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?” <span
id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948) And to this cavil of erring men,
who know nothing about the grace of God, he returned such an answer as
he ought in these words: “God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to
sin, live any longer therein?” Nothing could have been said more
succinctly, and yet to the point. For what more useful gift does the
grace of God confer upon us, in this present evil world, than our dying
unto sin? Hence he shows himself ungrateful to grace itself who chooses
to live in sin by reason of that whereby we die unto sin. May God,
however, who is rich in mercy, grant you both to think soundly and
wisely, and to continue perseveringly and progressively to the end in
every good determination and purpose. For yourselves, for us, for all
who love you, and for those who hate you, pray that this gift may be
attained,—pray earnestly and vigilantly in brotherly peace. Live unto
God. If I deserve any favour at your hands, let brother Florus come to
me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[439:2937](1050933.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p5"></span> The phrase of Christian salutation,
*vestra caritas* which may be rendered “your loving or beloved selves;”
it is a parallel phrase with the more familiar one to modern ears, “Your
Honour.”

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[439:2938](1050933.htm#fr_2937) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p6"></span> [Rom.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[439:2939](1050933.htm#fr_2938) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p8"></span> The following treatise is here referred
to,—*On Grace and Free Will*.

<span id="fn_2939"></span>[439:2940](1050933.htm#fr_2939) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p9"></span> See *Epp*. 175–177, and 181–183.

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[439:2941](1050933.htm#fr_2940) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p11"></span> *Ep*. 194.

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[440:2942](1050933.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p13"></span> [Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2942"></span>[440:2943](1050933.htm#fr_2942) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p15"></span> [Prov.
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027)<span
id="xix.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2943"></span>[440:2944](1050933.htm#fr_2943) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p17"></span> [Ps. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[440:2945](1050933.htm#fr_2944) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p18"></span> [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[440:2946](1050933.htm#fr_2945) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p19"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[440:2947](1050933.htm#fr_2946) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p20"></span> [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[440:2948](1050933.htm#fr_2947) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p23"></span> [Rom. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[440:2949](1050933.htm#fr_2948) <span
id="xix.iii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.ii-p24"></span> [Rom.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)<span id="xix.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abstract.](1050934)
