[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050461)  [Next](1050463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7 \[VI.\]—Pelagius Posits God’s Aid
Only for Our “Capacity.”</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vii-p2"></span>Let not Pelagius, however, in this way
deceive incautious and simple persons, or even himself; for after
saying, “Man is therefore to be praised for his willing and doing a good
work,” he added, as if by way of correcting himself, these <span
id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span id="xv.iii.vii-Page_219"></span>words:
“Or rather, this praise belongs to man *and to God*.” It was not,
however, that he wished to be understood as showing any deference to the
sound doctrine, that it is “God which worketh in us both to will and to
do,” that he thus expressed himself; but it is clear enough, on his own
showing, why he added the latter clause, for he immediately subjoins:
“Who has bestowed on him the ‘capacity’ for this very will and work.”
From his preceding words it is manifest that he places this capacity in
our nature. Lest he should seem, however, to have said nothing about
grace, he added these words: “And who evermore, by the help of His
grace, assists this very capacity,”—“*this very capacity*,” observe; not
“*very will*,” or “*very action;*” for if he had said so much as this,
he would clearly not be at variance with the teaching of the apostle.
But there are his words: “this very capacity;” meaning that very one of
the three faculties which he had placed in our nature. This God
“evermore assists by the help of His grace.” The result, indeed, is,
that “the praise does not belong to man and to God,” because man so
wills that yet God also inspires his volition with the ardour of love,
or that man so works that God nevertheless also cooperates with him,—and
without His help, what is man? But he has associated God in this praise
in this wise, that were it not for the nature which God gave us in our
creation wherewith we might be able to exercise volition and action, we
should neither will nor act.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1050463)
