[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050733)  [Next](1050735) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2 \[II.\]—Why Victor Assumed the
Name of Vincentius. The Names of Evil Men Ought Never to Be Assumed by
Other Persons.</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.ii-p2"></span>The first thing which caused me some
anxiety about you was the title which appeared in your books with your
name; for on inquiring of those who knew you, and were probably your
associates in opinion, who Vincentius Victor was, I found that you had
been a Donatist, or rather a Rogatist, but had lately come into
communion with the catholic Church. Now, while I was rejoicing, as one
naturally does at the recovery of those whom he sees rescued from that
system of error,—and in your case my joy was all the greater because I
saw that your ability, which so much delighted me in your writings, had
not remained behind with the enemies of truth,—additional information
was given me by your friends which caused me sorrow amid my joy, to the
effect that you wished to have the name Vincentius prefixed to your own
name, inasmuch as you still held in affectionate regard the successor of
Rogatus, who bore this name, as a great and holy man, and that for this
reason you wished his name to become your surname. Some persons also
told me that you had, moreover, boasted about his having appeared in
some sort of a vision to you, and assisted you in composing those books
the subject of which I have discussed with you in this small work of
mine, and to such an extent as to dictate to you himself the precise
topics and arguments which you were to write about. Now, if all this be
true, I no longer wonder at your having been able to make those
statements which, if you will only lend a patient ear to my admonition,
and with the attention of a catholic duly consider and weigh those
books, you will undoubtedly come to regret having ever advanced. For he
who, according to the apostle’s portrait, “transforms himself into an
angel of light,” <span id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436) has
transformed himself before you into a shape which you believe to have
been, or still to be, an angel of light. In this way, indeed, he is less
able to <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> <span
id="xvii.vi.ii-Page_344"></span>deceive catholics when his
transformations are not into angels of light, but into heretics; now,
however, that you are a catholic, I should be sorry for you to be
beguiled by him. He will certainly feel torture at your having learnt
the truth, and so much the more in proportion to the pleasure he
formerly experienced in having persuaded you to believe error. With a
view, however, to your refraining from loving a dead person, when the
love can neither be serviceable to yourself nor profitable to him, I
advise you to consider for a moment this one point—that he is not, of
course, a just and holy man, since you withdrew yourself from the snares
of the Donatists or Rogatists on the score of their heresy; but if you
do think him to be just and holy, you ruin yourself by holding communion
with catholics. You are, indeed, only feigning yourself a catholic if
you are in mind the same as he was on whom you bestow your love; and you
are aware how terribly the Scripture has spoken on this subject: “The
Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the man who feigns.” <span
id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437) If, however, you are sincere in
communicating with us, and do not merely pretend to be a catholic, how
is it that you still love a dead man to such a degree as to be willing
even now to boast of the name of one in whose errors you no longer
permit yourself to be held? We really do not like your having such a
surname, as if you were the monument of a dead heretic. Nor do we like
your book to have such a title as we should say was a false one if we
read it on his tomb. For we are sure Vincentius is not *Victor*, the
conqueror, but *Victus*, the conquered;—may it be, however, with
fruitful effect, even as we wish you to be conquered by the truth! And
yet your thought was an astute and skilful one, when you designated the
books, which you wish us to suppose were dictated to you by his
inspiration, by the name of Vincentius Victor; as much as to intimate
that it was rather he than you who wished to be designated by the
victorious appellation, as having been himself the conqueror of error,
by revealing to you what were to be the contents of your written
treatise. But of what avail is all this to you, my son? Be, I pray you,
a true catholic, not a feigned one, lest the Holy Spirit should flee
from you, and that Vincentius be unable to profit you at all, into whom
the most malignant spirit of error has transformed himself for the
purpose of deceiving you; for it is from that one that all these evil
opinions have proceeded, notwithstanding the artful fraud which has
persuaded you to the contrary. If this admonition shall only induce you
to correct these errors with the humility of a God-fearing man and the
peaceful submission of a catholic, they will be regarded as the mistakes
of an over-zealous young man, who is eager rather to amend them than to
persevere in them. But if he shall have by his influence prevailed on
you to contend for these opinions with obstinate perseverance, which God
forbid, it will in such a case be necessary to condemn them and their
author as heretical, as is required by the pastoral and remedial nature
of the Church’s charge, to check the dire contagion before it quietly
spreads through the heedless masses, while wholesome correction is
neglected, under the name but without the reality of love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[343:2437](1050734.htm#fr_2436) <span
id="xvii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.ii-p3"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="xvii.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[344:2438](1050734.htm#fr_2437) <span
id="xvii.vi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.ii-p4"></span> [Wisdom
1.5](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#005)<span id="xvii.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1050735)
