[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050924)  [Next](1050926) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxii"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.vi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32 \[XII.\]—The Pelagian’s
Heresy Arose Long After Ambrose.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxii-p2"></span>It would be too long if I were to
seek to mention everything which the holy Ambrose said and wrote against
this heresy of the Pelagians, which was to arise so long afterwards; not
indeed with a view to answer them, but with a view to declare the
catholic faith, and to build up men in it. Moreover, I neither could nor
ought to mention all those things which Cyprian, most glorious in the
Lord, wrote in his letters, whereby it is shown how this which we hold
is the true and truly Christian and catholic faith, as it was delivered
of old by the Holy Scriptures, and so retained and kept by our fathers
and even to this time, in which these heretics have attempted to destroy
it, and as it will hereafter by God’s good will be retained and kept.
For that these things and things of this kind were thus delivered to
Cyprian, and by Cyprian, is testified by the testimonies produced from
his letters; and that thus they were maintained up to our times is shown
by these things which Ambrose wrote about these matters before these
heretics had begun to rage, and catholic ears had shuddered at their
profane novelties which are everywhere; and that thus, moreover, they
shall be maintained hereafter, was declared with sufficient vigour
partly by the condemnation of such opinions as these, partly by their
correction. For whatever they may dare to mutter against the sound faith
of Cyprian and Ambrose, I do not think that they will break out into
such a madness as to dare to call those noted and memorable men of God,
Manicheans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1050926)
