[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050844)  [Next](1050846) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—How Far the Manicheans and
Pelagians are Joined in Error; How Far They are Separated.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.iii-p2"></span>Still, indeed, they alike oppose the
grace of Christ, they alike make His baptism of no account, they alike
dishonour His flesh; but, moreover, they do these things in different
ways and for different reasons. For the Manicheans assert that divine
assistance is given to the merits of a good nature, but the Pelagians,
to the merits of a good will. The former say, God owes this to the
labours of His members; the latter say, God owes this to the virtues of
His servants. In both cases, therefore, the reward is not imputed
according to grace, but according to debt. The Manicheans contend, with
a profane heart, that the washing of regeneration—that is, the water
itself—is superfluous, and is of no advantage. But the Pelagians assert
that what is said in holy baptism for the putting away of sins is of no
avail to infants, as they have no sin; and thus in the baptism of
infants, as far as pertains to the remission of sins, the Manicheans
destroy the visible element, but the Pelagians destroy even the
invisible sacrament. The Manicheans dishonour Christ’s flesh by
blaspheming the birth from the Virgin; but the Pelagians by making the
flesh of those to be redeemed equal to the flesh of the Redeemer. Since
Christ was born, not of course in sinful flesh, but in the likeness of
sinful flesh, while the flesh of the rest of mankind is born sinful. The
Manicheans, therefore, who absolutely abominate all flesh, take away the
manifest truth from the flesh of Christ; but the Pelagians, who maintain
that no flesh is born sinful, take away from Christ’s flesh its special
and proper dignity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1050846)
