[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050554)  [Next](1050556) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xliv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xliv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 44 \[XXXIX.\]—Even the Children of
the Regenerate Born in Sin. The Effect of Baptism.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xliv-p2"></span>This concupiscence of the flesh would be
prejudicial, <span id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) just in so far
as it is present in us, <span id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031) if
the remission of sins were not so beneficial <span
id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) that while it is present in men,
both as born and as born again, it may in the former be prejudicial as
well as present, but in the latter present simply but never prejudicial.
In the unregenerate it is prejudicial to such an extent indeed, that,
unless they are born again, no advantage can accrue to them from being
born of regenerate parents. The fault of our nature remains in our
offspring so deeply impressed as to make it guilty, even when the guilt
of the self-same fault has been washed away in the parent by the
remission of sins—until every defect which ends in sin by the consent of
the human will is consumed and done away in the last regeneration. This
will be identical with that renovation of the very flesh itself which is
promised in its future resurrection, when we shall not only commit no
sins, but be even free from those corrupt desires which lead us to sin
by yielding consent to them. To this blessed consummation advances are
even now made by us, through the grace of that holy laver which we have
put within our reach. The same regeneration which now renews our spirit,
so that all our past sins are remitted, will by and by also operate, as
might be expected, to the renewal to eternal life of that very flesh, by
the resurrection of which to an incorruptible state the incentives of
all sins will be purged out of our nature. But this salvation is as yet
only accomplished in hope: it is not realized in fact; it is not in
present possession, but it is looked forward to with patience. \[XL.\]
And thus there is a whole and perfect cleansing, in the self-same
baptismal laver, not only of all the sins remitted now in our baptism,
which make us guilty owing to the consent we yield to wrong desires, and
to the sinful acts in which they issue; but of these said wrong desires
also, which, if not consented to by us, would contract no guilt of sin,
and which, though not in this present life removed, will yet have no
existence in the life beyond.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[252:2031](1050555.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="xv.iv.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xliv-p3"></span> The three phrases here marked with
asterisks have a more clearly expressed relation in the original:
*obesset, inesset, prodesset*.

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[252:2032](1050555.htm#fr_2031) <span
id="xv.iv.xliv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xliv-p4"></span> The three phrases here marked with
asterisks have a more clearly expressed relation in the original:
*obesset, inesset, prodesset*.

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[252:2033](1050555.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="xv.iv.xliv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xliv-p5"></span> The three phrases here marked with
asterisks have a more clearly expressed relation in the original:
*obesset, inesset, prodesset*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](1050556)
