[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050713)  [Next](1050715) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Shall God’s Nature Be Mutable,
Sinful, Impious, Even Eternally Damned.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.vi-p2"></span>All this, however, I am saying to a
catholic: advising with him rather than teaching him. For I do not
suppose that these things are new to you; or that they have been long
heard of by you, but not believed. This epistle of mine, you will, I am
sure, so read as to recognise in its statement your own faith also,
which is by the gracious gift of the Lord the common property of us all
in the catholic Church. Since, then (as I was saying), I am now speaking
to a catholic, whence I pray you tell me, do you suppose that the soul,
I will not say your soul or my own soul, but the soul of the first man,
was given to him? If you admit that it came from nothing, made, however,
and inbreathed into him by God, then your belief tallies with my own.
If, on the contrary, you suppose that it came out of some other created
thing, which served as the material, as it were, for the divine
Artificer to make the soul out of, just as the dust was the material of
which Adam was formed, or the rib whence Eve was made, or the waters
whence the fishes and the fowls were created, or the ground out of which
the terrestrial animals were formed: then this opinion is not catholic,
nor is it true. But further, if you think, which may God forbid, that
the divine Creator made, or is still making, human souls neither out of
nothing, nor out of some other created thing, but out of His own self,
that is, out of His own nature, then you have learnt this of your new
instructor; but I cannot congratulate you, or flatter you, on the
discovery. You have wandered along with him very far from the catholic
faith. Better would it be, though it would be untrue, yet it would be
better, I say, and more tolerable, that you should believe the soul to
have been made out of some other created substance which God had already
formed, than out of God’s own uncreated substance, so that what is
mutable, and sinful, and impious, and if persistent to the end in the
impiety will have to suffer eternal damnation, should not with horrible
blasphemy be referred to the nature of God! Away, brother, I beseech
you, away with this, I will not call it faith, but execrably impious
error. May God avert from you, a man of gravity and a presbyter, the
misery of being seduced by a youthful layman; and, while supposing that
your opinion is the catholic faith, of being lost from the number of the
faithful. For I must not deal with you as I might with him; nor does
this tremendous error, when yours, deserve the same indulgence as being
that of this young man, although you may have derived it from him. *He*
has but just now found his way to the catholic fold to get healing and
safety; <span id="fr_2402"></span>[2403](#fn_2402) *you* have a rank
among the very shepherds of that fold. But we would not that a sheep
which comes to the Lord’s flock for shelter from error, should be healed
of his sores in such a way, as first to infect and destroy the shepherd
by his contagious presence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2402"></span>[333:2403](1050714.htm#fr_2402) <span
id="xvii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.vi-p3"></span> See below in ch. 14 \[x.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1050715)
