[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050923)  [Next](1050925) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—The Testimonies of Ambrose on
the Imperfection of Present Righteousness.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p2"></span>But now, since the Pelagians say that
there either are or have been righteous men in this life who have lived
without any sin, to such an extent that the future life which is to be
hoped for as a reward cannot be more advanced or more perfect, let
Ambrose here also answer them and refute them. For, expounding Isaiah
the Prophet in reference to what is written, “I have begotten and
brought up children, and they have despised me,” <span
id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899) he undertook to dispute concerning
the generations which are of God, and in that argument he quoted the
testimony of John when he says, “He that is born of God sinneth
not.” <span id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900) And, treating the same
very difficult question, he says: “Since in this world there is none who
is free from sin; since John himself says, ‘If we say that we have not
sinned, we make Him a liar.’ <span id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901)
But if ‘they that are born of God sin not,’ and if these words refer to
those of them who are in the world, it is necessary that we should
regard them as those numberless people who have obtained God’s grace by
the regeneration of the laver. But yet, when the prophet says, ‘All
things are waiting upon Thee, that Thou mayest give them meat in season.
That Thou givest them they gather for themselves; when Thou openest
Thine hand, all things shall be filled with goodness. But when Thou
turnest away Thy face, they shall be troubled: Thou shall take away
their breath, and they shall fail, and shall be turned into their dust.
Thou shall send forth Thy Spirit, and they shall be created: and Thou
shalt renew the face of the earth,’ <span
id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) such things as these cannot seem to
have been said of any time whatever but of that future time, in which
there shall be a new earth and a new heaven. Therefore they shall be
disturbed that they may take their beginning. ‘And when Thou openest Thy
hand all things shall be filled with goodness,’ which is not easily
characteristic of this age. For concerning this age what does Scripture
say? ‘There is none that doeth good, no, not one.’ <span
id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903) If, therefore, there are different
generations,—and here the very entrance into this life is the receiver
of sins to such an extent that even he who begot should be despised;
while another generation does not receive sins;—let us consider whether
by any means there may not be a regeneration for us after the course of
this life,—of which regeneration it is said, ‘In the regeneration when
the Son of man shall sit in the throne of His glory.’ <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904) For as that is called the
regeneration of washing whereby we are renewed from the filth of sins
washed away, so that seems to be called a regeneration by which we are
purified from every stain of bodily materiality, and are regenerated in
the pure sense of the soul to life eternal; so that every quality of
regeneration may be purer than of that washing, so that no suspicion of
sins can fall either on a man’s doings, or even on his very thoughts
themselves.” Moreover, in another place in the same work he says: “We
see it to be impossible that any person created in a body can be
absolutely spotless, since even Paul says that he is imperfect. For thus
he has it: ‘Not that I have already received, or am already
perfect;’ <span id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905) and yet after a
little he says, ‘As many of us, therefore, as are perfect.’ <span
id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906) Unless, perchance, there is one
perfection in this world, another after this is completed, of which he
says to the Corinthians, ‘When that which is perfect is come;’ <span
id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907) and elsewhere, ‘Till we all <span
id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-Page_433"></span>come into the unity of the faith, and
the knowledge of the Son of God, into the perfect man to the measure of
the age of the fulness of Christ.’ <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908) As, then, the apostle says that
many are placed in this world who are perfect along with him, but who,
if you have regard to true perfection, could not be perfect, since he
says, ‘We see now through a mirror, enigmatically; but then face to
face: now I know in part; but then I shall know even as also I am
known:’ <span id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) so also there both
are those who are ‘spotless’ in this world, and will be those who are
‘spotless’ in the kingdom of God, although certainly, if you consider it
accurately, no person can be spotless, because no person is without
sin.” Also in the same he says: “We see that, while we live in this
life, we ought to purify ourselves and to seek God; and to begin from
the purification of our soul, and as it were to establish the
foundations of virtue, so that we may deserve to attain the perfection
of our purgation after this life.” And again, in the same he says: “But
laden and groaning, who does not say, ‘O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?’ <span
id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) So with the same teacher we give
all varieties of interpretation. For if he is unhappy who recognises
himself as involved in the evils of the body, certainly everybody is
unhappy; for I should not call that man happy who, being confused with
any darkness of his mind, does not know his own condition. That,
moreover, has not absurdly come to be understood; for if a man who knows
himself is unhappy, assuredly all are wretched, because every one either
recognises his weakness by wisdom, or by folly is ignorant of it.”
Moreover, in the treatise “On the Benefit of Death,” he says: <span
id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911) “Let death work in us, in order
that that may work life also, a good life after death,—that is, a good
life after victory, a good life after the contest is finished; so that
now no longer the law of the flesh may know how to resist the law of the
mind, that no longer we may have any contention with the body of death.”
Again, in the same treatise he says: “Therefore, because the righteous
have this reward, that they see the face of God, and that light which
lightens every man, let us henceforth put on the desire of this kind of
reward, that our soul may draw near to God, our prayer may draw near to
Him, our desire may cleave to Him, that we be not separated from Him.
And placed here as we are, let us by meditating, by reading, by seeking,
be united with God. Let us know Him as we can. For we know Him in part
here; because here all things are imperfect, there all are perfect; here
we are infants, there we shall be strong men. ‘We see,’ says he, ‘now
through a mirror in an enigma, but then face to face.’ Then, His face
being revealed, we shall be allowed to look upon the glory of God, which
now our souls, involved in the compacted dregs of this body, and
shadowed by some stains and filth of this flesh, cannot clearly see.
‘For who,’ He says, ‘shall see my face and live?’ and rightly. For if
our eyes cannot bear the rays of the sun,—and if any one should gaze too
long on the region of the sun he is said to be blinded,—if a creature
cannot look upon a creature without deceit and offence, how can he
without his own peril look upon the glittering face of the eternal
Creator, covered as he is with the clothing of this body? For who is
justified in God’s sight, when even the infant of one day cannot be pure
from sin, and no one can boast of his integrity and pureness of heart?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[432:2900](1050924.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p3"></span> [Isa. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[432:2901](1050924.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p4"></span> [1 John iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[432:2902](1050924.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p5"></span> [1 John i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[432:2903](1050924.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p6"></span> [Ps. civ.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#027)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p6.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[432:2904](1050924.htm#fr_2903) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p7"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[432:2905](1050924.htm#fr_2904) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p8"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[432:2906](1050924.htm#fr_2905) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p9"></span> [Phil. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[432:2907](1050924.htm#fr_2906) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p10"></span> [Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[432:2908](1050924.htm#fr_2907) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[433:2909](1050924.htm#fr_2908) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p12"></span> [Eph. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[433:2910](1050924.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[433:2911](1050924.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p14"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[433:2912](1050924.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxxi-p15"></span> Work cited, chs. 9, 49

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1050925)
