[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050388)  [Next](1050390) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4 \[II.\]—The Same Continued.</span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>If Pelagius, as he possibly might, were to
say in reply to this, that that very thing was what he meant by “the
knowledge of the law, without which a man is unable to be free from
sins,” which is communicated by the teaching of faith to converts and to
babes in Christ, and in which candidates for baptism are catechetically
instructed with a view to their knowing the creed, certainly this is not
what is usually meant when any one is said to have a knowledge of the
law. This phrase is only applied to such persons as are skilled in the
law. But if he persists in describing the knowledge of the law by the
words in question, which, however few in number, are great in weight,
and are used to designate all who are faithfully baptized according to
the prescribed rule of the Churches; and if he maintains that it was of
this that he said, “No <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="xiv.viii-Page_185"></span>one is without sin, but the man who has
acquired the knowledge of the law,”—a knowledge which must needs be
conveyed to believers before they attain to the actual remission of
sins,—even in such case there would crowd around him a countless
multitude, not indeed of angry disputants, but of crying baptized
infants, who would exclaim,—not, to be sure, in words, but in the very
truthfulness of innocence,—“What is it, O what is it that you have
written: ‘He only can be without sin who has acquired a knowledge of the
law?’ See here are we, a large flock of lambs, without sin, and yet we
have no knowledge of the law.” Now surely they with their silent tongue
would compel him to silence, or, perhaps, even to confess that he was
corrected of his great perverseness; or else (if you will), that he had
already for some time entertained the opinion which he acknowledged
before his ecclesiastical examiners, but that he had failed before to
express his opinion in words of sufficient care,—that his faith,
therefore, should be approved, but this book revised and amended. For,
as the Scripture says: “There is that slippeth in his speech, but not in
his heart.” <span id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) Now if he would
only admit this, or were already saying it, who would not most readily
forgive those words which he had committed to writing with too great
heedlessness and neglect, especially on his declining to defend the
opinion which the said words contain, and affirming that to be his
proper view which the truth approves? This we must suppose would have
been in the minds of the pious judges themselves, if they could only
have duly understood the contents of his Latin book, thoroughly
interpreted to them, as they understood his reply to the synod, which
was spoken in Greek, and therefore quite intelligible to them, and
adjudged it as not alien from the Church. Let us go on to consider the
other cases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[185:1610](1050389.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="xiv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
19.16](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#016)<span id="xiv.viii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1050390)
