[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050751)  [Next](1050753) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20 \[XIV.\]—Augustin Calls on Victor
to Correct His Errors. (See Above in Book II. 22 \[XVI.\].)</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xx-p2"></span>Now these errors, and such as these,
with whatever others you may perhaps be able to discover in your books
on a more attentive and leisurely perusal, I beg of you to correct, if
you possess a catholic mind; in other words, if you spoke in perfect
sincerity when you said, that you were not over-confident in yourself
that what statements you had made were all capable of proof; and that
your constant aim was not to maintain even your own opinion, if it were
shown to be improbable; and that it gave you much pleasure, if your own
judgment were condemned, to adopt and pursue better and truer
sentiments. Well now, my dear brother, show that you said this in no
fallacious sense; so that the catholic Church may rejoice in your
capacity and character, as possessing not only genius, but prudence
withal, and piety, and moderation, rather than that the madness of
heresy should be kindled by your contentious persistence in these
errors. Now you have an opportunity of showing also how sincerely you
expressed your feelings in the passage which immediately follows the
satisfactory statement which I have just now mentioned of yours. “For,”
you say, “as it is the mark of every highest aim and laudable purpose to
transfer one’s self readily to truer views; so it shows a depraved and
obstinate judgment to refuse to return promptly to the pathway of
reason.” Well, then, show yourself to be influenced by this high aim and
laudable purpose, and transfer your mind readily to truer views; and do
not display a depraved and obstinate judgment by refusing to return
promptly to the pathway of reason. For if your words were uttered in
frank sincerity, if they were not mere sound of the lips, if you really
felt them in your heart, then you cannot but abhor all delay in
accomplishing the great good of correcting yourself. It was not, indeed,
much for you to allow, that it showed a depraved and obstinate judgment
to refuse to return to the pathway of reason, unless you had added
“*promptly.*” By adding this, you showed us how execrable is his conduct
who never accomplishes the reform; inasmuch as even he who effects it
but tardily appears to you to deserve so severe a censure, as to be
fairly described as displaying a depraved and obstinate mind. Listen,
therefore, to your own admonition, and turn to good account mainly and
largely the fruitful resources of your eloquence; that so you may
promptly return to the pathway of reason, more promptly, indeed, than
when you declined therefrom, at an unstable period of your age, when you
were fortified with too little prudence and less learning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1050753)
