[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050717)  [Next](1050719) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.x"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10 \[VI.\]—Children May Be Found of
Like or of Unlike Dispositions with Their Parents.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.x-p2"></span>Then, again, how ineptly he labours to
free the soul, which he supposes to be corporeal, from the passions of
the body, raising questions about the soul’s infancy; about the soul’s
emotions, when paralysed and oppressed; about the amputation of bodily
limbs, without cutting or dividing the soul. But in dealing with such
points as these, my duty is to treat rather with him than with you; it
is for him to labour to assign a reason for all he says. In this way we
shall not seem to wish to be too importunate with an elderly man’s
gravity on the subject of a young man’s work. As to the similarity of
disposition to the parents which is discovered in their children, he
does not dispute its coming from the soul’s seed. Accordingly, this is
the opinion also of those persons who do away with the soul’s
propagation; but the opposite party who entertain this theory do not
place on this the weight of their assertion. For they observe also that
children are unlike their parents in disposition; and the reason of
this, as they suppose, is, that one and the same person very often has
various dispositions himself, unlike each other,—not, of course, that he
has received another soul, but that his life has undergone a change for
the better or for the worse. So they say that there is no impossibility
in a soul’s not possessing the same disposition which he had by whom it
was propagated, seeing that the selfsame soul may have different
dispositions at different times. If, therefore, you think that you have
learnt this of him, that the soul does not come to us by natural
transmission at birth,—I only wish that you had discovered from him the
truth of the case,—I would with the greatest pleasure resign myself to
your hands to learn the whole truth. But really to learn is one thing,
and to seem to yourself to have learned is another thing. If, then, you
suppose that you have learned what you still are ignorant of, you have
evidently not learnt, but given a random credence to a pleasant hearsay.
Falsity has stolen over you in the suavity. <span
id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407) Now I do not say this from feeling
as yet any certainty as to the proposition being false, which asserts
that souls are created afresh by God’s inbreathing rather than derived
from the parents at birth; for I think that this is a point which still
requires proof from those who find themselves able to teach it. No; my
reason for saying it is, that this person has discussed the whole
subject in such a way as not only not to solve the point still in
dispute, but even to indulge in statements which leave no doubt as to
their falsity. In his desire to prove things of doubtful import, he has
boldly stated things which undoubtedly merit reprobation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[335:2408](1050718.htm#fr_2407) <span
id="xvii.v.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.x-p3"></span> This play of words too inadequately
represents Augustin’s *Subrepsit tibi falsiloquium per suaviloquium*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1050719)
