[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050590)  [Next](1050592) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.v.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Whatever is Born Through
Concupiscence is Not Undeservedly in Subjection to the Devil by Reason
of Sin; The Devil Deserves Heavier Punishment Than Men.</span>

<span id="xvi.v.xxvi-p2"></span>This wound which the devil has inflicted
on the human race compels everything which has its birth in consequence
of it to be under the devil’s power, as if he were rightly plucking
fruit off his own tree. Not as if man’s nature, which is only of God,
came from him, but sin alone, which is not of God. For it is not on its
own account that man’s nature is under condemnation, because it is the
work of God, and therefore laudable; but on account of that condemnable
corruption by which it has been vitiated. Now it is by reason of this
condemnation that it is in subjection to the devil, who is also in the
same damnable state. For the devil is himself an unclean spirit: good,
indeed, so far as he is a spirit, but evil as being unclean; for by
nature he is a spirit, by the corruption thereof an unclean one. Of
these two, the one is of God, the other of himself. His hold over men,
therefore, whether of an advanced age or in infancy, is not because they
are human, but because they are polluted. He, then, who feels surprise
that God’s creature is a subject of the devil, should cease from such
feeling. For one creature of God is in subjection to another creature of
God, the less to the greater, a human being to an angelic one; and this
is not owing to nature, but to a corruption of nature: polluted is the
sovereign, polluted also the subject. All this is the fruit of that
ancient stock of pollution which he has planted in man; himself being
destined to suffer a heavier punishment at the last judgment, as being
the more polluted; but at the same time even they who will have to bear
a less heavy burden in that condemnation are subjects of him as the
prince and author of sin, for there will be no other cause of
condemnation than sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1050592)
