[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050931)  [Next](1050933) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.iii.i"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xix.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Letter I.</span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p2"></span>\[*The 214th of Augustin’s Epistles.*\]

<span id="xix.iii.i-p3"></span>To my very dear lord and most honoured
brother among the members of Christ, Valentinus, and to the brethren
that are with you, Augustin sends greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xix.iii.i-p4"></span>1. <span class="c16"><span
id="xix.iii.i-p4.1"></span>Two</span> young men, Cresconius and Felix,
have found their way to us, and, introducing themselves as belonging to
your brotherhood, have told us that your monastery was disturbed with no
small commotion, because certain amongst you preach grace in such a
manner as to deny that the will of man is free; and maintain—a more
serious matter—that in the day of judgment God will not render to every
man according to his works.  <span id="fr_2915"></span>[2916](#fn_2915)
At the same time, they have pointed out to us, that many of you do not
entertain this opinion, but allow that free will is assisted by the
grace of God, so as that we may think and do aright; so that, when the
Lord shall come to render unto every man according to his works, <span
id="fr_2916"></span>[2917](#fn_2916) He shall find those works of ours
good which God has prepared in order that we may walk in them. <span
id="fr_2917"></span>[2918](#fn_2917) They who think this think rightly.

<span id="xix.iii.i-p8"></span>2. “I beseech you therefore, brethren,”
even as the apostle besought the Corinthians, “by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you.” For, in the first place, the Lord Jesus, as it is
written in the Gospel of the Apostle John, “came not to condemn the
world, but that the world by Himself might be saved.” <span
id="fr_2918"></span>[2919](#fn_2918) Then, afterwards, as the Apostle
Paul writes, “God shall judge the world <span
id="fr_2919"></span>[2920](#fn_2919) when He shall come,” as the whole
Church confesses in the Creed, “to judge the quick and the dead.” Now, I
would ask, if there is no grace of God, how does He save the world? and
if there is no free will, how does He judge the world? That book of
mine, therefore, or epistle, which the above-mentioned brethren have
brought with them to you, I wish you to understand in accordance with
this faith, so that you may neither deny God’s grace, nor uphold free
will in such wise as to separate the latter from the grace of God, as if
without this we could by any means either think or do anything according
to God,—which is quite beyond our power. On this account, indeed, it is,
that the Lord when speaking of the fruits of righteousness said,
“Without me ye can do nothing.” <span
id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920)

<span id="xix.iii.i-p12"></span>3. From this you may understand why I
wrote the letter which has been referred to, <span
id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921) to Sixtus, presbyter of the Church
at Rome, against the new Pelagian heretics, who say that the grace of
God is bestowed according to our own merits, so that he who glories has
to glory not in the Lord, but in himself,—that is to say, in man, not in
the Lord. This, however, the apostle forbids in these words: “Let no man
glory in man;” <span id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922) while in
another passage he says, “He that glorieth let him glory in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923) But these heretics,
under the idea that they are justified by their own selves, just as if
God did not bestow on them this gift, but they themselves obtained it by
themselves, glory of course in themselves, and not in the Lord. Now, the
apostle says to such, “Who maketh thee to differ from another?” <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) and this he does on the ground that
out of the mass of perdition which arose from Adam, none but God
distinguishes a man to make him a vessel to honour, and not to
dishonour. <span id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) Lest, however, the
carnal man in his foolish pride should, on hearing the question, “Who
maketh thee to differ <span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="xix.iii.i-Page_438"></span>from another?” either in thought or in
word answer and say: My faith, or my prayer, or my righteousness makes
me to differ from other men, the apostle at once adds these words to the
question, and so meets all such notions, saying, “What hast thou that
thou didst not receive? now, if thou didst receive it, why dost thou
glory, as if thou didst not receive it?” <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) Now, they boast as if they did not
receive their gifts by grace, who think that they are justified of their
own selves, and who, on this account, glory in themselves, and not in
the Lord.

<span id="xix.iii.i-p19"></span>4. Therefore I have in this letter,
which has reached you, shown by passages of Holy Scripture, which you
can examine for yourselves, that our good works and pious prayers and
right faith could not possibly have been in us unless we had received
them all from Him, concerning whom the Apostle James says, “Every good
gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the
Father of lights.” <span id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) And so no
man can say that it is by the merit of his own works, or by the merit of
his own prayers, or by the merit of his own faith, that God’s grace has
been conferred upon him; nor suppose that the doctrine is true which
those heretics hold, that the grace of God is given us in proportion to
our own merit. This is altogether a most erroneous opinion; not, indeed,
because there is no desert, good in pious persons, or evil in impious
ones (for how else shall God judge the world?), <span
id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) but because a man is converted by
that mercy and grace of God, of which the Psalmist says, “As for my God,
His mercy shall prevent me;” <span id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929)
so that the unrighteous man is justified, that is, becomes just instead
of impious, and begins to possess that good desert which God will crown
when the world shall be judged.

<span id="xix.iii.i-p23"></span>5. There were many things which I wanted
to send you, by the perusal whereof you would have been able to gain a
more exact and full knowledge of all that has been done by the bishops
in their councils against these Pelagian heretics. But the brethren were
in haste who came to us from your company. By them we have sent you this
letter; which is, however, not an answer to any communication, because,
in truth, they brought us no epistle from your beloved selves. Yet we
had no hesitation in receiving them; for their simple manners proved to
us clearly enough that there could have been nothing unreal or deceptive
in their visit to us. They were, however, in much haste, as wishing to
spend Easter at home with you; and my earnest prayer is, that so sacred
a day may, by the Lord’s help, bring peace to you, and not dissension.

<span id="xix.iii.i-p24"></span>6. You will, indeed, take the better
course (as I earnestly request you), if you will not refuse to send to
me the very person by whom they say they have been disturbed. For either
he does not understand my book, or else, perhaps, he is himself
misunderstood, when he endeavours to solve and explain a question which
is a very difficult one, and intelligible to few. For it is none other
than the question of God’s grace which has caused persons of no
understanding to think that the Apostle Paul prescribes it to us as a
rule, “Let us do evil that good may come.” <span
id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930) It is in reference to these that
the Apostle Peter writes in his second Epistle; “Wherefore, beloved,
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found
of Him in peace, without spot and blameless and account that the
long-suffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother
Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath written unto
you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things: in
which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto
their own destruction.” <span id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931)

<span id="xix.iii.i-p27"></span>7. Take good heed, then, to these
fearful words of the great apostle; and when you feel that you do not
understand, put your faith in the meanwhile in the inspired word of God,
and believe both that man’s will is free, and that there is also God’s
grace, without whose help man’s free will can neither be turned towards
God, nor make any progress in God. And what you piously believe, that
pray that you may have a wise understanding of. And, indeed, it is for
this very purpose,—that is, that we may have a wise understanding, that
there is a free will. For unless we understood and were wise with a free
will, it would not be enjoined to us in the words of Scripture,
“Understand now, ye simple among the people; and ye fools, at length be
wise.” <span id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932) The very precept and
injunction which calls on us to be intelligent and wise, requires also
our obedience; and we could exercise no obedience without free will. But
if it were in our power to obey this precept to be understanding and
wise by free will, without the help of God’s grace, it would be
unnecessary to say to God, “Give me understanding, that I may learn Thy
commandments;” <span id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933) nor would it
have been written in the gospel, “Then opened He their understanding,
that they might understand the Scriptures;” <span
id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934) nor should the Apostle James
address us in such words as, “If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall
be given him.” <span id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) But the Lord
is able to grant, both to you and to us, that we may rejoice over very
speedy tidings of your peace and pious unanimity. I send you greeting,
not in my own name only, but of the brethren also who are with me; and I
ask you to pray for us with one accord and with all earnestness. The
Lord be with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2915"></span>[437:2916](1050932.htm#fr_2915) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p5"></span> See [Matt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017), [Rom.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span id="xix.iii.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2916"></span>[437:2917](1050932.htm#fr_2916) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p6"></span> See [Matt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017), [Rom.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span id="xix.iii.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2917"></span>[437:2918](1050932.htm#fr_2917) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p7"></span> [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2918"></span>[437:2919](1050932.htm#fr_2918) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p9"></span> [John iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span id="xix.iii.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2919"></span>[437:2920](1050932.htm#fr_2919) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p10"></span> [Rom. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006)<span id="xix.iii.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[437:2921](1050932.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p11"></span> [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="xix.iii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[437:2922](1050932.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p13"></span> *Ep*. 194.

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[437:2923](1050932.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p14"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021)<span id="xix.iii.i-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[437:2924](1050932.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031), [2 Cor.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)<span
id="xix.iii.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[437:2925](1050932.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p16"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="xix.iii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[437:2926](1050932.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p17"></span> [Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="xix.iii.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[438:2927](1050932.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p18"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="xix.iii.i-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[438:2928](1050932.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p20"></span> [Jas. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="xix.iii.i-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[438:2929](1050932.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p21"></span> [Rom. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006)<span id="xix.iii.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[438:2930](1050932.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p22"></span> [Ps. lix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii.i-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[438:2931](1050932.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p25"></span> [Rom. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008)<span id="xix.iii.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[438:2932](1050932.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p26"></span> [2 Pet. iii.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014)<span
id="xix.iii.i-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[438:2933](1050932.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p28"></span> [Ps. xciv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#008)<span id="xix.iii.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[438:2934](1050932.htm#fr_2933) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p29"></span> [Ps. cxix.
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#073)<span id="xix.iii.i-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[438:2935](1050932.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p30"></span> [Luke xxiv.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045)<span id="xix.iii.i-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[438:2936](1050932.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="xix.iii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xix.iii.i-p31"></span> [Jas. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)<span id="xix.iii.i-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter II](1050933)
