[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050631)  [Next](1050633) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25 \[XII.\]—Augustin Not the
Deviser of Original Sin.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxvi-p2"></span>“This sexual connection of bodies,” he
says, “together with the ardour, with the pleasure, with the emission of
seed, was made by God, and is praiseworthy on its own account, and is
therefore to be approved; it, moreover, became sometimes even a great
gift to pious men.” He distinctly and severally repeated the phrases,
“with ardour,” “with pleasure,” “with emission of seed.” He did not,
however, venture to say, “with lust.” Why is this, if it be not that he
is ashamed to name what he does not blush to praise? A gift, indeed, for
pious men is the prosperous propagation of children; but not that
shame-producing excitement of the members, which our nature would not
feel were it in a sound state, although corrupted nature now experiences
it. On this account, indeed, it is that he who is born of it requires to
be born again, in order that he may be a member of Christ; and that
<span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.xxvi-Page_293"></span>he of whom he is born, even though he
be already born again, wants to be freed from that which exists in this
body of death by reason of the law of sin. Now since this is the case,
how is it he goes on to say, “You must, therefore, of necessity confess
that the original sin which you had devised is done away with”? It was
not I who devised the original sin, which the catholic faith holds from
ancient times; but you, who deny it, are undoubtedly an innovating
heretic. In the judgment of God, all are in the devil’s power, born in
sin, unless they are regenerated in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1050633)
