[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050781)  [Next](1050783) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[XVIII.\]—St. Perpetua Seemed
to Herself, in Some Dreams, to Have Been Turned into a Man, and Then
Have Wrestled with a Certain Egyptian.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxvi-p2"></span>Some notice must be taken of sundry
accounts of martyrs’ visions, because you have thought proper to derive
some of your evidence therefrom. St. Perpetua, for instance, seemed to
herself in dreams to be wrestling with an Egyptian, after being changed
into a man. Now, who can doubt that it was her soul in that apparent
bodily form, not her body, which, of course, remained in her own sex as
a woman, and lay on the bed with her senses steeped in sleep, whilst her
soul was struggling in the similitude of a man’s body? What have you to
say to this? Was that male likeness a veritable body, or was it no body
at all, although possessing the appearance of a body? Choose your
alternative. If it was a body, why did it not maintain its sexual
integrity? For in that woman’s flesh were found no virile functions of
generation, whence by any such process as that which you call
*congelation* could be moulded this similitude of a man’s body. We will
conclude then, if you please, that, as her body was still alive while
she slept, notwithstanding the wrestling of her soul, she remained in
her own natural sex, enclosed, of course, in all her proper limbs which
belong to her in her living state, and was still in possession of that
bodily shape and the lineaments of which she had been originally formed.
She had not resigned, as she would by death, her joints and limbs; nor
had she withdrawn from the transposing power, which arises from the
operation of the power of death, any of her members which had already
received their fixed form. Whence, then, did her soul get that virile
body in which she seemed to wrestle with her adversary? If, however,
this \[male likeness\] was not a body, although such a semblance of one
as admitted the sensation in it of a real struggle or a real joy, do you
not by this time see, as far as may be, that there can be in the soul a
certain resemblance of a bodily substance, while the soul is not itself
a body?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1050783)
