[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050604)  [Next](1050606) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.v.xl"></span>

<span id="xvi.v.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.v.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter 40 \[XXXV.\]—Refutation of the
Pelagians by the Authority of St. Ambrose, Whom They Quote to Show that
the Desire of the Flesh is a Natural Good.</span>

<span id="xvi.v.xl-p2"></span>In respect, however, to this concupiscence
of the flesh, we have striven in this lengthy discussion to distinguish
it accurately from the goods of marriage. This we have done on account
of our modern heretics, who cavil whenever concupiscence is censured, as
if it involved a censure of marriage. Their object is to praise
concupiscence as a natural good, that so they may defend their own
baneful dogma, which asserts that those who are born by its means do not
contract original sin. Now the blessed Ambrose, bishop of Milan, by
whose priestly office I received the washing of regeneration, briefly
spoke on this matter, when, expounding the prophet Isaiah, he gathered
from him the nativity of Christ in the flesh: “Thus,” says the bishop,
“He was both tempted in all points as a man, <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) and in the likeness of man He bare
all things; but inasmuch as He was born of the Spirit, He kept Himself
from sin. For every man is a liar; and there is none without sin but God
alone. It has, therefore, been ever firmly maintained, that it is clear
that no man from husband and wife, that is to say, by means of that
conjunction of their persons, is free from sin. He who is free from sin
is also free from conception of this kind.” Well now, what is it which
St. Ambrose has here condemned in the true doctrine of this
deliverance?—is it the goodness of marriage, or not rather the worthless
opinion of these heretics, although they had not then come upon the
stage? I have thought it worth while to adduce this testimony, because
Pelagius mentions Ambrose with such commendation as to say: “The blessed
Bishop Ambrose, in whose writings more than anywhere else the Roman
faith is clearly stated, has flourished like a beautiful flower among
the Latin writers. His fidelity and extremely pure perception of the
sense of Scripture no opponent even has ever ventured to impugn.” <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189) I hope he may regret having
entertained opinions opposed to Ambrose, but <span id="page_280">p.
280</span> <span id="xvi.v.xl-Page_280"></span>not that he has bestowed
this praise on that holy man.

<span id="xvi.v.xl-p5"></span>Here, then, you have my book, which, owing
to its tedious length and difficult subject, it has been as troublesome
for me to compose as for you to read, in those little snatches of time
in which you have been able (or at least, as I suppose, have been able)
to find yourself at leisure. Although it has been indeed drawn up with
considerable labour amidst my ecclesiastical duties, as God has
vouchsafed to give me His help, I should hardly have intruded it on your
notice, with all your public cares, if I had not been informed by a
godly man, who has an intimate knowledge of you, that you take such
pleasure in reading as to lie awake by the hour, night after night,
spending the precious time in your favourite pursuit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[279:2189](1050605.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="xvi.v.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v.xl-p3"></span> [Heb. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span id="xvi.v.xl-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[279:2190](1050605.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="xvi.v.xl-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v.xl-p4"></span> *Pro libero arbitrio*, lib. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](1050606)
