[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050257)  [Next](1050259) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xv"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11 \[X.\]—Grace Subtly Acknowledged by
Pelagius.</span>

<span id="xii.xv-p2"></span>He then starts an objection to his own
position, as if, indeed, another person had raised it, and says: “‘A
man,’ you will say, ‘may possibly be \[without sin\]; but it is by the
grace of God.’” He then at once subjoins the following, as if in answer
to his own suggestion: “I thank you for your kindness, because you are
not merely content to withdraw your opposition to my statement, which
you just now opposed, or barely to acknowledge it; but you actually go
so far as to approve it. For to say, ‘A man may possibly, but by this or
by that,’ is in fact nothing else than not only to assent to its
possibility, but also to show the mode and condition of its possibility.
Nobody, therefore, gives a better assent to the possibility of anything
than the man who allows the condition thereof; because, without the
thing itself, it is not possible for a condition to be.” After this he
raises another objection against. himself: “But, you will say, ‘you here
seem to reject the grace of God, inasmuch as you do not even mention
it;’” and he then answers the objection: “Now, is it I that reject
grace, who by acknowledging the thing must needs also confess the means
by which it may be effected, or you, who by denying the thing do
undoubtedly also deny whatever may be the means through which the thing
is accomplished?” He forgot that he was now answering one who does not
deny the thing, and whose objection he had just before set forth in
these words: “A man may possibly be \[without sin\]; but it is by the
grace of God.” How then does that man deny the possibility, in defence
of which his opponent earnestly contends, when he makes the admission to
that opponent that “the thing is possible, but only by the grace of
God?” That, however, after he is dismissed who already acknowledges the
essential thing, he still has a question against those who maintain the
impossibility of a man’s being without sin, what is it to us? Let him
ply his questions against any opponents he pleases, provided he only
confesses this, which cannot be denied without the most criminal
impiety, that without the grace of God a man cannot be without sin. He
says, indeed: “Whether he confesses it to be by grace, or by aid, or by
mercy, whatever that be by which a man can be without sin,—every one
acknowledges the thing itself.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1050259)
