[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050758)  [Next](1050760) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—How Much Do We Know of the
Nature of the Body?</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.iii-p2"></span>Well, now, this extremely lucid and
eloquent castigation which you have inflicted on our ignorance lays you
so strictly under the necessity of knowing every possible thing which
appertains to the nature of man, that, should you unhappily be ignorant
of any particular, you must (and remember it is not I, but you, that
have made the necessity) be compared with “the cattle.” For although you
appear to aim your censure at us more especially, when you quote the
passage, “Man, although he was in honour, understood not,” inasmuch as
we (unlike yourself) hold an honourable place in the Church; yet even
you occupy too honourable a rank in nature, not to be preferred above
the cattle, with which according to your own judgment you will have to
be compared, if you should happen to be ignorant on any of the points
which manifestly appertain to your nature. For you have not merely
aspersed with your censure those who are affected with the same
ignorance as I am myself labouring under, that is to say, concerning the
origin of the human soul (although I am not indeed absolutely ignorant
even on this point, for I know that God breathed into the face of the
first man, and that “man then became a living soul,” <span
id="fr_2456"></span>[2457](#fn_2456) —a truth, however, which I could
never have known by myself, unless I had read of it in the Scripture);
but you asked in so many words, “What difference is there between a man
and a brute beast, if he knows not how to discuss and determine his own
quality and nature?” And you seem to have entertained your opinion so
distinctly, as to have thought that a man ought to be able to discuss
and determine the facts of his own entire quality and nature so clearly,
that nothing concerning himself should escape his observation. Now, if
this is really the truth of the matter, I must now compare you to “the
cattle,” if you cannot tell me the precise number of the hairs of your
head. But if, however far we may advance in this life, you allow us to
be ignorant of sundry facts appertaining to our nature, I then want to
know how far your concession extends, lest, perchance, it may include
the very point we are now raising, that we do not by any means know the
origin of our soul; although we know,—a thing which belongs to
faith,—beyond all doubt, that the soul is a gift to man from God, and
that it still is not of the same nature as God Himself. Do you,
moreover, think that each person’s ignorance of his own nature must be
exactly on the same level as <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="xvii.vii.iii-Page_355"></span>your ignorance of it? Must everybody’s
knowledge, too, of the subject be equal to what you have been able to
attain to? So that if he is so unfortunate as to possess a slightly
larger amount of ignorance than yourself, you must compare him with
cattle; and on the same principle, if any one shall be ever so little
wiser than yourself on this subject, he will have the pleasure of
comparing you with equal justice to the aforesaid cattle. I must
therefore request you to tell me, to what extent you permit us to be
ignorant of our nature so as to save our distance from the formidable
cattle; and I beg you besides duly to reflect, whether he is not further
removed from cattle who knows his ignorance of any part of the subject,
than he is who thinks he knows what in fact he knows not. The entire
nature of man is certainly spirit, soul, and body; therefore, whoever
would alienate the body from man’s nature, is unwise. Those medical men,
however, who are called anatomists have investigated with careful
scrutiny, by dissecting processes, even living men, so far as men have
been able to retain any life in the hands of the examiners; their
researches have penetrated limbs, veins, nerves, bones, marrow, the
internal vitals; and all to discover the nature of the body. But none of
these men have ever thought of comparing us with the cattle, because of
our ignorance of their subject. But perhaps you will say that it is
those who are ignorant of the nature of the soul, not of the body, who
are to be compared with the brute beasts. Then you ought not to have
expressed yourself at starting in the way you have done. Your words are
not, “For what difference is there between a man and cattle, if he is
ignorant of the nature and quality of the soul;” but you say, “if he
knows not how to discuss and determine his own nature and quality.” Of
course our quality and our nature must be taken account of together with
the body, but at the same time the investigation of the several elements
of which we are composed is conducted in each case separately. For my
own part, indeed, if I wished to display how far it was in my power to
treat scientifically and intelligently the entire field of man’s nature,
I should have to fill many volumes; not to mention how many topics there
are which I must confess my ignorance of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2456"></span>[354:2457](1050759.htm#fr_2456) <span
id="xvii.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.iii-p3"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="xvii.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1050760)
