[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050522)  [Next](1050524) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12 \[XI.\]—A Portion of the
Proceedings of the Synod of Palestine in the Cause of Pelagius.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xii-p2"></span>“The synod said: <span
id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) Now, forasmuch as Pelagius has
pronounced his anathema on this uncertain utterance of folly, rightly
replying that a man by God’s help and grace is able to live <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iv.xii-p3.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iv.xii-p3.2"></span>ναμάρτητος</span>, that
is to say, without sin, let him give us his answer on other articles
also. Another particular in the teaching of Cœlestius, disciple of
Pelagius, selected from the heads which were mentioned and heard at
Carthage before the holy Aurelius bishop of Carthage, and other bishops,
was to this effect: ‘That Adam was made mortal, and that he would have
died, whether he sinned or did not sin; that Adam’s sin injured himself
alone, and not the human race; that the law no less than the gospel
leads us to the kingdom; that before the coming of <span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="xv.iv.xii-Page_240"></span>Christ
there were persons without sin; that newborn infants are in the same
condition that Adam was before the transgression; that, on the one hand,
the entire human race does not die on account of Adam’s death and
transgression, nor, on the other hand, does the whole human race rise
again through the resurrection of Christ; that the holy bishop Augustin
wrote a book in answer to his followers in Sicily, on articles which
were subjoined, and in this book, which was addressed to Hilary, are
contained the following statements: That a man is able to be without sin
if he wishes; that infants, even if they are unbaptized, have eternal
life; that rich men, even if they are baptized, unless they renounce and
give up all, have, whatever good they may seem to have done, nothing of
it reckoned unto them, neither can they possess the kingdom of heaven.’
Pelagius then said: As regards man’s ability to be without sin, my
opinion has been already spoken. With respect, however, to the
allegation that there were even before the Lord’s coming persons who
lived without sin, we also on our part say, that before the coming of
Christ there certainly were persons who passed their lives in holiness
and righteousness, according to the accounts which have been handed down
to us in the Holy Scriptures. As for the other points, indeed, even on
their own showing, they are not of a character which obliges me to be
answerable for them; but yet, for the satisfaction of the sacred Synod,
I anathematize those who either now hold or have ever held these
opinions.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[239:1941](1050523.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="xv.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xii-p3"></span> Compare *On the Proceedings of
Pelagius*, chs. 16, 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1050524)
