[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050735)  [Next](1050737) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4 \[IV.\]—Victor’s Simile to Show
that God Can Create by Breathing Without Impartation of His
Substance.</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.iv-p2"></span>“But,” you say, “when we inflate a bag,
no portion of our nature or quality is poured into the bag, while the
very breath, by the current of which the filled bag is extended, is
emitted from us without the least diminution of ourselves.” Now, you
enlarge and dwell upon these words of yours, and inculcate the simile as
necessary for our understanding how it is that God, without any injury
to His own nature, makes the soul out of His own self, and how, when it
is thus made out of Himself, it is not what Himself is. For you ask: “Is
this inflation of the bag a portion of our own soul? Or do we create
human beings when we inflate bags? Or do we suffer any injury in
anything at all when we impart our breath by inflation on diverse
things? But we suffer no injury when we transfer breath from ourselves
to anything, nor do we ever remember experiencing any damage to
ourselves from inflating a bag, the full quality and entire quantity of
our breath remaining in us notwithstanding the process.” Now, however
elegant and applicable this simile seems to you, I beg you to consider
how greatly it misleads you. For you affirm that the incorporeal God
breathes out a corporeal soul,—not made out of nothing, but out of
Himself,—whereas the breath which we ourselves emit is corporeal,
although of a more subtle nature than our bodies; nor do we exhale it
out of our soul, but out of the air through internal functions in our
bodily structure. Our lungs, like a pair of bellows, are moved by the
soul (at the command of which also the other members of the body are
moved), for the purpose of inhaling and exhaling the atmospheric air.
For, besides the aliments, solid or fluid, which constitute our meat and
drink, God has surrounded us with this third aliment of the atmosphere
which we breathe; and that with so good effect, that we can live for
some time without meat and drink, but we could not possibly subsist for
a moment without this third aliment, which the air, surrounding us on
all sides, supplies us with as we breathe and respire. And as our meat
and drink have to be not only introduced into the body, but also to be
expelled by passages formed for the purpose, to prevent injury accruing
either way (from either not entering or not quitting the body); so this
third airy aliment (not being permitted to remain within us, and thus
not becoming corrupt by delay, but being expelled as soon as it is
introduced) has been furnished, not with different, but with the
self-same channels both for its entrance and for its exit, even the
mouth, or the nostrils, or both together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1050737)
