[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050536)  [Next](1050538) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[XXIII.\]—The Pelagians Maintain
that Raising Questions About Original Sin Does Not Endanger the
Faith.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>Therefore, after the full discussion
with which we have been able to rebut in writing this error of theirs,
which is so inimical to the grace of God bestowed on small and great
through our Lord Jesus Christ, it is now our duty to examine and explode
that assertion of theirs, which in their desire to avoid the odious
imputation of heresy they astutely advance, to the effect that “calling
this subject into question produces no danger to the faith,”—in order
that they may appear, forsooth, if they are convicted of having deviated
from it, to have erred not criminally, but only, as it were,
courteously. <span id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) This,
accordingly, is the language which Cœlestius used in the ecclesiastical
process at Carthage: <span id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) “As
touching the transmission of sin,” he said, “I have already said that I
have heard many persons of acknowledged position in the catholic Church
deny it, and on the other hand many affirm it; it may fairly, indeed, be
deemed a matter for inquiry, but not a heresy. I have always maintained
that <span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="xv.iv.xxvi-Page_245"></span>infants require baptism, and ought to be
baptized. What else does he want?” He said this, as if he wanted to
intimate that only then could he be deemed chargeable with heresy, if he
were to assert that they ought not to be baptized. As the case stood,
however, inasmuch as he acknowledged that they ought to be baptized, he
thought that he had not erred \[criminally\], and therefore ought not to
be adjudged a heretic, even though he maintained the reason of their
baptism to be other than the truth holds, or the faith claims as its
own. On the same principle, in the book which he sent to Rome, he first
explained his belief, so far as it suited his pleasure, from the Trinity
of the One Godhead down to the kind of resurrection of the dead that is
to be; on all which points, however, no one had ever questioned him, or
been questioned by him. And when his discourse reached the question
which was under consideration, he said: “If, indeed, any questions have
arisen beyond the compass of the faith, on which there might be perhaps
dissension on the part of a great many persons, in no case have I
pretended to pronounce a decision on any dogma, as if I possessed a
definitive authority in the matter myself; but whatever I have derived
from the fountain of the prophets and the apostles, I have presented for
approbation to the judgment of your apostolic office; so that if any
error has crept in among us, human as we are, through our ignorance, it
may be corrected by your sentence.” <span
id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955) You of course clearly see that in
this action of his he used all this deprecatory preamble in order that,
if he had been discovered to have erred at all, he might seem to have
erred not on a matter of faith, but on questionable points outside the
faith; wherein, however necessary it may be to correct the error, it is
not corrected as a heresy; wherein also the person who undergoes the
correction is declared indeed to be in error, but for all that is not
adjudged a heretic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[244:1954](1050537.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="xv.iv.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvi-p3"></span> This is far from a clear translation of
the terse original: *Non criminaliter, sed quasi civiliter errasse
videantur*.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[244:1955](1050537.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="xv.iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvi-p4"></span> See above, ch. 3 \[IV.\]

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[245:1956](1050537.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="xv.iv.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xxvi-p5"></span> See above, ch. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1050538)
