[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050854)  [Next](1050856) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.xiii"></span> <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-Page_397"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13 \[VII.\]—He Repels the Calumny
Concerning the Acceptance of Persons.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>And, moreover, we rightly call it
“acceptance of persons” where he who judges, neglecting the merit of the
cause concerning which he is judging, favours the one against the other,
because he finds something in his person which is worthy of honour or of
pity. But if any one have two debtors, and he choose to remit the debt
to the one, to require it of the other, he gives to whom he will and
defrauds nobody; nor is this to be called “acceptance of persons,” since
there is no injustice. The acceptance of persons may seem otherwise to
those who are of small understanding, where the lord of the vineyard
gave to those labourers who had done work therein for one hour as much
as to those who had borne the burden and heat of the day, making them
equal in wages in the labour of whom there had been such a difference.
But what did he reply to those who murmured against the goodman of the
house concerning this, as it were, acceptance of persons? “Friend,” said
he, “I do thee no wrong. Hast not thou agreed with me for a denarius?
Take what thine is, and go; but I choose to give to this last as to
thee. Is it not lawful to me to do what I will? Is thine eye evil
because I am good?” <span id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640) Here,
forsooth, is the entire justice: “I choose this. To thee,” he says, “I
have repaid; on him I have bestowed; nor have I taken anything away from
thee to bestow it on him; nor have I either diminished or denied what I
owed to you.” “May I not do what I will? Is thine eye evil because I am
good?” As, therefore, here there is no acceptance of persons, because
one is honoured freely in such wise as that another is not defrauded of
what is due to him: so also when, according to the purpose of God, one
is called, another is not called, a gratuitous benefit is bestowed on
the one that is called, of which benefit the calling itself is the
beginning,—an evil is repaid to him that is not called, because all are
guilty, from the fact that by one man sin entered into the world. And in
that parable of the labourers, indeed, where they received one denarius
who laboured for one hour, as well as those who laboured twelve times as
long,—though assuredly these latter, according to human reasonings,
however vain, ought in proportion to the amount of their labour to have
received twelve denarii,—both were put on an equality in respect of
benefit, not some delivered and others condemned; because even those who
laboured more had it from the goodman of the house himself, both that
they were so called as to come, and that they were so fed as to have no
want. But where it is said, “Therefore, on whom He will He has mercy,
and whom He will He hardeneth,”  <span
id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641) who “maketh one vessel to honour
and another to dishonour” <span id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) it
is given indeed without deserving, and freely, because he is of the same
mass to whom it is not given; but evil is deservedly and of debt repaid,
since in the mass of perdition evil is not repaid to the evil unjustly.
And to him to whom it is repaid it is evil, because it is his
punishment; while to Him by whom it is repaid it is good, because it is
His right to do it. Nor is there any acceptance of persons in the case
of two debtors equally guilty, if to the one is remitted and from the
other is claimed that which is equally owed by both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[397:2641](1050855.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiii-p3"></span> [Matt. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#009)<span id="xviii.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[397:2642](1050855.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiii-p4"></span> [Rom. ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[397:2643](1050855.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiii-p5"></span> [Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="xviii.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1050856)
