[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050438)  [Next](1050440) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.lviii"></span>

<span id="xiv.lviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.lviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 54 \[XXX.\]—On the Letter of
Pelagius, in Which He Boasts that His Errors Had Been Approved by
Fourteen Bishops.</span>

<span id="xiv.lviii-p2"></span>For I will not be silent as to the
transactions which took place after this trial, and which rather augment
the suspicion against him. A certain epistle found its way into our
hands, which was ascribed to Pelagius himself, writing to a friend of
his, a presbyter, who had kindly admonished him (as appears from the
same epistle) not to allow any one to separate himself from the body of
the Church on his account. Among the other contents of this document,
which it would be both tedious and unnecessary to quote here, Pelagius
says: “By the sentence of fourteen bishops our statement was received
with approbation, in which we affirmed that ‘a man is able to be without
sin, and easily to keep the commandments of God, if he wishes.’ This
sentence,” says he, “has filled the mouths of the gainsayers with
confusion, and has separated asunder the entire set which was conspiring
together for evil.” Whether, indeed, this epistle was really written by
Pelagius, or was composed by somebody in his name, who can fail to see,
after what manner this error claims to have achieved a victory, even in
the judicial proceedings where it was refuted and condemned? Now, he has
adduced the words we have just quoted according to the form in which
they occur in his book of “Chapters,” as it is called, not in the shape
in which they were objected to him at his trial, and even repeated by
him in his answer. For even his accusers, through some unaccountable
inaccuracy, left out a word in their indictment, concerning which there
is no small controversy. They made him say, that “a man is able to be
without sin, if he wishes; and, if he wishes, to keep the commandments
of God.” There is nothing said here about this being “*easily*” done.
Afterwards, when he gave his answer, he spake thus: “We said, that a man
is able to be without sin, and to keep the commandments of God, if he
wishes;” he did not then say, “*easily* keep,” but only “keep.” So in
another place, amongst the statements about which Hilary consulted me,
and I gave him my views, it was objected to Pelagius that he had said,
“A man is able, if he wishes, to live without sin.” To this he himself
responded, “That a man is able to be without sin has been said above.”
Now, on this occasion, we do not find on the part either of those who
brought the objection or of him who rebutted it, that the word
“*easily*” was used at all. Then, again, in the narrative of the holy
Bishop John, which we have partly quoted above, <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) he says, “When they were
importunate and exclaimed, ‘He is a heretic, because he says, It is true
that a man is able, if he only will, to live without sin;’ and then,
when we questioned him on this point, he answered, ‘I did not say that
man’s nature has received the power of being impeccable,—but I said,
whosoever is willing, in the pursuit of his own salvation, to labour and
struggle to abstain from sinning and to walk in the commandments of God,
receives the ability to do so from God.’ Then, whilst some were
whispering, and remarking on the statement of Pelagius, that ‘without
God’s grace man was able to attain perfection,’ I censured the
statement, and reminded them, besides, that even the Apostle Paul, after
so many labours,—not, indeed, in his own strength, but by the grace of
God,—said, ‘I laboured more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the
grace of God that was with me.’” <span
id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753) And so on, as I have already
mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[206:1753](1050439.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="xiv.lviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.lviii-p3"></span> In 37 \[XIV.\]

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[206:1754](1050439.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="xiv.lviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.lviii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="xiv.lviii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 55](1050440)
