[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050912)  [Next](1050914) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20 \[VIII.\]—The Testimonies of the
Ancients Against the Pelagians.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xx-p2"></span>But since they say “that their enemies
have taken up our words for hatred of the truth,” and complained that
“throughout nearly the whole of the West a dogma not less foolish than
impious is taken up, and from simple bishops sitting in their places
without a Synodal congregation a subscription is extorted to confirm
this dogma,”—although the Church of Christ, both Western and Eastern
shuddered at the profane novelties of their words—I think it belongs to
my care not only to avail myself of the sacred canonical Scriptures as
witnesses against them, which I have already sufficiently done, but,
moreover, to bring forward some proofs from the writings of the holy men
who before us have treated upon those Scriptures with the most
widespread reputation and great glory. Not that I would put the
authority of any controversialist on a level with the canonical books,
as if there were nothing which is better or more truly thought by one
catholic than by another who likewise is a catholic; but that those may
be admonished who think that these men say anything as it used to be
said, before their empty talk on these subjects, by catholic teachers
following the divine oracles, and may know that the true and anciently
established catholic faith is by us defended against the receding
presumption and mischief of the Pelagian heretics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1050914)
