[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050406)  [Next](1050408) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22 \[X.\]—The Same Continued. The
Synod Supposed that the Grace Acknowledged by Pelagius Was that Which
Was So Thoroughly Known to the Church.</span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p2"></span>This grace, then, which was most
completely known in the catholic Church (as the bishops were well
aware), they supposed Pelagius made confession of, when they heard him
say that “a man, when converted from his sins, is able by his own
exertion and the grace of God to be without sin.” For my own part,
however, I remembered the treatise which had been given to me, that I
might refute it, by those servants of God, who had been Pelagius’
followers.  <span id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670) They,
notwithstanding their great affection for him, plainly acknowledged that
the passage was his; when, on this question being proposed, because he
had already given offence to very many persons from advancing views
against the grace of God, he most expressly admitted that “what he meant
by God’s grace was that, when our nature was created, it received the
capacity of not sin<span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="xiv.xxvi-Page_193"></span>ning, because it was created with free
will.” On account, therefore, of this treatise, I cannot help feeling
still anxious, whilst many of the brethren who are well acquainted with
his discussions, share in my anxiety, lest under the ambiguity which
notoriously characterizes his words there lies some latent reserve, and
lest he should afterwards tell his followers that it was without
prejudice to his own doctrine that he made any admissions,—discoursing
thus: “I no doubt asserted that a man was able by his own exertion and
the grace of God to live without sin; but you know very well what I mean
by grace; and you may recollect reading that grace is that in which we
are created by God with a free will.” Accordingly, while the bishops
understood him to mean the grace by which we have by adoption been made
new creatures, not that by which we were created (for most plainly does
Holy Scripture instruct us in the *former* sense of grace as the true
one), ignorant of his being a heretic, they acquitted him as a
catholic. <span id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) I must say that my
suspicion is excited also by this, that in the work which I answered, he
most openly said that “righteous Abel never sinned at all.” <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) Now, however, he thus expresses
himself: “But we did not say that any man could be found who at no time
whatever, from infancy to old age, has committed sin; but that, if any
man were converted from his sins, he could by his own labour and God’s
grace be without sin.” <span id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673) When
speaking of righteous Abel, he did not say that after being converted
from his sins he became sinless in a new life, but that he never
committed sin at all. If, then, that book be his, it must of course be
corrected and amended from his answer. For I should be sorry to say that
he was insincere in his more recent statement; lest perhaps he should
say that he had forgotten what he had previously written in the book we
have quoted. Let us therefore direct our view to what afterwards
occurred. Now, from the sequel of these ecclesiastical proceedings, we
can by God’s help show that, although Pelagius, as some suppose, cleared
himself in his examination, and was at all events acquitted by his
judges (who were, however, but human beings after all), that this great
heresy, <span id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) which we should be
most unwilling to see making further progress or becoming aggravated in
guilt, was undoubtedly itself condemned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[192:1671](1050407.htm#fr_1670) <span
id="xiv.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p3"></span> Timasius and Jacobus, at whose instance
Augustin wrote, and to whom he addressed his book *De Naturâ et Gratiâ*.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[193:1672](1050407.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="xiv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p4"></span> The reader may consult the treatise *De
Naturâ et Gratiâ*, chs. 53 and 54, on this opinion of Pelagius.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[193:1673](1050407.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="xiv.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p5"></span> See *De Naturâ et Gratiâ*, xxxvii. (44).

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[193:1674](1050407.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="xiv.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p6"></span> See above, ch. 16 (vi).

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[193:1675](1050407.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="xiv.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxvi-p7"></span> Hanc talem hæresim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1050408)
