[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050741)  [Next](1050743) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.x"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—His Fourth Error. (See Above in
Book I. 6 \[VI.\] and Book II. 11 \[VII.\].)</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.x-p2"></span>Neither believe, nor say, nor teach that
“the soul, by means of the flesh, repairs its ancient condition, and is
born again by the very means through which it had deserved to be
polluted,” if you wish to be a catholic. I might, indeed, dwell upon the
strange discrepancy with your own self which you have exhibited in the
next sentence, wherein you said that the soul through the flesh
deservedly recovers its primitive condition, which it had seemed to have
gradually lost through the flesh, in order that it may begin to be
regenerated by the very flesh through which it had deserved to be
polluted.” Here you—the very man who had just before said that the soul
repairs its condition through the flesh, by reason of which it had lost
its desert (where nothing but *good desert* can be meant, which you will
have to be recovered in the flesh, by baptism, of course)—said in
another turn of your thought, that through the flesh the soul had
deserved to be polluted (in which statement it is no longer the good
desert, but *an evil one,* which must be meant). What flagrant
inconsistency! but I will pass it over, and content myself with
observing, that it is absolutely uncatholic to believe that the soul,
previous to its incarnate state, deserved either good or evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1050743)
