[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050266)  [Next](1050268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20 \[XVIII.\]—What Prayer Pelagius
Would Admit to Be Necessary.</span>

<span id="xii.xxiv-p2"></span>He confesses that “sins which have been
committed do notwithstanding require to be divinely expiated, and that
the Lord must be entreated because of them,”—that is, for the purpose,
of course, of obtaining pardon; “because that which has been done
cannot,” it is his own admission, “be undone,” by that “power of nature
and will of man” which he talks about so much. From this necessity,
therefore, it follows that a man must pray to be forgiven. That a man,
however, requires to be helped not to sin, he has nowhere admitted; I
read no such admission in this passage; he keeps a strange silence on
this subject altogether; although the Lord’s Prayer enjoins upon us the
necessity of praying both that our debts may be remitted to us, and that
we may not be led into temptation,—the one petition entreating that past
offences may be atoned for; the other, that future ones may be avoided.
Now, although this is never done unless our will be assistant, yet our
will alone is not enough to secure its being done; the prayer,
therefore, which is offered up to God for this result is neither
superfluous nor offensive to the Lord. For what is more foolish than to
pray that you may do that which you have it in your own power to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1050268)
