[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050728)  [Next](1050730) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21 \[XV.\]—Victor’s Perplexity and
Failure.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxi-p2"></span>For these reasons I fail thus far to
discover what this instructor has taught you, and what grounds you have
for the gratitude you have lavished upon him. For the question remains
just as it was, which inquires about the origin of souls, whether God
gives, forms, and makes them for men by propagating them from that one
soul which He breathed into the first man, or whether it is by His own
inbreathing that He does this in every case, as He did for the first
man. For that God *does* form, and make, and bestow souls on men, the
Christian faith does not hesitate to aver. Now, when this person
endeavoured to solve the question without gauging his own resources, by
denying the propagation of souls, and asserting that the Creator
inbreathed them into men pure from all contagion of sin,—not out of
nothing, but out of Himself,—He dishonoured the very nature of God by
opprobriously attributing mutability to it, an imputation which was
necessarily untenable. Then, desirous of avoiding all implication which
might lead to God’s being deemed unrighteous, if He ties with the bond
of original sin souls which are pure of all actual sin, although not
redeemed by Christian regeneration, he has given utterance to words and
sentiments which I only wish he had not taught you. For he has accorded
to unbaptized infants such happiness and salvation as even the Pelagian
heresy could not have ventured on doing. And yet for all this, when the
question touches the many thousands of infants who are born of the
ungodly, and die among the ungodly,—I do not mean those whom charitable
persons are unable to assist by baptism, however desirous of doing so,
but those of whose baptism nobody either has been able or shall be able
to think, and for whom no one has offered or is likely to offer the
sacrifice which, as this instructor of yours thought, ought to be
offered even for those who have not been baptized, <span
id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432) —he has discovered no means of
solving it. If he were questioned concerning them, what their souls
deserved that God should involve them in sinful flesh to incur eternal
damnation, never to be washed in the laver of baptism, nor atoned for by
the sacrifice of Christ’s body and blood, he will then either feel
himself at an utter loss, and so will regard our hesitation with a real,
though tardy favour; or else will determine that Christ’s body must be
offered for all those infants which all the world over die without
Christian baptism (their names having been never heard of, since they
are unknown in the Church of Christ), although not incorporated into the
body of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[341:2433](1050729.htm#fr_2432) <span
id="xvii.v.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxi-p3"></span> \[The editions give the manifestly
false reading *nobis* for *non*, yielding the sense: “even for ourselves
who have been baptized.”—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1050730)
