[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050442)  [Next](1050444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.lxii"></span>

<span id="xiv.lxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.lxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 58.—The Same Continued.</span>

<span id="xiv.lxii-p2"></span>He has, moreover, in this same paper,
huddled together afterwards many of the points which were objected
against him out of the “Chapters,” of Cœlestius’ book; nor has he kept
distinct, at the intervals which separate them in the Proceedings, the
two answers in which he anathematized these very heads; but has
substituted one general reply for them all. This, I should have
supposed, had been done for the sake of brevity, had I not perceived
that he had a very special object in the arrangement which disturbs us.
For thus has he closed this answer: “I say again, that these opinions,
even according to their own testimony, are not mine; nor, as I have
already said, am I to be held responsible for them. The opinions which I
have confessed to be my own, I maintain are sound and correct; those,
however, which I have said are not my own, I reject according to the
judgment of the holy Church, pronouncing anathema on every man that
opposes and gainsays the doctrines of the holy and catholic Church; and
likewise on those who by inventing false opinions have excited odium
against us.” This last paragraph the Proceedings do not contain; it has,
however, no bearing on the matter which causes us anxiety. By all means
let them have his anathema who have excited odium against him by their
invention of false opinions. But, when first I read, “Those opinions,
however, which I have said are not my own, I reject in accordance with
the judgment of the holy Church,” being ignorant that any judgment had
been arrived at on the point by the Church, since there is here nothing
said about it, and I had not then read the Proceedings, I really thought
that nothing else was meant than that he promised that he would
entertain the same view about the “Chapters” as the Church, which had
not yet determined the question, might some day decide respecting them;
and that he was ready to reject the opinions which the Church had not
yet indeed rejected, but might one day have occasion to reject; and that
this, too, was the purport of what he further said: “Pronouncing
anathema on every man that opposes and gainsays the doctrines of the
holy catholic Church.” But in fact, as the Proceedings testify, a
judgment of the Church had already been pronounced on these subjects by
the fourteen bishops; and it was in accordance with this judgment that
he professed to reject all these opinions, and to pronounce his anathema
against those persons who, by reason of the said opinions, were
contravening the judgment which had already, as the Proceedings show,
been actually settled. For already had the judges asked: “What says the
monk Pelagius to all these heads of opinion which have been read in his
presence? For this holy synod condemns them, as does also God’s holy
catholic Church.” Now, they who know nothing of all this, and only read
this paper of his, are led to suppose that some one or other of these
opinions may lawfully be maintained, as if they had not been determined
to be contrary to catholic doctrine, and as if Pelagius had declared
himself to be ready to hold the same sentiments concerning them which
the Church had not as yet determined, but might have to determine. He
has not, therefore, expressed himself in this paper, to which we have so
often referred, straightforwardly enough for us to discover the fact, of
which we find a voucher in the Proceedings, that all those dogmas by
means of which this heresy has been stealing along and <span
id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span id="xiv.lxii-Page_209"></span>growing
strong with contentious audacity, have been condemned by fourteen
bishops presiding in an ecclesiastical synod! Now, if he was afraid that
this fact would become known, as is the case, he has more reason for
self-correction than for resentment at the vigilance with which we are
watching the controversy to the best of our ability, however late. If,
however, it is untrue that he had any such fears, and we are only
indulging in a suspicion which is natural to man, let him forgive us;
but, at the same time, let him continue to oppose and resist the
opinions which were rejected by him with anathemas in the proceedings
before the bishops, when he was on his defence; for if he now shows any
leniency to them, he would seem not only to have believed these opinions
formerly, but to be cherishing them still.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 59](1050444)
