[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050677)  [Next](1050679) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6 \[VI.\]—Another Error Out of His
Second Book, to the Effect, that the Soul Deserved to Be Polluted by the
Body.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.vi-p2"></span>But he is plainly past endurance in what
he says in his second book, when he endeavours to solve a very difficult
question on original sin, how it belongs to body and soul, if the soul
is not derived by parental descent but is breathed afresh by God into a
man. Striving to explain this troublesome and profound point, he thus
expresses his view: “Through the flesh the soul fitly recovers its
primitive condition, which it seemed to have gradually lost through the
flesh, in order that it may begin to be regenerated by the very flesh by
which it had deserved to be polluted.” You observe how this person,
having been so bold as to undertake what exceeds his powers, has fallen
down such a precipice as to say, that the soul deserved to be defiled by
the body; although he could in no wise declare whence it drew on itself
this desert, before it put on flesh. For if it first had from the flesh
its desert of sin, let him tell us (if he can) whence (previous to sin)
it derived its desert to be contaminated by the flesh. For this desert,
which projected it into sinful flesh to be polluted by it, it of course
had either from itself, or, which is much more offensive to our mind,
from God. It certainly could not, previous to its being invested with
the flesh, have received from that flesh that ill desert by reason of
which it was projected into the flesh, in order to be defiled by it.
Now, if it had the ill desert from its own self, how did it get it,
seeing that it did no sin previous to its assumption of flesh? But if it
be alleged that it had the ill desert from God, then, I ask, who could
listen to such blasphemy? Who could endure it? Who could permit it to be
alleged with impunity? For the question which arises here, remember, is
not, what was the ill desert which adjudged the soul to be condemned
after it became incarnate, but what was its ill desert prior to the
flesh, which condemned it to the investiture of the flesh, that it might
be thereby polluted? Let him explain this to us, if he can, seeing that
he has dared to say that the soul deserved to be defiled by the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1050679)
