[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051052)  [Next](1051054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17 \[IX.\]—His Argument in His
Letter Against Porphyry, as to Why the Gospel Came So Late into the
World.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xvii-p2"></span>But that which you remember my saying
in a certain small treatise of mine against Porphyry, under the title of
*The Time of the Christian Religion*, I so said for the sake of escaping
this more careful and elaborate argument about grace; although its
meaning, which could be unfolded elsewhere or by others, was not wholly
omitted, although I had been unwilling in that place to explain it. For,
among other matters, I spoke thus in answer to the question proposed,
why it was after so long a time that Christ came: “Accordingly, I say,
since they do not object to Christ that all do not follow His teaching
(for even they themselves feel that this could not be objected at all
with any justice, either to the wisdom of the philosophers or even to
the deity of their own gods), what will they reply, if—leaving out of
the question that depth of God’s wisdom and knowledge where perchance
some other divine plan is far more secretly hidden, without prejudging
also other causes, which cannot be traced out by the wise—we say to them
only this, for the sake of brevity in the arguing of this question, that
Christ willed to appear to men, and that His doctrine should be preached
among them, at that time when He knew, and at that place where He knew,
that there were some who would believe on Him. For at those times, and
in those places, at which His gospel was not preached, He foreknew that
all would be in His preaching such as, not indeed all, but many were in
His bodily presence, who would not believe on Him, even when the dead
were raised by Him; such as we see many now, who, although the
declarations of the prophets concerning Him are fulfilled by such
manifestations, are still unwilling to believe, and prefer to resist by
human astuteness, rather than yield to divine authority so clear and
perspicuous, and so lofty, and sublimely made known, so long as the
human understanding is small and weak in its approach to divine truth.
What wonder is it, then, if <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.xvii-Page_507"></span>Christ knew the world in former ages to
be so full of unbelievers, that He should reasonably refuse to appear,
or to be preached to them, who, as He foreknew, would believe neither
His words nor His miracles? For it is not incredible that all at that
time were such as from His coming even to the present time we marvel
that so many have been and are. And yet from the beginning of the human
race, sometimes more hiddenly, sometimes more evidently, even as to
Divine Providence the times seemed to be fitting, there has neither been
a failure of prophecy, nor were there wanting those who believed on Him;
as well from Adam to Moses, as in the people of Israel itself which by a
certain special mystery was a prophetic people; and in other nations
before He had come in the flesh. For as some are mentioned in the sacred
Hebrew books, as early as the time of Abraham,—neither of his fleshly
race nor of the people of Israel nor of the foreign society among the
people of Israel,—who were, nevertheless, sharers in their sacrament,
why may we not believe that there were others elsewhere among other
people, here and there, although we do not read any mention of them in
the same authorities? Thus the salvation of this religion, by which only
true one true salvation is truly promised, never failed him who was
worthy of it; and whoever it failed was not worthy of it. And from the
very beginning of the propagation of man, even to the end, the gospel is
preached, to some for a reward, to some for judgment; and thus also
those to whom the faith was not announced at all were foreknown as those
who would not believe; and those to whom it was announced, although they
were not such as would believe, are set forth as an example for the
former; while those to whom it is announced who should believe, are
prepared for the kingdom of heaven, and the company of the holy
angels.” <span id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[507:3483](1051053.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="xxi.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xvii-p3"></span> Augustin’s *Epistles*, 102, chs. 14,
15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1051054)
