[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051078)  [Next](1051080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.xliii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.ii.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 43 \[XXI.\]—Conclusion.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xliii-p2"></span>I have said a great deal, and,
perchance, I could long ago have persuaded you what I wished, and am
still speaking this to such intelligent minds as if they were obtuse, to
whom even what is too much is not enough. But let them pardon me, for a
new question has compelled me to this. Because, although in my former
little treatises I had proved by sufficiently appropriate proofs that
faith also was the gift of God, there was found this ground of
contradiction, viz., that those testimonies were good for this purpose,
to show that the increase of faith was God’s gift, but that the
beginning of faith, whereby a man first of all believes in Christ, is of
the man himself, and is not the gift of God,—but that God requires this,
so that when it has preceded, other gifts may follow, as it were on the
ground of this merit, and these are the gifts of God; and that none of
them is given freely, although in them God’s grace is declared, which is
not grace except as being gratuitous. And you see how absurd all this
is. Wherefore I determined, as far as I could, to set forth that this
very beginning also is God’s gift. And if I have done this at a greater
length than perhaps those on whose account I did it might wish, I am
prepared to be reproached for it by them, so long as they nevertheless
confess that, although at greater length than they wished, although with
the disgust and weariness of those that understand, I have done what I
have done: that is, I have taught that even the beginning of faith, as
continence, patience, righteousness, piety, and the rest, concerning
which there is no dispute with them, is God’s gift. Let this, therefore,
be the end of this treatise, lest too great length in this one may give
offence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](1051080)
