[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051016)  [Next](1051018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="xx.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xx.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 33 \[XII.\]—What is the Difference
Between the Ability Not to Sin, to Die, and Forsake Good, and the
Inability to Sin, to Die, and to Forsake Good?</span>

<span id="xx.xxxvi-p2"></span>On which account we must consider with
diligence and attention in what respect those pairs differ from one
another,—to be able not to sin, and not to be able to sin; to be able
not to die, and not to be able to die; to be able not to forsake good,
and not to be able to forsake good. For the first man was able not to
sin, was able not to die, was able not to forsake good. Are we to say
that he who had such a free will could not sin? Or that he to whom it
was said, “If thou shalt sin thou shalt die by death,” could not die? Or
that he could not forsake good, when he would forsake this by sinning,
and so die? Therefore the first liberty of the will was *to be able not
to sin*, the last will be much greater, *not to be able to sin;* the
first immortality was to be able not to die, the last will be much
greater, not to be able to die; the first was the power of perseverance,
to be able not to forsake good—the last will be the felicity of
perseverance, not to be able to forsake good. But because the last
blessings will be preferable and better, were those first ones,
therefore, either no blessings at all, or trifling ones?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](1051018)
