[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051064)  [Next](1051066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—God’s Dealing Does Not Depend
Upon Any Contingent Merits of Men.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxix-p2"></span>And thus, unless we indulge in reckless
disputation, the entire question is concluded concerning him who is
taken away lest wickedness should alter his understanding. And the book
of Wisdom, which for such a series of years has deserved to be read in
Christ’s Church, and in which this is read, ought not to suffer
injustice because it withstands those who are mistaken on behalf of
men’s merit, so as to come in opposition to the most manifest grace of
God: and this grace chiefly appears in infants, and while some of these
baptized, and some not baptized, come to the end of this life, they
sufficiently point to God’s mercy and His judgment,—His mercy, indeed,
gratuitous, His judgment, of debt. For if men should be judged according
to the merits of their life, which merits they have been prevented by
death from actually having, but would have had if they had lived, it
would be of no advantage to him who is taken away lest wickedness should
alter his understanding; it would be of no advantage to those who die in
a state of lapse if they should die before. And this no Christian will
venture to say. Wherefore our brethren, who with us on behalf of the
catholic faith assail the pest of the Pelagian error, ought not to such
an extent to favour the Pelagian opinion, wherein they conceive that
God’s grace is given according to our merits, as to endeavour (which
they cannot dare) to invalidate a true sentiment, plainly and from
ancient times Christian,—“He was taken away, lest wickedness should
alter his understanding;” and to build up that which we should think, I
do not say, no one would believe, but no one would dream,—to wit, that
any deceased person would be judged according to those things which he
would have done if he had lived for a more lengthened period. Surely
thus what we say manifests itself clearly to be incontestable,—that the
grace of God is not given according to our merits; so that ingenious men
who contradict this truth are constrained to say things which must be
rejected from the ears and from the thoughts of all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1051066)
