[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051142)  [Next](1051144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.lxiii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.lxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 61.—Use of the Third Person
Rather Than the Second.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lxiii-p2"></span>But now I marvel if any weak brother
among <span id="page_550">p. 550</span> <span
id="xxi.iii.lxiii-Page_550"></span>the Christian congregation can hear
in any way with patience what is connected with these words, when it is
said to them, “And if any of you obey, if you are predestinated to be
rejected, the power of obeying will be withdrawn from you, that you may
cease to obey.” For what does saying this seem, except to curse, or in a
certain way to predict evils? But if, however, it is desirable or
necessary to say anything concerning those who do not persevere, why is
it not rather at least said in such a way as was a little while ago said
by me,—first of all, so that this should be said, not of them who hear
in the congregation, but about others to them; that is, that it should
not be said, “If any of you obey, if you are predestinated to be
rejected,” but, “If any obey,” and the rest, using the third person of
the verb, not the second? For it is not to be said to be desirable, but
abominable, and it is excessively harsh and hateful to fly as it were
into the face of an audience with abuse, when he who speaks to them
says, “And if there are any of you who obey, and are predestinated to be
rejected, the power of obedience shall be withdrawn from you, that you
may cease to obey.” For what is wanting to the doctrine if it is thus
expressed: “But if any obey, and are not predestinated to His kingdom
and glory, they are only for a season, and shall not continue in that
obedience unto the end”? Is not the same thing said both more truly and
more fittingly, so that we may seem not as it were to be desiring so
much for them, as to relate of others the evil which they hate, and
think does not belong to them, by hoping and praying for better things?
But in that manner in which they think that it must be said, the same
judgment may be pronounced almost in the same words also of God’s
foreknowledge, which certainly they cannot deny, so as to say, “And if
any of you obey, if you are foreknown to be rejected you shall cease to
obey.” Doubtless this is very true, assuredly it is; but it is very
monstrous, very inconsiderate, and very unsuitable, not by its false
declaration, but by its declaration not wholesomely applied to the
health of human infirmity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 62](1051144)
