[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051059)  [Next](1051061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—That No One is Judged According
to What He Would Have Done If He Had Lived Longer.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>For who can hear that infants, baptized
in the condition of mere infancy, are said to depart from this life by
reason of their future merits, and that others not baptized are said to
die in the same age because their future merits are foreknown,—but as
evil; so that God rewards or condemns in them not their good or evil
life, but no life at all? <span id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499) The
apostle, indeed, fixed a limit which man’s incautious suspicion, to
speak gently, ought not to transgress, for he says, “We shall all stand
before the judgment-seat of Christ; that every one may receive according
to the things which he has done by means of the body, whether it be good
or evil.” <span id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500) “Has done,” he
said; and he did not add, “or would have done.” But I know not whence
this thought should have entered the minds of such men, that infants’
future merits (which shall not be) should be punished or honoured. But
why is it said that a man is to be judged according to those things
which he has done by means of the body, when many things are done by the
mind alone, and not by the body, nor by any member of the body; and for
the most part things of such importance, that a most righteous
punishment would be due to such thought, such as,—to say nothing of
others,—that “The fool hath said in his heart there is no God”? <span
id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) What, then, is the meaning of,
“According to those things that he hath done by means of the body,”
except according to those things which he has done during that time in
which he was in the body, so that we may understand “by means of the
body” as meaning “throughout the season of bodily life”? But after the
body, no one will be in the body except at the last resurrection,—not
for the purpose of establishing any claims of merit, but for the sake of
receiving recompenses for good merits, and enduring punishments for evil
merits. But in this intermediate period between the putting off and the
taking again of the body, the souls are either tormented or they are in
repose, according to those things which they have done during the period
of the bodily life. And to this period of the bodily life moreover
pertains, what the Pelagians deny, but Christ’s Church confesses,
original sin; and according to whether this is by God’s grace loosed, or
by God’s judgment not loosed, when infants die, they pass, on the one
hand, by the merit of regeneration from evil to good, or on the other,
by the merit of their origin from evil to evil. The catholic faith
acknowledges this, and even some heretics, without any contradiction,
agree to this. But in the height of wonder and astonishment I am unable
to discover whence men, whose intelligence your letters show to be by no
means contemptible, could entertain the opinion that any one should be
judged not according to the merits that he had as long as he was in the
body, but according to the merits which he would have had if he had
lived longer in the body; and I should not dare to believe that there
were such men, if I could venture to disbelieve you. <span
id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-Page_510"></span>But I
hope that God will interpose, so that when they are admonished they may
at once perceive, that if those sins which, as is said, would have been,
can rightly be punished by God’s judgment in those who are not baptized,
they may alo be rightly remitted by God’s grace in those who are
baptized. For whoever says that future sins can only be punished by
God’s judgment, but cannot be pardoned by God’s mercy, ought to consider
how great a wrong he is doing to God and His grace; as if future sin
could be foreknown, and could not be foregone. <span
id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502) And if this is absurd, it is the
greater reason that help should be afforded to those who would be
sinners if they lived longer, when they die in early life, by means of
that laver wherein sins are washed away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[509:3500](1051060.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> See Prosper’s Letter in Augustin’s
*Letters*, 225, ch. 5.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[509:3501](1051060.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> [2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[509:3502](1051060.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p5"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[510:3503](1051060.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxiv-p6"></span> *Prænosci possit, nec possit ignosci*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1051061)
