[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051061)  [Next](1051063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[XIV\]—Reference to Cyprian’s
Treatise “On the Mortality.”</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>Cyprian wrote a work *On the
Mortality*, <span id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503) known with
approval to many and almost all who love ecclesiastical literature,
wherein he says that death is not only not disadvantageous to believers,
but that it is even found to be advantageous, because it withdraws men
from the risks of sinning, and establishes them in a security of not
sinning. But wherein is the advantage of this, if even future sins which
have not been committed are punished? Yet he argues most copiously and
well that the risks of sinning are not wanting in this life, and that
they do not continue after this life is done; where also he adduces that
testimony from the book of Wisdom: “He was taken away, lest wickedness
should alter his understanding.” <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) And this was also adduced by me,
though you said that those brethren of yours had rejected it on the
ground of its not having been brought forward from a canonical book; as
if, even setting aside the attestation of this book, the thing itself
were not clear which I wished to be taught therefrom. For what Christian
would dare to deny that the righteous man, if he should be prematurely
laid hold of by death, will be in repose? Let who will, say this, and
what man of sound faith will think that he can withstand it? Moreover,
if he should say that the righteous man, if he should depart from his
righteousness in which he has long lived, and should die in that impiety
after having lived in it, I say not a year, but one day, will go hence
into the punishment due to the wicked, his righteousness having no power
in the future to avail him,—will any believer contradict this evident
truth? Further, if we are asked whether, if he had died then at the time
that he was righteous, he would have incurred punishment or repose,
shall we hesitate to answer, repose? This is the whole reason why it is
said,—who<span id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.xxvi-Page_511"></span>ever says it,—“He was taken away lest
wickedness should alter his understanding.” For it was said in reference
to the risks of this life, not with reference to the foreknowledge of
God, who foreknew that which was to be, not that which was not to
be—that is, that He would bestow on him an untimely death in order that
he might be withdrawn from the uncertainty of temptations; not that he
would sin, since he was not to remain in temptation. Because, concerning
this life, we read in the book of Job, “Is not the life of man upon
earth a temptation?” <span id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505) But why
it should be granted to some to be taken away from the perils of this
life while they are righteous, while others who are righteous until they
fall from righteousness are kept in the same risks in a more lengthened
life,—who has known the mind of the Lord? And yet it is permitted to be
understood from this, that even those righteous people who maintain good
and pious characters, even to the maturity of old age and to the last
day of this life, must not glory in their own merits, but in the Lord,
since He who took away the righteous man from the shortness of life,
lest wickedness should alter his understanding, Himself guards the
righteous man in any length of life, that wickedness may not alter his
understanding. But why He should have kept the righteous man here to
fall, when He might have withdrawn him before,—His judgments, although
absolutely righteous, are yet unsearchable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[510:3504](1051062.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> Cyprian, Works in *The Ante-Nicene
Fathers*, vol. v. p. 469.

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[510:3505](1051062.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> [Wisdom
4.11](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#011)<span
id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[511:3506](1051062.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p5"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="xxi.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1051063)
