[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051081)  [Next](1051083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_525">p. 525</span> <span
id="xxi.iii.ii-Page_525"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>A Treatise on the gift of
perseverance, <span id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559) </span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>by aurelius augustin, bishop of
hippo;</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>Being the Second Book,</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>Of the Treatise “On the Predestination of
the Saints.”</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p6"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>addressed to prosper and hilary.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p7"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>a.d. 428 or 429</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p8"></span>————————————

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p9"></span>*In the first part of the book he proves
that the perseverance by which a man perseveres in Christ to the end is
God’s gift; for that it is a mockery to ask of God that which is not
believed to be given by God. Moreover, that in the Lord’s prayer
scarcely anything is asked for but perseverance, according to the
exposition of the martyr Cyprian, by which exposition the enemies to
this grace were convicted before they were born. He teaches that the
grace of perseverance is not given according to the merits of the
receivers, but to some it is given by God’s mercy; to others it is not
given, by His righteous judgment. That it is inscrutable why, of adults,
one rather than another should be called; just as, moreover, of two
infants it is inscrutable why the one should be taken, the other left.
But that it is still more inscrutable why, of two pious persons, to one
it should be given to persevere, to the other it should not be given;
but that this is most certain, that the former is of the predestinated,
the latter is not. He observes that the mystery of predestination is set
forth in our Lord’s words concerning the people of Tyre and Sidon, who
would have repented if the same miracles had been done among them which
had been done in Chorazin. He shows that the case of infants is of force
to confirm the truth of predestination and grace in older people; and he
answers the passage of his third book on free will, unsoundly alleged on
this point by his adversaries. Subsequently, in the second part of this
work, he rebuts what they say,—to wit, that the definition of
predestination is opposed to the usefulness of exhortation and rebuke.
He asserts, on the other hand, that it is advantageous to preach
predestination, so that man may not glory in himself, but in the Lord.
As to the objections, how*<span id="page_526">p. 526</span> <span
id="xxi.iii.ii-Page_526"></span>*ever, which they make against
predestination, he shows that the same objections may be twisted in no
unlike manner either against God’s foreknowledge or against that grace
which they all agree to be necessary for other good things (with the
exception of the beginning of faith and the completion of perseverance).
For that the predestination of the saints is nothing else than God’s
foreknowledge and preparation for His benefits, by which whoever are
delivered are most certainly delivered. But he bids that predestination
should be preached in a harmonious manner, and not in such a way as to
seem to an unskilful multitude as if it were disproved by its very
preaching. Lastly, he commends to us Jesus Christ, as placed before our
eyes, as the most eminent instance of predestination.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[525:3560](1051082.htm#fr_3559) <span
id="xxi.iii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.ii-p2"></span> \[In some editions and in many <span
class="c16"><span id="xxi.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>mss</span>. the title is,
*On the Benefit of Perseverance*, and the book is so cited by Remigius,
Florus (or Bede), Hincmar, and others. Probably neither title is
authentic. Prosper speaks of it to Hilary as if it simply bore the name
of the second book of the *Predestination of the Saints*. “In the
books,” he writes, “of Bishop Augustin, of blessed memory, which bear
the title, *On the Predestination of the Saints*.”—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1051083)
