<span
class="small">[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Angelus
Silesius](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](scw001) [Next](scw003)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

## PREFACE

To many of those acquainted with the literature of mysticism the name of
Angelus Silesius has a familiar sound and yet recalls no familiar image.
It appears and re-appears in footnotes or attached to a wandering verse.
It is a name without a local habitation. It appears to have been first
introduced to the notice of English readers by R. A. Vaughan in his
lively, informative, but somewhat exasperating mid-Victorian dialogue,
*Hours with the Mystics*. Vaughan, however, was in doubt as to the
identity of its owner and repeated the error of the German critic
Schrader in denying that it was the pseudonym of the Silesian convert to
Roman Catholicism, Johannes Scheffler. His estimation, moreover, of the
work which has made the name of Angelus Silesius memorable was tinged
with contempt, for while acknowledging the pithiness of the epigrams and
rhyming sentences of the *Cherubinic Wanderer*, he qualified his
appreciation by the stricture that many of them were "as destitute of
sense as all are of poetry."

 The obscurity which once involved the figure of the seventeenth-century
poet and mystic has been completely dispelled by a long line of German
investigaton, and his personality now stands revealed in its essential
features, although the data are lacking which permit the outline to be
filled up in precise detail.

 In these circumstances it has seemed opportune to offer to the
English-speaking reader a fuller relation of the known facts concerning
the author of the <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> *Cherubinic Wanderer*,
together with a larger selection of translations therefrom, than has
hitherto been presented. My undertaking is less the result of a
deliberate intention than the outgrowth of an increasing interest and
appreciation. In revolving the German verses in my mind I found them
gradually shaping themselves into English rhymes. The present
collection, comprising nearly a quarter of the original work, may be
claimed to be representative of the whole, although it is possible that
I have allowed the mystical to preponderate over the purely devotional
and didactic elements.

 For the fact that so many of the alexandrine couplets of the German
poet appear in the following pages in the guise of quatrains of varying
patterns, I have no other excuse to offer than that of my inability to
preserve the original form without doing violence to the sense. If I
have unhappily deviated from the sense as well as from the form, I can
at any rate plead that I have made the best amends within my power by
facilitating reference to the original text. The orthography has been
modernized in accordance with the texts set forth in the editions of
Georg Ellinger and H. L. Held. The headings, which not infrequently
serve to explicate the meaning of the verses, are of course those
supplied by Angelus Silesius himself. I have taken the liberty of
rearranging the original sequence of the verses, which appears to be
mainly chronological, and grouping them into sections of more or less
homogeneous content. Possibly some of the couplets may gain an
additional illumination by their new juxtaposition.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

 To comment upon the residue of truth or wisdom enshrined in the
utterances of Angelus Silesius does not lie within my scope. For mystics
the heart is always the supreme court of appeal and within their
community, though so widely extended in space and time, there has always
been a remarkable unanimity in its findings. Needless to say, there are
rival jurisdictions in which its Judgements are invariably reversed. The
judge, it is to be feared, is not incorruptible, and the case for
mysticism has commonly been supported by alluring bribes. The evidence
submitted, nevertheless, lies open to inspection, and there is much in
it which few who examine their inner experience with candour will fail
to corroborate.

 The sense of a radical duality of self, or even or a plurality of
selves, appears to be given in introspection. These diverse selves may
be represented diagrammatically as concentric. Each one tends to ascribe
finality to its own circumference. Each assigns value only to that which
lies within its own boundary and finds in everything beyond an enemy to
its peace. The problem is where to draw the line dividing self from
not-self. If we determine it by the short radius measured by the primary
needs and desires of our animal organism, we shall live within the most
restricted circle of all. If we take as the measuring rod our more
generous interests and idealisms, our circumference describes a wider
sweep and we have a larger self to live in. But even against the limits
of the widest periphery presses an inchoate mass of indefinite extent,
unknown but vaguely suspected as hostile, or at best as icily
indifferent, <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> the vast world of the
not-self, which our love has not yet embraced; and its pressure is felt
as restrictive and painful. The mystics are those who have widened the
circle of self to its utmost limits until all the not-self is drawn
within it. They are free and at peace because there remains nothing
outside of them to confine their freedom or trouble their serenity. They
have abolished the frontier-line between internal and external, between
I and Thou. They are to be defined by the definition which they
themselves have given to the divine Essence—their centre is everywhere
and their circumference is nowhere. They are those who can say with
Angelus Silesius

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Turn whereso'er I will, I find no evidence<br />
Of End, Beginning, Centre or Circumference.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 There are perhaps few to-day who will find the language of Angelus
Silesius adequate in every respect to the expression of their deepest
intuitions. He spoke in the dialect of a venerable creed, but the
experience of which he spoke is immemorial. And it appears to be
unchanging. Those who are in possession of the code will readily
decipher the message. *Cor ad cor loquitur*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](scw003)
