<span
class="small">[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index.md) [Angelus
Silesius](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](scw002) [Next](scw004.md)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

## I ANGELUS SILESIUS

M<span class="small">ANY</span> centuries before Frederick the Great's
tall grenadiers wrenched Silesia from the grasp of the Austrian queen,
Maria Theresa, the German people, by a continuous infiltration of
settlers into the wide plain watered by the Oder and its tributaries,
had thrust a wedge of *Deutschtum* into the heart of the Slavonic lands
lying to the south-east. Walled in by the high Tarnowitz plateau on the
east and the pine-clad peaks of the Riesen Gebirge on the west, the
eighteen principalities into which Silesia was parcelled out owned a
nominal allegiance first to the kingdom of Poland and then to that of
Bohemia; but their sympathies flowed with their rivers and their
commerce northwards to the home of the ancestral German stock. From
Nuremberg the first impulse of the early Renaissance penetrated up the
Oder valley and shortly afterwards from the Warthurg came the Bibles of
Luther. The Reformation broke over German Silesia like an inrushing
wave. Only in Breslau, the capital city of the province, the powerful
prince-bishops still held the fort for the ancient faith.

 Lutheranism established itself as the sole recognized faith of the
Silesian duchies and rapidly hardened into an orthodoxy as unyielding
and intolerant as that which it had recently displaced. Luther, however,
had released a spring which immediately reacted with disruptive <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> force upon Lutheranism itself. That deep
current of vital religion which had manifested itself in the German
mystics of the fourteenth century and in those loose associations of
spiritually minded laymen known as the Beghards and Brethren of the Free
Spirit, driven for a time underground by an angry persecution, once
again foamed up to the surface. Perhaps nowhere in Europe was this
renaissance of spiritual life outside the pale of the organized churches
more vigorous or more adventurous than in the territories of Silesia.
The radical tenets of the Anabaptists were welcomed by the common folk
of the towns and stamped out only by burnings and banishments. Caspar
Schwenkfeld, a scion of a noble family in the duchy of Liegnitz, gained
adherents among all classes, and notably among the Silesian nobility, to
a purer and more primitive form of Christianity than that of Luther.
Here and there in remote country villages "prophets" or *Wundermänner*,
ignorant of the debates of the theologians at Wittenberg or Geneva, but
glowing with visions which had surprised them when brooding over their
newly translated German Bibles, announced to wondering peasants the
proximate end of the world and the advent of the millennium. One of
them, a certain cobbler of Görlitz, thinker as well as visionary,
hammered out over his last a bizarre but pregnant theosophy which still
engages the attention of the world. In the first quarter of the
seventeenth century, manuscript copies of the cryptic writings of Jacob
Böhme passed from hand to hand in Silesia and opened the eyes of their
readers to the divine signature legible in all things.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

 The aspiration common to all these sectaries, the *fanatici Silesiorum*
as they were termed by the supercilious, was to liberate the spirit of
religion from bondage to the letter. They acknowledged no authority,
whether of church or synod or even of Scripture, save only the authority
of the inward voice. Dismayed by the rigid dogmas and authoritative
temper of the new Reformation ecclesiasticism, they sought to revive a
freer, less theological, more interior and spiritual type of
Christianity. They founded no churches, but grouped together in obscure
fellowships they tended in quietness the flame of the spirit, while
Catholics and Lutherans contended for thrones and dominions in the long
agony of the Thirty Years War.

 Such was the spiritual soil in which the author of the *Cherubinic
Wanderer* took root and grew to maturity in the second quarter of the
seventeenth century.

\*  
\*   \*

Breslau was deemed by the poet, Martin Opitz, writing in the year 1631,
to be perhaps the most beautiful of all the German cities. Built
originally on a group of islands in the midst of the Oder, it was
intersected by numerous streams spanned by graceful bridges. Its forty
churches and eleven cloisters, for the most part amazingly lofty
constructions of Gothic brickwork, jutted against the skyline a
silhouette of crowded spires and pinnacles. As many bells rang from
their towers, it was said, as would have sufficed for three cities of
equal size. Its Rathaus, with its lavishly ornate balconies and gables,
giving expression <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> to the extravagant
fantasies of the expiring art of the Middle Ages, testified to the
wealth of its burghers and their pride in the magnificence of the
Silesian capital.

 To this flourishing city there came in the early years of the
seventeenth century a Polish nobleman, Stanislaus, Lord of Borwicze. As
was indicated by his family name of Scheffler, he was of German descent.
Born in Kraków in 1562, he had distinguished himself in both the civil
and the military service of the Polish crown and had been duly rewarded
with the grant of a title and a coat-of-arms. The cause of his
self-exile from his native country is unknown; but as the profession of
Lutheranism, to which faith he belonged, was still barely tolerated in
Poland, it may be conjectured that it was in pursuit of religious
liberty that he transferred his residence to a Protestant city.

 He brought with him a substantial fortune which he husbanded with care
and almost, it would seem, with passion. An incident recorded in a
lawsuit arising out of one of his financial transactions throws a gleam
of light upon his character. Having made a loan to a prominent citizen
who died before its repayment, he demanded restitution from the debtor's
daughter. The refusal of the latter to acknowledge the liability threw
him into a frenzy of indignation. He appears to have created a violent
scene, hurling abuse at the young woman and possibly even striking her
or attempting to tear from her shoulders a valuable fur to which he also
laid claim. The city council was obliged to intervene in the unseemly
quarrel. It decreed the repayment of the loan together with the
surrender of the <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> disputed fur, but at
the same time threatened to inflict a penalty upon the irate creditor
for his violence and strictly ordered him to refrain henceforth from
molesting the young lady and her family by word or deed.

 Shortly after this incident the hot-blooded Polish nobleman, to whom
years appear not to have brought discretion, married at the age of
sixty-two a young woman some forty years younger than himself, Maria
Hennemann, a daughter of a physician to the Imperial Court. The marriage
took place in February 1624 and on the following Christmas Day a son was
baptised in the Lutheran church of St. Elizabeth by the name of
Johannes. Two years later followed the birth of a daughter, Magdalena,
and in 1630 that of another son, Christian. In 1637 Stanislaus Scheffler
died at the age of seventy-five. A specimen of his handwriting a year
before his death indicates no declension of vigour through sickness or
old age.

 The young wife did not long outlive her septuagenarian husband. The
church register which records her death on May 27, 1639, makes a curious
mention of her "troubled life." As her husband's fortune must have
shielded her from material cares, it may be concluded that the allusion
is to some form of physical suffering which shadowed her life and cut it
short at a premature age.

 Johann Scheffler, destined to become known to fame as Angelus Silesius,
was fourteen years old when his mother died. A month before her death
she had entered him and his brother Christian at the Elizabeth Gymnasium
in Breslau. The awakening of interest in <span id="page_20">p. 20</span>
German poetry which had been brought about in Silesia by the recently
published works of Martin Opitz was reflected in the importance given to
poetical composition, not merely in the classical languages but in the
German tongue, in the school curriculum. The Gymnasium, moreover,
possessed a theatre devoted to the representation of plays and masques
by the scholars, in one of which, a Masque of May, it is recorded in a
programme still extant that Johann Scheffler played the part of a
nightingale. One of his masters, Christoph Köler, with whom he appears
to have been on specially friendly terms, was himself a poet of some
note and encouraged Johann in the practice of verse-making. The few
specimens of his youthful compositions which have survived reveal an
early acquired mastery of poetic technique without displaying any
considerable originality of thought or expression.

 The impression derived from the scanty records of the young Scheffler
is that of a talented youth, whose gentle nature won for him the name of
"angel," studious, pliant and impressionable, of a disposition that both
awakened and responded to affection. Christoph Köler spoke of him as
"destined to the highest things."

 In his nineteenth year Scheffler matriculated at the university of
Strassburg, where he studied medicine and law; but after only one year's
residence he proceeded to Leyden. It is probable that the two years
which he spent at the Dutch university brought him into contact with
those religious dissidents for whom in the first half of the seventeenth
century the United <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> Provinces offered a
refuge from persecution. It was in Amsterdam that the works of Jacob
Böhme had been first published in 1642. Sects fermenting with the
mystical leaven—Anabaptists, Mennonites, Collegiants—abounded in all the
principal towns of Holland. In later life one of his controversial
opponents accused Scheffler of having been a "free spirit" and a
frequenter of sectarian conventicles, to which he replied, not
altogether convincingly, that he did not know to that day where a
Mennonite or Anabaptist church was to be found in Leyden. He
acknowledged, however, that be had read several of Böhme's works,
excusing himself on the ground that "when one is in Holland all sorts of
things come one's way"; but he thanked God for it, as they were largely
the cause of his coming to a knowledge of the truth.

 From Leyden, Johann Scheffler proceeded to the great medical school of
Padua; where in 1648 he received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy and
Medicine. It is possible that a year elapsed between his departure from
the Dutch and his matriculation at the Italian university. His assertion
in later life that he had visited various "Catholic localities," having
resolved to investigate for himself the charges of false doctrine
brought against the Catholic Church may have reference to this period;
but what these places were, other than Padua, cannot now be determined.
The statement is important, however, as evidencing an early
preoccupation with the question of Catholicism.

 During all this period we know as little of the <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> inner workings of his mind as of the outward manner of his
life. Only one illuminating datum remains. In 1649, possibly while he
was still at Padua, he wrote in a friend's album or remembrance book
this significant sentence: "The World is a very beautiful Nothing"
(*Mundus pulcherrimum nihil*). It was the keythought of his life. It
expresses at once his sensitiveness to beauty and his acceptance of the
"negative way" of mysticism, an inner discord which he was never able to
resolve into harmony.

 Although after his departure from Padua we are again without precise
information as to Scheffler's movements, various circumstances point to
the probability of his return to Breslau. His sister Magdalena was now
married to a doctor named Tobias Brückner, who resided at Bernstadt near
Breslau and held an appointment as physician to the Duke of Oels. In the
preceding December the guardians of the children of Stanislaus Scheffler
had disbursed to the elder brother and sister their shares of the
paternal inheritance. Johann's portion had been entrusted provisionally
to his brother-in-law Brückner, with whom it was natural that be sbould
now seek a settlement. The condition of his brother Christian, now in
his twentieth year, must also have claimed his attention. From a
document of the year 1665 we learn that be was then insane; we may
infer, however, that his malady dated back to a much earlier period,
since his estate was never made over to him on his coming of age but
continued throughout his life to be administered by guardians. It is
natural to suppose that during his stay in <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> Breslau, Scheffler renewed his friendly intercourse with his
old schoolmaster, Christoph Köler. An important significance attaches to
this relationship, for Köler was intimately connected with a group of
Silesian Protestants who, finding it impossible to nourish their
spiritual life upon the dry husks of Lutheran orthodoxy, discovered a
richer sustenance in the writings of the pre-Reformation mystics.
Scattered among the various Silesian duchies, these friends kept in
touch with one another by correspondence and from time to time met
together at Breslau. Two of the leaders of the movement, Dietrich von
Tschesch and Daniel Czepko, were poets; both were deeply steeped in the
thought of the fourteenth-century mystics. Whether Scheffler at this
time actually became acquainted with these spiritual reformers cannot be
distinctly ascertained, but it cannot be doubted that directly or
indirectly he was initiated into their teaching.

 In November 1649, thanks undoubtedly to his brother-in-law's influence,
Johann Scheffler was appointed Court Physician to the Lutheran Duke
Sylvius Nimrod of Würtemberg-Oels. He received an annual salary of 175
thalers and was granted a licence to carry on a private practice within
the limits of the Duchy.

\*  
\*   \*

When the young physician rode into Oels through the Breslauer Tor after
his twenty-mile journey from Breslau he may well have reflected how
little either the Catholics or Lutherans of his day were animated <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> by the spirit of the religion of peace.
Repeatedly cannonaded, stormed and plundered by both parties in the
Thirty Years War which had ended only the previous year, the little
country town was now scarcely more than a heap of ruins. Its former
population of four thousand inhabitants had been reduced to less than
half by slaughter, famine and disease. Most of the houses were
uninhabitable. The ducal castle at which he presented his credentials,
with its steep-pitched roof, its tall octagonal tower, its balconied
Renaissance court yard, still stood intact on the outskirts of the town,
overlooking a pleasant stretch of water-meadows backed by low wooded
hills.

 About the time when Scheffler arrived at Oels to take up his
appointment at the Court, another and older traveller was returning
after a long absence to the town in the neighbourhood of which he had
been born fifty-six years before. The friendships which he was destined
to make exercised a strong influence on Scheffler's sensitive nature and
perhaps afford a clue to the evolution of a character which otherwise
presents a baffling problem in psychology. Of him it may be said that
there were friends by whom he was saved and friends from whom the pity
of it was that he could not be saved. Chief among the former was Abraham
von Franckenberg, the man who in the following brief but critical years
of his inner development was to guide him in his spiritual wayfaring.

 Like Scheffler, Franckenberg belonged to the class <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> of the lesser nobility. He rejected, however,
the brilliant career which his birth and talents opened up to him and
even renounced the inheritance which fell to him as the eldest son,
reserving for his own use only one or two rooms in the ancestral castle
of Ludwigsdorf, where he gave himself up to a life of study and
meditation. He emerged only occasionally from his retirement to minister
to the sick in time of plague or to visit a circle of friends who were
engaged like himself in the quest for truth. It was on one of these
visits that he first met Jacob Böhme, whose writings he had long
cherished and some of which he had caused to be printed at his own
expense. He was in closest sympathy with the thought of the visionary of
Görlitz, and it became one of the chief aims or his life to make it
known to the world. He wrote two lives of Böhme, and he it was who
undertook the publication of his works at Amsterdam in 1642.

 Franckenberg aspired to the most comprehensive world-view which the
quasi-scientific knowledge of his day permitted. He availed himself of
every key, no matter how questionable its shape, to unlock the universal
mystery. He studied the Cabala and was deeply learned in the lore of
Alchemy, that semi-mystical system which contained within itself the
seeds of an experimental science. He eagerly absorbed the ideas of
Giordano Bruno, though not without a certain shrinking from their
pantheistic tendencies. In the discoveries of Copernicus he became aware
of the melting into infinity of the static universe of medieval
tradition, with its fixed spheres and local heaven.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

 Such freedom of thought, verging indeed upon heresy, necessarily
rendered Franckenberg obnoxious to the Lutheran clergy, of whose bigoted
dogmatism he on his part only expressed his abhorrence. Rather, however,
than embroil himself in a controversy which was repellent to his
peace-loving nature he quitted Ludwigsdorf in 1641 and passed the
greater part of the next eight years at Danzig, where he was the guest
of the astronomer Helvelius. It was from this sojourn that we find him
returning home in the early winter of 1649.

 If this student of science laboured so hard to win the secrets of the
temporal world, it was in order to find through them a doorway into the
eternal. The rending of the veil, so dense and yet so fragile, that
hangs between the seen and the unseen was the supreme object of his
endeavour. The results of his researches never disturbed his faith in
the fundamental truth of the Scriptures and the Christian scheme of
salvation. If he could not comprehend the whole of the mystery, he was
content to hold fast to what he deemed to be the master-truth, the
possibility in this life of the perfect union of the soul with God. This
union was conditioned not by belief but solely by purity of heart. "God
is not the God of Jews and Christians alone," he declared—and the
utterance was far from being a colourless truism in
mid-seventeenth-century Germany—"but also of the heathen, yea, of all
peoples;" and when asked by the Duke Sylvius Nimrod to what faith he
belonged, Catholic, Lutheran <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> or
Calvinist, he replied, "I am the Heart of these religions."<span
id="page_27_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_27_note_1.md)

 The effect upon Scheffler's responsive nature of such a personality as
that of Abraham von Franckenberg can be conjectured but scarcely
overestimated. The mystical doctrine, with which he was already familiar
in the writings of Böhme, Czepko and others of the group of Silesian
spiritual reformers, was now discovered to him in its operative force in
a man of purified character, of breadth of mind and largeness of heart,
perfected in self-renunciation. In Franckenberg's portrait we see a man
of middle age with thick hair brushed back from a high forehead, short
neatly trimmed beard, sensitive and finely modelled features, the
gravity of the clear, sad eyes contrasting with an amused and kindly
smile. It is a face that combines in a singular harmony the expressions
of thoughtfulness, assurance, benevolence and inward peace. It is not
difficult to imagine its mobility lit up with the glow of enthusiasm as
he conversed with the young doctor in his lonely room at Ludwigsdorf on
the matters that lay nearest to his heart—relating his reminiscences of
his beloved <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> Böhme, speculating upon the
mysteries of Alchemy and the Cabala, imparting the astronomical
knowledge that he had gained in the observatory at Danzig or unravelling
the paradoxes of Eckhart and the Rhineland mystics. And with what
burning thoughts must the poet-physician have walked back in the dusk
over the low swell of meadow-land beyond which were disclosed the
lighted windows and fantastic gables of the castle of Oels!

 The positive record of the friendship existing between these two men is
to be found in Franckenberg's gift of books to Scheffler and in the
moving verses in which the poet commemorated the death of his "dearest
friend," which occurred only two-and-a-half years after their
simultaneous arrival in Oels. The only worldly possessions in which
Franckenberg was wealthy were his books and manuscripts. His library—"a
real pharmacy of the soul" he called it—evidences his familiarity with
the works of the medieval mystics, his predilection seemingly having
been for Tauler and the unknown author of the *Theologia Germanica*,
from whose writings he had compiled an anthology. As indicative of the
sources which Scheffler was enabled to draw upon it is of interest to
note, apart from the earlier mystical writers, the works of Böhme,
Valentine Weigel, Sebastian Franck, Johann Arndt, Paracelsus, Bruno,
Reuchlin, Daniel Sudermann and the manuscripts of von Tschesch. Two
volumes are still extant which Scheffler rcceived as gifts during his
friend's lifetime. One of them consists of the *Revelations of St.
Gertrude and St. Mechtild* bound up with Tauler's <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> sermons. That it was highly prized by Scheffler is manifest
from the Latin inscription, written in his precise and shapely script
and dated March 1652, in which he recorded that he had received it from
his "faithful friend Abraham von Franckenberg" and had had it rebound in
a new and handsome binding. Another volume, containing Rulwin Merswin's
*Book of the Nine Rocks* and the *Revelations of St. Bridget*, is filled
with cabalistic annotations in Scheffler's hand.

 Franckenberg died on June 25, 1652, but his burial in the castle-church
of Oels did not take place until six months later. The funeral sermon
was preached by the Court Chaplain, Christoph Freytag, who had regarded
Franckenberg during his lifetime as a semi-heretical fanatic. On this
occasion, however, he repressed his theological hatred and paid his
tribute to the well-known virtues of his former enemy.

 Shortly afterwards Scheffler published a poem of twenty-eight stanzas
in honour of his friend's memory, the first to appear in print since his
juvenile compositions. In this noble and moving elegy he stressed the
heavenly principles which underlay the nobility of his friend's
character and which enabled him, while still in this life, to pass
beyond the dominion of chance and time and place into the "state" of
eternity, becoming "one spirit, one light, one life with God." Here the
central doctrine of mysticism is announced in the boldest terms. The
stately march of the alexandrine quatrains, reverberating like the roll
of drums, envelops <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> the tenderness of the
elegy with the firm resonance of a hymn of triumph.<span
id="page_30_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_30_note_1.md)

\*  
\*   \*

 Franckenberg's death left Scheffler without a companion for his spirit.
Doubtless he was not without an outer circle of friends, among them
being Johann Dirix, the ducal secretary, for whom about this time he
wrote a consolatory poem on the death of a young daughter. Neverthless
his close association with the sage of Ludwigsdorf and his final
preoccupation with <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> alchemical and
cabalistic mysteries must have attracted to him the suspicion of the
orthodox society of the small town dominated by the pious but narrowly
Lutheran Duke Sylvius and his still more bigoted chaplain.

 But if in Oels itself he was starved of companionship, he still
remained in touch with those friends of the life of the spirit,
scattered throughout Silesia, who had looked up to Franckenberg as their
spiritual guide. To them Scheffler now turned in his loneliness and
conceived the idea of presenting them with a New Year's gift in the form
of an anthology of passages from his favourite mystical authors. The
censorship of all books printed within the Duchy was in the hands of
Christoph Freytag, to whom, as a matter of course the printer submitted
Scheffler's anthology for approval. The occasion presented him with an
opportunity of marking his disapproval of the mystical trend of the
Franckenberg circle. In high-handed fashion he struck out in red ink the
passages in which he detected an unorthodox flavour and returned the
book to the printer with an unqualified refusal of his imprimatur. With
Scheffler himself he declined to enter into any discussion.

 Scheffler's reaction to this repulse had swift and unforeseeable
consequences. What appears to have shocked him most was the discovery
that these extracts from the rapt meditations of Catholic saints, of
which his anthology consisted, were obnoxious to Lutheran orthodoxy. In
a letter to a friend he freely expressed his bitter opinion of the
Lutheran clergy: "What sort <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> of a
priestly judgement and apostolic procedure this is, I leave each one to
judge for himself. I know now exactly what I am to think of them." They
were, so he affirmed, "inexperienced and unversed in the whole body of
ancient piety and destitute of the true and living theology." The Court
Chaplain's censure revealed to him with the harshest clarity what he
must long before have more or less dimly recognized, the fact, namely,
that the inner faith by which he lived was incompatible with the creed
and temper of Lutheranism. For Luther himself he appears never to have
had any great love. He was repelled by the strain of coarseness in his
nature and by his contempt of asceticism. Although in his early days
Luther had come under the spell of the mystics, especially of Tauler and
the author of the *Theologia Germanica*, he reverted later to a rigid
and more external theology and exceeded his wonted violence in his
attacks on the Schwenkfeldians and kindred sects that laid emphasis on a
more mystical interpretation of religion. But in rigidity of creed and
anti-mystical bias the Lutheran pastors of the seventeenth century far
out-Luthered Luther. As in a flash Freytag's condemnation of his
anthology made it vividly clear to Scheffler that the Lutheran Church
could never be his spiritual home.

 As soon as his resolution was taken, Scheffler acted without
hesitation. He left Oels immediately and returned to his native Breslau.
There he occupied himself for some months in a study of the works of
Catholic apologists. The religious world of Silesia was startled <span
id="page_33">p. 33</span> to learn that on June 12, 1653, the
ex-physician of the Lutheran Court of Oels had been received into the
Roman Catholic Church. At his confirmation he assumed the name of
Angelus.<span id="page_33_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_33_note_1.md)

 His change of faith at once brought Scheffler into the full blaze of
notoriety and was the signal for the outbreak of those venomous attacks
of which he was the object throughout his life. At this time religious
passions were inflamed by an intensification of the feud between
Reformation and Counter-Reformation. In Silesia the Catholic Church was
launching a successful offensive movement. The defeat of Frederick of
the Palatinate at the battle or the White Mountain in 1620 had weakened
the position of Protestantisin in the Silesian duchies. The Jesuits
re-establisbed themselves in Breslau. The withdrawal of the Swedish
troops at the close of the Thirty Years War cleared the way for a
militant campaign, supported by the Emperor, for the restoration of
Catholicism. As the road to office and promotion was conditional on
communion with Rome, numerous conversions took place which were dictated
solely by self-interest. In these circumstances the change of faith of a
private individual, which might have passed unregarded in more normal
times, was lifted from obscurity into the arena of public <span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> debate, to be hailed by one party as an
addition to its forces and to be reviled by the other as a treasonable
desertion.

 Scheffler's resolution to embrace Catholicism, so astonishing to his
contemporaries, remains still not fully explicable when viewed in
perspective. That the immediate cause of his defection from the church
of his fathers was the censureship of his mystical anthology, he himself
was ready to admit.<span id="page_34_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_34_note_1.md)
But this incident in itself is not adequate to explain the subsequent
orientation of his faith. In order to justify to the world the transfer
of his ecclesiastical allegiance—one shrinks from using the word
conversion—he drew up a tabulated statement which was published under
the title *The Fundamental Grounds and Motives of Johann Scheffler's
renunciation of Lutheranism and of his profession of the Catholic
Religion*. This document impresses us not so much as the record of a
deep inward experience as a rationalization in logical form of a
decision previously determined upon. It is in the main a recapitulation
of the stock arguments of the Catholic contraversialists of the day.
Scheffler bases his condemnation of Lutheranism, among other grounds, on
the novelty and uncertainty of its doctrines and their derivation not
from the pure word of God but from the arbitrary judgement of the
Reformers; the violent dissensions <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> among
the Reformers themselves; the rejection of the veneration of the Virgin
and the saints; the repudiation of the oral tradition handed down from
the Apostles; the corrupt translation of the Lutheran Bible. In point of
doctrine the gravamen of his charge falls upon the tenet of
justification by faith alone, together with its corollary, the denial of
the meritoriousness of good works. If faith be the sole condition of
salvation, love becomes a supererogatory virtue, whereas it is the pith
and kernel of Scheffler's teaching that love and love alone unlocks the
door which admits to the presence chamber of God. His most deep-seated
motive appears to be revealed in the article in which he reproaches the
exponents of Lutheranism with their "impious rejection of the hidden
way, wholly unknown to them, of communion with God (*Theologia Mystica*)
which is the Christian's highest wisdom." At this point his public
conversion is intimately linked with the event which was of capital
importance in his life.

 Although not yet published, it may be regarded as certain that
Scheffler had already written the *Cherubinic Wanderer* before his overt
profession of Catholicism. It is evident that the author of this work
had already cast off his Lutheran moorings. But it seems no less clear
that his voyage was set upon a course that would take him beyond all
confessional and ecclesiastical landmarks. It might naturally be
supposed that his religious evolution would have led him into closer
association with that fellowship of mystically minded Christians into
whose society he had been introduced by Franckenberg. It was for his
friends <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> among the members of this group
that he had printed his ill-fated anthology. The poem in which he had
given voice to the promptings of his heart suggests that the true goal
or his spiritual pilgrimage could be none other than that *Cor
Religionum* which Franckenberg represented—the religion of the spirit
whose worship is at neither Rome nor Wittenberg nor Geneva.

 In our ignorance of the inner processes of his mind during the year
following Franckenberg's death we can do more than hazard a guess at the
motives which impelled Scheffler to communion with the Roman Catholic
Church. We seem to be on known ground, however, when we point to the
profound influence which the Catholic mystics had exercised upon his
thought and character. Scheffler cannot but have felt a strong
attraction to the church which had produced such men as Eckhart, Tauler,
Suso and Ruysbroeck, who had revealed to him the "hidden way of
communion with God"; and that the same church was still capable or
giving birth to kindred spirits he had the witness or the
post-Reformation saints, Teresa and St. John of the Cross. It seems
scarcely possible to doubt that it was to Rome as the nursing-mother of
the mystics that he surrendered his allegiance.

\*  
\*   \*

It was now the hap of Angelus Silesius, as we must henceforth designate
the Catholic Scheffler, in his new environment to come under the
influence of a man whose temperament and outlook contrasted in almost
every respect with those of Abraham von Franckenberg. <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> The son of a poor ropemarker, Sebastian von
Rostack, now in the prime of life, owed his rapid advancement to the
post of Vicar General of the diocese of Breslau to his own natural
talents and capacity for tireless industry. As parish priest of Neisse
he had shared in all the hardships and dangers of the Thirty Years War
and, remaining faithful to his duties when all the municipal authorities
had fled, had been taken prisoner by the Swedes and narrowly escaped
with his life. Such was his devotion to his flock that in time of plague
he was accustomed to place a ladder against those houses the doors of
which were sealed up and to climb in through the windows to minister to
the sick and dying. On one occasion, when riding alone in the country,
he was set upon by two ruffianly troopers. Drawing the sword which even
priests were in the habit of carrying in those troubled times, he ran
one of his assailants through the body and then, mindful of the duties
of his office, leaped off his horse and administered absolution to the
victim of his prowess.

 Of a stiff and upright carriage—it is one of his chaplains who has
sketched his portrait—he walked with a measured gait. From a stern
countenance his penetrating eyes looked out with such a burning
intensity that even the canons quailed before him. He was not easily
amused or moved to laughter. He was quick with his tongue, but never
spoke at meals, looking straight before him with a severity of
expression that caused a profound uneasiness among his chaplains.

 During the winter of 1653-54, Sebastian von Rostock, as a member of the
Imperial Commission appointed <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> to carry
out the "reduction" of the Protestant churches of Silesia, was
energetically engaged in the work of the Counter-Reformation. Silesia
had been almost wholly lost to Catholicism. Lutheran pastors had taken
possession of the churches and had won over the congregations. In only a
few parishes a mutilated form of Catholic worship was preserved; married
priests said Mass in the German tongue and administered the Eucharist to
the laity under both kinds. The Commission, backed by a military escort,
went from village to village ejecting the Lutheran pastors and handing
over the keys of the churches to newly appointed Catholic priests. The
Protestant parishioners greeted them with hoots and jeers or, massed in
the churchyard, chorused their defiant Lutheran hymns.

 It must have been with mingled feelings of satisfaction and frustration
that Sebastian von Rostock returned to Breslau at the conclusion of this
campaign. True, no fewer than 254 churches had been wrested out of the
hands of the Lutherans, but the zeal of the devout Catholic could
scarcely be content with a victory achieved by brute force rather than
by the force of conviction. The need of the hour was for a propaganda
capable of undermining the principles of the Reformation and winning
back the hearts of the people to the faith which they had abandoned.

 It was at this juncture that Angelus Silesius came into prominence as
an illustrious convert. The shrewd ecclesiastic could not fail to remark
that here was a man fitted by a gifted speech and a glowing fervour for
the church of his adoption to undertake the work <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> of the reconversion of Silesia. As a mark of the esteem in
which he was held by the Catholic party in Breslau, Angelus Silesius was
appointed, early in 1654, probably at Rostock's instigation, Physician
to the Imperial Court. This honour provoked his enemies to attribute his
"conversion" to a desire for worldly advancement, a charge which his
complete lack of self-interest rendered peculiarly ill-judged. As the
appointment was titular only, he lost rather than gained by his transfer
from the Court of Oels to that of the Emperor.

 Information is lacking as to the earlier development of the relations
between the poet and the Vicar General. It was not long, however, before
Angelus Silesius confided to Rostock the manuscript of the *Cherubinic
Wanderer* which he had brought with him from Oels. It can scarcely be
supposed that the verses of the mystic struck a responsive chord in the
stern spirit of the man of action, although his insight must have
discerned the steel of the warrior and the ascetic beneath the
gentleness of the quietist. No doubt he was informed by their author of
his treatment at the hands of Pastor Freytag. It would have been
impolitic, to say the least of it, if he had shown as ungracious a
welcome to the spiritual wanderer as the churlish doorkeeper of Lutheran
orthodoxy. Mystics had a traditional leave to warm themselves at the
Catholic hearth, even though at times the mistress of the house might
have occasion to reprove them for their freedom of speech. Their
dialect, strange though it might sound to the orthodox ear, could still
be interpreted according to the grammar of faith. A judicious editing, a
<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> prefatory gloss, would be enough to warn
the unwary reader against a too literal interpretation of the poet's
mystical paradoxes. The Vicar General gave his imprimatur. Angelus wrote
an Introduction in which the more daring of his speculations were
modified and brought into harmony with Catholic teaching. Rostock's
imprimatur is dated July 6, 1656, but the work did not appear until the
spring of the following year, and then not at Breslau but at Vienna. It
is possible that a lingering doubt as to the unimpeachable orthodoxy of
the verses led him to prefer that it should not be published within the
diocese which he administered.

 In the same year another volume of poems from the pen of Angelus
Silesius was published, this time in Breslau, and again with the
imprimatur of Sebastian von Rostock. *The Soul's Holy Delight or
Spiritual Pastorals of the Jesus-loving Psyche (Heilige Seelen-Lust oder
geistliche Hirten-Lieder der in ihren Jesum verliebten Psyche)* was
probably of later date than the *Cherubinic Wanderer*, although from a
certain parallelism of expression it may be inferred that in part at
least the composition of the two was concurrent.<span
id="page_40_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_40_note_1.md) In general, however, the
<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> earlier work may be assumed to reveal
the mind of Angelus Silesius before his profession of Catholicism, while
the *Spiritual Pastorals* expresses his emotional attitude during the
transitional period and the years immediately following. The two books
represent wholly diverse modes of spiritual experience. While the former
embodies that mystical apprehension of reality in which creeds are
dissolved into metaphor, the latter speaks the language of ecstatic
devotion to an incarnate Saviour. It draws its inspiration and its
images from a source to which Christian mystics have frequently turned,
the love-motive of the Song of Songs. It has, moreover, a close
connection with the contemporary pastoral poetry of Germany, the purpose
of Angelus Silesius being to adapt the lyrical expression of earthly
love to the soul's quest of the heavenly Lover. The opening lines of
many of the songs are borrowed from the popular song-writers of the day,
whereafter the theme is transposed from the secular to the spiritual
key. The book met with popular success and was thrice reprinted before
the close of the century. Many of the hymns passed into church hymnals
and are sung to this day by Lutheran congregations in Germany.<span
id="page_41_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_41_note_1.md)

 In the following years we find Angelus Silesius identifying himself
more and more closely with the activities of the Catholic Church in
Breslau. He is recorded as the donor of a sum of 200 thalers to the
Church of the Holy Cross, the interest on which was to be used to
provide for an annual sermon on Shrove <span id="page_42">p. 42</span>
Tuesday and a distribution of cakes to the poor. He established another
foundation for the provision of sermons during Lent at the Convent of
St. Clare, evidencing his care for the bodily as well as the spiritual
comfort of the nuns by directing that they should be given "a drink of
good wine with biscuits of white bread." His name frequently appears in
the baptismal registers of the period as godfather to children of poor
parentage, whom it is probable that he assisted with financial support.

 His zeal for his adopted Church showed itself in his activity in
promoting processions. These had been forbidden in Breslau since the
Reformation. A Confraternity of the Rosary, of which Angelus was now a
member, had formerly been wont to conduct a pilgrimage through the town
to the shrine of a saint in the village of Trebnitz. Angelus became the
promoter of a movement for the revival of the ancient custom and
addressed an appeal to the Emperor to override the ban of the Protestant
authorities. He saw in the projected procession not merely an occasion
of triumph for the Church but also an opportunity of publicly
signalizing his devotion to it. Great as the scandal of his change of
faith had been to his former coreligionists, he yet wished to drink the
cup of persecution and mockery to the very dregs. He craved to expose
himself as a spectacle to men and angels and in some sort to share with
his Master the ignominy of a *via dolorosa*. His exaltation of spirit is
clearly indicated in the following memorandum: "1. I wish to carry the
Cross through the town with a crown on my head, in order that <span
id="page_43">p. 43</span> thereby I may become like unto Christ who
carried the Cross through the town with a crown of thorns on his most
sacred head. 2. That thereby I may thank Christ in act and deed for
carrying the Cross for my sake. 3. That thereby I may be dishonoured and
despised by all men and before all men, for of this I am worthy, and
Christ was dishonoured and despised for me; for the most part will rate
me as a fool or deem me greedy of honour, as if in this matter I sought
some vain glory, and thus I shall lose much of the esteem in which I was
previously held. 4. That thereby I may serve as an example to all godly
people. 5. That thereby I may help towards the conversion of the town
and of all those who shall have ridiculed me, which is my singular
intention. Blessed be God! In the year 1660."

 It was not long before he was enabled to gratify his wish. The Emperor
granted his appeal and ordered the municipal authoritics to rescind
their opposition. On August 22, 1661, the triumph of the
Counter-Reformation was signalized by the first procession that had
displayed the emblems of the Catholic faith in the streets of Breslau
for 135 years. Sebastian von Rostock marched at the head and Angelus
Silesius followed, carrying the Cross and crowned with thorns. A few
months later the Confraternity organized a procession of the Blessed
Sacrament in which he was allotted the honour of carrying the
Monstrance.

 Shortly before these events, on May 29, 1661, Angelus Silesius had
received the ordination to the priesthood. By this time the ardour with
which he <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> had thrown himself into the
external activities of the Church had reacted profoundly upon his inner
nature. He himself laments that by the press of external business he had
been all unwillingly tom from that state of "spiritual peace and
gracious inwardness" in which he had composed the *Cherubinic Wanderer*
and the *Spiritual Pastorals*. "But the love of Christ compelled me
thereto."<span id="page_44_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_44_note_1.md) Sebastian
von Rostock had the satisfaction of witnessing the transformation of the
mystic into the strenuous soldier of the Church Militant here on earth.

 The Vicar General had now attained the height of his ambition by being
promoted to the episcopal throne. One of his first acts was to appoint
Angelus Silesius to the post of Marshal to his princely court.
Immediately after his enthronement he set out on a progress through the
diocese. In a description of his state entry into Neisse, the town in
which he had once officiated as a simple parish priest, we may catch a
glimpse of the pageantry over which it was now the business of Angelus
Silesius to preside. Heralded by mounted drummers and trumpeters and
troops with banners, who in turn were followed by a cavalcade of nobles
and a score of coaches conveying prelates and court officials, preceded
by his noble page-boys and escorted by his bodyguard in crimson and
violet uniform, the Prince-Bishop, "bare-headed and bowing smilingly on
all sides," advanced through the narrow streets amid the roar of cannon,
the pealing of bells and the cheers of the welcoming populace. Although
<span id="page_45">p. 45</span> more befitting a temporal than a
spiritual ruler, it may be supposed that such pomp and circumstance was
not uncongenial to the Court Marshal as assuring him of the revival of
the lapsed glories of the Catholic Church in Silesia. Nevertheless the
multifarious duties of his office consumed his time and imposed a strain
on his weakly constitution, already preyed upon by consumption and
undermined by his ascetic austerities. It is possible that the strain
may have quickened a natural irritability which it has been suggested
that he inherited from his hot-tempered father. Whatever may have been
its cause, a sharp dispute with another dignitary of the Court arose out
of his discharge of his functions. The affair might have been
accommodated, as Angelus himself admitted, by a few friendly words, but
he preferred to seize the opportunity to resign a post which doubtless
had become irksome to him. The incident, however, did not disturb the
amity between himself and the Bishop. It is indeed not unlikely that
Rostock himself realized that the zeal and talents of his faithful
henchman might be more advantageously employed than in ordering the
ceremonies of an episcopal court.

 Shortly after his retirement from the office of Court Marshal, Angelus
Silesius took up his residence in the Hospice of the Knights of the
Cross with the Red Star (Matthiasstift), in whose church he had made his
profession of faith as a Catholic more than ten years before. To this
quiet cloister on the banks of the Oder, filled with the sound of the
lapse of flowing waters, he withdrew not in order to recapture his lost
spiritual <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> peace but to forge weapons
with which to strike at the reeling giant of Lutheranism. In the
Church's truceless warfare with heresy he was to prove himself the most
unwearying and implacable of combatants. Already in 1663 he had fired
his first furious shot in his *Türkenschrift* or *Causes of the Turkish
Invasion and Downtreading of the people of God*. Christendom was first
menaced by the Infidel after it had been seduced by Protestantism, and
therefore, so ran his inconsequential argument, *post hoc, propter hoc*.
The tractate served only to inflame the passions of the calumniated
Lutherans who demanded its suppression by the Emperor. Unmoved by the
storm which he had provoked, Angelus replied by issuing his
*Christenschrift*, in which he pertinaciously reiterated his argument
that God's favour to his people was conditional upon their true
allegiance to the Church of Rome.

 In the succeeding years his controversial activity was tireless. His
attacks called forth counter-attacks and these in turn led to still more
vigorous assaults upon his assailants. In his tactics he showed himself
versatile and resourceful, always alert to seize an advantage by a
change of ground or of weapons. Syllogism, persuasion, invective—all
arms came ready to his hand. He aimed both high and low. Now he brought
his artillery to bear on the fortresses of Lutheran orthodoxy, now he
skirmished with the rank and file in the market-place. His earlier
writings were signed with his own name, but in later years he made an
effective use of anonymity to cloak his identity in a disguise barrowed
from the enemy. Sometimes he <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> posed as an
honest Lutheran perplexed by the internal dissensions within the
Reformed churches; sometimes as an unbeliever desirous of becoming a
Christian and seeking instruction from Lutheran, Calvinist and Catholic
advisers in turn; sometimes as a converted Catholic peasant searchingly
cross-questioned by a Lutheran pastor. In order to reach the popular ear
he cast his arguments into the form of dialogue, into which he
introduced the telling and incisive turns of speech in use among his
Silesian countrymen.

 In the twelve years between 1663 and 1675, Angelus Silesius contributed
to the literary arsenal of the Counter-Reformation no fewer than
fifty-five works of a controversial or propagandist nature. In nothing
save in their superior literary dexterity are they distinguished from
the mass of religious polemical writings of the period. The differences
between the rival creeds are seized in their external aspects rather
than in their deeper inner significance. We look in vain for a gleam of
the spiritual illumination which in the couplets of the *Cherubinic
Wanderer* played like lightning flashes on the far horizon of
speculation or for the throb or personal devotion which pulsated in the
*Spiritual Pastorals*. Even if the view be held that he was deliberately
adapting his arguments to the lower intellectual level of the crowd,
nevertheless it is difficult to resist the conviction that his finer
perceptions were becoming blunted in the rough-and-tumble of
controversy. His tone noticeably increases in bitterness as the conflict
proceeds. Himself acutely sensitive to the abuse of his opponents, he
does not shrink from retaliating in kind, <span id="page_48">p.
48</span> and if in the earlier stages of the controversy he is outdone
in invective by his antagonists, it becomes in course of time no easy
matter to determine whether he or they should be awarded the palm in the
ignoble art of vituperation.<span
id="page_48_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_48_note_1.md)

 The increasing petulance in the accents of the ageing poet was
accompanied by an even more painful growth of intolerance. In all his
writings the Catholic Church is declared to be the sole repository of a
truth inaccessible to human reason, but it is disconcerting to the
reader of the *Cherubinic Wanderer* to find its author affirming that
outside the Church there is no Christ and no life-giving Holy
Ghost.<span id="page_48_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_48_note_2.md) From the
doctrine of *extra ecclesia nulla salus* it is but a short stride to the
persuasion that those outside the fold must be driven in, if need be, by
the blows of the shepherd's crook. "Who is the mother," Angelus cries,
"who would not force her child to the medicine if there were no other
cure? Who is he so cruelly gentle who would not use violent means to
restrain a man in delirium from flinging himself out of a window?" The
argument is familiar in the mouths of persecutors. And Angelus <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> Silesius readily persuaded himself that the
violence of the means which he demanded should be applied to the
conversion of heretics was only the measure of his love for them. Of the
success of these methods he seems to have entertained no doubt;
compulsion would be necessary only in the first stage—once within the
fold the erring sheep would lose the desire for liberty. His excess of
zeal was not approved by the more judicious of his allies, whom he on
his part reproached with lukewarmness. It cannot but be distressing to
reflect that at the very time when Europe was beginning to weary of the
long and disastrous fevers of religious hatred Angelus Silesius should
have been exerting all his efforts to rekindle the dying fires of
intolerance and persecution.

 In this period of controversial activity a further development of his
poetic talent was hardly to be expected. In 1668 appeared a new and
augmented edition of the *Spiritual Pastorals*. In 1675 the *Cherubinic
Wanderer* also attained its second edition, in which a sixth book was
added to the previous five. In the same year a new poetical work was
given to the press, *The Sensuous Description of the Four Last Things
(Sinnliche Beschreibung der vier letzten Dinge)*. Death, the Last
Judgement, the pains of Hell and the joys of Heaven are set forth in a
series of pictures whose crude chiaroscuro of tortures and delights is
designed alternately to terrify and entice the reader into the practice
of holy living. The poet himself seems to be aware of the need of
justifying so violent a transposition of spiritual doctrine into a
context of uncompromising <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> materiality.
"We write," he explains in his Preface, "only what we know and what we
can think of and what can be represented to the sensual man. As to what
blessedness is in itself, it remains true that the eye hath not seen it
nor the ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man."
Together with this proviso we should no doubt also bear in mind the
blunter sensibility to representations of physical suffering which
characterized an age that had just emerged from the brutalities of the
Thirty Years War. The poem presents itself frankly as an instrument of
propaganda and is to be regarded rather as a pendant to the author's
controversial literature than as a work of the disinterested
imagination.

 Nevertheless it bears all too plain evidence of the clouding of the
once serene heaven of the poet's mind. The scenes of torture which he
depicts with unmixed colours in his description of the Last Judgement,
accordant though they may be with traditional representation, seem to
have presented themselves with a kind of fascination to his morbid
fantasy. Obsessed with the spectre of heresy and frustrated in his
campaign for its extermination, he appears to have found an almost
sadistic relish in letting his fancy play upon the punishment to be
inflicted in a future world upon those who had escaped a merited
chastisement in this. His description of the joys of the blessed gives
scope for a happier display of his sensitiveness to natural beauties
and, in particular, of his love of flowers and birds. His Paradise is no
less substantial than his Inferno. It reproduces all the pleasures
without any of the <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> inconveniences of the
lower world, offering a composite and opulent landscape in which
autumnal peaches and muscatels ripen side by side with spring daffodils
and anemones, while flocks of sheep adorned with fleece of silk instead
of wool repose in fields of never-fading clover. The Court of Heaven
reduplicates on a grander scale that of a terrestrial prince-bishop,
including even a Court Marshal and a corps of "Edelknaben." But the
triviality of the Baroque imagery cannot obscure the moral earnestness
of the poet. Even the accent of the mystic is heard in the prediction
that ultimately all "otherness" will fall away and the very
consciousness of self be lost.

 Tradition has asserted that in his later years Angelus Silesius burned
all the books bequeathed to him by Abraham von Franckenberg. That in his
fanatical detestation of heresy he should have destroyed the works of
Giordano Bruno, whom the Inquisition had condemned to the stake, is not
improbable, and his library of Protestant authors may have suffered a
like fate. Others however survived the holocaust, and among them was a
Latin version of a work by an anonymous Dutch sixteenth-century writer
of a mildly mystical type, entitled *Margarita Evangelica*. A
translation of this book by Angelus Silesius, undertaken at an earlier
date, appeared in 1676. In the same year he edited thirty-nine of his
controversial tractates, which were issued with a new Introduction under
the title of *Ecclesiologia*. This publication terminated his literary
activity.

\*  
\*   \*

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

 On June 8, 1671, the episcopal coach waited before the doors of the
palace to convey Sebastian von Rostock to Trebnitz where he was to
superintend the restoration of yet another Lutheran church to
Catholicism. At the last moment an imperial decree cancelling the
sequestration was put into his hands. The waiting coach was sent away.
On receiving the news of this minor Protestant success the champion of
the Counter-Reformation in Silesia was seized by a stroke. Early the
following morning the Cathedral Chapter was informed that the
Prince-Bishop was dead.

 The loss of his friend and protector added to the gloom which gathered
round Angelus Silesius in his later years. Isolated from the friends of
his youth by his change of faith, tormented by his Protestant
adversaries, who clung round him, as he said, like a swarm of hornets
and stung him with their poisonous satires, caricatures and lampoons,
estranged even from many of his Catholic associates, who were repelled
by the extravagance of his proselytizing temper, suffering under a
mortal disease, Angelus Silesius was in greater need than ever before of
those solaces of friendship which his nature appears always to have
demanded. Fortunately his need was fulfilled and a friendship, warmer
perhaps than that of the stern Prince-Bishop, cheered the later years of
his life.

 Bernard Rose, Abbot of the Cistercian monastery of Grüssau and Vicar
General of his Order for Silesia, belonged to the circle of Rostock's
associates and was one of the most strenuous supporters of the
Counter-Reformation movement. It was natural therefore that <span
id="page_53">p. 53</span> during his visits to Breslau he should have
become acquainted with the famous Catholic controversialist and poet. He
was in all respects an exemplary prelate, an enthusiastic church
builder, a promoter of pilgrimages, enforcing a strict discipline in the
monasteries under his rule, himself sharing in his own abbey the common
life of the brethren in choir and refectory. Furthermore he was of a
warm and generous heart. His abbey was renowned for its hospitality. Its
doors were always open to the poor, and needy travellers were richly
entertained and sent away laden with gifts.

 Grüssau was situated on a spur of the Riesen Gebirge on the borders of
Bohemia, some fifty miles south-west of Breslau. Thither Angelus
journeyed in spite of his weakness to visit the Abbot. His health
suffered from the raw mountain air, but for this the warm welcome that
he received more than made amends. Such kindness, he relates, somewhat
wistfully perhaps, he had never experienced elsewhere. He was enchanted
with all that he saw. The abbey was like heaven and the monks lived like
angels. He was moved to tears at the sight of the hundreds of poor
children who were fed by the Abbot's bounty. A pilgrimage which took
place during his visit roused him, as processions were wont to do, to
the highest degree of enthusiasm. "If you had been present," he writes,
"you would have beheld with admiration not only the brightly shining
paintings or shields, the multitude of burning torches, the worshipful
images of Jesus, Mary and Joseph, the various costumes of the image
bearers and all the rest <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> of the
furnishing, but you would also have seen him \[the Abbot\] going on foot
the whole way, over hill and down dale, in the midst of his poor
subjects, praying and singing with them and scattering alms, so that it
is a pity that the whole pageant has not been engraved on copper."

 The "poor subjects," Angelus informs us, consisted chiefly of the
Abbot's converts, and there were cogent reasons for their conversion,
for Bernard Rose was a stringent represser of heresy and employed the
threat of imprisonment to purge his territory from the taint of
Lutheranism. It was the fervour of their mutual zeal for the
reconversion of Silesia that helped to forge the link of their
friendship. The Abbot lent the pamphleteer that support of which he had
been deprived by the death of Rostock and spurred him to excesses which
it is probable that the more statesmanlike Bishop would have restrained.
Having lavished in charitable benefactions the considerable fortune
which he had inherited, Angelus now lacked the necessary funds for
financing the issue of his works. Rose's purse however was at his
disposal. The poem of the *Four Last Things* and the *Ecclesiologia*
were published at his expense, and the latter probably also at his
instigation.

 More and more as the shadows closed round him, Angelus Silesius turned
to Bernard Rose for assistance and sympathy. He was now a dying man, and
as he wrote the dedication of the *Ecclesiologia* to his friend, feared
that death would take the pen from his fingers before he had
accomplished his task. He was broken, moreover, not only in body but in
spirit. Silesia, in spite of his twenty years' warfare, remained
stubbornly <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> Protestant. His enemies, he
states with a naïve surprise, rewarded him for his efforts to warn them
of their eternal danger with nothing but ingratitude, hate and
persecution. They had even complained of him to the Emperor as a
sedition-monger who deserved to have his tongue torn out of his throat.
His friends were lukewarm and misunderstood him. Sheltered though he was
in his cloistral retirement from the hostility of the outer world, even
there he was conscious of a certain aloofness in the attitude of those
around him. He speaks of himself, when lying sick to death in the
Hospice of St. Matthias, as "forsaken by all other spiritual
flower-fragrance or refreshment" save that which came down to him like
the breath of roses from the mountains of Grüssau. "You are what you are
called—a rose," he wrote to his friend, "a spiritual rose which blossoms
through God's grace in the flower-vessel of your body." He regrets that
in his Introduction to the *Ecclesiologia* he has painted his friend's
virtues in all too pale and niggardly colours, "but the painter is sick
and can neither mix the colours nor guide the brush aright."

 These words were written towards the end of March 1677. As though not
caring to keep his body alive any longer, he refused almost all
nourishment, and to those who saw him appeared scarcely to own a
corporal existence. During the last few weeks he declined to admit any
visitor, in order that he might not be distracted even for a moment from
inward contemplation. Having received the sacraments of Absolution and
Extreme Unction with a clear consciousness, be died peacefully on July
9, 1677.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

 His enemies, implacable to the last, gave out that Angelus Silesius had
hanged himself.

\*  
\*   \*

The attempt to bring into clear focus the personality of the author of
the *Cherubinic Wanderer* is frustrated by a lack of relevant material.
Although as convert, court official, poet and controversialist, Dr.
Johann Scheffler was a prominent actor on the public stage of Silesia,
and played his part to the accompaniment of some applause and a storm of
hisses, his contemporaries have left no records from which we can
construct an intimate portrait of the man himself. Daniel Schwartz, the
Jesuit Father who pronounced his funeral oration, speaks as a churchman
in laudatory terms of the virtues of the deceased priest—his large
charity, his rigorous asceticism, his zeal in the defence of
orthodoxy—but he is silent upon those features of habit and character
which it would most gratify our lay curiosity to be informed of. Nor is
the gap in our knowledge filled by any disclosure made by Angelus
himself. Little of a private nature remains to us from his hand; only in
the preliminaries of his *Ecclesiologia* does be lift the veil for a
moment and allow us a brief glimpse of his personal environment. Our
portrait of him, therefore, must be pieced together from inferences
drawn from the recorded events of his scanty biography and such
autobiographical elements as can be discovered in his published
writings.

 In his valuable study of the poet, Georg Ellinger emphasizes as the
dominant note of his character an <span id="page_57">p. 57</span>
ungoverned impulsiveness which is presumed to have been inherited from
his father, the irascible Polish nobleman. Before such a presumption
could be well established, our knowledge, not only of the Lord of
Borowisce but also of the laws of heredity, would have to be much more
precise than they actually are: sons have a way of disowning as well as
reproducing their fathers' distinctive qualities. Nevertheless
indications are not wanting that Angelus Silesius was characterized by a
certain nervous irritability which made it difficult for him in any
course of thought or action to pursue the golden mean. Such a lack of
balance and measure may be traced in his quickness to take offence at
the action of Pastor Freytag, in his sudden determination to resign the
office of Court Marshal rather than compromise a petty quarrel, in his
eagerness to exhibit himself to the contempt of his fellow-townsmen in
the Catholic processions at Breslau, in the intolerance of his polemical
writings and the violence of the measures which he advocated for the
extirpation of Protestantism, in the extremity of both his generosity
and his asecticism. There was a quality of rashness in his nature which
pushed him always to excess. His statement that he composed the first
book of the *Cherubinic Wanderer* in four days announces a capacity for
working at fever-heat. His verses give evidence of having been struck
out in breathless moments of impulse. They lack the chastening of the
file and remain ejaculatory and often contradictory. The habit of his
mind impelled him to violence of expression and to neglect of the
correlation of his ideas. <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> It is
understandable that he should have fallen under the spell of Eckhart,
whose sentences were marked by an audacity and repudiation of compromise
equal to his own. The excessive sweetness of his devotional poetry, with
its luxuriance of physical symbolism, betrays a similar absence of
restraint in the current of the emotions.

 His physical constitution and the circumstances of his upbringing
contributed to enhance his sensibility. The child of an elderly father
and an ailing mother, he inherited a frail body which was still further
weakened by the encroachments of consumption. The fact that he was left
an orphan at the age of fourteen is presumptive of the loneliness of his
youth, and in later years the habit of solitude seems to have grown upon
him. "I flee from the crowd," he remarks in one of his couplets, and it
is probable that he himself is the Theophilus of another verse, whom an
interlocutor reproaches for being too much alone. A solitary disposition
is at once the cause of sensitiveness and the consequence of it. His
habit of withdrawal from the world rendered less bearable the roughness
of its contacts. The abusiveness of his enemies stung him to the quick
and exacerbated the bitterness of his replies. The failure of his
friends to adjust their views to his own was interpreted as coldness and
became the matter of querulous complaint.

 Although it was a part of his religion to deny himself the pleasures of
the senses, Angelus Silesius does not appear to have been indifferent to
them. His body, he stated in one of his verses, was his dearest friend
as well as his greatest enemy. Parting from it would be <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> pain. Many of his verses open with a
confession of delight: "Beauty I dearly love," "I love to see roses," "I
love to hear trumpets." "The figure of the world," he exclaims, "is full
of splendour." He makes a constant use of flowers in his poetic imagery.
His employment of them goes beyond the conventionalism of the religious
poet, to whom lilies are all but lifeless metaphors for purity and
virginity; in an age of formalism, when admittance to the dignity of
poetic mention was almost confined to the lily and the rose, he lingers
lovingly over the names of the wilder varieties. His repeatedly
expressed wish that his heart might be like "a vase full of flowers"
could come naturally only to one to whom such an object was familiar and
delightful. Nevertheless he finds it scarcely permissible to rest his
satisfaction in the fugitive beauty of the objects of sense and to enjoy
them for their own sakes, but must refer them to their moral
significance. He loves roses, he says, because they blossom for
themselves alone and care not whether they are seen of any eye, and he
takes for a type of sinlessness the "dumb flowers" which never pretend
to be other than they are. The unhappy doctrine, which he seems to have
shared with almost all the medieval mystics, that the eye or the soul
could only perform its function when the eye of sense was closed,
thwarted the development of his esthetic perceptivity.

 Angelus Silesius was more than usually pliant to the radiations of a
dominating personality. The important part played in his life by his
friendships has already been remarked upon. Of these there can be <span
id="page_60">p. 60</span> no doubt that his relationship with
Franckenberg was the most intimate and the most fruitful. The period of
his sojourn at Oels witnessed the blossoming-time of his spirit and of
his poetical activity, and it is scarcely too much to say that but for
Franckenberg the *Cherubinic Wanderer* would never have been written.
Rostock's militant zeal precluded a disinterested friendship; for him
Angelus was a tool to be used for the furtherance of impersonal ends.
Bernard Rose's warmth of affection was accompanied by an illiberal
influence which still further deflected the mind of the poet from its
earlier serenity. Throughout all his literary activity Angelus reveals
the same eager receptiveness to suggestion. There is little that is
strictly original in either the form or the substance of his work, but
building on the foundations of others he was frequently successful, by a
quickness of sympathetic insight, in perfecting a design which the
original authors had left unfinished.

 Angelus Silesius sums up the long mystical tradition of Germany, and
yet it remains to be asked to what extent he himself was the recipient
of the authentic mystical experience. Was the ecstatic union of which he
speaks the central fact of his spiritual life, or did he merely
crystallize in scintillating phrases the reports of others? The fact
that almost all his more pregnant utterances are transcriptions of
passages which may be discovered in the writings of the older mystical
authors suggests a deficiency in the fountains of inward experience. He
views the promised land but seems to describe it in terms of hope and
anticipation. A sympathetic imagination enabled him to decipher the
<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> mystical code, but the message itself
appears to have been communicated from without rather than to have been
received from within.

 It is in fact impossible, in a close attention to his voice, not to be
aware of a note of defeat, perhaps even of despair. His reiterated Alas!
Alas! voices a sense of unfulfilment. He has not yet succeeded in
finding the central point of that Eternity into which he so ardently
yearns to pass. He seeks but has not found the secret of Eternal Rest.
He is himself the wheel that runs of itself and knows never any peace.
He is in conflict with himself. "I love and hate myself. I make war upon
myself. To get the victory over myself I use force and practise
strategy. I batter and kill myself. I do all that I can to be myself no
longer I."<span id="page_61_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_61_note_1.md) This is
the language of tortured endeavour, not of attained peace. Such
assertions as "I am as great as God," "I am as rich as God," owe their
triumphant resonance to a logic of mysticism that was proved to the
intellect rather than upon the heart. Transposed into the mode of
Baroque, the Gothic sentences of Eckhart sometimes give out a brittle,
staccato note; Angelus Silesius fails to reproduce the deep sonority,
the massive groundswell of conviction, that sweeps through the sermons
of the Rhineland master.

 The assured voices of the mystics telling of the peace that follows the
stilling of the insistent clamour of the restless, desiring, anxious,
personal I, came to Angelus with a promise of deliverance from the
strain and turbulence of the life of impulse. Merged in the <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> waveless ocean of Deity, asleep in the dark
night of the Absolute, he would be freed at last from the fret of
sensibility and the ache of an unsatisfied craving for love. But this
effort of supreme abandonment was not within his power. At that altitude
where the familiar world recedes into a concernless unreality the
atmosphere was too frigid and rarefied for him to breathe. Not the
impassive serenity of an unknowable Godhead but the love of a known and
personal God alone could fill his being with light and warmth. And so be
turned for the satisfaction of his emotional needs to the human figure
of a divine Person. In the *Cherubinic Wanderer* the scenes of Bethlehem
and Calvary, the images of the Virgin and the saints, already propitiate
the eye that is baffled in its endeavour to penetrate into the void of
the Divine Darkness. To the *Cherubinic Wanderer* succeeded the
*Spiritual Pastorals of the Psyche in love with her Jesus*, in which the
soul seeks and finds a Lover with a distinguishable form. Angelus
Silesius aspired after an ineffable union in which the self loses its
sense of distinction, but he convinces us of an experienced rapture
rather when he relates his encounter with the loving Shepherd, his
adorable *Jesulein*. The Catholic Church, with its personalization of
the Divine, its human and heavenly society, beckoned him like a grateful
hearth at which he could warm his spirit chilled with its wanderings in
the "Silent Wilderness where no one is at home."

 Yet in the end it may be doubted whether the promises of the Catholic
Church were crowned with a more satisfactory fulfilment than those of
the *via* <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> *negativa* of mysticism.
Stronger natures than his own availed themselves of the ardour of the
convert and urged him into the arena of controversial strife. Angelus
found himself caught up in the machinery of the Counter-Reformation. As
the peace which he sought eluded him, he endeavoured to recapture it by
a more desperate devotion to the cause in which he had enlisted.
"Fanaticism," it has been said, "consists in redoubling your effort when
you have forgotten your aim."<span
id="page_63_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_63_note_1.md) Angelus Silesius never
forgot his first aim, which was the conquest of the Kingdom of Heaven,
but he spent his best energies in the service of a secondary one, the
conquest of Protestant Silesia.

 It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the life of Angelus
Silesius conceals an inner tragedy. It might perhaps be suggested that
the tragedy was occasioned by his submission to Catholicism, and yet
under happier circumstances he might have found peace for his spirit in
the Church which Tauler, Suso and Ruysbroeck clung to and which even
Eckhart did not abandon. It was his misfortune to have been received
into the Church at a moment when the Church's militancy was most sharply
accentuated. The need of the hour, at any rate in Silesia, was not for
contemplatives but for combatants. It seems clear that if, at the moment
when he rejected and was rejected by Lutheranism, Angelus had been true
to his deepest self, be would have followed the way leading to spiritual
freedom, even though it had led him into solitary places. Had
Franckenberg lived it is possible to surmise that the <span
id="page_64">p. 64</span> Church would have been deprived of one of her
most illustrious converts. But Angelus was not strong enough to stand
alone. Dependent, clinging, responsive, his nature craved the support of
an authority to which he could sacrifice himself, and in this sacrifice
of his true self consisted the tragedy of his life.

 In the cloister of the Merciful Brethren at Breslau hangs a portrait in
oils of Angelus Silesius painted in the last years of his life. The
wasted cheeks are of an ashen hue. A thin black moustache droops round
the corners of the close-shut mouth, below which clings a tuft of beard.
The dome of the forehead recedes into the shadow of the dark hair
enclosed in a velvet cap. Beneath the lifted eyebrows and falling
eyelids the mournful eyes are fixed in a gaze which seems to rest upon
its object without interest, as though what it saw was but a
hallucination scarcely worthy of serious concern. A vertical furrow
above the springing of the thin aquiline nose indicates suffering and
perplexity. One hand rests upon a book, the other hangs downwards
nervelessly. The frail hunched form has a vague suggestion of pain. In
the compressed grey lips, the faded bitter smile, the steady but
incurious gaze, it is not impossible to detect the imprint of a spirit
whose sympathy has been frozen by chilling and fore-concluded
judgements. But above all, the expression communicates a sense of strain
and disillusionment, as of one who had toiled and suffered without
enjoying the fruition of his labours, and had tasted the bitterness of
defeat, yet with an unpersuadable refusal to acknowledge himself to be
defeated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](scw004.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_27">p. 27</span>

 <span id="page_27_note_1"></span>[1](#page_27_fr_1.md) This reply recalls
the epigrammatic verse of the contemporary Silesian poet, Friedrich von
Logau:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Luthrisch, päbstisch, und calvinisch,<br />
 diese Glauben alle drey<br />
Sind vorhanden; doch ist Zweifel<br />
 wo das Christenthum denn sey?<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

(Lutheran, Papist and Calvinist, these three faiths we know; but the
question is, where is Christianity?)

<span id="footnotes_page_30">p. 30</span>

 <span id="page_30_note_1"></span>[1](#page_30_fr_1.md) The poem culminates
in an impressive final stanza:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Wer Zeit nunmt ohne Zeit und Sorgen ohne Sorgen,<br />
Wem gestern war wie heut' und heute gilt wie morgen,<br />
Wer alles gleiche schätzt, der tritt schon in der Zeit<br />
In den gewunschten Stand der lieben Ewigkeit.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

(Who takes Time and Care as if Time and Care were not, whose Yesterday
was as To-day and whose To-day is as To-morrow, who values all things
alike, he enters even now in the midst of time into the longed-for state
of happy eternity.)

 The thought echoes that of Böhme in a verse which Franckenberg recorded
in the second of his biographies:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Wem Zeit ist wie Ewingkeit<br />
Und Ewigkeit wie Zeit,<br />
Der is befreit von allem Streit.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

(He to whom Time is as Eternity and Eternity as Time is freed from all
conflict.)

There may also be an echo from à Kempis, who in Book III, Chapter XXVI,
of the *Imitation* noted among the marks of a perfect man the ability to
pass throught many cares as if without a care—*inter multas curas quasi
sine cura transire*.

<span id="footnotes_page_33">p. 33</span>

 <span id="page_33_note_1"></span>[1](#page_33_fr_1.md) According to one
authority the choice of this name was due to Scheffler's esteem of a
Spanish mystical writer, Johannes ab Angelis, author of *Los Triunfos
del Amor*. In his funeral sermon, however, the Jesuit Daniel Schwartz
stated that the allusion was to the name of "Angel" by which he was
known in his childhood. The addition of Silesius serves to distinguish
him from a contemporary Lutheran theologian, Johannes Angelus of
Darmstadt.

<span id="footnotes_page_34">p. 34</span>

 <span id="page_34_note_1"></span>[1](#page_34_fr_1.md) "Diese \[the
excerpts from the prayers of the saints inctuded in the anthology\] ob
zwar die Urheber drüber stunden, schalt der dahmalige Hoff prediger für
Enthusiastisch. Welches mir denn den letzten Stoss gab, dem Lutherthum
gram zu werden." *Verthädigten Lutherischen Wahrheit*, 1665.

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

 <span id="page_40_note_1"></span>[1](#page_40_fr_1.md) A comparison of the
verses at the beginning of Book IV of the *Cherubinic Wanderer* with
those of *Book of the Spiritual Pastorals* suggests many
cross-references. Thus a verse (iv. 3) of the *Cherubinic Wanderer*
begins as follows:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Ich habe dich, mein Kind, du zarter Nazarener,<br />
Den Lilien oft vergleicht.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

No such comparison is to be found in the preceding book, but in i. 12 of
the *Spiritual Pastorols* we read:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Sagt an, ihr Lilien und Narzissen,<br />
Wo ist das zarte Lilien-Kind?<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="footnotes_page_41">p. 41</span>

 <span id="page_41_note_1"></span>[1](#page_41_fr_1.md) The best known are
"Mir nach, spricht Christus, unser Reid" and "Auf, auf, O Seel, auf,
auf, zum Streit."

<span id="footnotes_page_44">p. 44</span>

 <span id="page_44_note_1"></span>[1](#page_44_fr_1.md) Preface to
*Ecclesiologia*, 1676.

<span id="footnotes_page_48">p. 48</span>

 <span id="page_48_note_1"></span>[1](#page_48_fr_1.md) Among the
theologians of the day the schoolboy amenity of discovering an
unpleasant allusion in an adversary's surname was much in vogue. Thus
Scheffler is nicknamed Schneffler or Schefflermaul. He retorts by
addressing a theologian of the name of Hunnius as a "totes Huhn." It may
be recalled that Luther was not above referring to the saintly
Schwenkfeld as "Stenkfeld."

 <span id="page_48_note_2"></span>[2](#page_48_fr_2.md) Ausser der Kirche
Christi, die nur die eine und einzige, ist kein Christus . . . ausser
ihr macht auch der heilige Geist niemanden lebendig. (*Alleiniges
Himmelbreich*. 1675.)

<span id="footnotes_page_61">p. 61</span>

 <span id="page_61_note_1"></span>[1](#page_61_fr_1.md) *Cherubinic
Wanderer*, iii. 229.

<span id="footnotes_page_63">p. 63</span>

 <span id="page_63_note_1"></span>[1](#page_63_fr_1.md) G. Santayana,
*Reason in Commonsense*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
