[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](itp05)  [Next](itp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO6SI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk*, by Edward Carpenter,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### As Inventors of the Arts and Crafts

I HAVE already said that I think there is an original connection of some
kind between homosexuality and divination; but in saying this, of
course, I do not mean that everywhere and always the one is associated
with the other, or that the relationship between the two is extremely
well marked; but I contend that a connection can be traced and that on
*a priori* grounds its existence is quite probable.

And first, with regard to actual observation of such a connection, the
fact of the widespread belief in it, which I have already noted as
existing among the primitive tribes of the earth, and their founding of
all sorts of customs on that belief, must count for something. Certainly
the mere existence of a widespread belief among early and superstitious
peoples--as for instance that an eclipse is caused by a dragon
swallowing the sun--does not prove its truth; but in the case we are
considering the matter is well within the range of ordinary

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

observation, and the constant connection between the *choupan* and the
*angakok*, the *ke'yev* and the *shaman*, the *berdashe* and the
witch-doctor, the ganymede and the temple-priest, and their
correspondences all over the world, the *basir* among the Dyaks, the
boy-priests in the temples of Peru, the same in the Buddhist temples of
Ceylon, Burma and China--all these cases seem to point to some
underlying fact, of the fitness or adaptation of the invert for priestly
or divinatory functions. And though the tendency already alluded to, of
a later religion to ascribe devilish potency to earlier cults, must
certainly in many instances shed a sinister or sorcerous glamour over
the invert, yet this exaggeration need not blind us to the existence of
a residual fact behind it; and anyhow to a great many of the cases just
mentioned it does not apply at all, since in them the question of one
religion superseding another does not enter.

To come to more recent times, the frequency with which accusations of
homosexuality have been launched against the religious orders and monks
of the Catholic Church. the Knights Templars, and even the ordinary
priests and clerics, must give us pause. Nor need we overlook the fact
that in Protestant Britain the curate and the parson quite often appear
to belong to some "third sex" which is neither wholly masculine nor
wholly feminine!

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Granting, then, that the connection in question is to a certain degree
indicated by the anthropological facts which we already possess--is
there, we may ask, any rational ground for expecting this connection *a
priori* and from psychological considerations? I think there is.

In the first place all science now compels us to admit the existence of
the homosexual temperament as a fact of human nature, and an important
fact; and not only so, but to perceive that it is widely spread among
the various races of the earth, and extends back to the earliest times
of which we have anything like historical knowledge. We can no longer
treat it as a mere local and negligible freak, or put it in the category
of a sinful and criminal disposition to be stamped out at all costs. We
feel that it must have some real significance. The question is what that
may be. The following is a suggestion that may cover part of the ground,
though not, I think, the whole.

In the primitive societies the men (the quite normal men) are the
warriors and hunters. These are their exclusive occupations. The women
(the normal women) attend to domestic work and agriculture, and their
days are consumed in those labors. But in the evolution of society there
are many more functions to be represented than those simple ones just
mentioned. And we may almost

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

think that if it had not been for the emergence of intermediate
types--the more or less feminine, man and similarly the more or less
masculine woman--social life might never have advanced beyond these
primitive phases. But when the man came along who did not *want* to
fight--who perhaps was more inclined to run away--and who did not
particularly care about hunting, he necessarily discovered some other
interest and occupation--composing songs or observing the qualities of
herbs or the processions of the stars. Similarly with the woman who did
not care about house-work and child-rearing. The non-warlike men and the
non-domestic women, in short, sought new outlets for their energies.
They sought different occupations from those of the quite ordinary man
and woman--as in fact they do to-day; and so they became the initiators
of new activities. They became students of life and nature, inventors
and teachers of arts and crafts, or wizards (as they would be
considered) and sorcerers; they became diviners and seers, or revealers
of the gods and religion; they became medicine-men and healers, prophets
and prophetesses; and so ultimately laid the foundation of the
priesthood, and of science, literature and art. Thus--on this view, and
as might not unreasonably be expected--it was primarily a variation in
the intimate sex-nature

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

of the human being which led to these important differentiations in his
social life and external activities.

In various ways we can see the likelihood of this thesis, and the
probability of the intermediate man or woman becoming a forward force in
human evolution. In the first place, as just mentioned, not wholly
belonging to either of the two great progenitive branches of the human
race, his nature would not find complete satisfaction in the activities
of either branch, and he would necessarily create a new sphere of some
kind for himself. Secondly, finding himself *different* from the great
majority, sought after by some and despised by others, now an object of
contumely and now an object of love and admiration, he would be forced
to *think*. His mind turned inwards on himself would be forced to tackle
the problem of his own nature, and afterwards the problem of the world
and of outer nature. He would become one of the first thinkers,
dreamers, discoverers. Thirdly, some of the Intermediates (though
certainly not all) combining the emotionality of the feminine with the
practicality of the masculine, and many other qualities and powers of
both sexes, as well as much of their experience, would undoubtedly be
greatly superior in ability to the rest of their, tribe, and making
forward progress in the world of thought and imagination

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

would become inventors, teachers, musicians, medicine-men and priests;
while their early science and art (for such it would be)--prediction of
rain, determination of seasons, observation of stars, study of herbs,
creation of chants and songs, rude drawings, and so forth-would be
accounted quite magical and divinatory.

With regard to the early beginnings of poetry and music, we know that
dancing had an important place; and there is an interesting passage in
Leguével de Lacombe's *Voyage d Madagascar*, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) (vol. L, pp. 97, 98), which indicates the
connection of these arts, among the Tsecats of Madagascar, with sexual
variation. "Dancers form a distinct class in Madagascar, though they are
not very numerous. They have their own manners and customs, and live
apart; they do not marry, and even affect dislike for women--although
they wear the dress of the latter and imitate their voice, gestures, and
general habits. They wear large earrings of gold or silver, necklaces of
coral or coloured beads, and bracelets of silver; they carefully extract
the hair of their beards, and in short play the part of women so well
that one is often deceived. For the rest these dancers have simple
manners, and are very sober in their habits; they are continually on the
move, and are well accepted

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

wherever they go; sometimes, indeed, they receive considerable presents.
I have seen chiefs who have been amused by them for some days make them
a present, on their departure, of two or three slaves. They are the
poets or the bards of the island, and they improvise rhapsodies in
praise of those who are generous to them."

Very similar customs connecting the wandering life of dancers, actors,
and singers with a certain amount of inversion of temperament, are known
to have existed among that strange and remarkable people, the Areoi of
Polynesia: of whom Win. Ellis, the missionary already quoted, says that
they were honoured as gods, and were supposed to be inspired by the gods
to become members of the Areoi society; also that their initiations
began by submission to service and to various ordeals, and ended by a
ceremonial in which the candidate snatched and appropriated the cloth
worn by the *chief* woman present!

In all this--whether relating to primitive science or primitive
art--there would, of course, really be nothing miraculous. It is easy to
see that certain individuals, whose interests or abilities were turned
in special or unusual directions, would seem to the general herd as
having supernatural intuitions or powers. The "rain-maker's" predictions
in South Africa to-day may date from no more weather

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

lore than those of a British farmer; but to his tribe he appears a
magician. Magic and early science have almost everywhere been
interchangeable terms. The intermediate or Uranian man, from this point
of view, would be simply an ordinary member of the tribe who from his
double temperament would be rather more observant and acute and
originative than the rest. There is, however, another point of view from
which he might be credited with something distinctly additional in the
way of faculty.

For, in the fourth place, I believe that at this stage an element of
what might *really* be called divination would come in. I believe that
the blending of the masculine and feminine temperaments would in some of
these cases produce persons whose perceptions would be so subtle and
complex and rapid as to come under the head of genius, persons of
intuitive mind who would perceive things without knowing how, and follow
far concatenations of causes and events without concerning themselves
about the *why*--diviners and prophets in a very real sense. And these
persons-whether they prophesied downfall or disaster, or whether they
urged their people onward to conquest and victory, or whether by acute
combinations of observation and experience they caught at the healing
properties of herbs or determined the starry influences on

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the seasons and the crops--in almost all cases would acquire and did
acquire a strange reputation for sanctity and divinity--arising partly
perhaps out of the homosexual taboo, but also out of their real
possession and command of a double-engine psychic power.

The double life and nature certainly, in many cases of inverts observed
to-day, seems to give to them an extraordinary humanity and sympathy,
together with a remarkable power of dealing with human beings. It may
possibly also point to a further degree of evolution than usually
attained, and a higher order of consciousness, very imperfectly
realised, of course, but indicated. This interaction in fact, between
the masculine and the feminine, this mutual illumination of logic and
intuition, this combination of action and meditation, may not only raise
and increase the power of each of these faculties, but it may give the
mind a new quality, and a new power of perception corresponding to the
blending of subject and object in consciousness. It may possibly lead to
the development of that third order of perception which has been called
the cosmic consciousness, and which may also be termed divination. "He
who knows the masculine," says Lao-tsze, "and at the same time keeps to
the feminine, will be the whole world's channel. Eternal virtue will not
depart from him,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

and he will return again to the state of an infant." To the state of an
infant!--that is, he will become undifferentiated from Nature, who is
his mother, and who will lend him all her faculties.

It is not, of course, to be supposed that the witchdoctors and diviners
of barbarian tribes have in general reached to the high order of
development just described, yet it is noticeable, in the slow evolution
of society, how often the late and high developments have been indicated
in the germ in primitive stages; and it may be so in this case. Very
interesting in this connection is the passage already quoted (page
[19](itp04.htm#page_19)) from Elie Reclus about the initiations of the
Esquimaux *angakok* and the appearance to him of his own Genius or
Double from the world beyond, for almost exactly the same thing is
supposed to take place in the initiation of the religious yogi in
India--except that the god in this latter case appears to the pupil in
the form of his teacher or guru. And how often in the history of the
Christian saints has the divinity in the form of Jesus or Mary appeared
to the strenuous devotee, apparently as the culminating result of his
intense effort and aspiration, and of the opening out of a new plane of
perception in his mind! It may be that with every great onward push of
the growing soul, and every great crisis in which as it were a sheath or
a husk falls away from the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

expanding bud, something in the nature of a metamorphosis does really
take place; and the new order, the new revelation, the new form of life,
is seen for a moment as a Vision in glorious state of a divine being
within. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[60:1](itp06.htm#fr_31) 2 vols. (Paris, 1840).

<span id="fn_32"></span>[65:1](itp06.htm#fr_32) It is probable also that
the considerable degree of continence, to which many homosexuals are by
nature or external necessity compelled, contributes to this visionary
faculty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Hermaphrodism among Gods and Mortals](itp07)
