[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](itp08)  [Next](itp10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO6SI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk*, by Edward Carpenter,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### The Dorian Comradeship in Relation to the Status of Woman

ALTHOUGH, as has been already indicated, there are instances of manly
and military institutions of somewhat similar quality among other early
peoples, it is doubtful whether in the history of the world there has
ever been another case of such complete acceptance of comrade-love as a
valued and recognised cult; and certainly this cult has never been
associated with such priceless contributions to art, literature and
civilisation generally, as in the case of the Greeks. It is consequently
all the more strange to find with what neglect the whole subject--both
of the love itself and of its relation to political and social life--has
been treated in modern times. It is difficult to understand the attitude
of mind which--as in some professorial and literary circles--is never
tired of pointing out the excellencies of the Greek civilisation, the
public

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

spirit and bravery of its peoples, their instinct for beauty, their
supremacy (especially at Athens) in literature and art; and yet
absolutely ignores a matter which was obviously a foundation element of
that civilisation.

The only feasible explanation, to my mind, of this strange phenomenon is
that people--taking (it must be said) a very easy-going and superficial
view of the whole subject--have assumed that the love-customs and
institutions which have been described above were merely adopted as a
blind or a cloak for sensuality, and were of no particular importance in
themselves. Everyone knows, of course, that homosexual habits of a more
or less frivolous and ephemeral kind are to be found fairly widely
spread among most peoples; and as it has been generally assumed among
Western moralists that nothing good can proceed from the homosexual
instinct, it has been possible for a certain class of minds either to
pass over the said institutions as being frivolous and unimportant too,
or else, if forced to acknowledge their value and importance, to
separate this aspect of them entirely from the homosexual aspect, and to
say that while the former was glorious the latter was negligible. But as
I say, this kind of view is of the most superficial sort. It is
impossible, with any seriousness, or deliberate consideration,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

to maintain on the one hand that the institution of military comradeship
among the Dorians--branching out as it did later in the various Greek
states into an inspiration of political freedom, or of art, or of
philosophy--was frivolous or unimportant; and it is equally impossible
on the other hand, to weigh the evidence and not see that a most
intimate and, to some degree, physical relation lay at the root of the
institution and could not possibly be separated from it--not to see, in
fact, that what we call homosexuality was of the essence of the thing.
All the historical evidence, and all the literature of this
period--whether serious or fanciful, whether in prose or in verse--point
to this intimate unity; and what the people themselves, who knew all the
circumstances, associated so closely together, it is hard for us to
separate and disunite.

We must conclude, then, that the Dorian Greeks and those who were
influenced by them regarded a very close and personal love between men
as part and parcel of their civic life. Though homosexual, as we should
say, in its quality, this love did not interfere with the institution of
normal or ordinary marriage, which existing alongside of it had its own
sphere of civic value and service--while the comrade-love occupied
another sphere, equally necessary.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

This being so, it would obviously be as absurd to try to explain away
the Greek comradeship, and all the life that flowed from it, by its
connection with sensual pleasure of a certain kind, as it would be to
explain away the joys and activities of marriage, and the life of the
family, by the phenomena of concubinage and hetairism.

There is, however, another explanation which has from time to time been
put forward--namely, that the predominance of the Uranian affection in
the Greek States was due to the contempt or neglect of women which
prevailed there; and this may demand a brief consideration.

Supposing such contempt and neglect to have been proved, the argument
even then is not very satisfactory, for it would still remain uncertain
which might be the horse and which the cart in the sequence--which the
cause and which the effect. But as a matter of fact, to prove anything
like general disregard or neglect of women by the Greek peoples would be
difficult. Lowes Dickinson, in his *Greek View of Life*, insists on the
prevalent conception among them of the inferiority of the female sex,
but he finds himself obliged (p. 164) to qualify this by large
exceptions, and he points out (what most authorities agree in) that
great fluctuations occurred, and that while in Homer there ruled "a
conception of woman and of her relation

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

to man finer and nobler in some respects than that of modern times," in
the 5th and 4th centuries, B.C., a comparatively low estimate had become
dominant. Benecke, in his *Women in Greek Poetry*, (Sonnenschein, 1896,)
goes with much care into this subject, and makes some remarks which are
very helpful for our purpose. He says (p. 7):--"It is generally agreed
that in prehistoric times the position of women among the Greeks was a
much higher one than was the case subsequently. There seems every reason
to believe that the social conditions of the Lesbians and the Dorians,
and the other nations which did not come under the influence of the
history-writing Ionians, were but the survivals of what was originally a
more or less general state." This is especially interesting to us
because it points to the fact that the institution of military
comradeship which came into Greece with the Dorians from prehistoric
sources must have been in its inception associated with just such a high
standard in the position of women, and not by any means with their
neglect or contempt. This association is also very noticeable in Homer.
For the main motive of the Iliad is, as Benecke observes, undoubtedly
the dramatic and passionate comradeship between Achilles and Patroclus;
yet no one could say that Andromache or Penelope or Nausicaa are
negligible or servile characters.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

There is ample evidence indeed to show that the status of women among
the early Dorians was one of freedom and honour--a survival, perhaps, of
a matriarchal period. Addington Symonds, in his *Key of Blue*  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) (p. 64), says:--"This masculine love did
not exclude marriage, nor had it the effect of lowering the position of
women in society, since it is notorious that in those Dorian States
where the love of comrades became an institution, women received *more*
public honour and enjoyed fuller liberty and power over property than
elsewhere." C. O. Müller, in his already quoted book (vol. ii., p. 395),
says:--"The Dorians, as well at Sparta as in the South of Italy, were
almost the only nation who esteemed the higher attributes of the female
mind as capable of cultivation." In Sparta the women had great sway and
influence. The wife was called δέσποινα (mistress) by the husband. As
girls they were "trained by physical exercise for the healthy
performance of the duties of motherhood; they were taught to run and
wrestle naked, like the youths, to dance and sing in public, and to
associate freely with men. Marriage was permitted only in the prime of
life; and a free intercourse, outside the limits of marriage, between
healthy men and women was encouraged and approved by public
opinion." <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65)

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

It may be worth while to quote entire the passage in which Plutarch
(Lycurgus, c. 14) describes this state of affairs. He first of all cites
Aristotle as saying (Polit, Book ii.) that "in the absence of their
husbands, the wives made themselves absolute mistresses at home, and
would be treated with as much respect as if they had been so many
queens;" and then he goes on to say that Lycurgus "took for that sex all
the care that was possible. As an instance of it, he ordered the maidens
to exercise themselves with wrestling, running, throwing the bar, and
casting the dart, to the end that the fruit they conceived might take
deeper root, and grow strong, and spread itself in strong and healthy
bodies; and withal that they themselves, by such robust exercises, might
be the more able to undergo the pains of child-bearing with ease and
safety. And to the end he might take away their overgreat tenderness and
that *acquired* womanishness which vain custom hath added to the
natural, he ordered that they should go naked as well as the young men,
and dance, too, in that condition at their solemn feasts and sacrifices,
singing certain songs, whilst the young men stood in a ring about them,
seeing and hearing them. In these songs they now and then gave a
satirical glance, to very good purpose, on those who had misbehaved
themselves (in the wars), and some

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

times sang enconiums upon such as had done any gallant action; and by
these means enflamed the younger sort with an emulation of their glory.
Those that were thus praised for their bravery, and in high credit among
the virgins, went away hugely satisfied with such commendation; and
those who were rallied were as sensibly touched with it as if they had
been formally and severely reprimanded; and so much the more because the
Kings and the whole Senate, as well as the rest of the rest of the city,
went to see and hear all that passed." <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)

This passage is particularly interesting here for two reasons:--(1)
because it shows the respect of the men for the opinion of the
women--their praise or their blame; and (2) because of the
extraordinarily public and open life of the latter, here represented,
and the equality of their physical training with that of the men. With
regard to this last, we have in the *Epithalamium* of Theocritus (Idyll
xviii.) a charming picture of a chorus of Spartan maidens singing before
the bridal chamber of Helen, and reminding her of how they used to
exercise by the banks of the Eurotas:--

<span class="small">"Thrice eighty virgins we pursued the race,  
Like men, anointed with the glistering oil."</span> <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No wonder it has
been said of the Spartans that

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

they were "the most healthy of the Greeks, and that the most beautiful
men as well as women were found amongst them." <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) Nor can we be surprised to read further in
Plutarch the anecdote of Gorgo, wife of King Leonidas,--"who being told,
in discourse with some foreign ladies, 'You women of Lacedaemon are they
only of the world who have an empire over the men,' she briskly
reparteed: 'A good reason, for we are the only women who bring forth
Men.'" <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) All this goes to show clearly
enough that--however it may have been in other Greek States, or at other
times--contempt and neglect of women did *not* prevail in Sparta in the
period which we are considering; and it proves conclusively that the
institution of military love among the Dorians did *not* rest upon
inferiority in the character of the women, or on any insufficiency of
access to them. <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70) The love was an
independent and authentic phenomenon, self-produced out of the heart and
temperament of the people, and not to be explained away by adventitious
and subsidiary circumstances.

And it suggests a further speculation, namely, whether the Uranian
temperament in the Dorian

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

men--or such amount of it as existed among them--did not naturally
favour rather than discourage this freedom and self-dependence and
political activity of the women. In present-day life it pretty clearly
is so. It is the Uranian classes of men, or those at least who are
touched with the Uranian temperament, who chiefly support the modern
woman's movement. They, among the men, are those who sympathise with the
aspirations of women towards liberty. The downright normal man with whom
the passion for the other sex is the dominant note of life may love and
care for his womenkind; but it is generally with a proprietary sort of
love. He does not exactly want to see them independent and
self-determining of their fates. It is the man in whom sex-polarity is
not too pronounced and dominant who looks for comradeship in woman, and
is glad to give her an equal footing with himself in social life. And so
also was it, perhaps, among some of these early and prehistoric peoples
of whom the Dorian traditions and the Homeric poems give us a glimpse.

Certainly it is curious that the gradual fall of the status of women in
Greece from those early days down to the 5th, 4th, and 3rd centuries,
B.C., when the position of the wife became that of a domestic drudge,
and her ideal was "to stay at home and mind the house" <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)--that this fall was

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

simultaneous with the gradual decline of the honour in which manly love
was held, and its gradual deterioration from a great civic institution
into a mere personal pastime and indulgence. The growth of civilisation
(as has elsewhere been remarked) <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) had
from the first the effect of accentuating the sex-passion. The luxurious
selfishness of men was stimulated in a way that led to the ultimate
enslavement of women; and it is possible that the simultaneous decay of
the Uranian love removed the one force which might have acted in the
opposite direction-namely, towards heroism, endurance, military and
civic efficiency, and a generous sense of comradeship towards the other
sex. Curious, I say, that these two changes should have gone on
simultaneously, and suggestive of the question whether there may not be
a necessary connection between them. Curious, too, to find that in our
present-day civilisations where (till quite recently) the position of
women had reached its lowest ebb, the Uranian attachment has similarly
been disowned and its healing influences utterly ignored.

With regard to the general suggestion just made that in very early
times--bordering on the prehistoric and matriarchal--love of a
homosexual or Uranian kind had a far wider scope and acknowledged

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

place in social life than in later days, I may, of course, refer to the
earlier chapters in this volume--which must anyhow convince us of the
immense ramifications and importance of the impulse in primitive
societies. And, with regard to the special peoples we are dealing with
in this paper, it may be desirable here to point out that this impulse
among the early Greek peoples was by no means confined to the men, but
was active and salient among the women also. Plutarch, in his *Lycurgus*
(c. 18), speaking of *paiderastia* among the Spartans, says:--"This sort
of love was so much in fashion among them that the most staid and
virtuous matrons would own publicly their passion to a modest and
beautiful virgin." <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) The loves of the
Lesbian women and of Sappho (B.C. 600) have been celebrated in all
literature, and have in modern times been treated with more respect,
perhaps, and understanding, than their counterpart among Greek men.
Bethe, in his treatise cited above, says, speaking first of the
attachment among the Greek men:--"It is clear that the Aeolian warriors
in Lesbos about 600, B.C., favored the same in their general admiration
for the Spartan ways, although in their poetry this does not show itself
very strongly. But the very close alliances of women there--well-known
in connection

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

with Sappho--presuppose equally close bonds among the men; just as these
latter in Sparta had their counterpart in feminine associations." <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) And in another passage, rebutting the
contention that these homosexual relations sprang from the seclusion of
the sexes from each other, he says:--"The attempt breaks down utterly in
face of the fact that just in Sparta and Lesbos, where we know most
about this boy-love and girl-love, the sexes to the best of our
knowledge, mixed with each other *more* freely than in the other Greek
States." <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75)

There appears to have been a curious custom in Sparta, connected with
the ordinary marriage by capture, which may be mentioned here as
suggesting some *wavering*, so to speak, at that time, of the line
between male and female. "The bridegroom," says Müller, <span
id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76) "brought the young virgin, having carried
her off from the chorus of maidens or elsewhere, to the bride's
maid--who cut short her hair, and left her lying in a man's dress and
shoes, without a light, on a bed of rushes; until the bridegroom
returning from the public supper, carried the bride to the nuptial
couch, and unloosed her girdle." Whatever may have been the exact
meaning of this custom, it almost suggests that

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

marriage by capture of women was preceded by marriage by capture of
youths.

At any rate, it becomes quite clear, I think, from all this that no
extraneous explanation--about the relative position of women, or the
fortuitous confusion of abstract friendship with mere sensual
passion--is needed in order to account for the genesis of boy-love or
comrade-love among the Dorians, and the growth of this love into a
positive institution. It sprang quite naturally from the temperament of
the people--just as any one nowadays may see it springing spontaneously,
though obscurely, in all classes of modern society, and as it has sprung
also at various times in the past in Persia or Arabia or Japan, or among
the other peoples mentioned in the first essay in this volume. In each
of these cases it may have had a different complexion and expression
according to the genius of the people concerned, in some it may have
been established as a civic or a military institution, in others it may
have fallen short of this kind of recognition; but in all, I think, we
may say it has been a natural and not an artificial racial outgrowth. In
no case may it have been a perfectly ideal thing, but almost always it
has been a positive, serious and deep-rooted impulse; and the problem
before each people has been not to extinguish the impulse, but to turn
it into

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

a great, publicly-recognised and honorable force making for the welfare
of the community. We have seen in what way the Dorians solved this
problem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[107:1](itp09.htm#fr_64) Published by John Lane
(London, 1893).

<span id="fn_65"></span>[107:2](itp09.htm#fr_65) Lowes Dickinson, *The
Greek View of Life*, p. 97.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[109:1](itp09.htm#fr_66) Dacier's translation,
vol. i.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[109:2](itp09.htm#fr_67) Translation by M. J.
Chapman (London, 1836).

<span id="fn_68"></span>[110:1](itp09.htm#fr_68) Müller, *op. cit.*,
vol. ii., p. 327.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[110:2](itp09.htm#fr_69) Dacier's *Plutarch*,
vol. I., p. 215.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[110:3](itp09.htm#fr_70) Though as regards the
latter, Symonds suggests (*A Problem in Greek Ethics*, p. 2) that in
camp-life this may have been one contributing cause.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[111:1](itp09.htm#fr_71) See *The Greek View of
Life*, p. 161.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[112:1](itp09.htm#fr_72) *Civilisation: its
Cause and Cure*, by E. Carpenter, p. 26.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[113:1](itp09.htm#fr_73) Dacier's translation of
Plutarch.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[114:1](itp09.htm#fr_74) Bethe, *op. cit.*, p.
442.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[114:2](itp09.htm#fr_75) Bethe, *op. cit.*, p.
440.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[114:3](itp09.htm#fr_76) *Op. cit.*, ii., 229.
See also Plutarch's *Lycurgus*, ch. xv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Relation to Civic Life and Religion](itp10)
