[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](itp09)  [Next](itp11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO6SI/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk*, by Edward Carpenter,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### Relation to Civic Life and Religion

BUT more has to be said before the full scope and character of the
Dorian solution can be recognised. It is quite in keeping with what we
know of the hardihood, public spirit, military prowess, and so forth, of
the Doric race, to find that in this matter of love between an elder
warrior and a younger it was not the epithet καλός which was the coveted
one, but ἀγαθός--not to be "beautiful" or "handsome," but to be
"worthy," "brave," "efficient." This last was the decisive thing. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) The Athenian and other peoples, with
greater refinement and artistic sense, might worship beauty and indulge
in a kind of luxurious contemplation of it; καλὸς ὁ πᾶις, "fair, fair is
the youth," is their constant refrain in epigram and inscription; but to
the Dorian it was valor, efficiency,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

which drew his admiration. It is like the difference between the Doric
architecture and that of the Ionians or Corinthians. There is a certain
severity about the first-mentioned--an absolute adaptation to use, and
freedom from superfluous ornament. The sense of public life, in fact,
and of dedication to the common weal, was so strong among the
Dorians--as we see in many other ways--that it deeply coloured their
love-relations, and gave the latter a scope and a purpose considerably
beyond that of personal gratification. The normal marriage, as we have
already seen, was regulated in the interests of the State; and so too,
the love between men and youths, instead of sinking as it did among some
peoples into a dilettante affair and matter of private indulgence, was
lifted into an important institution in the interests of general
education and militarism. The love was not by any means--as a score of
passages show--a purely ideal or abstract sentiment; but what is
interesting to us is the splendour of the result which was evolved out
of its comparatively coarse and sensual roots.

"The Dorians," says Bethe, "regulated the love-relation of the man to
the youth in fixed forms, and dealt with it quite openly and with
honorable seriousness, as deeming it an important institution under the
*ægis* of the Family, the Public,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

the State, and Religion. Everywhere among them--in Sparta, Crete,
Thebes, or wherever anything more than the mere fact has come down to
us--we clearly discover that *paiderastia* was among the ruling class
the foundation of all training towards ἀρετή (courage, virtue), in other
words, towards manly efficiency such as shows itself principally in war,
and the cultivation and preservation of the same. For to a point beyond
this somewhat narrow and mediæval conception of virtue, the Dorian
States never attained, and could not well attain, as long as their
outlook on life remained. The highest ethic and wisdom that Theognis had
to offer, he was fain to put into words of counsel to a beloved youth
who should be the inheritor of his ἀρετή."

"In Sparta," he continues, "the lovers were so far responsible for their
loved ones that for any dishonorable conduct of the latter they--not the
latter--were punished. And it was the lover, as well as the youth's
relatives, who represented the beloved in all affairs in the Agora--to
which indeed the latter was not admitted till his 30th year. So that in
fact the *Erastes* is put legally on an equal footing with the father
and elder brothers of the *Eromenos*--indeed, even above them, since he
bears a responsibility for him which the latter's family does not
undertake."

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Speaking further
of the custom of placing lover-pairs together in the battle-ranks,
Professor Bethe says that the reason for this is obvious:--"Any conduct
that was not in accordance with the chivalric sense of honour was barred
on the one hand by the anxiety of the man to be a model to his beloved
of true ἀρετή, and no less by the latter's consciousness of his duty to
show himself worthy of his lover." And then he quotes the well-known
words of Phædrus in Plato's *Banquet*:--"I say, then, that if a man who
loves should be discovered doing anything dishonourable or through fear
suffering the same without resistance, he would not be so shamed or
pained before his own father or companions, or any one else, as before
his beloved youth. And we see the same with regard to the youth, that he
throws disgrace especially on his lovers when he is discovered in any
dishonour."

J. Addington Symonds has a very interesting essay, <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) in which he compares the love-ideal of
mediæval and feudal Europe with that of ancient Greece. Both loves
became recognised and accepted institutions, and both had the same
social purpose, namely the formation of the perfect knight-the
embodiment of honour and bravery. But in the first case it was the
devotion to one

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

fair lady-and through her to all the suffering and oppressed women-kind;
and in the second case it was devotion to some youth, and through him to
the whole commonwealth--which led to this result. In both cases the love
was apart from and outside of ordinary matrimony. The mediæval knight
might be duly married, but what inspired his romance and heroism was
worship of some lady--who was probably the wife of another; and the
Dorian knight no doubt had a wife and children at home, but the love
which spurred him to his deeds of bravery was for the younger comrade
who stood beside him in the ranks. The direct incitements were, in both
cases, the same. "Just as in the 12th and 13th centuries," says Bethe,
"the lady sends her warrior suitor from one love-ordeal to another, so
does Konon tell of a Cretan youth (Leucocomas, he calls him) who tests
his lover (Promachos) with great and dangerous encounters. Such stories
are not by any means later growths; they were the commonly accepted view
of the matter in the 5th century, B.C., certainly in the 6th. For the
contemporaries of Aeschylus and Pindar were hardly able to think of
warrior-pairs like Achilles and Patroclus, Theseus and Peirithous,
Herakles and Ioläus, otherwise than as pairs of lovers."

Thus it was largely for the purpose of spreading

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

a high standard of public honour, bravery, and efficiency, that military
comradeship was encouraged among the Dorians. It worked powerfully among
the boys and youths, who aspired to become men, and especially to be
loved by some heroic warrior; <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) and it
had a deep influence on the men, who (referring again to the extract
from Strabo) would be well received by the boy's relations if of good
name and fame, but rejected if "unworthy." Remembering that the Dorian
polity was an aristocracy, in which families of good name and tradition
had a great sway, we see how it was that to become the παραστάτης or
squire of a well-known warrior, was to become at once κλεινος or
distinguished, to wear a distinctive dress, and to pass into a good
social position; while on the other hand, for a man to have his advances
towards a youth refused by the relations was to suffer the deepest of
insults.

We have thus seen that the education of the youths, the honour and fair
name of the men, efficiency in battle, and the safety of the State were
all involved in the Dorian Custom of military comradeship. It is
needless, therefore, to remark that religion was also involved; for in
the old pagan world every great social custom was identified with or
sanctioned by religion.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

With regard to this point the remarkable investigations of Hiller von
Gaertringen, a few years ago in the island of Thera, in the Ægean Sea,
yield important evidence. As we have already said, the Dorians on their
immigration settled not only in various parts of Greece, but in the
islands of the Ægean and in Crete. One of these islands was Thera (or
Santorin), and it became an important centre--a holy place and resort of
the Dorian tribes, with temples and dancing and running grounds. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) At some early period it had been occupied
by the Phoenicians; but Strabo calls it "a colony of the Lacedæmonians,
and the mother-city of the Cyrenians;" and there seems little doubt that
it was colonised from Sparta, and that afterwards it sent out a colony
to Cyrene in Africa. As this latter event took place about 630 B.C., it
seems probable that the former was not later than 700 B.C. Here, then,
on one hill on this island are the remains of temples and holy
places--sacred to Apollo (Karneios and Delphinios), to Zeus, Athena,
Artemis, and others; and close at hand an old circular structure and a
natural cavern, "both of which were later united by the
Gymnasium-building, and were clearly at that early period dedicated to
the Dorian athletic exercises

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

and dances of youths." <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) Less than a
stone's throw from these, on the side of the sacred mountain itself, are
(as Hiller found and copied) a quantity of very archaic inscriptions, at
least as old as the 7th century, B.C., deeply chiselled in the rock (as
it were for all time) in letters four to six inches long, and
celebrating the names and the betrothals of comrades. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md) We are accustomed, in the modern world, to
see love-inscriptions on trees and even rocks, of feminine names; but
here we have the names of youths and men. Let us give Hiller's own
words: <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83.md)--"At first we find the simple
names, like Aglon, Maisiadas, Kikinnios, Arasimandros, Biaios,
Euryteles, Tharres, and many another. But soon we find the same with
additions: 'Moniadas is the first'--'Ainesis was brought up by the
Graces'--'So and so is good, so and so is good (ἀγαθός).'"

Leaving Hiller for a moment, it is interesting to see here, what we
noticed before, the admiration of this people for "goodness," valour,
efficiency, rather than for beauty. The epithet καλός in this collection
hardly appears more than once, but the epithet ἀγαθός over and over
again, sometimes alone, as *Laqudidas agathos* or *Telekrates agathos*,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

sometimes in praise of their dancing, as Βαρβαξ ορκhειται τε αγαθος, or
Ευμηλος αριστος ορκhεστας.

Continuing, then, Hiller says:--"But presently the inscriptions speak
more plainly. We find not only praise of the best dancer, but also
direct evidence of the love of youth in quite sensual form--over which
later ages sought to draw a veil. For evidence of this, I refer to the
classic examples, I.G. xii., 3, 536-540. They prove to us the rude
habits of the Dorian settlers, and they show also their total absence of
prudery, and an entirely different sentiment on these subjects from what
afterwards prevailed."

Among the examples referred to are for instance 536, saying that
Pheidippidas was united to Timagoras, or 537 (also quoted by Bethe),
saying: "Here in these sacred precincts, with invocation of the
Delphinian, Krimon was united to the son of Bathycles." <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md) In the latter, the solemn appeal to the
Delphinian Apollo (ναι τον Δελπhινιον) assures us of the religious
character of the betrothal; and others of the inscriptions contain
similar dedications. Hiller himself says:--"Of the various lovers

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

one invokes Apollo, <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md) another
Delphinios--that is Apollo again--as witness that he has fulfilled his
proper duty."

Ordinary marriage between man and woman has, of course, in all ages and
among most peoples, been made a religious institution, and has been
ceremonially sealed in the presence of the deity and with the invocation
of his name--as in our Christian churches; but it is strange to find
here a similar ritual between men. Yet, as a matter of fact, even
to-day, in Albania, and under the protection of the Greek Church,
something of the kind--as already mentioned--continues. Hahn, in his
*Albanesische Studien*, says that the Dorian customs of comradeship
still flourish in Albania "just as described by the ancients," and are
closely entwined with the whole life of the people. (The elder lover
instructs and, when necessary, reproves the younger, follows him
jealously about, fights duels on his behalf, protects him, makes him
presents of various kinds, and so forth.) And he describes, in some
detail, the church ceremonial

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

attending the brotherhood-union of two men. And Dr. p. Naecke,
reporting <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md) information received from
Albania, says:--"The Skipetars (North Albanians) entertain for handsome
youths a quite enthusiastic love. Their passion and jealousy is so
strong that even to-day sometimes a case of suicide on that account will
occur. . . . Further, it is quite true that the brotherhood-unions when
taking place are blessed by the priests--the two partners sharing the
Eucharist immediately after. With the Turks the ceremony is different.
My landlord (a Christian) in Ochrida sealed blood-brotherhood with an
Albanian Moslem (Gega). The two made incision in each other's fingers,
and sucked drops of each other's blood. Henceforth one must stand by the
other in life and death; and for the Christian landlord that is a
valuable guarantee."

The latter part of this passage is interesting as showing how in
Albania, though the blood-brotherhoods may be sanctified by some kind of
religious ceremonial, they still in some cases overpass the ordinary
religious barriers--as between Christian and Turk. And Hahn, again, in
his book, says that religious differences do not form a bar. The Turk
loves the Christian, and the Christian the Turk, and many a Christian
has gone

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

over to Islam because his beloved had promised, on this condition, to be
subject to him.

Here then, it would seem, at Thera there was a celebrated holy place and
*rendezvous* of the Doric race, <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md) and
hither, at festival periods, crowds would come;--comrade-pairs would
ratify their alliances in the temple-precincts, and lovers would
inscribe the names of their beloved on the rocks.

If this was the case at Thera, would there not be other places, we may
ask, where similar ceremonies took place? And Professor Bethe, with
great plausibility, suggests that there were. "I do not doubt," he
says, <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) "that starting from the above
solid evidence we can also interpret that

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

custom of the Thebans which lingered still in Aristotle's time, and
attracted his attention. 'On the grave of the hero Ioläus,' he wrote,
'lovers and their beloved youths still pledge their troth with one
another;' <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) and Plutarch adds:
'because Ioläus was the favorite of Heracles, and for that reason took
part in his battles as his squire.' In Thebes no doubt at that time folk
would be satisfied with a festal symbolical ceremony, corresponding to
betrothal before divine witnesses. But originally in Thebes, even as in
Thera, the act must have been carried out right on the holy place in the
presence of the heroic prototype and patron of comrade-love. To
understand the meaning of the name, *The Sacred Band*, from the
sacredness of these comrade-alliances is now easy." Further he suggests
that the competition which yearly took place among the youths at the
tomb of the great hero and lover, Diocles, in Megara--and which is known
to us through Theocritus (Idyll xii.)--had a similar origin; and
represented the survival of actual betrothals which once were celebrated
there, as at a holy place.

There is certainly something very grand about this whole conception and
manifestation of the Uranian love among the Dorians. The wonderful
stories--treasured in the hearts of the Greek peoples

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

for centuries--of heroic bravery and mutual devotion inspired by it; the
high seriousness with which it was cultivated both as a political
safeguard and as a means of the education of youth, the religious
sanction and dedication to the gods, and withal the absolute recognition
of its human and passional origin, cannot fail to make us feel that here
was a great people with a unique message for the world. Certainly we
shall never in modern times understand this love until we realise this
quality of it and its immense capabilities.

The modern peoples, it must be said, seem to have a strangely low
estimate of love in general. Even the quite normal love between man and
wife--though recognised as the foundation of the family, and
contributing somewhat to the education of children--does not often
figure as an inspiration to political life or to public service; and
certainly, in the public mind, has no great association with religion.
Indeed the physical circumstances of marriage are generally looked upon
as repugnant to religion, and the sexual relation between man and woman
as in itself unclean, and by no means to be thought of in connection
with a church or other consecrated place or the divinity that may dwell
there. Yet we know that this low estimate has not by any means been
universal. It seems to mark a certain period, and to characterise

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

certain races in the evolution of humanity. The Jewish peoples--perhaps
by way of protest and reaction against the excesses of the surrounding
Syrian tribes--insisted on a complete divorce between sex and religion;
and that alienation of the two has lasted on down the Christian
centuries. But in much of the old pagan world it was just the contrary.
Sexual rituals were an intimate part of religion; and the wonder and
glory of sex were a recognised manifestation of divinity. In India, even
to-day, I believe, ordinary marriages are sometimes consummated within
the temple-precincts; women who wish for children pay their respects in
a very practical way to the *lingams* or phallic emblems in the sacred
cloisters, just as they did in earlier times to the priests themselves,
representing the gods; and the *devadasis*, or girls who dance before
the divinities, are still treated with honour and a certain reverence,
though their sexual functions in connection with the temple services,
dating from thousands of years back (but now largely discontinued), are
well-known. In the temples of Syria, and in other cases--some of which
have just been touched upon in the first paper in this volume--a similar
*rapprochement* between sex and religion existed.

In all these cases it has been the usual criticism of the votaries of
Christianity to say that this connection

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

or *rapprochement* only proves how unworthy and debased and merely
sensual the religions of the old world were. But does this conclusion
follow? Doubtless in cases these worships were unworthy and debased. But
would not the argument be equally valid if it were said that our
conclusion that religion was soiled by its contact with sex only proves
how *unclean* our conception of sex is? In the Upanishads of India--a
series of writings, which perhaps show the high-watermark of the
religious sense in any age of the world--the perfectly naive, direct and
open way in which the physical facts of human love are brought into
direct touch with the supreme inspiration of the religious consciousness
affords to us a profound lesson, which we should do well to bear in
mind. In the Brihadáranyaka Upanishad--one of the finest of the
Upanishads--there is a passage in which instruction is given to the man
who desires a noble son as to the prayers which he shall offer to the
gods on the occasion of congress with his wife. In simple and serene
language it directs him how--"when he has placed his virile member in
the body of his wife, and joined his mouth to her mouth," he should pray
to the various forms of deity who preside over the operations of nature:
to Vishnu to prepare the womb of the future mother, to Prajapati to
watch over the influx of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

the semen, and to the other gods to nourish the fœtus, etc. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md) How far all this seems from the modern
mind, how alien, how profane!

Yet the gross details of physical union were obviously not unclean to
the writers of this and similar passages in the Upanishads. There is
indeed, for instance, not a little reason for thinking that many of the
early peoples regarded the semen as the vehicle and special condensation
of the soul. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md) The soul was
transferred to the woman, perhaps for re-embodiment in the child,
perhaps for union with and reinforcement of *her* soul.

And it must be confessed that in view of all the conclusions of modern
thought and science, such a theory, if not by any means to be considered
valid or even adequate, does at any rate appear a natural and not
impossible one. To such people, then, the so-called physical union was
in very truth and reality a sacred affair taking place in the presence
of the gods, and vouched for by the amazing inspiration and revelation
of the passion of love itself.

And leaving aside this special theory with regard to the semen; we
to-day can see that in the more subtle and refined intimacies of lovers
in caresses and embraces, and in the silent influences of mere

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

presence and nearness, there do pass over from one to the other elements
of character, shades of feeling and disposition, and something indeed of
the nature of the soul. That well-known and fine epigram of Plato
conveys this very idea:--

<span class="small">"Thee as I kist, behold I on my lips my own soul was
trembling;  
For, bold one, she had come, meaning to find her way through."</span>

And yet, strangely enough, while this is recognised, there is little
sense in modern times of the sacredness of love, even in its most
gracious forms, nor any inclination to connect it with religion. The
marvellous and mysterious process by which the soul, the very inner
being, of one person passes over and transfuses that of another, seems
to be passed by or treated as something unworthy. How vulgar--if one may
use the word--is our current conception of these subjects!

However, with the modern world--except for the purpose of illustrating
certain points--we are not here concerned. The point which I wish
especially to illuminate is that love in its more serious aspects was
recognised in the old world as having influences on character so deep
and solemn that they brought it into close touch with religion. We have
seen in the Dorian institution that the love between a man and a youth
was largely encouraged

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

on this very ground--of the communication of character, virtue, ἀρετή.
For a valiant warrior *not* to have a youth attached to him as squire or
favorite was disgraceful, or even punishable, because so the contagion
and inheritance of his valour would be lost. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) We have seen above, in the account of
Ephorus in Strabo, that the relatives would enquire most closely about
the honour and bravery of such a lover before surrendering their boy to
him. On the other hand, Plutarch, in his *Lycurgus* (c. 18), says:--"It
is a thing remarkable that their lovers had a share in the young lad's
honour or disgrace: and there goes a story that one of them was fined by
the magistrates, because the lad whom he loved cried out effeminately as
he was fighting. . . . And though several men's fancies met in one
person, yet did not this cause any strangeness or jealousy among them,
but was rather the beginning of a very intimate friendship, whilst they
all jointly conspired to render the belov'd boy the most accomplished in
the world."

Such a contagion and identification of the sense of honour between two
persons could obviously only come about through a deep and heroic love
between them; and when such love ramified widely, as indicated in the
last quotation, from one to

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

another through the land, and when the standard of honour concerned was
the welfare of the country--then clearly the "soul" transmitted by means
of the love-relation was not merely the soul of any one individual
concerned, but was the Soul of the People--that is, in other words, the
inspiration of their religion.

How far the primitive Dorians, beneath their strange customs and
quasi-religious rites, may have had an inkling of this truth, it might
be difficult to say. Probably no very reasoned perception of it, but
rather a kind of sub-conscious intuition. Anyhow, the love-customs of a
people whose career was so splendid, and who exercised such a profound
influence upon the other Greek peoples, and so on the rest of the world,
cannot but be deeply interesting to us moderns--despite such elements of
crudeness and barbarism as are certainly to be found among them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[117:1](itp10.htm#fr_77.md) See the quotation above
(ch. v., p. 94) from Strabo: "They do not regard as an object of
affection a youth exceedingly handsome, but him who is distinguished for
courage and decorum (ἀνδρέιᾳ καὶ κοσμιότητι)."

<span id="fn_78"></span>[120:1](itp10.htm#fr_78.md) *The Dantesque and
Platonic Ideals of Love*, in the Key of Blue (John Lane, 1893).

<span id="fn_79"></span>[122:1](itp10.htm#fr_79.md) See Aelian 7, iii.,
12--who says that the Spartan boys would beg a man ἐισπνε̃ιν ἀυτο̃ις.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[123:1](itp10.htm#fr_80.md) See *Thera*, by Hiller
von Gaertringen (3 vols., Berlin, 1899).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[124:1](itp10.htm#fr_81.md) Bethe, p. 450.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[124:2](itp10.htm#fr_82.md) See for these, H. von
Gaertringen, I. G., xii., 3, 536-601, etc.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[124:3](itp10.htm#fr_83.md) *Thera*, vol. iii., p.
67 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[125:1](itp10.htm#fr_84.md) Πhειδιππιδας ωιπhε
Τιμαγορας, and Ναι τον Δελπhινιον hο Κρίμων τειδε ωιπhε παιδα Βαθυκλεος.
These inscriptions are in an archaic script which cannot exactly be
reproduced here, but the readings given are as near as available in the
later alphabet--a modern "h" being used for the old Greek aspirate.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[126:1](itp10.htm#fr_85.md) With regard to this
invocation of Apollo, see above, ch. i., page 27. Apollo was the special
god of comradeship; as Delphinios he was the source of divination; as
Karneios he links on to the Syrian Ashteroth Karnaim, the feminine
principle. Nor must it be forgotten that Thera had already been at an
earlier date a Phœnician or Syrian colony, and that here was a point of
contact between the Dorian and the Syrian festivals.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[127:1](itp10.htm#fr_86.md) In the *Jahrbuch für
Sexuelle Zwischenstufen*, vol. ix., p. 328.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[128:1](itp10.htm#fr_87.md) Thera, in fact,
occupied for the Dorian Greeks much the same position as Delos did for
the Ionians: of which Mr. H. B. Cotterill (*Ancient Greece*, p. 152)
says, "This island, lying in the midst of the Cyclades, which offer easy
transit between Greece and Ionia, was in early times an important
*entrepôt*. It was also the religious centre of the Ionian world, famed
as the birthplace of Artemis and Apollo and for the most ancient oracle
of the god. Every fifth year the birth of the twin deities was
celebrated with magnificence amid a great concourse, vividly described
in the ancient Hymn to Apollo: 'Hither gather the long-robed Ionians
with their children and chaste wives. They wrestle, they dance, they
sing, in memory of the god. He who saw them would say they were immortal
and ageless, so much grace and charm would he find in viewing the men,
the fair-girdled women, the swift ships, and riches of every kind.'
These festivals seem to have been accompanied by contests in music and
poetry."

<span id="fn_88"></span>[128:2](itp10.htm#fr_88.md) Bethe, *op. cit.* p.
450.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[129:1](itp10.htm#fr_89.md) See Plutarch's
*Pelopidas*, ch. xviii.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[133:1](itp10.htm#fr_90.md) See *Love's Coming of
Age*, by E. Carpenter, p. 17.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[133:2](itp10.htm#fr_91.md) See Bethe, *op. cit.*,
p. 464 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[135:1](itp10.htm#fr_92.md) See Aelian 8, iii. 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Samurai of Japan: and their Ideal](itp11.md)
