[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs00)  [Next](sfs02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

### PREFACE.

So much interest has lately been awakened in, and centred round,
Folk-lore, that it needs no apology to lay before the British reader
additional information upon the subject. Interesting enough in itself,
it has been rendered doubly interesting by the rise and progress of the
new science of Comparative Mythology, which has already yielded
considerable results, and promises to yield results of still greater
magnitude, when all the data requisite for a full and complete induction
have been brought under the ken of the inquirer. The stories of most
European races have been laid under contribution, but those of the
Slavonians have, as yet, been only partially examined. Circumstances
have enabled me to make a considerable addition to what is as yet known
of Slavonic Folk-lore, although I cannot make any pretence to having
exhausted the mine, or, rather, the many mines, which the various
Slavonic races and tribes possess, and which still, more or less, await
the advent of competent explorers.

In offering to the public a selection of sixty folk-lore stories
translated from exclusively Slavonic sources, it is but

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

fitting to give some account of the work from which I have derived them.
In 1865, the late K. J. Erben, the celebrated Archivarius of the old
town of Prague, published a 'Citanka,' or reading-book, intended to
enable Bohemians to commence the study of all the numerous Slavonic
dialects, containing 'one hundred simple national tales and stories, in
their original dialects.' To this he appended a vocabulary, with
explanations of words and forms strange to, or divergent from, the
Bohemian, briefly given in the Bohemian language. This vocabulary is
divided into two parts, one illustrating the tales of those Slavonians
who make use of the Cyrillic characters, and belong to the Orthodox
Greek Church; and the other, those of the Catholic and Protestant
Slavonians, who employ alphabets founded on the Latin characters of the
West of Europe. Pan Erben paid special attention to the preservation of
the simple national forms of speech, as taken down from the lips of the
people; and, besides laying printed collections under contribution,
obtained several previously unpublished stories.

Beginning with his native tongue, the Bohemian language, he passes on to
the closely-allied Moravian and Hungarian-Slovenish (Slovak) dialects,
and then takes the Upper and Lower Lusatian, the former of which is
related to the old Bohemian, while the latter inclines rather to the
Polish language. He next goes on to the Kashubian, a rapidly-perishing
sub-dialect of Polish, and then to the Polish tongue itself.

Next comes the White Russian, forming a transition from Polish to Great
Russian, whereas the Little Russian in Galicia,

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

the Ukraine, and South Russia, is more nearly allied to the Bohemian
than to the White Russian. The ancient Russian language, which was also
much allied to the Old Bohemian, is the basis of the present written
Russian, and presents a transition to the Bulgarian, which, in the
north-west, melts into the Serbian, which again, in its Croatian branch,
near Varazdin, approaches most nearly to the Bohemian. The
Illyrian-Slovenish of Carinthia, though, in locality, least distant from
Bohemia, exhibits forms most removed from the Bohemian language, just as
the Upper Lusatian is less allied to the Bohemian than is the
locally-distant Kashubian.

I took up the book, originally, for the purpose for which it was
compiled, viz., that of obtaining an acquaintance with the main features
of all the Slavonic dialects, but found myself tempted, by the extreme
beauty of some of the stories, to translate the major portion of them.
That I do not present a still larger selection to the reader is due to
the fact that so many of the Great Russian *skazkas* have been so
admirably translated, edited, and illustrated by my friend--alas! that I
must now term him my late friend--Mr. W. R. S. Ralston, that I have
scarcely considered them as coming within the sphere of the present
work.

For an essay on the singular mythical being, *Kurent*, occurring only in
the Serbian tales from Carniola, and as yet unnoticed in any work on
Slavonic mythology, I am indebted to Professor Gregor Krek, of Grätz, in
Styria. This will be found prefixed to the stories which it illustrates.

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

I have also prefixed a short introduction, containing various matters of
interest, to each set of tales, as they follow each other, according to
their different languages, dialects, or sub-dialects.

The table of contents immediately following will give a general view of
the stories and their respective sources, arranged under the three heads
of: (*a*) The Western Slavonians, (*b*) the Eastern Slavonians, and
(*c*) the Southern Slavonians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sfs02)
