[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs12)  [Next](sfs14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_09"></span>

### IX.--THE FOUR BROTHERS.

THERE was, once upon a time, a huntsman who had four sons, and these
sons wanted to go to gain experience in the world. When they were all
over sixteen years old, they said to their father: 'We are going into
the world, father; we pray you give us money for our journey.' The
father gave

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

them 100 florins and a horse apiece. They mounted their horses and rode
to the mountains. On a mountain were four roads, and between them stood
a beech-tree. At this beech-tree they halted, and the eldest said to the
rest, 'Brothers, let us separate here, and go each by a different road
to seek his fortune in the world. Let us each stick his knife into this
beech-tree, and in a year and a day let us all meet together here. These
knives will be tokens for us; if any one of the knives is rusty, the one
of us to whom it belongs will be dead; and he whose knife is free from
rust will be alive and well.' They separated, and went each his way, and
when they came to suitable places they each learned a handicraft. The
eldest learned to be a cobbler, the second to be a thief, the third to
be an astrologer, and the fourth to be a huntsman. When the year and day
arrived, they started on their return. The eldest came first to the
beech-tree, pulled out his own knife and looked at the other knives.
Seeing that they were all free from rust, he rejoiced, and said, 'Praise
be to God! we are all alive and well.' He went home. When he came to his
father, his father asked him, 'What manner of handicraft have you
learnt?' The son replied, 'Daddy, it's no use telling you stories; I'm a
cobbler.' The father said, 'Well, you've learned a nice gainful
handicraft.' The son answered, 'But, daddy, I'm not a cobbler like other
cobblers, but I'm this kind of cobbler: if anything is worn out, I only
say, "Let it be mended up," and it is so at once.' The father had a coat
worn out at the elbows, and told him to cobble it up. The son gave the
command, 'Let it be mended up,' and in a moment the coat was mended up
as if it were brand new, nor was it possible to know that it had been
mended at all. Upon this the father said nothing more. The next day the
second son came to the beech. He pulled out his own knife, and looked at
the remaining two; the third was

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

already gone. Seeing that they were both free from rust, he rejoiced,
and said, 'Praise be to God! we are all alive and well; our eldest
brother is at home already.' He also went home. When he came to his
father, his father asked him, 'What manner of handicraft have you
learned?' The son replied, 'Dear daddy, it's no use telling stories to
you; I'm a thief.' The father said, 'Oh, you've learned a nice gainful
trade! Shame on you!' The son said to him, 'But, daddy, I'm not a thief
like a thief, but I'm such a thief that, if I think of anything, be it
where it may, I have it with me at once.' Just then a hare came running
on the hillside; it could be seen through the window; the father told
him to fetch the hare. The son immediately said, 'Let yon hare be here,'
and it was with them at once. After this the father said no more. The
third day the third son came to the beech, pulled out his own knife and
looked at the other knife, two not being there. Seeing that it was clear
of rust, he said, 'Praise be to God! we are all alive and well; my two
elder brothers are at home already.' He also went home. When he came to
his father, his father asked him what manner of handicraft he had
learned. The son replied, 'Dear daddy, it's no use to tell you stories;
I'm an astrologer.' His father said to him that it was a nice pretty
handicraft. The son answered, 'But, daddy, I am this kind of astrologer:
if I look at the sky, I see at once where anything is in the whole
earth.' On the fourth day the youngest son came to the beech and pulled
out his knife, the other three being there no longer. He was glad, and
said, 'My brothers are already all at home.' He also went home. When he
came to his father, the father asked him what manner of handicraft he
had learned. The son answered that he was a huntsman. The father said,
'Anyhow, you have not despised my craft; for that you're a good lad.'
The son said, 'But, dear daddy, I'm not such a huntsman

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

as you are, but one of this kind; if there is an unusually fine head of
game, I say, 'Let it be shot,' and immediately shot it is.' There was a
hare darting along the hillside; it was visible through the window. The
father said, 'Shoot it!' The youngest son spoke the word, and the hare
lay dead. The father said, 'I don't see whether it is lying dead.' The
astrologer looked at the sky, and said, 'Yes, daddy, it's lying there
behind the bushes.' The father said, 'Yes, it's lying there, but how are
we to get it?' The brother who was a thief said, 'Let it be here,' and
immediately there it was. But it had come through thorny bushes, and was
all torn. The father said, 'The whole skin is torn; who'll buy it of
us?' The brother who was a cobbler said, 'Let it be mended up,' and
immediately mended up it was. The father said, 'Well, you'll all four
maintain yourselves by your handicrafts.'

They lived for some time at home with their father, and maintained
themselves well. Then a king lost the princess, his daughter, and made
proclamation that whoever should find her, to that person he would give
his daughter and the kingdom as well. The brothers said to one another,
'Let us go thither.' The father didn't give them leave to go, but go
they did, and gave out that they were the people who would find the lost
princess. The king immediately sent a carriage for them. When they came
to the king, they said that they understood he had made proclamation
that his daughter was lost, and that he would give her and the kingdom
as well to whoever should find her. The king said that this was very
truth, and immediately asked them to tell him where his daughter was.
The astrologer replied that he could not tell him just then, but when
evening came he would perceive in the sky where she was. About eight or
nine o'clock they went out and gazed at the sky. The astrologer said
that she had been taken captive by a dragon;

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

that the dragon had seized her as she was out walking, and was keeping
her on an island beyond the Red Sea; that she was obliged to fondle him
for two hours every day, and that the dragon then had his head placed on
her lap. When day came, they assembled and drove in the carriage to the
Red Sea. Then they got into a boat and rowed to the island where the
princess was. When they arrived at the island, the princess was out
walking, and the dragon wasn't at home; but the princess made signs to
them that they were in evil case, for the dragon was just flying home.
The thief-brother called out with speed, 'Let the princess be here!' She
was with them in the boat at once, but cried out that they were in evil
case, and would all perish. They rowed speedily away in the boat, but
the dragon, full of wrath, roared and growled and rose in the air above
them. The astrologer said to the huntsman, 'Brother, shoot him.' The
huntsman-brother said, 'Let him be shot.' The dragon was shot, but fell
on the boat and broke a hole in it, so that the water came in. They
threw the dragon into the sea, and the huntsman-brother gave the word to
the cobbler-brother, 'Mend the leak.' The cobbler-brother mended the
leak, so that not a drop of water came into the boat to them. Thus they
arrived safely with the princess at the sea-shore, landed on the beach,
took their seats in the carriage with the princess, and drove off. But
as they drove along in the carriage, they disputed to which of them the
princess and the kingdom belonged. The astrologer said, 'The princess is
mine. If it hadn't been for me, we shouldn't have known where the
princess was.' The thief said, The princess is mine. If it hadn't been
for me, we shouldn't have got the princess into the boat.' The huntsman
said that the princess was his; if it hadn't been for him, they wouldn't
have shot the dragon. The cobbler shouted that the princess was his if
it hadn't been for him,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

they would all have been drowned and have perished. When they came to
the palace to the king, they asked him to decide to whom the princess
belonged. The king said, 'Dear brothers, I will judge you righteously.
It is true that you have all deserved her, but you cannot all obtain
her. According to my promise, the astrologer-brother must obtain her,
for I made proclamation that whoever should find the lost princess
should obtain her and the kingdom with her; the astrologer found her,
and told us where she was. But, that none of you may be unfairly dealt
with, each shall receive a district of his own, and ye shall each be
kings in your own districts.' They were all content. The astrologer, as
soon as the wedding was over, sent home for his father. The father came,
and was delighted that his sons had become monarchs each in his
district. In the spring he lived with the cobbler, in the summer with
the thief, in the autumn with the huntsman, and in winter with the
astrologer, and enjoyed himself everywhere till death.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

I think that this story is connected with the Ceres and Proserpine
cycle, only the daughter is lost by a father instead of a mother. It
will be seen, also, that at the conclusion of the story the order of the
brothers is not the same as in the story itself. And I think the error
is in the story, and that the astrologer ought to have been the youngest
brother instead of the huntsman. The brothers are the four seasons of
the year, which in ancient times began with spring, the cobbler, who
mends up all things, and makes them new again; next comes summer, the
thief, who gathers the products of the earth; third comes autumn, the
huntsman, when the wild animals that have increased and multi-plied
during the year are destroyed and reduced within

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

limits; last comes winter, the astrologer, when ploughing, sowing, and
other agricultural operations that govern the whole year go on by
calculation. Thus the princess herself, the earth or its fertility, is
assigned to the representative of winter, while the other seasons are
lords each in his own district.

This Moravian tale will bear an advantageous comparison with Grimm's
tale of the 'Four Accomplished Brothers,' in which neither of the
brothers is allowed to obtain the princess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](sfs14)
