[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs45)  [Next](sfs47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_34"></span>

### XXXIV.--ILYA OF MUROM AND NIGHTINGALE THE ROBBER.

IN the famous city of Murom, in the village of Karatcharof, lived a
peasant, Ivan Timofeewitch. He had an

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

only child, Ilya Murometz. He sat as children do for thirty years, and
when thirty years had passed, he began to walk firmly on his feet,
became conscious of vast strength, made himself a warrior's equipment
and a steel spear, and saddled a good horse, worthy of a hero. He went
to his father and mother, and begged their blessing. 'My honoured father
and mother, let me go to the famous city of Kief to perform my devotions
to God, and to kneel to the Prince of Kief.' His father and mother gave
him their blessing, laid upon him serious injunctions, and spoke to this
effect: 'Ride straight to the city of Kief; straight to the city of
Chernigof, and on your road do no injury, shed no Christian blood
causelessly.' Ivan Murometz received the blessing of his father and
mother, prayed to God, took leave of his father and mother, and started
on his journey.

He travelled far on into the gloomy forest, until he came to a robbers'
camp. The robbers espied Ilya Murometz, and their robber hearts burned
for his heroic horse, and they began to talk together about taking his
horse from him, for they were not wont to see such horses anywhere, and
now an unknown man was riding on so good a horse. And they arose to
assail Ilya Murometz by tens and twenties. Ilya Murometz halted his
heroic horse, and took out of his quiver an arrow of guelder-rosewood,
and placed it on his tough bow. He shot the arrow of guelder-rosewood
along the ground, and it penetrated to the distance of a fathom
slanting. Seeing this, the robbers were terrified, collected into an
orb, fell on their knees, and said: You are our lord and father, valiant
and good youth! We are guilty before you; take for such a fault as ours
as much as you please of coloured raiment and herds of horses.' Ilya
smiled and said: 'I've nowhere to put it; but if you wish to live, don't
venture any further!' and rode on his way to the famous city of Kief.

He rode on to the city of Chernigof, and under that city

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

of Chernigof were standing armies of heathen innumerable, and they were
besieging the city of Chernigof, and wanted to destroy it and ravage the
churches of God therein, and to take into captivity the Prince and Duke
of Chernigof himself. Ilya Murometz was terrified at this great force;
nevertheless, he committed himself to the Lord God, his Creator, and
determined to risk his head for the Christian faith. Ilya Murometz began
to slaughter the heathen forces with his steel spear, and defeated all
the pagan power, and took captive the heathen prince, and led him into
the city of Chernigof. The citizens came out of the city of Chernigof to
meet him with honour; the Prince and Duke of Chernigof came himself.
They received the good youth with honour, and gave thanks to the Lord
God, because the Lord unexpectedly sent deliverance to the city, and
caused them not all to perish in vain at the hands of such a heathen
host. They received him into their houses, made him a great
entertainment, and let him proceed on his journey.

Ilya Murometz rode off towards the city of Kief by the direct road from
Chernigof, which had been beset for full thirty years by Nightingale the
robber, who allowed neither horseman nor foot-traveller to pass, and
slew them not by any weapon, but by his robber whistling. Out rode Ilya
Murometz into the open country, and espied the tracks of horses, and
rode on upon them, and arrived at the Branskian forest, at the muddy
swamps, at the bridges of guelder-rosewood, and at the river Smorodinka.
Nightingale the robber forboded his end and a great misfortune, and
before Ilya Murometz approached within twenty versts, began to whistle
vigorously with his robber whistling; but the hero's heart was not
terrified. Then, before he approached within ten versts, he began to
whistle still more violently, and from this whistling Ilya Murometz's
horse tottered under him. Ilya Murometz rode up to the nest itself,
which was constructed upon twelve oaks. Nightingale the robber espied

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

the hero of Holy Russia, whistled with all his might, and wanted to
smite Ilya Murometz to death.

Ilya Murometz took down his tough bow, placed on it an arrow of
guelder-rosewood, shot it at Nightingale's nest, struck his right eye
and knocked it out. Nightingale the robber tumbled down like a sack of
oats. Ilya Murometz took Nightingale the robber, bound him fast to his
steel stirrup, and rode on towards the famous city of Kief. On the way
stood a mansion belonging to Nightingale the robber, and when Ilya
Murometz came opposite the robber's mansion, the windows thereof were
open, and at these windows the robber's three daughters were looking
out. The youngest daughter saw him, and cried to her sisters: 'There's
our father outside coming with booty, and leading to us a man bound to
his steel stirrup.' But the eldest daughter looked, and began to weep
bitterly. That isn't our father coming: it's an unknown man coming, and
leading our father.' They began to scream to their husbands: 'Our dear
husbands! ride and meet the man, and take our father from him; do not
let our family be put to such contempt.' Their husbands, strong heroes,
rode against the hero of Holy Russia; their horses were good, their
spears were sharp, and they were about to receive Ilya on their spears.
Nightingale the robber espied this, and said to them: 'My dear
sons-in-law, do not cause yourselves to be put to shame, and do not
provoke so mighty a hero; rather with humility entreat him to drink a
cup of green wine in my house.' At the request of the sons-in-law, Ilya
turned into the house, not knowing their villainy. The eldest daughter
raised on chains an iron slab, which was placed over the door, in order
to crush him. But Ilya observed her at the door, struck her with his
spear, and smote her to death.

When Ilya Murometz arrived at Kief city, he rode straight to the
prince's palace, and entered the house, which was of

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

white stone, prayed to God, and knelt to the prince. The Prince of Kief
asked him: 'Tell me, good youth, how men name you, and of what city you
are a native?' Ilya Murometz made reply: 'My lord, men call me Little
Ilya, but by my father's family I am an Ivanof; a native of the city of
Murom, of the village of Karatcharof.' The prince inquired: 'By what
road did you ride from Murom?' 'By that of Chernigof, and under the
walls of Chernigof I defeated an innumerable heathen host, and delivered
the city of Chernigof. Thence I proceeded by the direct road, and took
captive the mighty hero, Nightingale the robber, and led him hither with
me bound to my steel stirrup.' The prince, becoming angry, said: 'What a
lie you are telling!' When the heroes, Alesha Popovitch and Dobrynya
Nikititch, heard this, they flew to look, and assured the prince that it
really was so. The prince ordered a cup of green wine to be brought to
the good youth. The prince had a wish to listen to the robber's
whistling. Ilya enveloped the prince and princess in a sable mantle,
placed them beneath his arms, summoned Nightingale, and commanded him to
give the Nightingale whistle with half strength. But Nightingale the
robber whistled with his full robber whistle, and deafened the heroes,
so that they fell on the floor. For this Ilya Murometz slew him.

Ilya Murometz made a brotherhood with Dobrynya Nikititch. They saddled
their good steeds, and rode into the open country to seek adventures;
and they rode full three months without finding any adversary. But they
rode on in the open country; there came a wandering beggar: the ragged
dress upon his back weighed fifty poods, his hat nine poods, his staff
was ten fathoms long. Ilya Murometz began to urge his horse toward him,
and was about to match his heroic strength with him. The wandering
beggar recognised Ilya Murometz, and said 'Oh! you are Ilya Murometz. If
you remember, we learnt to read and write

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

together at one school, and now you are urging your horse against a poor
cripple like me, as against an enemy. But this you don't know, that in
the famous city of Kief a great misfortune has happened. An infidel, a
mighty hero, the unclean Idolishtcha, has arrived. His head is as big as
a beer caldron, his shoulders are a fathom broad, the distance between
his eyebrows is a span, that between his ears is an arrow of
guelder-rosewood; he eats an ox at a time, and drinks a caldron at a
draught; and the Prince of Kief is very grieved about you, because you
have left him in such perplexity.' Clothing himself in the beggar's
dress, Ilya Murometz went straight to the prince's court, and cried with
heroic voice: 'Oh, is it you, Prince of Kief? Send me an alms, wandering
beggar that I am.' The prince saw him, and spake as follows: 'Come into
the palace to me, beggar; I will give you your fill of food and drink,
and gold for your journey.' And the beggar entered the palace and stood
by the stove; he looked on at what was occurring. Idolishtcha asked for
something to eat. They brought him a whole ox roasted, and he ate it up,
bones and all. Idolishtcha asked for something to drink. They brought
him a caldron of beer, carried by twenty men; he took it up by the
handles, and drank it all up. Ilya Murometz said: 'My father had a
greedy mare; she over-ate herself and died.' Idolishtcha didn't stand
that, and said: 'Oh, it's you, wandering beggar! Why do you insult me?
It's nothing to me to take you up in my hands. Nay, what are you? If
such an one as Ilya Murometz was among you, I'd make a fight of it even
with him.' 'Then here's such an one as he,' said Ilya Murometz, and,
taking off his hat, struck him gently on the head with it.--But he broke
through the wall of the house, took the corpse of Idolishtcha, and threw
it out by the rent. For this the prince honoured Ilya Murometz with
great commendations, and placed him on the list of mighty heroes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](sfs47)
