[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs59)  [Next](sfs61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_45"></span>

### XLV.--THE BIRDCATCHER.

NEAR Constantinople there lived a man who knew no other occupation but
that of catching birds; his neighbours called him the birdcatcher. Some
he used to sell, others served him for food, and thus he maintained
himself. One day he caught a crow, and wanted to let it go, but then he
had nothing to take home. 'If I can't catch anything to-day, I'll take
my children the crow, that they may amuse themselves;

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

and they have no other birds at hand.' So he intended, and so he did.
His wife, on seeing the crow, said: 'What mischief have you brought me?
Wring the worthless thing's neck!' The crow, on hearing that sentence,
besought the birdcatcher to let her go, and promised to be always at his
service. 'I will bring birds to you; through me you will become
prosperous.' 'Even if you're lying, it's no great loss,' said the
birdcatcher to himself, and set the crow at liberty.

On the morrow the birdcatcher went out birdcatching as usual, and the
crow kept her word; she brought him two nightingales; he caught them
both, and took them home. The nightingales were not long with the
birdcatcher, for the grand vizier heard of them, sent for the
birdcatcher, took the two nightingales from him, and placed them in the
new mosque. The nightingales were able to sing sweetly and agreeably;
the people collected in front of the mosque and listened to their
beautiful singing; and the wonder came to the ears of the emperor. The
emperor summoned the grand vizier, took the birds from him, and inquired
whence he had got them. When the emperor had thought the matter over, he
sent his cavasses, and they summoned the birdcatcher. 'It's no joke to
go before the emperor! I know why he summons me; no half torture will be
mine. I am guilty of nothing, I owe nothing; but the emperor's will,
that's my crime!' said the birdcatcher, and went into the emperor's
presence all pale with fear. 'Birdcatcher, sirrah! are you the catcher
of those nightingales which were at the new mosque.' 'Padishah! both
father and mother! where your slipper is, there is my face!--I am.'
'Sirrah!' again said the emperor, 'I wish you to find their mother;
doubtless your reward will be forthcoming. But do you hear? You may be
quite sure of it; if you don't, there will be no head on your shoulders.
I'm not joking.' Now the

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

poor fellow went out of the emperor's presence, and how he got home he
didn't know; a good two hours afterwards he came to himself and began to
lament. 'I'm a fool! I thought my trade led no-whither, and not to
misfortune for me; but now see! To find the mother of the birds--none
but a fool could imagine it--and to catch her!' To this lamentation
there was neither limit nor end. It was getting dark, and his wife
summoned him to supper; just then the crow was at the window: 'What's
this?' the crow asked. What are these lamentations? What's the
distress?' 'Let me alone; don't add to my torture; I'm done for owing to
you!' said the birdcatcher, and told her all, what it was and how it
was. 'That's easy,' answered she; 'go to the emperor to-morrow, and ask
for a thousand loads of wheat; then pile up the corn in one heap, and I
will inform the birds that the emperor gives them a feast; they will all
assemble; their mother, too, will doubtless come; the one with regard to
which I give you a sign is she; bring a cage, put the two nightingales
in it; the mother, seeing her two young birds, will fly up; let your
snare be ready, and then we shall find and catch her.' As the crow
instructed him, so he did. The emperor gave him the corn; he feasted the
birds, caught the mother of the nightingales, and took her to the
emperor. He received a handsome reward, but he would gladly have gone
without such reward when he remembered how many tears he had shed. The
crow, too, received a reward, for she persuaded the birdcatcher to give
his wife a good beating, which he did, to the satisfaction of the crow,
in her presence.

Time after time, behold some of the emperor's cavasses! 'Come, the
emperor summons you!' sounded from the door. 'A new misfortune! a new
sorrow!' thought the birdcatcher in his heart, and went before the
emperor. Do you hear, sirrah? Just now I paid you a good recompense,

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

now a greater one awaits you. I wish you to seek the mistress of those
birds, otherwise, valah! bilah! your head will be in danger! Do you
understand me?' At these words of the emperor the birdcatcher either
could not or dared not utter a word; he shrugged his shoulders and went
out of his presence. As he went home he talked to himself weeping: 'I
see that he is determined to destroy me, and some devil has put it into
his head to torture me first.' On arriving at home he found his crow at
the window: 'Has some misfortune again occurred to you?' 'Don't ask,'
replied the birdcatcher; 'one still blacker and more miserable!' and
told her all in detail, what it was and how it was. 'Don't trouble your
head much about that,' said the crow. 'Be quick; ask the emperor for a
boat full of all manner of wares. Then we will push off on the deep sea;
when people hear that the emperor's agent is bringing wares, the people
will assemble, and that lady is sure to come; the one on which I perch
is she; up anchor and off with the boat!' This the birdcatcher
remembered well. What he asked of the emperor, that he gave him, and he
pushed the boat over the sea; his bringing wares for sale went from
mouth to mouth; people came and purchased the wares. At last came the
mistress of the birds also, and began to examine the wares; the crow
perched on her shoulder; the anchor was raised, and in a short time the
birdcatcher brought the boat to under the emperor's quay. When the
birdcatcher brought her before the emperor, the emperor was astounded.
He didn't know which to admire most, the birdcatcher's cleverness or her
beauty. Her beauty overpowered the emperor's mind; he rewarded the
birdcatcher handsomely, and placed the sultana in his house. 'You are
the dearest to me of all,' said the emperor several times to her; 'if I
were to banish all the sultanas, you should never go out of my
seraglio.'

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

The birdcatcher was again in evil case. The new sultana was in a
perpetual state of irritation, for it was poor luck to be obliged to be
affectionate to an elderly longbeard. The emperor comforted her, and
asked her what failed her, when she had everything in abundance with
him. A woman's revenge is worse than a cat's. Not daring to tell the
emperor the truth, she wanted to revenge herself on the poor
birdcatcher. 'Dear Padishah, I had a valuable ring on my hand when that
birdcatcher deluded me into the boat, and pushed it from the shore. I
began to wring my hands in distress, the ring broke, and one half fell
into the sea, just where it was my hap to be. But, dear sultan, if I am
a little dear to you, send that birdcatcher, let him seek that half for
me, that I may unite it to this one.' 'All shall be done,' said the
emperor; and the cavasses soon brought the birdcatcher. 'My son,' said
the emperor, 'if you do not intend to lose my love and favour, hearken
to me once more. At the place where you captured that lady, she broke a
ring; it fell into the sea. I know that you can do so--find her that
half; your reward will not fail; otherwise, you know . . . .' When the
poor fellow got home, a fit of laughter seized him from distress. 'I
knew that the devil was teaching him how to torment and torture me
before he put me to death. If hell were to open, all the devils wouldn't
find it!' 'What's the matter, friend?' said the crow. 'Till now you were
weeping and complaining, and now in a rage you are laughing.' He told
her all--what it was, and how it was. 'Don't fret yourself,' continued
the crow. 'Have you given your wife a good thrashing? I wish you to give
her a good hiding again, when we go down to the sea. And now come, ask
the emperor for a thousand barrels of oil.' The emperor had stores of
oil and felt; he gave him as much as he required. Everybody thought that
he was going to trade with the oil. When he arrived at the

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

place where he captured the young lady, the crow gave the word of
command, and they poured out all the oil into the sea. The sea became
violently agitated, the crow darted in, and found the missing fragment
of the ring. The bird-catcher took the boat back thence under the
emperor's palace, and delivered the ring to the emperor, he passed it on
to the lady, and she fitted it to the other half. Both she and the
emperor were astonished at the birdcatcher's cleverness, commended him,
and sent him home with a present.

The emperor wished by every means to induce the young lady to marry him,
and to have a formal wedding. She for a long time declined, but at last
said: 'If it is your will, I consent, but only on condition that before
our wedding you 'destroy that birdcatcher.' The emperor now found
himself between two fires. It was agony to destroy his benefactor, it
was worse agony not to he able to withstand his heart, and to give up
the love of the young lady. Love is eternal, and is often stronger even
than truth. He summoned the birdcatcher, commended him for having so
often fulfilled his will, and told him that he deserved to sit in the
grand vizier's seat. . . . 'But there is nothing else for it, but you
must go home, take leave of your wife, children, and friends, of whom I
will undertake the care; in the afternoon come; you must of necessity
jump into the fire.' He went home, and the crow came to meet him. He
told her all that was to be done with him in the afternoon, and said to
her: If you do not help me as usual now, I am done for, not through my
fault, nor through the emperor's, but owing to you.' The crow informed
him what to do, but before he went, he was to give his wife a thoroughly
good beating. His wife departed this life from so many blows. A fire was
flaming before the great mosque, the Turks came out of the mosque, the
emperor came, the people swarmed round the fire The birdcatcher came
cheerfully before the emperor.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Everyone deemed
him a malefactor. 'Fortunate Padishah, it is your pleasure to burn me to
death. I am happy to be able to be a sacrifice for you. It has occurred
to my mind, I am anxious to have a ride on a good horse: permit me so to
do before I jump into the fire.' The emperor smiled, and ordered his
best horse to be brought for him. He mounted, and made the horse gallop
well; when the horse sweated, he dismounted, anointed himself with the
horse's foam, remounted, darted up to the fire, then dismounted, and
darted into the fire. The people looked on; five times, six times did he
cross the flames, sprang out of the fire, and stood before the emperor
as a youth of twenty years of age, sound, young, goodly, and handsome.
The people cried: 'Mercy, emperor! He has fulfilled his penalty.' And
the emperor graciously pardoned him. The emperor now longed to become
young and handsome also. He made the birdcatcher grand vizier, merely
that he might tell him the secret. He said to him: 'My lord, it is easy.
Take a good horse, gallop about an hour as I did, dismount when the
horse sweats, anoint yourself with his perspiration, jump into the fire,
and you will come out such as I am.' Friday dawned; the emperor's best
horse was saddled for him; everybody thought that he was going to the
mosque. A fire was burning furiously in front of the mosque. The people
said: 'There's somebody going to jump in again,' and they were under no
delusion. The emperor darted up to the fire all alone, the people looked
on to see what was going to happen. The emperor dismounted with great
speed, and sprang into the fire. . . . The people crowded to rescue the
emperor--’twas all in vain. The emperor was burned to death. 'He was
crazy!' shouted the chief men and soldiers. They conducted the
birdcatcher into the mosque, and girt him with the emperor's sword. Then
the birdcatcher became emperor, the damsel he selected sultana, and the
crow the chief lady at court.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVI. The Two Brothers](sfs61.md)
