[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sfs61)  [Next](sfs63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GTCA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources*, by A.H. Wratislaw,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

# SERBIAN STORIES FROM CARNIOLA.

IN these we come to a very singular mythological being, *Kurent*, who
has not, as yet, found a place in the writings of Slavonic mythologists.
With respect to Kurent, Professor Krek writes as follows: The question
as to the nature of the Slovinish Kurent is very difficult, especially
as the tradition about him is, in my judgment, very corrupt. So far as I
know, no one has hitherto discussed it scientifically, and what I am now
writing to you is my own subjective opinion, rapidly formed. The name
itself does not appear to be indigenous, but I think it is of Romance,
perhaps of mediæval Latin origin, though I am not yet able to say what
its signification is. In a mythological point of view, there is to be
observed in the stories about Kurent a certain mixture of
heathen-Slavonic and Christian elements; but I think the basis is
entirely indigenous. If I mistake not, Kurent is essentially of
Dionysiac signification, which is indicated by the fact that the
Slovinish stories connect him closely with the vine-stock, and with wine
in general, just as is the case with the Greek Dionysos. It is
note-worthy that the Little Russians have the word "Kurent" in the sense
of a merry wedding tune (Zhelechovskij, i. 391), and that the Slovinish
tradition frequently puts Kurent in the place of "Pust," so that both
represent the same mythological idea. With regard to "Pust," there is no
doubt

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

that, with his orgiastic system, he is just like the Greek Dionysos,
although his name is recent, and rests upon alien conceptions; indeed,
here the fact is of more decisive import than the name. The name is not
connected with the old Slavonic "pust," *desertus*, but with "pust" in
the old Slavonic "mesopust," in Bohemian "masopust," which are identical
with the Greek ἀπόκρεως, in Latin "carnisprivium." Of what original
names "Kurent" and "Pust" have occupied the place, it will now never be
possible to determine. It is just in mythological matters, that all
manner of old traditions are unsatisfactory, as everybody knows who has
busied himself at all closely with this subject. Much that is Christian
has similarly become mingled with the original pagan conceptions in the
case of Kurent also, and it is not easy to separate them from later
accretions. I think that the Slovintzes honoured Kurent with a special
solemnity or festival at the same time that the other Slavonians
celebrated the regeneration of winter, nature, and the birth of the
solar deity. This mythological phenomenon has its analogy in the myths
of other Ario-European nations, a matter so generally known that there
is no need of dilating upon it now. What I wish to draw attention to is
this: that the Slovinish "Kurent," as also his representative "Pust" is
of Dionysiac signification, and I don't know to what to compare him more
properly than to the Greek Dionysos. Circumspection is especially
necessary in mythological matters, but I venture to affirm that my
opinion will hold its ground before severe criticism. I purpose treating
at greater length of this matter at a later time, but I do not think I
shall find it necessary to retract any portion of my opinion.'

Mr. Morfill informs me, moreover, that *Kurenta grati* is given by
Zhelikovskij in the sense 'to play the Kurent,' i.e., the air so called.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVII. The Origin of Man](sfs63.md)
