[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh05)  [Next](msh07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. MYSTERIES LEFT VEILED IN THIS TREATISE

In the course of all this Ghazzâlî gives us, incidentally, much that
excites our curiosity to the highest degree; though always, when we get
to the crucial point, we meet a "perhaps," or a patronizing allusion to
the immaturity of his less-initiated reader. (Ghazzâlî's
hesitations--"it may be," "perhaps", etc.--are worthy of study in this
treatise. They do not so much have the impression of hesitancy in his
own mind, as of a desire to "fence" a little with his reader.) He
himself writes "incommunicable mystery"' across a number of these
passages. Thus, the nature of the human intelligence

{p. 5}

and its peculiar affinity to the divine (pp. 16, 71); the mystic "state"
of al-<u>H</u>allâj, and other "inebriates," and the expressions they
emit in their mystic intoxication (p. \[20\]) --"behind which truths,"
says Ghazzâlî, "also lie secrets which it is not lawful to enter upon";
the astounding passage (p. \[24\]) in which to the supreme Adept of the
mystical Union with deity are ascribed features and functions of very
deity; the real explanation of the word *taw<u>h</u>îd*, involving as it
does the question of the reality of the universe and the nature of the
soul's union or identification with deity; the nature of the Commander
(*al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`*) of the universe, and whether he be Allah or an
ineffable supreme Vicegerent; who that Vicegerent is, and why it must be
he and not Allâh who performs the prime function of the cosmos-ruler,
viz. the issue of the command for the moving of the *primum mobile*,
whereby all the motions of the Heavenly (and the Sublunary) spheres are
set a-going; and the final mystery of Allah-*an-sich*, a Noumenal Deity,
in whose case transcendence is to be carried to such a pitch that
gnosticism and agnosticism meet,

{p. 6}

and the validity of every possible or conceivable predication is denied,
whether of act or attribute (see p. \[55\])--all these things are
incommunicable mysteries, secrets, from the revealing of which our
author turns away at the exact moment when we expect the *denouement*.
The art is supreme--but something more than tantalizing. Who were the
adepts to whom he *did* communicate these thrilling secrets? Were these
communications ever written down for or by his brother initiates? Or did
he ever communicate them? Was there really anything to communicate? If
so, what?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. A Ghazzalian Philosophy Of Religion](msh07.md)
