[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh06)  [Next](msh08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. A GHAZZALIAN PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION

On the whole it is the final section on the Veils-Tradition which,
though really of the nature of an appendix, contains the most numerous
and the most interesting problems for the study of Ghazzâlî's inner
life, thought, and convictions. This tradition speaks of "Seventy
Thousand Veils of Light and Darkness" which veil pure Godhead from the
human soul. The origin of the tradition is, it is safe to hazard,
Neoplatonic, and it therefore lent itself completely to the gnostic and
theosophical mode of

{p. 7}

thought which so soon invaded Muslim <u>S</u>ûfism after its less
successful effort to capture orthodox Christianity. Accordingly Muslim
mystics seem to have seized upon the tradition with avidity, though they
interpret it variously. For an entirely Neoplatonic, theosophical
interpretation, as expounded by Rifâ\`i dervishes, the translator's
"'Way' of a Mohammedan Mystic" may be consulted.\[1\] According to this
version, the soul, in its upward Seven-fold Way to Union with pure
Deity, is at every stage stripped of 10,000 of these Veils, the dark
ones first and then the bright. After that the naked soul stands face to
face with naked Deity, with Absolute Being, with an unveiled Sun, with
unadulterated Light. Ghazzâlî's treatment is different. According to
him, these Veils are various according to the varieties of the natures
which they veil from the One Real. And it is the classification of these
natures, which is thus involved, that supplies rich material for an
unusually inside view of Ghazzâlî's real views concerning men,
doctrines, religions, and sects. It

\[1. *The Moslem World*, year 1912, pp. 171 seqq., 245 seqq.; as
separatum, Otto Harrassowitz, pp. 9, 10.\]

{p. 8}

is not the orthodox schoolman, the fierce dogmatist, the rigid
*mutakallim*, who is now speaking. We have the sensation of overhearing
Ghazzâlî as he speaks aloud to his own soul, or to a circle of
initiates. It is hardly less than an outline of a philosophy of religion
with which we have to do. He divides mankind into four classes: those
veiled with veils of pure darkness; those veiled with veils of mixed
darkness and light; those veiled with veils of pure light; and those who
attain to the vision of the Unveiled. Every line of this part of the
work merits and requires the closest study. It is not possible to give
this detailed study here--it has been given elsewhere, and to that the
reader must be referred.\[1\] But a summary of Ghazzâlî's classification
of souls and creeds may be given here, for thus, even more effectively
than by an extended study, may a vivid preliminary appreciation be
gained of the importance of this section for students of the Ghazzâlî
problem. He begins at the bottom and works up the light-ladder, rung by
rung, to the very top, thus giving a gradation of

\[1. *Der Islam*, year 1914, in Nos. 2 and 3: by the present writer.\]

{p. 9}

human natures and human creeds in respect of their approach to absolute
truth. Sometimes the grades are definitely identified by the author. In
other cases they may be certainly, or nearly certainly, identified from
the description he gives. In the following summary Ghazzâlî's *own*
identifications are given between round brackets; *inferred*
identifications certain or nearly certain, between square brackets.

Class I.--Those veiled with Veils of pure Darkness

Atheists--

(*a*) Naturist philosophers whose god is Nature,

(*b*) Egotists whose god is Self.

Subdivisions of (*b*):--

\(1\) Seekers after sensual pleasures (the *bestial* attributes).

\(2\) Seekers after dominion ("Arabs, some Kurds, and (the very numerous
Fools").

\(3\) Seekers after filthy lucre

\(4\) Seekers after vainglory

(2-4) (the *ferocious* attributes).

Class II.--Those veiled with Veils of mixed Darkness and Light

{p. 10}

A. THOSE WHOSE DARKNESS ORIGINATES IN THE SENSES

\(1\) Image-worshippers. \[Polytheists of the Hellenic (? and Indian)
type.\]

\(2\) Worshippers of animate objects of physical beauty. (Some of the
most remote Turkish tribes.)

\(3\) Fire-worshippers. \[Magians.\]

\(4\) Astrologizing Star-worshippers. \[Star-worshippers of
<u>H</u>arran: ?<u>S</u>abîans.\]

\(5\) Sun-worshippers.

\(6\) Light-worshippers, with their dualistic acknowledgement of a
supreme correlative Darkness. (Zoroastrians of the cult of Ormuzd and
Ahrimân.)

B. THOSE WHOSE DARKNESS ORIGINATES IN THE IMAGINATION

(who worship a One Being, sitting \[spatially\] on his throne).

\(1\) Corporealists. {p. 11}

\[Extreme <u>H</u>anbalites: <u>Z</u>âhirites.\]

\(2\) Karrâmites.

\(3\) Those who have eliminated all spatial ideas in regard to Allâh
except the literal "up-above".

\[Ibn <u>H</u>anbal.\[1\] <u>H</u>anbalites.\[2\]\]

C. THOSE WHOSE DARKNESS ORIGINATES IN THE \[DISCURSIVE\]\[3\]
INTELLIGENCE

\[Various sorts of *Mutakallimîn*\]

\(1\) Anthropomorphists in respect of the Seven Attributes of Allah,
"Hearing, Seeing," etc., and especially the "Word" of Allah.

(Those who said that the Word of Allah has letters and sounds like
ours.) \[Early literalists; <u>H</u>anbalites: early Ash\`arites.\]

\(2\) Those who said that the word of Allah

\[1. *Fai<u>s</u>al al-Tafriqa*, p. 10.

2\. Averroes adds to these (with justice) the Koran; Mohammed himself;
the "Early Fathers"; al-Ash'ari; and the early Ash\`arites--before the
time of Abul Ma'âli," says Averroes, loc. cit. i.e. of al-Juwainî, The
Imâm al-Haramain, our author's Shaikh, d. 478 (see his *al-Kashf 'an
manâhij al-adillâ'*, ed. Müller, p. 65, Cairo ed., p. 54.)

3\. For according to Ghazzâlî the genuine axiomata of the pure
intelligence are infallible. See p. \[10\], and an important
autobiographical passage near the beginning of the *Munqidh*.\]

{p. 12}

is like our mental speech (*<u>h</u>adith al-nafs*.)

\[Later Ash\`arites.\]

Class III.--Those veiled by pure Light

\[i.e. purged of all anthropomorphism (*tashbîh*)\]

\(1\) Those whose views about the Attributes were sound, but who refused
to define Allah by means of them: replying to the question "What is the
Lord of the World?" by saying, "The Lord, who transcends the ideas of
those attributes; He, the Mover and Orderer of the Heavens."

\[<u>H</u>asan al-Ba<u>s</u>rî, al-Shâfi\`î, and others of the *bilâ
kaifa* school.\]

\(2\) Those who mounted higher than the preceding, in declaring that
Allah is the mover of only the primum mobile (the Ninth and outermost
Heaven), which causes the movement of the other Eight, mediated by their
respective Angels.

\[<u>S</u>ûfî philosophers. (?) Al-Fârâbî.\]

\(3\) Those who mount higher than these {p. 13} again, in putting a
supreme Angel in place of Allah, Who now moves the heavens by commanding
this supreme Angel, but not immediately by direct action.

\[<u>S</u>ûfî philosophers. Al-Ghazzâlî himself when *coram populo*
(*Munqidh*, p 11)!\]

Class IV.--The Unveiled who Attain

Those who will predicate *nothing whatsoever* of Allah, and refuse to
allow that He even issues the order for the moving of the *primum
mobile*. This Commander (Mu<u>t</u>â\`) is now a Vicegerent, who is
related to the Absolute Being as the sun to Essential Light or live coal
to the Element of Fire.

\(1\) Adepts who preserve self-consciousness in their absorption in this
Absolute, all else being effaced.

\(2\) Adepts whose self-consciousness is also effaced ("the Fewest of
the Few") \[al-<u>H</u>allâj and the extreme Mystics\],

(*a*) who attain to this State with a single leap--as Abraham
"al-Khalîl" did, {p. 14}

\(b\) who attain to it by stages,--as Mohammed "al-<u>H</u>abîb" did
\[at the *Mi\`râj*\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Ghazzali Problems Raised By The Foregoing](msh08.md)
