[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh04)  [Next](msh06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. DATE, OBJECT, AND GENERAL CONTENTS

There is no way of fixing the Precise date of this treatise; but it
falls among his later ones, perhaps among the latest; the most important
hint we get from Ghazzâlî himself being that the book was written after
his Magnum opus, the *I<u>h</u>yâ'al Ulûm* (p. \[9\]). Other works of
Ghazzâlî mentioned by him in this treatise are the *Mi\`âr al-\`Ilm*,
*Ma<u>h</u>akk al-Na<u>z</u>ar*, and *al-Maq<u>s</u>ad al-Asnâ*.

The object of the opuscule is to expound a certain Koran verse and a
certain Tradition. The former is the celebrated Light-Verse (S. 24, 35)
and the latter the Veils-Tradition. It is divided into three sections,
of which the first is considerably the longest.

In this first section he considers the word "light" itself, and its
plural "lights," as applied to physical light and lights; to the eye; to
the intelligence (i.e. intellect or reason); to prophets; to supernal
beings; and finally to Allah himself, who is shown to be not the only
source of light and of these lights, but also the only real actual light
in all existence.

{p. 3}

In the second section we have some most interesting prolegomena to the
whole subject of symbolic language in the Koran and Traditions, and its
interpretation. Symbols are shown to be no mere metaphors. There is a
real mystical nexus between symbol and symbolized, type and antitype,
outer and inner. The symbols are infinitely numerous, very much more
numerous than those mentioned in Koran, or Traditions. *Every* object on
earth "perhaps" has its correlative in the unseen, spiritual world. This
doctrine of symbols reminds us of the Platonic "ideas" and their earthly
copies, and of the "patterns of things in the heavens" and "the example
and shadow \[on earth\] of heavenly things" in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. A notable deduction is made from this doctrine, namely, the
equal incumbency of keeping the outward letter (*<u>z</u>âhir*) of the
Law as well as its inner meaning (*bâ<u>t</u>in*). Nearly all the most
advanced <u>S</u>ûfis were zealous and Minutely scrupulous keepers of
the ritual, ceremonial, and other prescriptions of the Sunna law, and
Ghazzâlî here supplies a quasi-philosophical basis for this fidelity--a
fidelity which some of the bolder and more extreme

{p. 4}

mystics found illogical and "unspiritual".

In the third section the results of this symbology are applied to the
Verse and Tradition in question. In the former the beautiful, and
undeniably intriguing expressions of the Koran--the Light, the Niche,
the Glass, the Oil, Tree, the East and the West--are explained both on
psychological and religio-metaphysical lines; and a similar exegesis is
applied to the tradition of the Seventy Thousand Veils.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Mysteries Left Veiled In This Treatise](msh06.md)
