[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh07)  [Next](msh09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. GHAZZALI PROBLEMS RAISED BY THE FOREGOING

The mere perusal of this graded scale of systems and of souls shows at
once its extraordinary interest because of its revelation of Ghazzâlî's
innermost thought about these things, and because of the piquancy and
difficulty of some of the problems raised. In the discussion of the
whole subject the reader is referred to, the monograph upon the Mishkât
to which allusion has been made. The problems may be indicated here in
the form of questions, for the sake of defining them as particularly as
possible:--

\(1\) How is it that some reputable Moslems are grouped with Idolators
and Dualists in the second division ("mixed light and dark")?

\(2\) How is it that Jews and Christians are neither mentioned nor
alluded to in this rather full sketch for a philosophy of religion? And
where could they have been fitted in if they had been mentioned?

{p. 15}

\(3\) How is it that the later Ash\`arites, the standard orthodox
Theologians, are placed so low, viz. in the division where there are
still veils of *darkness*?

\(4\) How is that the Mu\`tazilites are neither mentioned nor alluded
to; and that, according. to the differentia of the highest section of
the second division, it would be inevitable to place them above the
orthodox Ash\`arites?

\(5\) How is it that the most pious believers of the earliest and most
venerated type come no higher than the *lowest* section of the third
division?

\(6\) How is it that to such men is ascribed any special concern about
Allah as "*mover of the Heavens*"\[1\]

\(7\) How is it that the various doctrines about the mode of this Moving
of the Heavens is made the main if not the sole differentia of the
(*ascending*) grades of this division, though in other works Ghazzâlî
treats this very matter with marked coolness\[2\]? How is it that on

this

\[1. This is all the more marked because the words are Ghazzâlî's own
gloss on a quotation from the Koran; see below.

2\. E.g. *Tahâfut*, pp. 57, 60.\]

{p. 16}

is explicitly said to turn the superiority of the schools of
<u>S</u>ûfî's over the pious Believers, and the superiority of one
school of Sûfî's over another?

\(8\) How is it that this matter of Moving the Heavens is considered so
particularly to threaten the Unity of Allah, and that that Unity is only
saved when He is relieved from even the function of Commanding the
(outermost) Heaven to be moved?

\(9\) *And who is this Commander who thus commands, and who orders all
things, and who is related to pure Being as the Sun to Elemental Light?*
And what was "the mystery (in this affair), the disclosure of which this
book does not admit of"?

\(10\) What becomes of a Deity of whom nothing whatsoever can even be
said or predicated? And how, then, can a "relation" between Him and His
Vicegerent be asserted, still more described as above? And how can this
Unknowable, Unimaginable and Inconceivable be nevertheless "reached" by
mystic souls?

\(11\) What was "the book" into which Ghazzâlî himself says he put all
his esoteric

{p. 17}

teaching (*Jawâhir*, p. 31); which he implores any into whose hands it
may fall not to publish; which Ibn <u>T</u>ufail denies could have been
this *Mishkât* (*<u>H</u>ayy*, ed. Gautier, pp. 13-15, trans. Gautier.
pp. 12-14), nor any other of the supposed esoteric books that "had come
to Andalus"?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Problem Of The Vicegerent In Ibn Rushd And Ibn
Tufail](msh09)
