[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh11)  [Next](msh13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII. AL-GHAZZALI AND THE SEVEN SPHERES

The Seven Planetary Heavens played a great part in Platonic,\[1\]
Neoplatonic, and Gnostic-theosophical schemes. The naive adoption by
Mohammed (in the Koran) of the Ptolemaic celestial construction was one
of the things which added picturesqueness to early Mohammedan tradition
and theology; caused endless trouble to generations of later
theologians; made it easier for Neoplatonic ideas to graft themselves on
to Islam; gave to the raptures of the Mystics sensuous form and greater
definition; and afforded to the Philosophers a line of defence, and even
of attack, in their war with the Theologians.\[2\] And the allusions of
the Koran were heavily reinforced by the legend of the *Mirâj*, the
exact origin of which is obscure, but which appears in a highly
developed form almost from the first. The influences of the *Mi\`râj*
are indeed evident in page after page of the *Mishkât*.

Al-Ghazzâlî's sympathies in regard to this subject were divided. He
disliked the Philosophers,

\[1. See the *Vision of Er in the Republic*, bk. X.

2\. See Averroes' *Ki tab al Kashf an manâhij al adillâ*, quoted above
on p. 11, note 2.\]

{p. 47}

and this made him displeased with their confident assertions about the
Heavens, while he detested the "philosophical" profit to which they put
them. On the other hand, he was a <u>S</u>ûfî and thus in closest touch
with persons who made very similar assertions about the Heavens, and
also put them to profit in their own way. Finally, he was an Ash\`arite
Theologian, belonging to a school which had recently, after much
trouble, eliminated from theology the dangerous ideas to which
Mohammed's naive attitude to the Heavens, had given rise.

This uncertainty of touch comes out, as, might be expected, in a
treatise like *al-Mishkât* with its blend of scholasticism and
Neoplatonically-tinctured mysticism. The Heavens figure continually in
its pages. They seem to play a most important part both in thought and
in experience--towards the close of the book a determining part. Yet it
is impossible to make. out exactly what that part was, in the mind of
al-Ghazzâlî himself.

On p. \[23\] we have a correlation of the human microcosm and the
macrocosm of the

{p. 48}

celestial realm, Ptolemaically construed, in describing the Ascension of
a God-united soul. The, adept's body-and-soul structure is conceived of
as subsisting in three planes or Spheres, which are correlated with the
three lower spheres of the Seven Planetary Heavens. From the highest of
these (the Intelligence) the soul takes its departure and ascends
through the four upper Heavens (*ila saba\`i <u>t</u>abaqât*) to the
Throne \[beyond the outermost Heaven\]. Thus he "fills all things"' by
his upward Ascent just as Allâh did by His downward Descent (*nuzûl*).
In all this the pronoun "he" stands for the soul *who is now
Allâh-possessed and united*, as described in what immediately precedes.
It is the upward ascent of Allah (corresponding to His *nuzûl illa-l
samâ'i-l dunyâ*), and not of the Adept only.

On the other hand, in p. \[29\], this Ascent is described in purely
psychological terms, without this schema of the Heavens. And on p.
\[13\] we have the following: "Do not imagine that I mean by the World
Supernal the World of the \[Seven\] Heavens, though they are 'above' in
respect of part of our world of sense-perception. {p. 49} These Heavens
are equally present to our apprehension and that of the lower animals.
But a man finds the doors of the Realm Celestial closed to him, neither
does be become of or belonging to that Realm (*mala-kûtî*), unless this
earth to him 'be changed into that which is not earth; and likewise the
heavens;'\[1\] . . . and his 'heaven' come to be all that transcends his
sense. This is the first Ascension for every Pilgrim who has set out on
his Progress to the nearness of the Presence Dominical." And he
continues: "The Angels ... are part of the World of the Realm Celestial,
floating even in the Presence of the Transcendence, whence they gaze
down upon our world inferior.

The last lines hardly give us the same ultra-spiritualizing impression
which is conveyed by their predecessors. And, as we have already seen
(Introduction, pp. 12-17), the part played by the Spheres with their
Angels in the last section of the book is decisive, and there does not
seem to be there any spiritualizing whatever.

\[1. S. 14, 48.\]

{p. 50}

How far, therefore, these passages are mere word-play, pious
picturesqueness, or how far they represent speculation of a rather
far-reaching character, is one of the puzzles of the book. In the
*Tahâfut*, demolishing the arrogant claim of the Philosophers to *prove*
their doctrine of the Spheres by syllogistic demonstration (*burhân*),
he said: "The secrets of The Kingdom are not to be scanned by means of
such fantastic imaginations as these; Allâh gives none but His Prophets
and Saints (*anbiyâ'* and *awliyâ'*) to scan them, and that by
inspiration, not by demonstration."\[1\] So then there were mysteries
and secrets in regard to the Spheres. In the *Mishkât* we are able to
see pretty clearly that Ghazzâlî had his; but we are not able to see
just what they were. He has kept *this* secret well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Anthropomorphism And Theomorphism In Al-Mishkat](msh13.md)
