[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kfu083)  [Next](kfu085.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Kung-Fu, or Tauist Medical Gymnastics*, by John Dudgeon, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE EIGHTEEN DISCIPLINARY RECORDS.

*The Method of Rubbing the Shoulder and Wrist*.—On the completion of the
kung, first stretch out the left arm and let another lift up with both
hands the "tiger's mouth," (the space

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

between the thumb and forefinger) and rub energetically and gradually
increase the times; if at first it was ten times increase gradually to
100 times. The right arm is to be rubbed in the same manner. The object
aimed at is to produce heat in the two shoulders and wrists which will
reach to the bones.

*Disciplinary beating of the Hands and Feet*. At first according to
one's strength have a cloth bag made of two layers in which are five or
six catties of small gravel or sand and hang it on a frame. In
performing the kung, constantly push it with the palm, beat it with the
fist, kick it and step upon it with the feet. The important thing is to
keep the bag in motion, pushing and kicking it back. As time goes on
gradually increase the weight of the sand in the bag.

*The Method of disciplining the Fingers*. One must calculate his own
strength whether it is great or small and select a round, smooth clean
stone of one or two catties in weight and grasp it with five fingers,
let it go and again seize it before it leaches the ground. At first
practise it several times and after a time regularly increase the number
of times and the weight of the stone and thus the five fingers will
become strong.

Another method is, when sitting at anytime press the seat with the
fingers and gently raise the body on them and in this way the fingers
themselves will develop strength. This exercise can be done whether one
or many be present and after a time the result will be evident.

This is followed by a section on the "Jade Ring" Aperture; and this
again by prescriptions entitled the Elixir capable of Beating a Tiger,
the Great Strength Pills, the Immortals' Receipt for Washing the Hands
and for Strengthening the Sinews and Bones. The two pulses: the *Jen*,
(running down the middle of the body in front) and *Tu*, (from the
vertex to the coccyx) with the acupuncture apertures are next described.
Then follows a chapter on the number of the bones in the body, next on
the blood vessels; then a discourse on the air and blood, the former
being taken in the old sense of our artery and the latter of the veins
or only real blood vessels and in this case a most convincing proof of
the knowledge of the circulation of the blood possessed by the Chinese,
without, however, respect to the cause of the circulation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Divisions under the External Method](kfu085.md)
