[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kfu000)  [Next](kfu002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kung-Fu, or Tauist Medical Gymnastics*, by John Dudgeon, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

# KUNG-FU,

###### OR

### TAUIST MEDICAL GYMNASTICS.

##### BY

## JOHN DUDGEON, M.D., C.M.

Movements for the development of the body and for the prevention and
cure of disease were known and practised in the most ancient times in
all countries. We find gymnastic exercises forming a part of the
religion of the ancients. The great heroes of antiquity either
instituted, restored, or took part in them. Poets made them the theme of
their verses; and so, by immortalizing not only themselves but their
victors whose fame they celebrated, they animated the Greek and Roman
youth to tread in similar steps. Such exercises were then indispensable,
the use of fire-arms being at that time unknown. The body required to be
strengthened, and health to be confirmed and inured to fatigue. Contests
were generally decided in close fight, by strength of body. Hence the
origin of gymnasia, where the science of movement, as it were, was
taught, and which were always dedicated to Apollo, the god of
physicians. The Greeks owed much of their mental greatness to these
exercises. They formed one of the three great parts into which all
education was divided,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and this branch was the more important in that it did not cease at a
certain period but was continued through life. The Greek effort in
education seems to have been directed to the attainment of a sound mind
in a sound body, and it was on this account that their physicians and
philosophers placed well-regulated exercises as of first importance. We
know that the officers of these institutions were recognised as
physicians. Exercises of all kinds, such as walking, dry-rubbing or
friction, wrestling, etc., were a few of the common aids of physic, as
they were termed by Asclepiades, who did so much to bring them into
repute. The term *athletae* might most appropriately be applied to the
Chinese Tauist priests, the Greek word *athlos*, from which it is
derived, being similar in meaning to kung fu. In other respects,
however, they resemble more closely the *Agonistae*, who followed
gymnastics solely with the view of improving their health and strength;
and who, although they sometimes contended in the public games, did not
devote their whole lives, like the *Athletae*, to preparing for these
contests.

Gymnastics became a part of medicine shortly before the time of the
"Father of Medicine;" and, according to Plato, as a means of
counteracting the bad effects of increasing luxury and indulgence. It
soon passed into a complete system, as already indicated. The gymnasia
were often connected with the temple services in Greece where chronic
ailments, through bodily exercises, baths, and ointments, could be
cured. Æsculapius came to be considered the inventor of bodily
exercises. Plato styles two of these Greek gymnasts, who cured disease,
the inventors of medical gymnastics, Iccus of Tarentum and Herodicus of
Selymbra. The latter in particular made

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

use of them for medical purposes, which is the reason he is considered
to have been the first inventor of this art. Plato relates that the
latter was himself ill, and sought what gymnastic exercises might
conduce to his recovery. He gained his object, after which he
recommended the same method to others. Before his time, dietetics was
the chief part of medicine. It was he who advised his patients to
undertake the journey from Athens to Megara, a distance of 180 stadia,
equal to 6 German miles, and back. Hippocrates, who was one of his
pupils and superintended the exercises in his *palaestra*, tells us that
Herodicus cured fevers by walking and wrestling, and that. many found
the dry fomentations did them harm. In consumption, he advised the
patients to suck women's milk from the breasts, a practice found
existing in China at the present day among the old and debilitated.
Galen mentions Premigenes, who was great in the peripatetic theory and
wrote on gymnastics.

Other ancient nations besides Greece and Rome seem to have been early
convinced of the importance of a knowledge of the means of preserving
health. Among the Hindu legislators, we find laws enacted with this
object; and, with the view of enforcing them and making them obligatory,
we see them joined on to religion, just as in China we find similar
precepts extensively pervading their sacred books. The Chinese, like the
Hindus, have quite a large number of works on the means of retaining
health. These have reference to climate, seasons, time of the day, food,
bathing, anointing, clothing, housing, sleep, etc. Exercise receives
always a high place in all such works; for it increases strength,
prolongs life, prevents and cures disease by

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

equalising the humours, prevents fatness, and renews and increases the
power of resistance. In the Book of Rites (1,000 B.C.), we find archery
and horsemanship laid down in the curriculum of study to be pursued at
the National University. At the present day in China, besides the
exercises involved in *Kung-fu*, the various exercises that prevail in
Europe are practised publicly and privately by all classes, especially
by the Mantchus, and to a much larger extent than among ourselves. Our
present mode of warfare has done much to put an end to gymnastics as a
part of education and a means conducive to robust health. The ancients
may have esteemed them too highly, just as the moderns neglect them too
much. True philosophy points to the golden mean as the place where truth
is to be found. There are evils front inactivity as well as evils from
excessive exercise; but gymnastics, when practised under proper control,
must be invaluable in ensuring good health, a clear intellect, and in
curing many complaints. Preventive medicine is coming every year more
and more to the front, and gaining more attention and importance. The
present age seems to be more alive to the importance of gymnastics than
any preceding age of modern times. We find them introduced by
enlightened teachers into many of our schools and warmly advocated by
many medical men. Treatises on this subject are published yearly. One
author considers hygiene to be the most useful sphere of the physician,
and he believes that the subordinate value of therapeutics may be proved
by statistics. Another writer, also a German, speaks of gymnastics as
the principal agent for the rejuvenescence of body and mind.

But it is necessary to trace the rise of this subject in China somewhat
more particularly.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

The first mention in Chinese history of a system of movements, proper to
maintain health and cure disease, dates back to pre-historic times, the
time of the Great Yü, when the country was inundated, and the atmosphere
was nearly always wet and unhealthy, and disease overflowed, so to
speak, the earth. The Emperor ordered his subjects each day to take
military exercise. The movements, which they were thus obliged to make,
contributed not a little to the cure of those who were languishing, and
to maintain the health of those who were well.

Premare refers to the same tradition, where he says in his researches of
the time anterior to the *Shu Ching:*—In the time of Yü, the waters did
not flow away, the rivers did not follow their ordinary channels, which
developed a number of maladies. The Emperor instituted the dances named
Ta Wu (\#), the Great Dances. The native author, who reports this
tradition, adds that the life of man depends upon the union of heaven
and earth. The subtle material circulates in the body; and, if the body
is not kept in movement, the humours do not flow, the matter collects,
and from such obstruction disease originates. The great philosophers
explained in a similar way the cause for the most part of maladies. But
that which is specially remarkable in the Chinese tradition is that
moisture and stagnant water are considered the source of the endemic and
epidemic maladies, and that an efficient means to prevent them consists
in the regular exercise of the body or in the circling dances. These
movements tend in effect to produce a centrifugal result, from the
centre to the circumference, very suitable to restore the functions of
the skin, and to give tone and vigour to the whole economy. These dances
form part of the institutions of the Empire.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

We read also in the *Shu Ching* that the Emperor Yü ordered the dances
to be executed with shields and banners. These two sorts of dances were
the first sanctioned in the *Li Chi*, or ritual of civil and religious
ceremonies. Great importance was attached to the regular bodily
exercises. Like as in Greece, to sing and dance well constituted a good
education. Even to the present day, the people take to exercises, in
order to give themselves bodily strength and as much suppleness as
possible; as, for example, the exercises of the bow and arrow, throwing
and catching a heavy stone with a hole cut in it with which to provide a
handle, heavy bags of gravel, the bar with the two circular heavy stones
at the ends of it, the various feats of jugglery, etc. This taste for
bodily exercise is one of the fundamental maxims which have not ceased
to be considered as the base of all progress and all moral development,
the improvement of one's self. Pauthier, in his *Chine Moderne*,
mentions a large number of famous dances of antiquity.

The founder of the Shang dynasty (1766 B.C.) had engravers in the
bath-tubs—"Renew thyself each day completely; make it anew, still anew,
and always anew (\#).

From the earliest times there were public institutions where were taught
the six liberal arts (music, arithmetic, writing, religious and civil
ceremonies with their dances, fencing, and charioteering). We read in
the life of Confucius that he applied himself to perfect himself in all
these exercises. Regular and [rhythmic](errata.htm#0) movements were had
recourse to, to develop the physical force, skill to maintain the health
and to combat certain diseases.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

After the period of movement for the cure of disease comes the period of
healing by the virtues of plants, .according to Chinese tradition.
Although Fu-hsi had begun thus to cure maladies, the art is particularly
ascribed to Shên Nung (about 3218 B.C.). He distinguished all the
plants, and determined their different properties. The first Great
Herbal is ascribed to him.

The term *Kung-fu* (\#) means work-man, the man who works with art, to
exercise one's self bodily, the art of the exercise of the body applied
in the prevention or treatment of disease, the singular postures in
which certain Tauists hold themselves. The expression Kung-fu (\#) is
also used, meaning work done. The term Kung-fu, labour or work, is
identical in character and meaning with the word *Congou*, applied in
the South to a certain kind of tea. In China it is applied medically to
the same subjects as are expressed by the German *Heil Gymnastik*, or
Curative Gymnastics, and the French *Kinesiologie*, or Science of
Movement. Among the movements which are embraced within the domain of
this method are massage, friction, pressure, percussion, vibration, and
many other passive movements, of which the application made with
intelligence produces essential hygienic and curative results. These
different movements have been in use in China since the most ancient
times They are employed to dissipate the rigidity of the muscles
occasioned by fatigue, spasmodic contraction, rheumatic pains, the
effects of dislocations and fractures, and in many cases of sanguiferous
plethora in place of bleeding. These practices have to-day passed into
the habits of the people, and those who are in charge of them are
usually the barbers, as they were practised in Europe in the middle
ages, who frequent the streets advertising the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

people of their presence by striking a kind of tuning-like-fork called
*hwantow*. Those usually who practice these movements are the barbers
who have shops, and the various exercises are generally gone through in
the evenings. In the sequel of this Paper, we hope to describe the
methods pursued by them. There is also a class of rubbers, who go to
private houses. or who undertake to teach the art. Here we have
certainly a procedure allied to medical gymnastics, to which the Chinese
attribute therapeutic value. Kung-fu embraces, as already remarked,
massage (a word not found by-the-bye in Webster's Dictionary, from the
Greek *massein*, to rub, or Arabic *mass*, to press softly), and
shampooing (a Hindu word meaning to knead), a practice still in vogue in
China and highly esteemed. Massage consists in such operations as
kneading, thumping, chafing, rubbing, pressing, pinching, etc.
The-barbers, as a part of their duty after shaving the pate and face or
plaiting the queue, treat their customers to kneading the scalp of the
head, eye-brows, spine, calves of the legs, etc. These operations are
practised both by way of preventing and curing disease; but more
generally, as in part in Western countries, for the comfort and sense of
bracing which it confers. The practice is now largely had recourse to in
the West, and with marked benefit in cases of deficiency of nerve
force,—neurasthenia, paralysis, hysteria, etc. The various methods of
manipulation comprised under the term massage include *effleurage*,
*pétrissage*, *friction*, and *tapotement*. All these movements are
centripetal, and done with the dry hand. The effect produced by such
manipulations is the promotion of the flow of lymph, otherwise
designated *humours* by the older writers, and blood, and the
stimulation of the muscles of the skin and the skin reflexes.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

A medical man, who was lately asked if he used massage much in his
practice, replied—"Oh yes, a great deal; my butler does it." After that,
one should not have been surprised to hear that the electrical treatment
was conducted by his footman, and that the kitchen maid undertook the
obstetric cases. Mere rubbing or shampooing is no more massage than a
daub of paint is a work of art. It is not only a vicarious way of giving
exercise to patients who cannot take it themselves, but it is a valuable
curative agent. Lady Manners, in the *Nineteenth Century*, says—"The
Chinese are supposed to have learnt the use of gymnastic exercises from
the Indians, and the subject mentioned in the most ancient of their
books is called *Cong-fou*, or Science of Living." The late Dr. Macgowan
gives the term for Kung-fu (\#) as Kang (\#), the Great Bear, and fu
(\#), a charm.

The Tauists, the priests of the religion or system of rationalism of
Lau-tse (500 B.C.), have always been the chief practitioners of this
form of Medical Gymnastics. These Bonzes, as they are called by the
French, a term corrupted from the Japanese and first applied by the
Portuguese to a Japanese priest, were the early alchemists of the world,
and have for centuries been in search of the philosopher's stone. In
cinnabar they supposed they had found the elixir vitæ. Alchemy was
pursued in China by these priests of Tao long previous to its being
known in Europe. For two centuries prior and for four or more
[subsequent](errata.htm#1) to our era, the transmutation of the base
metals into gold and the composition of an elixir .of immortality were
questions ardently studied by the Tauists. The Arabs, in their early
intercourse with China, thus borrowed it, and they were the means of its
diffusion in the West. Kung-fu owes its origin to these same

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

investigators, and was adopted at a very early period, by which to ward
off and cure disease and for strengthening the body and prolonging life,
in which it has been declared a far-reaching and efficacious system. My
friend, the late Mr. Wylie, in his excellent *Notes on Chinese
Literature*, remarks regarding Tauism that it has "changed its aspects
with almost every age. Commencing with the profound speculations of
contemplative recluses, on some of the most abstruse questions, of
theology and philosophy, other subjects in the course of time were
super-added which at first appear to have. little or no connexion with
the doctrine of Tau. Among these the pursuit of immortality, the
conquest of the passions, the search after the philosopher's stone, the
use of amulets, the observance of fasts and sacrifices, together with
rituals and charms, and the indefinite multiplication of objects of
worship, have now become an integral part of modern Tauism."

\[<span class="smallcaps">Note</span>.—The reader, who may wish to
consult this curious subject along with the Medical Divinities and
Divinities worshipped in Medical Temples in China, will find a series of
Papers by the present writer—*On Chinese Arts of Healing*, in the
*Chinese Recorder*, Vols. 2 and 3\].

Besides a system of gymnastics and charms in Chinese Medicine, there are
other systems, one of which deserves a passing notice. Numerous works
exist on all such subjects. There is one on the *Art of procuring Health
and Long Life*, without the aid of physicians ands by means of regimen
and general hygienic measures. Such things are inculcated as the
regulation of the heart and its affections; and rules are laid down with
regard to dietetics, business, and rest, containing many wise, useful,
and quaint precepts, which, if attended to, would certainly

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

conduce to health and longevity, but which, being persistently
neglected, the constitution is ruined and loaded with infirmities, life
is shortened, and the body is sorely burdened with disease. \[<span
class="smallcaps">Note</span>.—The reader will find one such work
translated in Du Halde\].

It is the object of Kung-fu to make its votaries almost immortal; at
least, if immortality be not gained, it is claimed for it that it tends
greatly to lengthen the span of life, to increase the body's power of
resistance to disease, to make life happier, and to make the muscles and
bones insensible to fatigue and the severest injury, accidents, fire,
etc. The benefit, too, the soul derives from such exercises and the
merit accruing to the individual are not to be lightly esteemed. I have
seen these priests subject themselves to great hardship and severe
trials, without producing any impression upon them.

Having briefly sketched the practice of the art in ancient times both in
the Orient and Occident, a few remarks on its practice in modern times
are necessary to complete our historical retrospect.

In 1569, Mercurialis at Venice published his treatise *De arte
Gymnastica*, in which he recorded the most important exercises used by
the Greeks and Romans, and which has proved a perfect mine for
subsequent writers of the 17th and 18th centuries, who derived their
knowledge of this subject largely from this source. In 174, according to
M. Dally, and 1728, according to Dr. Roth, appeared in English a work by
Francis Fuller on *Gymnastic Medicine*, every man his own physician,
treating of the power of exercise in its relations to the animal
economy, and its great necessity for the cure of various maladies, such
as consumption, dropsy,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

hypochondria, itch, and other skin eruptions. This book made a sensation
at the time, and it passed through several editions, and was translated
into several languages. In 1748, there were published at Helmstadt two
works in Latin, entitled *Dissertatio de arte gymnastica nova* by
Boerner, and De Gymnasticæ medicæ veteris inventoribus by Gerike. The
medical world was too much pre-occupied with pharmaceutical and chemical
speculations to pay attention to the Gymnastics of the Greeks, and still
less to those of the Tauists, those Priests of Supreme Reason. Pére
Amiot, one of the Roman Catholic missionaries at Peking, drew attention
to the subject of Kung-fu, or, as he spells it, Cong-Fou, by the
publication of his *Notice du Cong-Fou* in 1779, in *Les Mémoires sur
les Chinois*, of which more anon. In 1781 appeared Tissot's work *La
Gymnastique Medicale*. In 1821, another Frenchman, Londe, published a
treatise on the same subject, or exercise applied to the organs of man
according to physiological, hygienic, and therapeutic laws. These works
merit study at the present day for the high estimation of the power of
regular and methodical movement on the living mechanism which they
indicate. The most important works for rational gymnastics have been
undertaken on the mechanism of locomotion. In 1794 an English work
appeared, by John Pugh, the anatomist, entitled *A Treatise on the
Science of Muscular Action*, showing its utility in restoring the power
of the limbs. A work by Dr. Barclay, called *The Muscular Motions of the
Human Body*, published in Edinburgh in 1808, was one of the most
remarkable, having for its object the anatomical study of each organ
wall relation to movement; and another on *The Power of Compression and
Percussion in the cure of Rheumatism*,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Gout, Debility of
the Extremities, and in promoting Health and Longevity*, by Dr. Balfour,
of Edinburgh, in 1819. Various works in French appeared for the cure of
deformities of the spinal column and osseous system generally, and
chorea by means of pressure, percussion, friction, massage, position,
attitudes, movements (active and passive), which constitute the science
and art of medical gymnastics, the therapeutics of antiquity, which has
had such prodigious success, principally in the deviations and spasmodic
and chronic maladies against which modern therapeutics has generally
recognised its powerlessness. In 1830 Dr. Koch's *Gymnastics in relation
to Dietetics and Psychology* was published. Numerous other works in
French and other languages appeared, treating of friction, ligatures,
compression, vibration, percussion, etc. Dr. Roth believes a great part
of the results produced by the so-called water cure is owing to the
importance of movements, in which the douche, compresses, friction,
etc., have so great an influence as well by their dynamical as by their
mechanical effects.

We have reserved, for the sequel of this retrospect, notice of the
originator of what is now called the Swedish system of
[Gymnastics](errata.htm#2), Ling (born 1766, died 1839). His system is
based on anatomical and physiological principles; and, in this respect,
differs entirely from the Chinese, which can lay claim to no such
foundation, and is therefore not calculated to produce all the curative
results claimed for the Swedish system. His great principle was the
oneness of the human organism and the harmony between mind and body, and
between the various parts of the same body. The development and
preservation of this harmony is the educational or prophylactic part of
the system; the restoration of the disturbed harmony forms the subject

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

of the medical part. His idea, in Dr. Roth's words, was that an
harmonious organic development of the body and of its powers and
capabilities by exercises, considered In relation to the organic and
intellectual faculties, ought to constitute an essential part in the
general education of a people. He looked upon anatomy and physiology as
the basis of gymnastics essentially necessary. His intention was to make
gymnastics not only a branch of education for healthy persons, but to
demonstrate it to be a remedy for disease. The curative movements were
first practised in Stockholm in 1813. His system is now largely extended
through the various countries of Europe. He arranged the vital
phenomena, which are subordinate as well to physiological as to physical
laws, in three orders, known as the Dynamical, Chemical, and Mechanical
agents. The union and harmony of these three, combined, constitute a
perfect organism.

Under the Dynamical he places the manifestations of the moral and
intellectual powers; under the Chemical, generation, nutrition,
reproduction, sanguinification, secretion, etc; under the Mechanical,
breathing, circulation, walking, etc. He carries out this analogy of
these three fundamental agents of the vital powers in various
directions, as, for example, telluric influences, such as light, heat,
electricity, magnetism, etc., are embraced in the Dynamical; nutriment,
medicine, poisons, etc., in the Chemical; and shock, pressure, etc., in
the Mechanical. The organism itself is divided into the brain, heart,
and lungs; arms and legs corresponding to the same three agents. The
animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms permit of a similar analogy.
Hitherto it has been principally by medicines, acting generally on the
Chemical agent alone, that we have tried to preserve health and

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

cure disease; the Dynamical and Mechanical agents have been either
entirely neglected or unscientifically considered. In any discordant
action of the organism, in other words, in indisposition and disease,
which of the three agents must be principally acted upon, must be
considered. As the chemical agent is as inseparable from the other two
as these are from it, hence it must be impossible to effect a cure in
all diseases solely by pure medicines which act principally on the
chemical agent. Wherefore medical men frequently prescribe either
exercise influencing the mechanical, or amusement, etc., acting by means
of the dynamic agent. "It is as wrong," and we are now quoting from Dr.
Roth, "to recommend a healthy person only to eat and drink, and not to
move or amuse himself, as it is in diseases to act exclusively on one
factor of the vital power." The great Sydenham, when dying, consoled
those who complained of the loss of the great physician by saying—"I
leave behind me three great and most important means, viz.,—air, water,
and exercise, which will compensate for the loss of my person."

Ling's idea of the harmonious development of the organs of the body,
being the essential base of the education of the young and of the
people, is a Greek idea which is found in all the writings of the
philosophers. Barclay of Edinburgh in 1808, as we have shown, professed
the same idea in the treatise on the muscular motions of the body. St.
Paul's words in his Epistles to the Corinthians (I, XII, 24) and to the
Ephesians (IV, 16), considered solely from the physiological point of
view, are still to-day the most perfect synthesis of the science. M.
Dally thinks it would be doing a real wrong to Ling's reputation to have
him posed as the inventor of it.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His system
resembles exactly that of the Kung-fu of the Tauists, and to M. Dally it
appears less complex than that of the Tauists. The Chinese system,
continues our author, is sanctioned by 5000 years of continued
experience. For it is from Central Asia, and from the seat of the origin
of mankind, that the Tauists have imported this doctrine into the
Orient, and since this epoch have not ceased to make application of it.
But it is also from Central Asia, and from the same source as that
whence the Tauists have drawn them, that the ancestors of the Greeks
imported into the Occident the same doctrine. What then, asks M. Dally,
is the merit of Ling? As his body of doctrine does not differ from that
of the Tauists, it must be admitted also that at the same time Ling had
in his hands the Notice of Amiot or some other original Chinese
treatise, produced it may be by other missionaries or by some persons
attached to Embassies from Europe in China. (Lawrence Lange, by-the-bye,
was a Swede, and the first Russian Consul at Peking in the second decade
of the 18th century). The doctrine of Ling in its entirety, theoretical
and practical, is only a sort of counter-drawn
[daguerreotype](errata.htm#3) of the Kung-fu of the Tauists. It is the
royal vase of Dresden, the splendid Chinese vase with its Chinese
figures overlaid with European paint. This is, according to our
historical studies, says Dally, the real merit of Ling. After all,
whether the work of Ling is only an importation of the doctrine
conserved in China in all its primitive originality and in its essential
therapeutic character, or a simple renovation of Greek art more
especially applied to the education of man, or a harmonious development
of form and force applied to aesthetics and the military art, in a word,
whatever be the sources whence Ling may have drawn

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

the elements and the combinations of his system and its applications, it
is none the less true that he is one of the men who have much aided to
bring back gymnastics among us as a science and an art to the purer
traditions of high antiquity.

My attention was first called to the *Notice* of P. Amiot, now nearly
thirty years ago, by the following communication from a friend in
Edinburgh:—"The Chinese have a mode of treating many diseases by various
ways of breathing while the patients are placed in previously determined
positions, which vary according to the nature of the disease. The
treatment is called Cong-fu, and was practised by the followers of the
Bonzes, Tao-sse, who prepared the patients by religious ceremonies for
the treatment. The French Missionaries of Peking have published in their
*Mémoires concernant les Chinois*, Paris, 1779, a chapter on this
treatment under the name of *Notice du Cong fu des
[Bonzes](errata.htm#4) Tao-sse*. Will you kindly furnish answers to the
following?

1.—Detailed information on the positions and breathing movements.

2.—Whether the followers of the Bonzes, Tao-sse, still exist and
practise the treatment by breathing movements.

3.—The titles of Chinese works on this subject. Some works with wood
engravings have been published on the subject.

4.—Any other information regarding this mode of treatment."

This letter was perhaps dictated by Dr. Roth, with whom I have since
kept up a friendly and constant correspondence, and supplied him with
the various Chinese works containing illustrations on the subject.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The result of my
attention having been called to this treatment is the following article
on Kung-fu, which was submitted to Dr. Roth, and by him recommended for
publication. I was unwilling at the time to present to the medical
profession or to the general public a subject so meagerly handled, and
during all these years have waited for the convenient time to devote to
it more study and research, with the view of supplying at least
sufficient details to render any one, ignorant of Chinese and medicine,
able to grasp the subject and determine its usefulness or otherwise as a
prophylactic and curative agent. Unfortunately the press of work,
necessitated by the care of a large hospital and other duties, has
prevented me from pursuing further this study. The subject was brought
by me before the Peking Oriental Society a few years ago, and it is now
published in their Journal.

Dr. Roth has been the most prominent exponent and successful
practitioner of the system in Great Britain. As an Hungarian exile after
the Russian invasion which crushed the Hungarian cause in 1849, he
settled in London after studying Chinese in Paris for some time, and
chose this speciality in which he rose to eminence. He published
numerous works on the subject which are well known, the chief of which
are—*The Cure of Chronic Diseases by Movements*, *Handbook of the
Movement Cure*, *On Paralysis in Infancy*, *The Prevention of Special
Deformities*, *The Treatment of Writer's Cramp*, etc., etc. He presented
the present writer with copies of all his published works. His Hand-book
is characteristically "dedicated to all Medical Practitioners who are
disposed to examine before they condemn." His work on *Infantile
Paralysis* is

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

dedicated to my friend and namesake Dr. R. E. Dudgeon, who was the first
to befriend the exile on landing on our shores, and who was the first to
give proof of this confidence by placing some patients under his care. I
visited Dr. Roth at his residence, 48 Wimpole St., London, on more than
one occasion, where he showed me his institution for carrying out this
treatment by movement. He had a similar institution at Brighton.

Amiot says Kung-fu consists in two things,—the posture of the body, and
the manner of respiration. There are three principal postures,—standing,
sitting, lying. The priests of Tao enter into the greatest detail of all
the attitudes, in which they vary and blend the different postures. As
these, however, have more connexion with their doctrines than the
medical part of Kung-fu, it will be enough to indicate the general
principles. The different modes, in the three principal positions, of
stretching, folding, raising, lowering, bending, extending, abducting,
adducting the arms and legs, form a variety of numerous attitudes. The
head, the eyes, and the tongue, have each their movements and positions.
The tongue is charged to make in the mouth such operations as balancing,
pulsating, rubbing, shooting, etc., in order to excite salivation. The
eyes close, open, turn, fix, and wink. The Tauists pretend, when they
have gazed for a long time, first on one side then on the other, in
regarding the root of the nose, that the torrent of thought is
suspended, that a profound calm envelopes the soul, and a preparation
for a doing-nothing inertia which is the beginning of the communication
with spirits.

Regarding respiration, there are three ways,—one by the mouth, one by
the nose, and inspiration by the one and expiration by the other. In the
three modes of

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

respiration, sometimes it is the inspiration that is, as Amiot puts it,
*precipitée*, *filée*, *pleine* or *éteinte;* sometimes it is the
expiration, sometimes also both. The other principal differences which
lie at the base of Kung-fu in respiration, as noted by Amiot, are
inspiration and expiration by *sifflement*, *haleinée*, *sauts*,
*repetition*, *attraction*, and *deglutition*.

It has now been said in what Kung-fu consists. It lies with art to
choose and combine them, to change and repeat them according to the
malady which it is sought to cure. The morning is the best time for it.
After the sleep of the night, the blood is in a state of greater repose,
the humours are more tranquil, and the organs more supple, especially if
one has been careful to sup lightly. Fat persons, or those charged with
humours, gain it always by eating nothing at night; and this preparation
is absolutely necessary for certain maladies.

In Amiot's *Notice*, twenty figures are given illustrative of the text.
In each of the postures, the principal thing is to respire in a
particular manner a certain number of times, and to proportion the
length of the Kung-fu to the malady. The body is either half nude or
dressed, and the position is either standing or sitting. There are
series of each. In respiration, the mouth must be half full of water or
saliva. Various potions, decoctions, and drugs, are ordered to be taken
before or after Kung-fu; they seem to have been added in the course of
time, to facilitate the effects.

Amiot dispensed with entering into greater details, as Kung-fu was only
a bagatelle, or .at least may be so merely; yet, as he might fail to
make his meaning clear, and as otherwise, as he says, it is always good
to speak to the eyes, he had figures copied to give an idea of the

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

subject. In a few words, he indicates the different maladies which they
are said to cure, in order that the European physician may be in a
position to pronounce on this singular practice. Of the twenty figures
drawn, although seventeen are given for the sitting posture, it would be
necessary, he says, to add many more to give all the attitudes and
positions which are blended with the posture; "but in truth we have not
had the courage to copy out a larger number," or, as Huc says in
speaking of current facts in Chinese medicine, he prefers to abstain
because, says he, "Le vrai peut quelquefois n’être pas vraisemblable."
Amiot says—"The account which we have under our eyes is in a manner so
obscure and in terms so bizarre that we have not ventured to risk a
translation of it." If some alleviation to the ills of humanity is the
result of it, he will believe himself well recompensed for the courage
he has had in risking the *Notice*.

The physical and physiological principles of the art are the following,
and I am indebted to M. Dally for this resumé.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1.—That the mechanism of the human body is altogether hydraulic, that is
to say, that the free circulation of the blood, of the humours (*i.e.*,
the lymph), and of the spirits, and the respective equilibrium which
modifies their movements and their reciprocal action, being all the time
the weight and the wheels of the human body, the health subsists only by
this circulation, and this equilibrium, wherein it is re-established,
only by their re-establishment.

2.—That the air, which without cessation enters the blood and the lymph
through the lungs, being as the balance which tempers and restores their
fluidity, can neither be re-established nor subsist of itself.

</div>

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

The consequences of these two principles are*:—*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1.—That the circulation of liquids in the human body having to conquer
the two great obstacles of weight and friction, everything which tends
to diminish the one or the other will aid in re-establishing it when it
is altered.

2.—As the activity and elasticity of the air increases the fluidity of
the liquids, and facilitating by that means their movement, all that
tends to increase or diminish the force and volume of them in those of
the human body, ought to accelerate or retard their circulation.

</div>

These principles and consequences being supposed, the defenders of
Kung-fu enter into very great details, to approximate it to the
sympathetic correspondence of the different parts of the body, the
action and reaction of the great organs of the circulation, of the
secretion of the lymph, of the digestion of the aliments, etc. So much
for the principles. What of the theory?

There are the two essential principles of Kung-fu,—the posture of the
body, and the mode in which respiration is quickened, retarded, and
modified.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1.—If we look at the circulation of the blood, lymph, and spirits, on
the side of the obstacles which the weight opposes to it, and of the
friction which retards it, it is evident that the mode in which the body
is straight or bent, lying or raised, the feet and hands stretched or
bent, raised, lowered or twisted, ought to work in the hydraulic
mechanism a physical change which facilitates or impedes it. The
horizontal situation, being that which diminishes the greatest obstacle
of the weight, is that also which is most favourable

</div>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

to the circulation. That of being upright, on the contrary, leaving all
its resistance to the action of the weight, ought necessarily to render
the circulation more difficult. For the same reason, according as one
holds the arms, the feet, and the head, raised, or inclined, or bent, it
ought to become more or less easy for it. This is not all; that which
retards it, in one place, gives it more force, where it does not find
any obstacle; and, from that time, it assists the lymph and the blood to
overcome the engorgements which obstruct their passage there. One can
further add that, the more it has been impeded in one place, the more
its impetuosity brings it back there with force when the obstacle is
removed.

It follows from this that the different postures of Kung-fu, well
directed, ought to operate in a salutary disengagement in all the
maladies which spring from an embarrassed, retarded, or even interrupted
circulation. Now, how many complaints are there that are not thus
caused? One can even demand if, except fractures, wounds, etc., which
derange the bodily organisation, there are any which do not so
originate?

2.—It is certain that the heart is the prime mover of the circulation,
and the force which it has to produce and conserve it is one of the
grand marvels of the world. It is further certain that there is a
sensible and continual correspondence between the beatings of the heart,
which fills and empties itself of blood, and the movements of dilatation
and contraction of the lungs, which empty and fill themselves with air
by inspiration and expiration. This

</div>

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

correspondence is so evident that the beating of the heart increases and
diminishes immediately, in proportion to the acceleration or retardment
of the respiration. Now, if we inspire more air than we expire of it, or
*vice versâ*, its volume ought to diminish or augment the total mass of
blood and lymph, and ought to invigorate more or less the blood which is
in the lungs. If one hurries or retards the respiration, one ought to
hurry or weaken the beatings of the heart. The bearing of this on
Kung-fu is self-evident, and need not further be illustrated. It is
evident that, in accelerating or retarding the respiration, we
accelerate or retard the circulation, and by a necessary consequence
that of the lymph; and that, in the case of inspiring more air than we
expire, we diminish or augment the volume of the air which is therein
contained. Now, all this mechanism being assisted by the posture of the
body, by the combined and assorted position of the members, it is
evident that it ought to produce a sensible and immediate effect upon
the circulation of the blood and lymph, an effect physical, necessary,
and intimate, linked to the mechanism of the body, an effect so much the
more certain as the repose of the night has rendered the organs more
supple, as the diet of the evening has diminished the plenitude of the
arteries, of the veins, and of the canals of the absorbents and
lacteals. The object of the *Notice* in the *Mémoires*, Amiot says, is
not to teach Kung-fu, but to enable European physicians to examine its
value without prejudice.

</div>

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

The above is chiefly a translation from Amiot's article. M. Dally
subjoins some observations. He supposes the Tauists to consider the body
as a vertical line, and the members which are attached to it as
articulated springs of the line, able to take in turn all the different
positions. Upon this vertical line they have made four general
divisions,—the head, the arms, the trunk, and the legs. Each of these
divisions has general movements proper to it, and the articulated parts
of each of these divisions have also their particular movements. He
takes, for example, the head, of which they have considered not only the
general movements, inclined in front and to the back, to the right and
to the left, but also the particular movements of torsion of the neck to
the right and left, those of the eyes, of the nose, of the mouth, of the
tongue, and of the jaws. They have obtained new movements in combining
the general movements among themselves, the particular movements among
themselves, and the particular movements with the general movements. Is
it wished to get an idea of the number of attitudes, orders, series, or
formulae, of which this system is composed? It is sufficient to
represent only what in mathematics one calls permutations, arrangements,
and combinations; and the figures become infinite. This infinite
multiple of formulae reproduce themselves again by the addition of the
different modes of respiration, and by other conditions, such as the
quickness, the resistance, the body being naked or dressed, burdened
with a weight upon the head, on the shoulders, or in the hand, according
to the malady; besides the body lying, sitting, standing, stretched or
relaxed, immovable or movable, walking, running, dancing, leaping, in an
active or passive state, or one part active and another passive;

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

all the conditions which influence specifically the physiological effect
of the same movement, or of a similar series of movements.

After mentioning the above six observations, M. Dally gives an example
which he says one can verify upon one's self. Stretch forth the arms
forcibly, while friction is made in a concentric curve over the
abdominal region. What do you feel? An increase of heat in the
intestines, at the same time also a diminution of the heat in the
anterior side of the abdomen. Therefore, there is an augmentation of the
circulation in the arteries of the intestines, and a diminution of the
blood in the abdominal veins. Would you like that the friction cause an
effect altogether the contrary? Lower the arms, and hold them hanging.
In this position, the same friction produces a diminution of the blood
in the intestinal veins, and an augmentation of the circulation in the
arteries and in the anterior abdominal walls. Then, in the one case and
in the other, there has been, at will, an exchange of arteriosity and
absorptivity between the walls of the abdomen and the intestines. Then
again, in the one case and in the other, the conditions of vitality
which preside over the functions of all the organs of the abdominal
region are powerfully active, and one conceives that it is possible to
produce the same effects on the entire economy, in assisting by general
friction the tension or distension of the whole muscular system, the
tension or distension which the reserve of the breath or the simple
ordinary respiration can again notably modify. Thus, of the different
attitudes, they can produce physiological phenomena exactly alike or
variously modified; and what is of great importance in the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

application to the treatment of disease is this, that we Can isolate a
portion of the body, by acting on some other parts.

Such is the system of Kung-fu, and P. Amiot, says Dally, one of the most
profound mathematicians of his time, has perfectly understood the
grandeur of this system when he says that all the known postures and
attitudes do not form a moiety of those which the Tauists have imagined.

These are M. Dally's observations on the system. He then adds these on
the method. We know the elementary movements of Kung-fu and their
various combinations to be infinite. By the examples which we have given
of the physiological effects of friction, combined with tension or
relaxation of the abdominal muscles, one can judge with what precision
and exactitude these effects can be produced, in order to combat the
diseases against which they are indicated, such as constipation,
diarrhœa, or any other enteric trouble. In order to better appreciate
the power of Kung-fu, it would be necessary to make a special study of
the thousand different modes of respiration; for this is the essential
point, and, according to the observation of Amiot, the most difficult of
this method. Yet, says M. Dally, the difficulty can be overcome by
special physiological and anatomical study, and by the Stern experience
obtained by the effects. One can be assisted in this matter by the
traditions of the employment of this exercise among the peoples of
antiquity.

After citing instances, he sums up thus:—Upon this point, as upon all
others, one comes back to the wisdom of high antiquity, where movement
is still timid and partial, but which tends constantly to complete

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

and generalize itself. Amiot's figures (4, 6, 12, and 20) recall to M.
Dally the formulae similar to those which he has previously given, in
affections of the abdominal region. He quotes figure 9 as a formula
against vertigo and dazzling. It indicates a movement of double pressure
of the head, combined without doubt with a movement of vibration and a
certain respiration. He himself applied this remedy with success against
vertigo and inveterate pains of the head. The physiological effect of
this formula is innervation, molecular division, and increase of
activity of the absorbent vessels. Applied to the head, it ought
necessarily to bring back there the freedom of the functions. An
analogous practice is found among the Greek physicians and in Ling's
method. M. Dally has also verified attitude 15 against gravel, nephritic
pains, and lumbago. He obtained instantaneous relief. As it is here only
a question of a certain pressure upon the kidneys, with tension of the
anterior muscles of the body, one is able to take the different
attitudes which pre-dispose the muscles in the same manner, and to make
them exercise this pressure by another person. This gymnastic remedy, M.
Dally says, is an hereditary usage in Hungary. Amiot was afraid to risk
a translation, which M. Dally deeply regrets; and he hopes, in the
interests of science, that some able and curious expert is to be met
with who will undertake to reconstitute this method, with the elements
of which he has annotated the system. M. Dally here, in a foot note,
refers to his visit in 1854 to Dr. Roth in London, who was the learned
and zealous director of an establishment there. He spoke of the
discovery he had made of the *Notice du Cong-fu*, in the *Mémoires sur
les Chinois*, praying him to examine this doctrine which had

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the greatest affinity with that of Ling. He hoped much from this step.
M. Dally thought that efforts made in the libraries of Europe, and in
the yearly papers sent by the missionaries in China, might probably find
out the works which Amiot had consulted. The works with figures,
consulted by Amiot, and many others, are now before the present writer.

In the meantime, continues our author, we remark in the *Notice* that
the conditions of time and diet were accessory elements in the
application of Kung-fu. We notice also in it that the simultaneous
administration of movements, along with certain medicaments, was a
practice foreign to the primitive and rational doctrine of this
institution, as well as the superstitious practices with which it is
to-day surrounded. Amiot does not say whether the system of Kung-fu is
applicable to the treatment of deformities, luxations, and other
surgical cases. In support of the treatment of surgical cases by this
method, he (M. Dally) quotes from Lay's *The Chinese as They Are* and
Dr. Williams’ *Middle Kingdom*, and says he could multiply facts of this
kind, which clearly establishes that the science of physiological
movement furnishes the Chinese with effectual means in the treatment of
maladies of all sorts. According to. Du Halde, the residence of the
Chief of the Tauists, called the Celestial Doctor (T‘ien Sze), is in the
department of Kan-chou Fu, in the province of Kansuh, a mountainous
country which furnishes an extraordinary abundance of medicinal plants.
There is the central establishment for the teaching of the doctrine.
They possess secondary establishments, one of the most considerable
being that in Kiangsi, where a crowd of sick come together from all
parts, in search of a remedy for their ills.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

M. Dally next gives us some observations on the principles and the
theory. According to Amiot, the Tauists consider the human body as a
purely hydraulic mechanism, and he explains their physical principles
and their physiological theory according to this sole fundamental idea.
In this case, there will be between the doctrine of the Tauists and
those of the Iatro-mechanists such a similitude of affinity that one can
believe that they pertain to the same school. Yet Amiot makes it
understood that Kung-fu relies still upon other principles. The
primitive priests considered the body not only as a physical and
mechanical apparatus, but also as a chemical one. They recognized even
that the physical and chemical laws of the body are subject to the
influence of a superior principle, which rules and harmonizes them in
the unity of the living being. This Chinese conception recalls exactly
the theory of Ling—of mechanical, chemical, and dynamic agents, which
balance themselves and hold themselves in equilibrium upon a central
point which is the life and whence proceed the three principal agents.
Dr. Bayes of Brighton, in his memoir entitled *On the Triple Aspect of
Chronic Disease*, London, 1854, takes also for the base of his
observations the theory of the Chinese balance of the three vital
forces, which he borrowed probably from the doctrine of Ling. M. Dally
has already spoken of them; it is necessary, be says, to revert to them
again.

The animal forces, locomotive or muscular, *Yang*, and the vegetative
forces, secretory or chemical, *Yin*, are harmonised and held in
equilibrium by the physical forces, *T‘ai-chi;* and from this state of
equilibrium results life and health. These three forces have contrary
tendencies; the *Yang* tends to produce and perpetuate itself
incessantly, the *Yin* tends to descend to the terrestrial region, and
the

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *T’ai-chi*
remounts to its origin, the Tao, the reason of all the visible
manifestation. The Yang and the Yin are so united among themselves that
they are in a state of reciprocal dependence, and they possess only a
certain power of reaction proportioned the one to the other, a power
dispensed by the *T’ai-chi*. It is in the maintenance of this
proportionality, of this species of static, physical, chemical, and
intellectual equilibrium, that the will, the moral power of man, and the
acts by which this will manifests itself, ought to tend incessantly.
Now, Kung-fu has been instituted for this object. It is charged with the
maintenance or re-establishment of all parts of the body and its
faculties in their condition of unity and primitive harmony among them
and with the soul, in order that the soul may have at its disposition a
powerful and faithful servant for the execution of its will. In other
words, and from the *Notice* of Amiot, Kung-fu is "a real exercise of
religion, which, in curing the body of its infirmities, frees the soul
from the servitude of the senses," and gives to it the power to
accomplish its duties upon the earth and of raising itself freely to the
perfection and perpetuity of its spiritual nature in the Tao, the reason
of the grand creative power. Thus Kung-fu, in its primitive institution,
appears as a souvenir of the Tree of Life, under which man of the first
days came, after his labours, to shelter his forces and his health and
conserve his soul, still pure, a docile instrument of his will. Such are
the principles upon which reposes the theory of Kung-fu of the Chinese,
like that of their chemical and pharmaceutical medicine, and also that
of their religious, social, and philosophic doctrines; for the Chinese,
whatever be their studies of man or the institutions which concern him,
carry always their considerations into all the

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

elements of his nature and his constitution. However we may think that
the progress of the civilization of the West has not yet arrived at this
degree of practical reason; we are certainly astonished to see that,
from the first ages of humanity, the priests of *Tao* were in possession
of this grand thought of the unity of the human nature, and that they
had made the application of it to all things, even to hygiene and to
therapeutics, by movement organised in its relations with the physical,
chemical, and psychical laws of the human being.

Indeed, this will be a curious history to write, says Dally, that of
these old priests of Tao,—these remains still living of the first
Brahmans of India, of the Magi of Chaldea, of the priests of Egypt, of
the Druids of Gaul, their contemporaries, diverse sects,—sprung more
than 3000 years before our era, from the alteration of the primitive
tradition of mankind. Depositories of the tradition, these founders of
nations carried the doctrine of Kung-fu from the common cradle into all
the countries where they established themselves. Perpetuated whole and
complete among the Chinese, we shall find it more or less mutilated and
altered among other peoples.

Lao-tse was the founder of the religion of Tao, or rather the restorer
of it, as he himself says. He appeared in the 6th century B.C.; and,
like Confucius, his rival, the political reformer of China, at the same
epoch as Buddha, Zoroaster, Socrates, and Plato, curious synchronisms
which prove the providential solidarity of all the fractions of
humanity. M. Dally, believing that he hears the distant echo of the
religious principle of the Kung-fu in Plato whom he quotes, he concludes
this chapter with the words of St. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Thessalonians (v. 23), where M. Dally recognises the pure

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

tradition of the religious and scientific principle which presides in
the doctrine of the Kung-fu:—"And the God of peace himself sanctify you
wholly; and may your spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved entire,
without blame, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ."

I am indebted for much of what has now been presented, in illustration
of this system, to Père Amiot, and particularly to M. Dally, who has
published a large work on the subject, called *Cinésiologie ou Science
du Movement*, Paris, 1857, in which he reviews Amiot's *Notice*. He sums
up the subject in these terms.

This art is a very ancient practice of medicine, founded on principles
originally pure and free of all the superstition with which it is to-day
surrounded. It goes back to a period when the Tauist priests formed an
official sacerdotal caste, in the time of Hwang-ti (2698 B.C.).

The art consists in three essential parts*:—*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1.—It comprises divers positions of the body, the art of varying the
attitudes; and it explains how, during these positions and attitudes,
the act of respiration ought to be carried on, following certain rules
in various inspirations and expirations.

2.—The method has its own scientific language.

3.—It has really operated in the cure of disease, and in the alleviation
of many infirmities.

</div>

The Chinese, to whatever order they belong, have recourse with eagerness
to this mode of therapeutics, when all other means of cure have been
tried in vain. Thus, Kung-fu has really all the characters of an ancient
scientific method.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

So much for the principles and theory of Kung-fu u given by Amiot, and
so ably enforced and explained by Dally. The latter entertains higher
ideas of the value of Kung-fu than, in my opinion, is warranted. Amiot
gives some of the salient points of position and breathing movements for
the cure of certain maladies, but has not criticised or pointed out the
unscientific ideas of the Chinese, not only regarding their cosmogony or
philosophy of creation, but the physiology and anatomy of the human body
which in their system are closely correlated, including the number,
position, and functions of the viscera, the circulation of the blood,
the true cause of the pulse, etc., and which are diametrically opposed
to our modern Western medical science. A couple of illustrations, which
will be found in the sequel, will explain the Chinese ideas of the human
body. Although their theories, however, may be and are wrong, there may
be and doubtless is advantage derived from Kung-fu in the prevention and
cure of disease, and the strengthening of the body, just as in their
therapeutics, although entirely empirical, they are often successful in
the treatment of disease.

We reserve for the conclusion of this Paper our own remarks and
investigations into these principles and theories, and now hasten to
place before the reader some of the various methods, active and passive,
prophylactic and curative of disease, and for strengthening the body.
There are numerous works on the subject, copiously illustrated by more
or less rude wood-cuts showing the various positions,—sitting, standing,
and lying. To facilitate the full understanding of much that lies at the
basis of all Chinese philosophy, and of course also of their medical
practice and theories, and is taken for granted in Kung-fu, would
require our entering into the general

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

subject at some length. At present it must suffice, aided by brief notes
where the references would otherwise be unintelligible, to give as
briefly as possible the rationale of the art from the Chinese
standpoint. This remarkable people have always highly esteemed the study
of physic, because of its utility in the preservation of life and the
cure of disease, but chiefly from the close connexion which they believe
exists between the body and its various. members and the heavenly
bodies. The reader will, therefore, not be astonished to find in
Kung-fu, as in their medicine generally, much that is puerile and
sublimely ridiculous, with here and there grains of wise observation and
practical remark. Their reverence for antiquity, and their clinging to
their elaborate and beautiful theories which their ignorance led them to
make, and their conservatism leads them to keep, has been the chief
cause of retarding progress in medicine and the cognate sciences. Had
they shown as much talent and industry in studying man as he is, as they
have exhibited in the industrial arts, etc., the Chinese would
undoubtedly have been the first physicians in the world. With the
highest heathen civilization, they stand lowest in point of practical
medicine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eight Ornamental Sections](kfu002)
