[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kfu102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Kung-Fu, or Tauist Medical Gymnastics*, by John Dudgeon, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CONCLUSION.

A certain amount of mystery surrounds all the Tauist doctrines. Modern
chemistry was derived from their alchymy; and the adoption of the
movement cure is also traceable to the Tauists. The desire has been long
expressed to know something of the extent, importance and rationale of
this particular practice of the sect, which goes back to the earliest
ages and is closely interwoven with the habits and ideas of the Chinese
people of the present day.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

The utmost confusion seems to exist regarding the character of Kung-fu.
A distinguished Edinburgh graduate in medicine, in answer to enquiries
about Kung-fu, wrote to my friend, the late Dr Roth of London, that it
represented certain slips of paper printed with some religious sentences
which people eat in the form of ashes, and enclosing two such slips of
paper. This is confounding Kung-fu with healing by charms and the
chanting of prayers, which is very prevalent in China. (See then
writer's series of articles on Chinese Arts of Healing—*Chinese
Recorder*). The late Dr. Porter Smith of Hankow described Kung-fu as a
species of disciplinary calisthenics practised by Tauist priests. The
writer has therefore attempted an exhaustive review of the practice of
Kung-fu, and it is hoped that this contribution will now set all doubt
at rest respecting this subject. He fears there will hardly be found a
grain of truth and common sense in the whole subject to reward the
labour and expense—by no means small—expended upon it. It required, too,
a considerable amount of courage to undertake the publication of such a
mass of rubbish. The reader, to whom the writer owes an apology, has no
idea how much matter, only worthy of such a designation, has been
discarded. The one gratification is alone left to him, viz.:—That the
subject has now been so exhaustively threshed out, that no subsequent
enquirer need enter the field in the hope of finding anything new or
important. And that as Cervantes, in his Don Quixote, hung his pen so
thigh on the conclusion of that ever-memorable work, that nobody coming
after him would venture to take it down, so he hopes that the same will
be the case in regard to this work.

The illustrations of this subject which might have been reproduced, are
endless. The reader will, it is feared, think that the limit in this
particular has been greatly overstepped. The diseases, too, for which
they are prescribed, are so much alike that one figure for each disease
might have sufficed. On account of the space occupied by them, it was
thought advisable to reduce them by one of the photographic processes,
but the Publishers recommended them to be inserted in their entirety as
facsimiles of Chinese illustrations, which may have a certain interest
for some as indicating the state of the engraver and designer's art. The
prescriptions, too, may afford those more medically inclined some
amusement, and possibly also some instruction in the style of Chinese
prescriptions: the drugs used, the mode of preparation, dosage, etc. The
growing interest and importance of medical gymnastic

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

exercises at the present day is one of the chief excuses for the
preparation and publication of this paper, and it is hoped that its
further examination has been rendered unnecessary. How far the writer
has succeeded in accomplishing M. Dally's wish—that some expert would
[thoroughly](errata.htm#34.md) investigate the subject of Kung-fu and
inform the public what it contains—, is left to the reader to judge.

 

 

 

<div style="font-size: 93%">

THE END.

 

 

 

 

</div>
