[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kfu099)  [Next](kfu101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Kung-Fu, or Tauist Medical Gymnastics*, by John Dudgeon, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Description of Diagrams.

<span class="smallcaps">The Level Frame</span>. (\#).—There are four
"horse-riding" (\#) forms under this position.

1.—Standing evenly and uprightly, separate the feet the width of the
shoulders apart and keep the palms upward on the same level as the
loins. Do not lean against anything.

2.—Turn the palms downwards, always on the same level as the loins.

3.—Rub evenly from the sides and make a circle as if rubbing the head.

4.—Then stretch the arms straight forward and erect the hands with the
palms directed forward and fingers upwards on the same level as the
nipple; take one breath, and wait a little, about the time of three
respirations. Afterwards, after taking a breath, the eyes should be
directed to the right, left, above and below, the time of three
respirations being taken as the unit.

There are also two "looking-moon" (\#), forms under this position.

1.—Let the left foot take a step horizontally to the side, bend the left
knee, incline the left foot; keep both the right leg and foot straight.
Lay the left hand on the upper aspect of the thigh, with the thumb
directed backwards and wind the right hand round the back of the right
ear and with the five fingers in a form as if holding a thing, the
points of the fingers directed backwards like the claws of a vulture.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

2.—Afterwards, raise the left hand up to the level of the eye, the
fingers clenched so that the thumb shall be opposite the little finger,
the second one, the fourth and the middle one projecting a little. Keep
the palm—the heart of the hand—hollow, sufficient to contain the lid of
a tea cup. First look at the height of the left hand, then turn the head
even and take a breath. Again turn the head and look at the part between
the thumb and forefinger. Repeat this on the right side; three times on
each side, swallowing six mouthfuls of air.

There are two "expanding-breath" (\#), forms tinder this position.

1.—The first resembles the first "horse-riding" form, except that the
palms are even.

2.—The second resembles the last "horse-riding" form, except that the
hands are turned and pushed to the front like the last of the
"horse-riding" forms and no breath is taken.

<span class="smallcaps">Preliminary Military Exercises</span>.—(\#),
There are three forms under this position and seven diagrams.

1.—The left foot bent, the right foot straight, the remainder the same
as the first "looking-moon" position and in addition with the face
straight take a breath and turn the head to the left.

2.—Stretch out the left hand which was formerly laid on the leg straight
to the left and keep the palm downwards.

3.—Turn the left hand back to the level of the breast and then stretch
it out again and bring it back, repeating it two times.

4.—Turn over the hand on the breast with the thumb upwards and the other
fingers downwards and the palm opposite the breast and take a breath.

5.—Turn the hand with the thumb downwards and the middle finger upwards
and turn the head to the left.

6.—Stretch out the hand opposite to the breast and wind it round the
ear, keep the palm directed upwards and extend it to the left.

7.—Turn it back from behind the ear and clench the fist in front of the
breast, keep the outer part of the fist directed upwards, take a breath
and then turn the head to the left. To be done on the right also, each
side three times, altogether taking eighteen breaths.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The "Circulating or Inspecting-Hand"
Position</span> (\#).

Standing erect, keep the feet 15 or 16 inches apart; the elbows extended
evenly forwards, the wrists straight and perpendicular opposite each
other and the fingers separated.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Jade Girdle" Position</span> (\#).

Separate the palms. pressing them down behind the ears to the loins on
the level of the navel; keep the tips of the fingers apart and
corresponding to each other, and distant from the body three inches
interlocking, as it were, the loins and take a breath.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Suspending-Loin" Position</span> (\#).

Apply the fists to the loins, turn the backs of the hands downward and
full in front take a breath.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Holding-Up Robe" Position</span> (\#).

Open the fists, turn them from the underpart of the ribs, pronate the
palms and stretch them forward evenly as if lifting something and full
in front take a breath.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Turban" Position</span> (\#).

Separate the hands, turn them out from under the ribs to above the head
to a distance of 7 or 8 inches between them and the head, direct the
palms outwards, the fingers separated opposite each other with the thumb
downwards on a level with the eyes.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Brushing-Face" Position</span> (\#).

There are two forms under this position.

1.—Keep the palms of the hands close together in front on a level with
the chin, the two little fingers and elbows applied close together and
raise them together over the forehead.

2.—Gradually bend the fingers in order to make hooks of them and then
slowly clench the fists and place them under the chin; open them (the
fists) again, bring the thumbs together, extend the hands and pass them
over the forehead; also keep the two little fingers together and finally
make the hands into fists and place them again under the chin. The
wrists and elbows should be close together.

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="smallcaps">"Court Tablet" Position</span> (\#).

Pull the fists apart on a level with the shoulders, in a circular form
as if enfolding things, the back of the hand directed upwards and the
fists opposite each other, and apart 18 or 19 inches, and in front take
a breath.

<span class="smallcaps">"Side-lifting" Position</span> (\#), There are
three forms under this position.

1.—Standing aslant, the left foot bent, the right foot erect, interlock
the hands and raise them with energy over the head.

2.—Bend the body gradually as if making a bow, as far as the instep of
the foot, turn the palms and press downwards, afterwards interlock them
again and raise them to the space between the knee and the chin, then
all at once make a whirl, and straighten the body and loins.

3.—Separate the hands and let them circle round the ears, then clench
the fists and bend the arms in a circular form; the two fists apart
opposite each other 18 or 19 inches and the back of the hands kept
upwards, take a breath. It is done in the same way on the right; thrice
on each side, taking altogether six breaths.

<span class="smallcaps">"Front-lifting Position</span> (\#). There are
three forms under this position.

1.—Standing erect, the feet 15 or 16 inches apart, interlock the hands
and raise them over the head.

2.—Gradually bend the body as in the 2nd form of the "Side-lifting"
position to the level of the loins. This is done in front, which is the
only difference.

3.—This form is also the same as the 3rd of the "Side-lifting" position,
except that it is performed thrice in front and one breath is taken each
time.

<span class="smallcaps">The Position of "Hsueh-Kung Standing"</span>
(\#). Ten forms are given under this position.

1.—Open the fists, keep the fingers straight, then wind them round the
ears and stop at a level with the breasts.

2.—Press downwards from the breasts to the navel without stopping until
the navel is reached.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

3.—Turn out the hands from the under part of the ribs, keep the palms
directed upwards on a level with the shoulders, each hand even 4 or 5
inches apart from the head; the two thumbs in front of the shoulders,
the other fingers extended behind the shoulders.

4.—Close the hands together even with the underpart of the chin; the two
little fingers close together with the p elms upwards and the wrists and
elbows close together. For the first time pronate the palms, let the two
little fingers be attached and stretch them upwards.

5.—And then raise them thus over the forehead.

6.—Gradually bend the fingers into the form of a hook, and form them
into fists level with the chin.

7.—Open the fists, the palms upwards and the thumbs close together. For
the second time pronate the palms the thumbs close together and stretch
them upwards.

8.—Raise the hands over the forehead, bring the two little fingers close
together, afterwards bring them down to the level of the chin, clench
them into fists, then open them as before, bring the two little fingers
close together and the palms directed upward over the forehead.

9.—This form is exactly related to the last. For the 3rd time, pronate
the palms, the two little fingers close together and stretch them
upwards.

10.—Then lower the fingers, form them into fists, let them be evenly
arranged and circularly as if enfolding things; the two fists 18 or 19
inches apart. One breath is then taken. This is to be performed three
times, so three breaths should be taken.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Arranging-Elbow" Position</span> (\#).
There are three forms under this position.

1.—The left foot bent, the right foot straight, the right hand clenched
and held in the left hand.

2.—Stretch out the left elbow to the left and draw it back immediately,
then squat with the body, the left foot straight, the other bent; let
the left hand still hold the right fist and raise the right elbow a
little.

3.—Raise the body, with the left foot bent and the right foot straight;
lean the body to the left, take a breath; raise the right elbow higher.
Perform the same on the right side; on each side three limes taking six
inspirations. While the body is leaning, let the eyes look at a point
six inches from the feet.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The "Resting-on-the knee" Position</span>. (\#).

The left foot bent, the right foot straight, law the right hand on the
left leg over two inches from the knee with the left hand laid on the
top of the right hand. Pronate the body sideways, let the face look
evenly towards the left and take a breath. With the back bowed, the neck
straight, look downwards at a point more than six inches from the feet.
Do the same on the right, three times on each side and take six breaths.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Chan-hsiao" Position</span> (\#). Four
forms are given under this position; the first two are termed the
"cannon of the den;" the third the "cannon rushing against the sky" and
the fourth the "cannon passing through the heart."

1.—The left foot bent, the right foot straight; let the palm of the left
hand face downwards level with the breast, the thumb kept inwards; and
the palm of the right hand directed upwards and level with the navel;
place the little finger inwards and keep all the fingers apart.

2.—Pull the hands out horizontally, then clench them, let the left one
be level with the breast eight or nine inches apart, the thumb kept
inwards and the right fist level with the ribs over one inch apart; the
thumb directed outwards, take a breath in front, then turn the head and
look to the left.

3.—Open the left fist and whirl it, then make it into a fist again,
[stretch](errata.htm#31.md) it perpendicularly on a level with the side of
the forehead. Take a breath in font, turn the head and look at the space
between the thumb and second finger of the left hand.

4.—Open the left fist and whirl it round the ear, then stretch the fist
straight out towards the left, keeping the dorsum upwards. Turn the head
and look to the left, and take one breath. Do the same on the right
side, on each side three times, taking altogether
[eighteen](errata.htm#32.md) breaths.

<span class="smallcaps">The "Grain-Bag-Beating" Position</span> (\#).
There are 12 forms under this position. The first two are termed "cannon
rushing against the sky" (\#).

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

1.—The left foot bent, the right foot straight; hold the bag in the
right hand, whirl the left from under the ribs, clench the fist, bend
the elbow and extend it upwards, then take a breath.

2.—Hold the bag with the right hand, with it beat the left arm steadily
down to the left palm and fingers several times. This is beating the
inner part of the left arm.

<span class="smallcaps">Rule</span>.—Always beat straight down—never
backwards—nor return on any omitted part. It should be done at once.

3.—This is termed "cannon passing through the heart." (\#). Open the
left fist, whirl it round the ear, stretch the fist straight out to the
left, keeping the dorsum upwards and take a breath. Holding the bag with
the right hand, with it beat the arm steadily to the back of the hand
and the tip of the middle finger. This is beating the outer part of the
left arm.

4.—This is termed the "vulture-hand" (\#). Whirl the left hand round and
take the form of a "vulture-hand," take a breath, then hold the bag with
the right hand and with it beat from the left armpit steadily down to
the side of the little finger. This is beating the under part of the
left upper limb.

5.—This is termed the "minor cannon rushing against the sky" (\#). Whirl
the left hand once, then raise the fist so as to assume the form of a
"cannon rushing against the sky" only a little lower, and take a breath.
Now the right hand beats with the bag from the left shoulder steadily
down to the side of the thumb of the left hand. This is beating the
upper part of the left upper limb.

6.—This and the following are both termed "carrying the tripod on the
shoulder" (\#). Whirl the left hand from under the ribs, clench the
fist, stretch it straight upwards with energy, keeping the thumbs at the
back part, then take a breath and look upward at the rising fist.

7.—Holding the bag with the right hand, beat with it from the left ribs
steadily down to the front side of the left leg, knee, shinbone, instep
of foot and toe. This is called beating the front part of the lower left
limb.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

8.—This is termed "coiling the elbow" (\#). Open the left fist and whirl
it round the ear, then bend the elbow and clench the fist on a level
with the breast, take a breath and raise the elbow a little. Now with
the bag in the right hand beat steadily from the left armpit inclined to
the left loin and to the outer ankle and the side of the little toe.
This is beating the outer part of the lower left limb.

9.—This is termed the "vulture hand." Open the left fist make a "vulture
hand," and whirl it round the ear and take a breath. Then holding the
bag by the right hand beat from the end of the sternum down to the
abdomen and from the space between the ribs and abdomen beat
horizontally to the right side of abdomen; change hands with the bag and
beat horizontally to the left of the abdomen. Protect the secret parts
by covering them with the right hand and beat with the left hand
beginning from the left side of the "little abdomen" steadily to the
inner part of the left leg and left toe. If there be abdominal illness
of any kind, it may be cured by beating several times. This is beating
the inner part of the lower left limb.

10.—This and the next two are called "resting-on-the-knee." The right
foot bent, left foot straight, the left hand holding the bag press on
the right in the middle of the leg, also the right hand pressing on the
bag, then take a breath.

11.—Holding the bag with both hands, raise it over the head and beat the
spine twenty times but do not beat the ridge of the spine.

12.—With the left foot stretched, the right foot bent, lay the right
hand on. the surface of the right leg; keep the thumb directed
backwards, incline the body backwards and look on the left knee. The
left hand holding the bag turn the hand back and beat the left part
under the back consecutively to the loin, then return the hand and beat
the left buttock, left leg, knee, calf down to the heel. This is beating
the back part of the lower left limb. After having gone through the
exercises on the left upper and lower limbs then transfer to the right
upper and lower limbs, following the same method.

<span class="smallcaps">The Position of "Scooping The Moon at the Bottom
of the Sea"</span> (\#) has five forms.

1.—Lay the left hand on the surface of the leg and make the right into a
"vulture hand" *i.e.* bringing the tips of the fingers together.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

2.—Whirl the left hand round the ear and then stretch the pains out
towards the left.

3.—Turn the hand with the back upwards.

4.—In such a way as to scoop the moon by bowing the head and bending the
loins to scoop from left to right; then raise the body up.

5.—While scooping, assume "the looking-moon" manner and take a breath,
then look at the interval between the thumb and the second finger of the
left hand. The same should be done on the right, thrice on each side and
altogether six breaths taken.

The above 64 diagrams are the first part of the exercises; embracing in
all 87 breaths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Physiology of Kung-fu](kfu101.md)
