[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khw09)  [Next](khw11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE508/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment*, by Rudolf Steiner,
\[1947\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

### VI

### *THE TRANSFORMATION OF DREAM LIFE*

AN INTIMATION that the student has reached or will soon reach the stage
of development described in the preceding chapter will be found in the
change which comes over his dream life. His dreams, hitherto confused
and haphazard, now begin to assume a more regular character. Their
pictures begin to succeed each other in sensible connection, like the
thoughts and ideas of daily life. He can discern in them law, cause, and
effect. The content, too, of his dreams is changed. While hitherto he
discerned only reminiscences of daily life and transformed impressions
of his surroundings or of his physical condition, there now appear
before him pictures of a world he has hitherto not known. At first the
general character of his dream life remains

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

unchanged, in as far as dreams are distinguished from waking mental
activity by the symbolical presentation of what they wish to express. No
attentive observer of dream life can fail to detect this characteristic.
For instance, a person may dream that he has caught some horrible
creature, and he feels an unpleasant sensation in his hand. He wakes to
discover that he is tightly grasping a corner of the blanket. The truth
is not presented to the mind, except through the medium of a symbolical
image. A man may dream that he is flying from some pursuer and is
stricken with fear. On waking, he finds that he has been suffering,
during sleep, from palpitations of the heart. Disquieting dreams can
also be traced to indigestible food. Occurrences in the immediate
vicinity may also reflect themselves symbolically in dreams. The
striking of a clock may evoke the picture of a troop of soldiers
marching by to the beat of drums. A falling chair may be the occasion of
a whole dream drama in which the sound of the fall is reproduced as the
report of a gun, and so forth. The more regulated dreams of esoteric
students whose etheric body has begun its development retain this
symbolical

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

method of expression, but they will cease merely to reflect reality
connected with the physical body and physical environment. As the dreams
due to the latter causes become more connected, they are mingled with
similar pictures expressing things and events of another world. These
are the first experiences lying beyond the range of waking
consciousness.

Yet no true mystic will ever make his experiences in dreams the basis of
any authoritative account of the higher world. Such dreams must be
merely considered as providing the first hint of a higher development.
Very soon and as a further result, the student's dreams will no longer
remain beyond the reach of intellectual guidance as heretofore, but on
the contrary, will be mentally controlled and supervised like the
impressions and conceptions of waking consciousness. The difference
between dream and waking consciousness grows ever smaller. The dreamer
remains awake in the fullest sense of the word during his dream life;
that is, he is aware of his mastery and control over his own vivid
mental activity.

During our dreams we are actually in a world other than that of our
senses; but with undeveloped

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

spiritual organs we can form none other than the confused conceptions of
it described above. It is only in so far present for us as, for
instance, the world of sense could be for a being equipped with no more
than rudimentary eyes. That is why we can see nothing in this world but
counterfeits and reflections of daily life. The latter are perceptible
to us because our own soul paints its daily experiences in pictorial
form into the substance of which that other world consists. It must be
clearly understood that in addition to our ordinary conscious work-a-day
life we lead a second, unconscious life in that other world. We engrave
in it all our thoughts and perceptions. These tracings only become
visible when the lotus flowers are developed. Now, in every human being
there are slender rudiments of these lotus flowers. We cannot perceive
by means of them during waking consciousness because the impressions
made on them are very faint. We cannot see the stars during the daytime
for a similar reason: their visibility is extinguished by the mighty
glare of the sun. Thus, too, the faint spiritual impressions cannot make
themselves felt in the face

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

of the powerful impressions received through the senses.

Now, when the gate of the senses is closed during sleep, these other
impressions begin to emerge confusedly, and the dreamer becomes aware of
experiences in another world. But as already explained, these
experiences consist at first merely of pictures engraved in the
spiritual world by our mental activity attached to the physical senses.
Only developed lotus flowers make it possible for manifestations not
derived from the physical world to be imprinted in the same way. And
then the etheric body, when developed, brings full knowledge concerning
these engraved impressions derived from other worlds.

This is the beginning of life and activity in a new world, and at this
point esoteric training must set the student a twofold task. To begin
with, he must learn to take stock of everything he observes in his
dreams, exactly as though he were awake. Then, if successful in this, he
is led to make the same observations during ordinary waking
consciousness. He will so train his attention and receptivity for these
spiritual impressions

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

that they need no longer vanish in the face of the physical impressions,
but will always be at hand for him and reach him in addition to the
others.

When the student has acquired this faculty there arises before his
spiritual eyes something of the picture described in the preceding
chapter, and he can henceforth discern all that the spiritual world
contains as the cause of the physical world. Above all things he can
perceive and gain knowledge of his own higher self in this world. The
next task now confronting him is to grow, as it were, into this higher
self, that is, really to regard it as his own true self and to act
accordingly. He realizes ever more clearly and intensely that his
physical body and what he hitherto called his “I” are merely the
instruments of his higher self. He adopts an attitude toward his lower
self such as a person limited to the world of the senses adopts toward
some instrument or vehicle that serves him. No one includes as part of
himself the vehicle in which he is traveling, even though he says: “I
travel”; so, too, when an inwardly developed person says: “I go through
the door,” his actual conception is: “I carry my body

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

through the door.” Only this must become a natural concept for him, so
that he never for a moment loses his firm footing in the physical world,
or feels estranged from it. If the student is to avoid becoming a
fantastic visionary he must not impoverish his life through his higher
consciousness, but on the contrary, enrich it, as a person enriches his
life by using the railway and not merely his legs to cover a certain
distance.

When the student has thus raised himself to a life in the higher ego, or
rather during his acquisition of the higher consciousness, he will learn
how to stir to life the spiritual perceptive force in the organ of the
heart and control it through the currents described in the foregoing
chapter. This perceptive force is an element of higher sustainability,
which proceeds from the organ in question and flows with beautiful
radiance through the moving lotus flowers and the other channels of the
developed etheric body. Thence it radiates outward into the surrounding
spiritual world rendering it spiritually visible, just as the sunlight
falling on the objects of the physical world renders them visible.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

How this perceptive force in the heart organ is created can only be
gradually understood in the course of actual development.

It is only when this organ of perception can be sent through the etheric
body and into the outer world, to illumine the objects there, that the
actual spiritual world, as composed of objects and beings, can be
clearly perceived. Thus it will be seen that complete consciousness of
an object in the spiritual world is only possible when man himself casts
upon it the spiritual light. Now, the ego which creates this organ of
perception does not dwell within, but outside the physical body, as
already shown. The heart organ is only the spot where the individual man
kindles, from without, this spiritual light organ. Were the latter
kindled elsewhere, the spiritual perceptions produced by it would have
no connection with the physical world. But all higher spiritual
realities must be related to the physical world, and man himself must
act as a channel through which they flow into it. It is precisely
through the heart organ that the higher ego governs the physical self,
making it into its instrument.

Now, the feelings of an esoterically developed

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

person toward the things of the spiritual world are very different from
the feelings of the undeveloped person toward the things of the physical
world. The latter feels himself to be at a particular place in the world
of sense, and the surrounding objects to be external to him. The
spiritually developed person feels himself to be united with, and as
though in the interior of, the spiritual objects he perceives. He
wanders, in fact, from place to place in spiritual space, and is
therefore called the *wanderer* in the language of occult science. He
has no home at first. Should he, however, remain a mere wanderer he
would be unable to define any object in spiritual space. Just as objects
and places in physical space are defined from a fixed point of
departure, this, too, must be the case in the other world. He must seek
out some place, thoroughly investigate it, and take spiritual possession
of it. In this place he must establish his spiritual home and relate
everything else to it. In physical life, too, a person sees everything
in terms of his physical home. Natives of Berlin and Paris will
involuntarily describe London in a different way. And yet there is a
difference between the spiritual and the physical home. We are born into
the latter

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

without our co-operation and instinctively absorb, during our childhood,
a number of ideas by which everything is henceforth involuntarily
colored. The student, however, himself founds his own spiritual home in
full consciousness. His judgment, therefore, based on this spiritual
home, is formed in the light of freedom. This founding of a spiritual
home is called in the language of occult science *the building of the
hut.*

Spiritual vision at this stage extends to the spiritual counterparts of
the physical world, so far as these exist in the so-called astral world.
There everything is found which in its nature is similar to human
instincts, feelings, desires, and passions. For powers related to all
these human characteristics are associated with all physical objects. A
crystal, for instance, is cast in its form by powers which, seen from a
higher standpoint, appear as an active human impulse. Similar forces
drive the sap through the capillaries of the plant, cause the blossoms
to unfold and the seed vessels to burst. To developed spiritual organs
of perception all these forces appear gifted with form and color, just
as the objects of the physical world have form and color for physical
eyes. At this

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

stage in his development the student sees not only the crystal and the
plant, but also the spiritual forces mentioned above. Animal and human
impulses are perceptible to him not only through their physical
manifestation in the individual, but directly as objects; he perceives
them just as he perceives tables and chairs in the physical world. The
whole range of instincts, impulses, desires and passions, both of an
animal and of a human being, constitute the astral cloud or aura in
which the being is enveloped.

Furthermore, the clairvoyant can at this stage perceive things which are
almost or entirely withheld from the senses. He can, for instance, tell
the astral difference between a room full of low or of high-minded
people. Not only the physical but also the spiritual atmosphere of a
hospital differs from that of a ballroom. A commercial town has a
different astral air from that of a university town. In the initial
stages of clairvoyance this perceptive faculty is but slightly
developed; its relation to the objects in question is similar to the
relation of dream consciousness to waking consciousness in ordinary
life; it will, however, become fully awakened at this stage as well.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

The highest achievement of a clairvoyant who has attained the degree of
vision described above is that in which the astral counter-effects of
animal and human impulses and passions are revealed to him. A loving
action is accompanied by quite a different astral concomitant from one
inspired by hate. Senseless desire gives rise to an ugly astral
counterpart, while a feeling evoked by a high ideal creates one that is
beautiful. These astral images are but faintly perceptible during
physical life, for their strength is diminished by life in the physical
world. The desire for an object, for example, produces a counterpart of
this sort in addition to the semblance of the desire itself in the
astral world. If, however, the object be attained and the desire
satisfied, or if, at any rate, the possibility of satisfaction is
forthcoming, the corresponding image will show but faintly. It only
attains its full force after the death of the individual human being,
when the soul in accordance with her nature still harbors such desires,
but can no longer satisfy them, because the object and the physical
organ are both lacking. The gourmand, for instance, will still retain,
after death, the desire to please his palate; but there is

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

no possibility of satisfying this desire because he no longer has a
palate. As a result, the desire produces an especially powerful
counterpart, by which the soul is tormented. These experiences evoked by
the counterparts of the lower soul-nature after death are called the
experiences in the soul-world, especially in the region of desires. They
only vanish when the soul has purified herself from all desires
inclining toward the physical world. Then only does the soul mount to
the higher regions, to the world of spirit. Even though these images are
faint during life in the physical world, they are none the less present,
following man as his world of desire, in the way a comet is followed by
its tail. They can be seen by a clairvoyant at the requisite stage of
development.

Such and similar experiences fill the life of the student during the
period described above. He cannot attain higher spiritual experience at
this stage of development, but must climb still higher from this point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Continuity of Consciousness](khw11)
