[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lfo004)  [Next](lfo006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

# CHAPTER II.

### THE LITURGY OF FUNERARY OFFERINGS DESCRIBED.

THE religious literature of all periods of Egyptian history proves that
the Egyptians believed in a resurrection and in immortality, and that
from the earliest to the latest times they performed ceremonies at, or
in, the tomb, and recited formulae, which were part incantations and
part prayers, with the view of assisting the dead to renew their life,
to enjoy their existence in the Other World, and to escape from "dying a
second time." We have already seen that so far back as the beginning of
the IVth Dynasty, about B.C. 3800, it was customary to offer series of
gifts of food, and drink, and raiment to the dead, and there is every
reason to think that the presentation of such gifts was made by priests,
who recited over them forms of words which were believed to sanctify the
things offered, and to make them to become suitable for the needs of the
dead. We know that certain kinds of food and drink were offered in
certain quantities, and in a definite order, and that every detail of
the ceremonies connected with their presentation was performed according
to a system

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

which had then been in use for a very long time. The ceremonies and
formulae of the liturgy of funeral sacrifice in their oldest forms
belong, no doubt, to the earliest period of Egyptian civilization, and
it is very probable that many of them were in existence in the
Predynastic Period.

Among the oldest of the ceremonies which were performed for the benefit
of the dead is that called the "Opening of the Mouth," and its object is
explained by its name. The Egyptians realized at a very early period
that it was useless to load the tables for offerings in the tombs with
bread, beer, meat, fruit, and vegetables unless the dead could in some
way partake of them, and the priests invented a series of ceremonies and
composed formulae which were intended to bring about this desirable
result. The belief in the importance of "Opening the Mouth" for the dead
has long been known to Egyptologists, in fact ever since the publication
of the text of the Saïte Recension of the *Book of the Dead* by Lepsius
in 1842. In the Saïte Recension, as in the Theban, the XXIIIrd Chapter
is devoted to the opening of the mouth of the deceased, and in the
Vignette a priest is seen standing before a statue of the deceased, to
which he addresses certain words. In his left hand he holds a vase of
unguent, which played a prominent part in the ceremony performed by the
priest whilst he uttered the prescribed formula.

The, XXIst and XXIInd Chapters were written with the view of "giving a
mouth to a man in Neter

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Khert," or the Other World, and in the Vignette
the priest is seen standing and holding the Ur-hekau instrument in his
right hand, and a vase in his left. He holds out the instrument towards
the face of the deceased, and is, as we know from other sources, about
to touch his mouth. In the text of the XXIIIrd Chapter the deceased
says, "Ptah hath opened for me my mouth with his instrument of iron
wherewith he opened the mouth of the gods." This is an important
statement, for it shows that in the Ptolemaic Period a legend was extant
that at some time during their existence the mouths of the gods needed
opening, that the origin of the ceremony of "Opening the Mouth" was
divine, and that it was performed in the mythological period.

The illustrated papyri which contain the Theban Recension of the *Book
of the Dead* supply further details of the ceremony, and in the papyrus
of Ani, in the Vignette of Chapter XXIII., we see a SEM priest, clad in
a panther's or leopard's skin, performing one portion of it on a figure
of the scribe Ani. In front of him are a sepulchral box for holding
unguents, three <span id="img_03500"></span> ![](img/03500.jpg)
instruments, and the instrument <span id="img_03501"></span>
![](img/03501.jpg). In another Vignette in the same papyrus is a
representation of the performance of the ceremony at the door of the
tomb. The mummy of Ani is held upright by Anubis, and three priests are
officiating; two hold the instruments to the face of the mummy, and the
third reads the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

formulae from a roll of papyrus in his hands. Between the mummy and the
priests is a table loaded with offerings, and on the ground round about
are the various objects which are used in the performance of the
ceremony. Behind the priests are the cow and calf for sacrifice, and an
assistant is seen bringing a leg of beef.

In the Papyrus of Hunefer this scene is repeated with some modifications
and fuller details; these are illustrated by the accompanying block. In
the upper register one priest presents to the face of the mummy four
vases, and another holds in one hand the instruments <span
id="img_03600"></span> ![](img/03600.jpg), and presents with the other
the Ur-hekau instrument, the head of which is in the form of that of a
ram. The SEM priest stands behind holding a libation jar in his right
hand, and a censer in his left. In the lower register are the cow and
calf for sacrifice, two ministrants, the one bearing the heart and the
other the leg of a bull, a sepulchral coffer, a table of offerings, and
a stand on which are spread out a panther's skin or leopard's skin, and
the instruments, vases, &c., which were used in the performance of the
ceremony. Above these scenes are several short lines of text, which are
entitled, "The Chapter of performing the Opening of the Mouth of the
statue" \[of the deceased\]. This chapter contains two extracts from the
"Liturgy of Funerary Offerings."

The merit of discovering the "Liturgy of Funerary Offerings" belongs to
Sig. Ernesto Schiaparelli, who in 1877 was able to prove that the
contents of Papyrus

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

\[paragraph continues\] No. 3155 in the Louvre were identical in a large
number of places with the text on the coffin of Butehai-Amen, in Turin.
Butehai-Amen was a priest who flourished under the XXth Dynasty, and he
caused a copy of the Book of Opening the Mouth to be written upon the
two covers of his coffin in red and black ink. Devéria had examined this
papyrus many years before, and he stated in his *Catalogue des
Manuscrits Égyptiens* (Paris, 1881, p. 171) that it "contained a
liturgical text entirely different from the ordinary funerary works, and
that it was noteworthy by reason of the mention in it of the priests of
different orders who officiated, and the description of the part which
each individual performed in the funeral ceremony." In a valuable paper
entitled "*Le Fer et l'Aimant en Égypte*," <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) he translated about a page and a half of
the papyrus, and Sig. Schiaparelli believes that he cherished the
thought of publishing the complete work.

The papyrus was-written for a priestess called SAIS. The lower portions
of the first few leaves are wanting, and the writing is in places very
difficult to read. Being convinced of the importance of the text, Sig.
Schiaparelli spent a winter in copying it, and he devoted himself to the
preparation of an edition of the text on the coffin in Turin, which
dates from the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

\[paragraph continues\] XXth Dynasty, and that of the Paris papyrus,
which was written probably between A.D. 50 and 150. Neither text is
accompanied by Vignettes, and many parts of them it is impossible to
understand without illustrations. About this time, fortunately, his
attention was called to a series of drawings of scenes in the tomb of
Seti I. at Thebes which Champollion <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44)
had made and published. In these priests are represented performing
ceremonies on the statue of the king, and the short texts which
accompany them were quickly seen by Sig. Schiaparelli to resemble
passages in the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings. From a paper by Professor
Naville <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) he was able to identify a
passage in the text on the coffin of Butehai-Amen, and with the help of
the careful copy of all the scenes and texts in the tomb of Seti I.,
with which Professor Naville supplied him, he was at length able to give
a rendering of the whole text, and to describe the ceremonies which were
there illustrated.

The first part of his work, <span id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46) i.e.,
the plates, appeared in 1881, and the two volumes of text in 1882 and
1890 respectively. In 1882 Professor Maspero published in his *Recueil*
(tom. iii., p. 171 ff.) the first part of the texts from the Pyramid of
Unas, which contains the oldest known form of the Liturgy of

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Funerary Offerings, with a French translation of
a portion of it. Another copy of this early form is found in the Pyramid
of Pepi II. Nefer-ka-Ra, and this Professor Maspero published, with a
translation of the whole, in a later volume of the same work, and in his
complete edition of the "Pyramid Texts" entitled, "Les Inscriptions des
Pyramides de Saqqarah," Paris, 1894. In 1884-5 Dr. J. Dümichen published
the first two parts of his monograph <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)
on the tomb of Peta-Amen-apt, a high priestly official who flourished
under the XXVIth Dynasty, containing copies of the scenes and texts with
descriptions, translations, &c., in German. The first part contains the
complete text of the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings, and the second a
version of the Book of Opening the Mouth; both works have Vignettes.

A year later appeared the first volume of the great French work on the
Royal Tombs of Thebes, <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) containing
all the scenes and texts in the Tomb of Seti I. Among these were
accurate copies of the texts of the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings, as
they are found in the tomb of Seti I. at Thebes, and the Book of Opening
the Mouth. In 1887 Professor Maspero published a valuable paper in the
*Revue de l'Histoire des Religions*, tom. xv., pp. 159-188, in which he
treated the Book of Opening the Mouth at considerable

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

length, and explained the Vignettes and the texts of the version in the
tomb of Seti I. Since that time the texts of several tombs at Thebes
have been published, and the material available for the study of the
texts and Vignettes has been greatly increased.

The principal versions of the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings and the Book
of Opening the Mouth may now be summarized. For the Liturgy there are
two copies of the period of the Ancient Empire, one in the Pyramid of
Unas, and one in the Pyramid of Pepi II. Nefer-ka-Ra. Several Lists of
offerings, more or less complete, from the mastaba tombs at Sakkarah are
also available. Of the XIXth Dynasty there are the Lists in the tomb of
Seti I. at Thebes and in his temple at Abydos. Of the XXth Dynasty there
is the List on the covers of the coffin of Butehai-Amen; of the XXVIth
Dynasty the List of Peta-Amen-apt; and of the Roman Period the List in
the Papyrus of Sais, the priestess, in Paris. For the Book of Opening
the Mouth there are: a copy, with Vignettes, in the tomb of Rekhmara at
Thebes, of the XVIIIth Dynasty; a copy, with Vignettes, in the tomb of
Seti I. at Thebes, of the XIXth Dynasty; a copy, without Vignettes,
written for Butehai-Amen on the covers of his coffin, of the XXth
Dynasty; a copy, with Vignettes, in the tomb of Peta-Amen-apt, of the
XXVIth Dynasty; a copy, without Vignettes, written for the priestess
Sais in the Roman period.

The reader who will take the trouble to compare

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the various versions of the Liturgy and the Book of Opening the Mouth
will find that, in all essentials, they remained unchanged from the IVth
Dynasty to about the end of the first century. of the rule of the Romans
in Egypt. The Vignettes, though we owe them to the funerary artists of
the XVIIIth, XIXth, and XXVIth Dynasties, illustrate faithfully
ceremonies which had been performed for many centuries before they were
drawn, and the evidence which they afford may be used as a sure guide in
determining the exact meaning of many obscure points in the rubrical
directions and texts.

We may now give an account of the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings, derived
from the texts in the Pyramid of Unas and the tomb of Peta-Amen-apt. The
Liturgy was recited in a chamber of the tomb called "Tuat," and when the
offerings had been brought there, the table for the offerings, or altar,
was purified for the KA, or Double, of the deceased, and the service
began. The formulae were recited by the Kher heb priest, who held in his
hands a roll of papyrus, on which was written a copy of the service, and
who directed the assistant priests; the ceremonies were performed
chiefly by the SEM, Or SMER, priest, assisted by one or more
ministrants. In the earliest times the ceremonies were probably
performed over the mummy, but at a later period a statue of the deceased
was substituted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[37:1](lfo005.htm#fr_43) *Mélanges d'Archéologie
Égyptienne*, tom. i., p. 45.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[38:1](lfo005.htm#fr_44) *Monuments*, plates
237, 243-248.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[38:2](lfo005.htm#fr_45) *Aeg. Zeitschrift*, Bd.
xi., 1873, p. 29 ff.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[38:3](lfo005.htm#fr_46) *Il Libro dei Funerali
degli antichi Egiziani tradotto e commentato da* E. S., Rome, 1881-90.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[39:1](lfo005.htm#fr_47) Der Grabpalast des
Patuamenap, Leipzic, 1884-5.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[39:2](lfo005.htm#fr_48) Les Hypogées Royaux de
Thèbes, by Bouriant, Loret, and Naville (*Mémoires de la Mission au
Caire*, tom. ii., Div. i., Paris, 1886).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Ceremony](lfo006)
