[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred Books of the
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](_001)  [Next](_003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*General Index to the Sacred Books of the East*, by Moriz Winternitz,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

#### BY PROFESSOR MACDONELL

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> period covered by the inception, the
publication, and the completion of the *Sacred Books of the East*
exactly coincides with the thirty-four years that I have spent in
Oxford. When I matriculated, Professor Max Müller, the editor of the
series, was about to begin work on the first volume, which appeared
while I was still an undergraduate. I lost no time in making his
acquaintance, for it was the influence of one of his works that had
stimulated me to begin under Professor Benfey the study of Sanskrit at
the University of Göttingen, when I left school nearly two years before.
During my undergraduate days and later I owed much to Professor Max
Müller's advice and encouragement in regard to my studies, which have
ever since followed, as far as Sanskrit is concerned, much the same
lines as his. I consequently always took a lively interest in the
*Sacred Books* edited by him as they successively appeared during the
course of a quarter of a century, no fewer than thirty-six volumes
having a more or less direct bearing on my own work, and fourteen of the
translators being personally known to me. Professor Max Muller lived to
see all but one of the forty-nine volumes published under his
supervision. Now the fiftieth and concluding volume is at last finished
when I myself have already arrived at advanced middle age. Owing to my
early relations with the editor and my interest in the series ever
since, I am glad to have this opportunity of accompanying with a few
words by way of preface the volume that brings the series to an end.

The *Sacred Books of the East* include all the most important works of
the seven non-Christian religions that have exercised a profound
influence on the civilization of the continent of Asia. Of the Indian
religions the Vedic-Brāhmanic system here claims twenty-one volumes,
Buddhism ten, and Jainism two. Eight volumes comprise translations of
the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

sacred books of the Persians. Two volumes represent Islām, and six the
two main indigenous systems of China, Confucianism and Taoism. This
great undertaking, planned and edited by Professor Max Müller, has been
carried out by the collaboration of twenty scholars, all leading
authorities in the special departments of Oriental learning to which the
works translated by them belong. By thus rendering these religious
systems accessible as a whole to the Western world in authoritative
translations, Professor Max Müller for the first time placed the
historical and comparative study of religions on a solid foundation. But
with that large view of the aims and needs of scholarship which
distinguished him, he saw that the investigation of the vast material
here collected could not become thoroughly effective without the
auxiliary aid of a separate index volume presenting that material
thoroughly digested and exhaustively classified. This work he entrusted
to Dr. Winternitz, who at that time was resident in Oxford and had been
assisting him in bringing out his second edition of the *Rigveda* with
the commentary of Sāyaṇa. The result, after various unavoidable delays,
is the present volume, in which the end in view has been most
successfully accomplished by the compiler, now Professor of Indian
Philology and of Ethnology in the German University of Prague.

The experience of many years has made me a convinced believer in the
great value of full and comprehensive indexes as aids to the scholar,
not only because they save his time, but because they tend to render his
results more comprehensive. This is especially true at the present time,
when the field of research has become so greatly extended in all
directions. The view which prevailed among Oriental scholars in my
student days was very different. About thirty years ago an eminent
Sanskrit scholar began the publication of the *editio princeps* of an
important and intricate work, which when completed appeared without an
index. The editor declined to yield to the suggestion that he should
supply one, declaring that those who wished to consult the book on any
point ought to be compelled to read it through. I feel convinced that as
a consequence of this attitude, research has been retarded in the

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

branch of learning to which the work in question belongs. Even in recent
years I have hardly ever seen an index to Oriental works that has not
seemed to me too meagre and consequently inadequate as an instrument of
research. Very different is the character of the present substantial
volume of 684 pages, which Professor Winternitz has compiled with so
much thoroughness and industry. I feel no hesitation in stating that it
is the most comprehensive work of the kind that has yet been published.
For it is not merely a complete index like vol. xxv of the recently
published *Imperial Gazetteer of India*. It also furnishes, in articles
of any length, a scientific classification of the subject under various
heads. Thus, in the article on Agni, the Indian god of fire, the
material relating to that deity is arranged under no fewer than
twenty-four subdivisions. Such fullness of treatment saves the book from
the inevitable dryness from which it would otherwise suffer. Indeed, its
perusal will, I believe, prove interesting not only to the expert, but
even to the general reader. The volume, in fact, constitutes a handbook
for the study of Oriental religions as far as represented by the *Sacred
Books of the East*. By saving the student of these volumes an immense
amount of time, it will greatly lighten his labours. The methodical
arrangement and the co-ordination of the vast and varied material that
they contain are also calculated to stimulate both the historical
investigation of each, and the comparative study of all of the religious
systems dealt with in the series. Hence if I were asked to select any
one of the fifty volumes of the *Sacred Books of the East* as specially
useful, I should certainly choose the last. The Delegates are to be
congratulated on rounding off with so valuable an addition a series that
reflects so much lustre on the University Press, and has contributed not
a little towards establishing its now unrivalled position as a centre of
Oriental publication.

A. A. MACDONELL.

  <span class="smallcaps">Oxford</span>,  
*February*, 1910.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introductory Note, by the Author](_003.md)
