[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE SUTRA OF THE FORTY-TWO SECTIONS

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

#### \[Old Series, Volume XIX\]

###### \[London, Harrison and Sons\]

#### \[1862\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, March 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ART. XIV.--*The Sutra of the Forty-two Sections, from the
Chinese*.--Translated by the REVEREND S. BEAL.

INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

THE ordinary account of the introduction of Buddhist books and tracts
into China is the following:--

   "In the fourth year of the reign of Ming-Ti,<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> of the Han dynasty, the Emperor dreamt
that he saw a divine personage, with a body like gold, and six
chang<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> in height, his head
surrounded with brightness like the sun. Flying towards him, this Being
entered his palace.

   "Favourably impressed by what he had seen, the Emperor inquired of
his ministers what the meaning of the dream might be; on which Fou-i,
who was connected with the Board of Astronomical Calculations,
replied:--'Your minister has heard that India possesses one who has
arrived at perfect wisdom, and who is called Fo (Buddha). It must have
been his body flying through space, and having a divine splendour, that
was the origin of your dream.' The Emperor on this hastily dispatched
the high military officer Tsai-In and the civil officers Wang-Tsiing and
Tsin-King,<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> with others,
amounting in all to eighteen persons, directing them to proceed to the
country of the Tai-yue-chi (Getæ) and to Central India, and diligently
seek after the law of Buddha.

   "After eleven years, In and the others returned from India, having
obtained the picture of Buddha, which King Yau-Chan<sup><span
class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> caused to be made, and also the classic
of the Forty-two Sections. They were accompanied also, on their
invitation, by the Shamans<sup><span class="small">\[5\]</span></sup>
Ma-Tang and Tchou-Fa-Lan, and so on the thirtieth day of the twelfth
month they arrive at Lo-Yang.<sup><span class="small">\[6\]</span></sup>

\[1. A.D. 64.

2\. 141 inches; .'. 6 chang = 846 inches, or about 70 feet.

3\. Vide Kang-Hi, sub voce.

4\. Oudayana, vid. Julian, sub voce.

5\. Matáñga, vid. Lalita Vistara, xvii. n.

6\. Honan-fou, the eastern capital, built by the first emperor of the
East. Han dynasty, A.D. 26.\]

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

   "Then the Emperor began to question Matáñga in this wise:--'When the
King of the Law (Buddha-Dhármavadya) was born, why did he not assume his
apparitional form in this country?' To which the priest replied, 'The
country of Ka-pi-lo<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> is the
centre of the Great Chiliocosm. All the Buddhas of the three ages,
therefore, were born there, and, moreover, the Devas, Dragons, and
Kwai-shin<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> above all things
desire that they may be born in that country, and practise the law of
Buddha, in order that by its transforming influence they may obtain
complete intelligence; for when born in other places no influence of
this sort can be exerted, and so the Buddhas never appear elsewhere. But
although this is the case, yet the brightness of his doctrine reaches to
other parts, so that for a period of 500, nay, of 1,000 years,<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> those without, having holy men (or
sages) preaching to them the traditional doctrine of Buddha, may obtain
transformation.'

   "The Emperor believing this testimony, and approving it, at once
ordered a temple to be founded outside the western gate of the city (of
Lo-Yang), and called it the Temple of the White Horse, where they
reverently placed the image of Buddha for worship; and also he ordered a
likeness of Buddha to be set up at the Tsing-leung-toi,<sup><span
class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> or the Southern Palace, as well as over
the chief gate of the city (of Lo-) Yang, that both the ministers and
people might see and reverence it."

   This account may be also found briefly given at the end of the book
itself (*i.e.*, of the Forty-two Sections).

   It is also alluded to by Abel Rémusat ("Foe-Koue-Ki,"<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> p. 44); by M. Forceaux ("Lalita Vist.,"
p. xvii. n.), and by M. Huc ("Travels in Tartary," &c., vol. ii., p.
78).

   We may therefore take for granted that this Sutra of Forty-two
Sections, or Divisions, is the first work on the subject translated into
Chinese.

   This is, indeed, no proof of the absolute age of the work itself, nor
of its authenticity; yet, from internal evidence it would seem to be of
an earlier date, and not the Sutras known as those of the "Great
Vehicle" (Mahayana). Its style is simple, its object to enforce the
moral precepts of the Buddhist religion, its method natural and uniform.
Yet, as there is no evidence that this work is known in the

\[1. Kapilavastu.

2\. *i.e.*, restless spirits.

3\. Confer {Greek: *oi eksw*}. Col iv. {Greek: *k.t.l*}.

4\. Called by Rémusat "Tour de la Pureté." Fo-Koue-Ki, p. 44.\]

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

southern school of Buddhism, we cannot venture to place it among the
earliest productions of that religion; and as in the first section there
is a distinct mention of the Two Hundred and Fifty Rules (*i.e.*, of the
Pratimoksha), it must be later than that work at any rate. On the whole,
considering that it was brought to China A.D. 64, and must have had
considerable notoriety in order to have attracted the attention of the
mission from the court, we may at any rate assume that it is as old as
our era, if not of an earlier date.

   The present version was made in the "Sin-chow" year of the Emperor
Keën-lung, *i.e.*, A.D. 1721, by a priest (Koue-sse) Chang-Ka, and is
the one generally used in China.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

THE SUTRA OF THE FORTY-TWO SECTIONS.

   At this time, the world-honoured one having perfected reason,
considered thus in his mind:--"The banishment of lust (or desire),
resulting in a state of perfect rest and quietness, this is the very
first and most excellent standing ground, the great means of subduing
all the wiles of Mara (or of overcoming all the followers of Mara or the
way of Mara)." So now he began to turn the wheel of the law for the
purpose of giving deliverance to all men (or all sentient beings) in the
midst of the garden of the park of deer (Mrigadava, Jul. sub voce); and
(particularly) on account of Chin-ju and his four companions (viz.
A.swajit, Bhadrika Mahanama, Da.sabala Kachyaha, and the one mentioned,
*i.e.* Ajuata Kanudenya, vid. Jul. ii. 364, n.) did he turn the wheel of
the law of the four great truths (arya satyani, vid. Jul. ii. 443), and
so enabled them to arrive at the accomplishment of the paths. It was
then that those Bikshus who had any doubts as to what had been spoken,
requested Buddha to confirm their faith and confidence in his doctrine;
on which the world-honoured one proceeded to instruct and answer them,
opening their understanding on every point, as each one stood, with
closed hands, in a reverent posture, attentively listening to, and
receiving the instruction of their master. At this time the
world-honoured one spoke this exact Sutra, containing forty-two
sections.

   <span id="pp_1">1.</span> "Buddha said: The man who leaves his
family, quits his <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> house, enters on the
study of supreme reason, searches out the deepest principle of his
intelligent mind, (so as to) understand the law which adroits of no
active exertion,--this man is called a Shamun {sic}. Such an one, ever
practising the 250 rules (viz. those contained in the book of the "four
divisions"), following in the four paths, aspiring to and attaining a
state of perfect rest and purity, completes in himself the condition of
a Rahat.

   <span id="pp_2">2.</span> Buddha said: The Rahat is able to fly,
change his appearance, fix the years of his life, shake heaven and
earth. The successive steps (towards this condition) are: A-na-hom
(Anagami), which is the condition that allows a man at the end of his
life to mount in soul above the nineteen heavens, and in that region of
bliss to attain the condition of Rahat; next (is the condition) of
Sz'-to-hom (Sakradagami), in which after one birth and death more, a man
becomes a Rahat: next (is the condition of) Sü-to-hun (*i.e.* Sowan), in
which, after seven births and deaths more, a man may obtain the state of
a Rahat. These are they who have entirely cut off their passions of love
and desire, which like severed branches of the tree are now useless (and
dead).

   <span id="pp_3">3.</span> Buddha said: The Shaman, who has left his
family, separated himself from lust, banished his sensual affections,
examined the true source of his individual mind, searched out the hidden
wisdom of Buddha, understood the unselfish nature of the Buddhist
religion, who finds nothing within to obtain, or without to seek after,
whose heart is not too much attached to the pursuit of reason (or the
accomplishment of the paths), nor yet involved in the web of Karma
(*i.e.*--the cause which is followed by an effect--as the life of a tree
by the fruit), in whom there is all absence of all unquiet thought, an
absence of all active exertion, an absence of an anxious preparation, an
absence of an fixed direction of purpose, who without passing through
the successive stages of advance has yet attained the highest personal
(individual) dignity (of being)--to attain this state is (indeed well)
named: "to accomplish reason."

   <span id="pp_4">4.</span> Buddha said: He who shaves his head and
beard in order to become a Shaman and receive the law of Buddha, (must)
forego all worldly wealth, and beg a sufficiency of food for his
support, eating one meal in the middle of the day, and occupying one
abode beneath a tree, and desire nothing more! That which causes a man
to become foolish and blind, is nothing more than lust and desire!

   <span id="pp_5">5.</span> Buddha said: Living creatures by ten things
attain virtue, <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> and by ten things
become vile; what are these ten things? There are three pertaining to
the body, four to the mouth, three to the thoughts; the three pertaining
to the body are the slaughter of living creatures, theft, lust; the four
belonging to the mouth are double-tongueness, slandering, lying,
hypocrisy (or glozy conversation); the three evils of the thought are
envy, anger, and wandering thoughts (chi). Disbelief in the three
precious ones is the true source of all this evil. But the yan-po-sat
(upasamandi) who observes the five rules untiringly, and advances to the
ten, he must obtain reason.

   <span id="pp_6">6.</span> Buddha said: A man guilty of many crimes,
not repenting himself, does but confirm the sinful principle within his
heart, and necessitate his return to the world in a bodily form, just as
the water returns to the sea. But when he has personally fulfilled, as
far as possible in his circumstances, the destruction and relinquishment
of evil, understanding the character of sin, avoiding crime, doing what
is right,--this man, the power of guilt destroyed, may obtain reason.

   <span id="pp_7">7.</span> Buddha said: A man foolishly stating or
considering that I do that which is not right, will obtain no other
refutation from me but that which proceeds from the exercise of my four
qualities of love (?), so the more evil he brings against me, the more
good will proceed from me; the influence of *this* resting on me, the
effect of *that* returning to him. A foolish man once hearing Buddha
explaining this doctrine came and blamed him on account of it. Buddha
was silent and answered not, pitying the folly of the man which caused
him to act thus. At length, when he ceased, Buddha asked, saying, When
one man (an inferior) visits another as a matter of politeness, and
finds him away from home, what is the expression used to him who pays
the visit? They say "chi kwai." \[This passage is very difficult,
perhaps a better translation would be this: "What is the polite
expression to use to an inferior who, in paying a visit or making a
present to another, has not observed the rules of propriety? They say
'keep--return' (*i.e.* do not trouble yourself, allow me to return you
your own)."\] So now this follower of mine abusing me, I decline also to
receive his abuse, and so it will return to himself, a source of misery.
For as sound belongs to the drum, and shadow to the substance, so does
misery attach itself to the evil doer.

   <span id="pp_8">8.</span> Buddha said: A wicked man who abuses the
good one, is like one looking upwards and spitting against heaven; his
spittle does not soil the heavens, but returns on himself. Or, when the
<span id="page_342">p. 342</span> wind is contrary, like one who aims
dust at another, the dust does but return against him who threw it. You
cannot injure the good man, the misery will devolve on yourself.

   <span id="pp_9">9.</span> Buddha said: A man who distributes alms
from a principle of private affection or violent pity, has not much
merit; but he who bestows alms with no private end, but from fealty to
the principle of supreme reason, his merit is great indeed! So he who
beholds another engaged in almsgiving, and from a principle of reason
approves of what he does, and rejoices at it, this man shall also share
in the merit of the action itself. It may be asked if the merit of the
first is hereby decreased? Buddha (in answer to this) says, Like as many
men lighting a fire for cooking rice from one torch, diminish not the
light of that one, so is it in this case of merit.

   <span id="pp_10">10.</span> Buddha said: To feed a hundred learned
men is not equal in point of merit to feeding one virtuous man; feeding
a thousand virtuous men is not equal in merit to feeding one man who
keeps the five precepts; feeding ten thousand such is not equal in merit
to feeding one Sz'-to-hom (Sakradagami); feeding ten million such is not
equal to feeding one Oh-na-hom (anagami); the merit of feeding one
hundred million such is not equal to the merit of feeding one Rahat; the
merit of feeding ten thousand million such is not equal to the merit of
feeding one Pi-chi \[Pasé, (Pratyeka)\] Buddha; and the merit of feeding
one hundred thousand million such is not equal to the merit of feeding
one Buddha, and learning to pray to Buddha, desiring him to save
mankind. The merit of feeding virtuous men is much greater indeed than
the matters which occupy the attention of mere worldly wise men; and the
matters of heaven and earth, spirits and demons, are not equal in point
of importance to the reverence due to parents; our parents are indeed
the most divine of all the gods.

   <span id="pp_11">11.</span> Buddha said: There are twenty difficult
things in the world, viz.: being poor to be charitable; being rich and
noble, to learn supreme wisdom; to risk one's life and yet escape death;
to gain sight of the Buddhist scriptures; to be born in the age of a
Buddha (or, in the world of a Buddha); to repress lust and banish
desire; to see an agreeable object and not covet it; having power, not
to be supercilious; not to be angry when insulted; to be passive amidst
all worldly influences; to understand completely the end of learning;
not to despise the ignorant; to eradicate selfishness; to unite virtuous
conduct with learning; to observe one's nature, and at the same time
pursue the study of supreme reason; having <span id="page_343">p.
343</span> attained one's end, not to be moved (by exultation); to
explain satisfactorily the nature of final deliverance; to pass through
various forms of being to deliver men; to have a heart enlightened and
unmoved in action; to avoid positive and disputatious assertions.

   <span id="pp_12">12.</span> There was a Shaman who asked Buddha "By
what influences is supreme reason engendered, and what are its
characteristics?" Buddha replied: "Supreme wisdom has no form or
qualities; so that to seek a knowledge of it is profitless. If you
desire to possess it, guard well your mind (or active powers of will)
and conduct. It may be compared to the polishing of a mirror; the dust
and dirt disappearing, the brightness of the mirror is at once produced;
so it embraces in itself, as it were, the power of beholding that which
has form; so separate (yourself) from lust, guard well the passionless
(empty) nature of your mind, then you will perceive reason and
understand its characteristics."

   <span id="pp_13">13.</span> Buddha said: What is active virtue but to
practise the dictates of reason? What is morality (or virtue), but the
highest agreement of the will with the requirements of reason? What is
magnanimity, but the untiring exercise of patience under injury? He who
bravely bears injury undeserved is a man indeed! And what is a sage (or
the wisdom of a sage) but a man whose heart is enlightened and free from
stain, all evil conduct destroyed, calm and pure within, without
blemish? To combine a complete knowledge of what was before either
heaven or earth existed with what happens to-day, a knowledge of the
universe when as yet nothing existed, so that there is nothing unknown,
unseen, unheard,--to possess this transcendant knowledge is true
enlightenment.

   <span id="pp_14">14.</span> Buddha said: A man who cherishes his
passions, unable to discern (the beauty of) supreme reason is like (a
vase of) impure water in which objects of variegated colours are placed;
(such a vase) being shaken up with violence, men coming and looking over
the water can perceive none of the objects which ought to be reflected
in it. So in the heart lust and passion cause obscurity, so that supreme
reason is darkened and hid. But if a man gradually understands and
repents of his sins, growing in knowledge, the foul water, losing its
obscurity, will become pure, and calm, and clear, reflecting in itself
the forms around. So fire placed under a pot, the water in it boiling
and bubbling, nothing within it below the surface can be perceived;--so
the three moral evils which naturally rage in the heart, causing the
five chenk (skandha) to combine with that which is without, in the end
<span id="page_344">p. 344</span> reason is obscured. It is by the
banishment, therefore, of these influences that our spiritual nature is
perceived; we leave the trammels of life and death, and ascend up to the
land of all the Buddhas, where virtue and reason abide.

   <span id="pp_15">15.</span> Buddha said: A man who cultivates supreme
reason is like one who takes a burning torch and enters a dark house;
the darkness which dwelt within is immediately dissipated, and lo! light
ensues! He who still continues the pursuit of wisdom, and fathoms the
systems of true philosophy,--his follies and mistakes all destroyed,
there must be perfect illumination!

   <span id="pp_16">16.</span> Buddha said: In religious exercises, in
conduct, in language, even in philosophizing, I never forget (the
necessity of founding all on the basis of) supreme reason.

   <span id="pp_17">17.</span> Buddha said: To behold heaven and earth,
and reflect on their impermanency, so also the mountains and rivers, and
all created things, the changes and productions of nature, all fleeting
and impermanent; but the heart, relying on this as constant, how quickly
reason may be attained!

   <span id="pp_18">18.</span> Buddha said: During an entire day to
reflect and act according to the dictates of supreme reason, and in the
end to obtain the root of firm faith,--this happiness is indeed
immeasurable!

   <span id="pp_19">19.</span> Buddha said: Never tire of reflecting on
that which is yourself! Remember that the four elements composing your
body, which are sometimes considered as real existences, are, in fact,
all mere names, without personality, and that the so-called "I" is but a
passing guest, a thing of a moment; all things around us are only
illusions!

   <span id="pp_20">20.</span> Buddha said: A man following the dictates
of his passions, seeking those so-called sweets of indulgence (flowers),
is just like the burning incense, the fragrance of which men may
perceive, but the incense itself in those very fumes is self-consumed!
So the foolish man, exalting the character of the vulgar enjoyments
found in selfish pleasures, and not guarding the treasure of his
reason,--the only true source of happiness,--endures both the misery of
his past gratification (*i.e.*, of its being passed) and also the
bitterness of after repentance!

   <span id="pp_21">21.</span> Buddha said: The man who rudely grasps
after wealth or pleasure, is like a child seizing a knife (to cut
honey),--the sweet delight of the first taste of the honey is scarcely
lost before he perceives the pain of his tongue cut with the knife!

   <span id="pp_22">22.</span> Buddha said: The man enthralled by the
deceitful pleasures of concupiscence (marriage), suffers misery greater
than the collars <span id="page_345">p. 345</span> and chains which bind
the inmates of the infernal regions; for from these pains there is
remittance, but the desire for the indulgence of sensual passion
(wifeage), though it have the misery of the tiger's mouth, still, by its
sweetness of appearance, fascinates the heart. The guilt of such
indulgence, how can it be remitted?

   <span id="pp_23">23.</span> Buddha said: Of all the passions (*lit*.,
lusts and desires) the greatest is love of women. Besides this,--so
great is it,--there is no other. Were there two of the same sort, no
mortal would be able to attain supreme reason.

   <span id="pp_24">24.</span> Buddha said: Passion governing a man is
like one seizing a torch and rushing with it alight against the wind.
The foolish man who does not drop it must have the pain of a burnt hand.
So the poisonous root of covetousness, lust, anger, envy, planted in the
body of the foolish man, and not early overpowered by the exercise of
reason, must necessarily bring calamity and woe, as the hand of this
foolish man who desires to carry the torch is burnt.

   <span id="pp_25">25.</span> On a certain occasion a Deva presented a
woman of pleasure to Buddha, desiring to tempt him. Buddha thought, I
will display the wisdom of Buddha (to this being.) So he said, "For
weeds and filth there is a receptacle! What then would you do? Why talk
to me of such foolish vulgar things (as sensual desires)? Surely it
would be difficult to excite passion in one who has for ever banished
the means (tung) by which these things are gratified." The Deva,
overpowered with awe, reverently desired Buddha to explain the subject
of supreme reason, which doing, he immediately became a Su-to-hun
(Sowan).

   <span id="pp_26">26.</span> Buddha said: Those who practise the
acquirement of supreme reason are like a piece of wood which floats down
with the tide of a stream, neither touching the left bank nor the right,
not detained by any worldly scheme nor misled by spiritual theories
(that which concerns spirits, *i.e.*, hope of attaining the condition of
a Deva), nor caught in the whirl of the tide to stop and rot;--I will
secure that this man enters the sea! So the man who practises reason,
not held by the hallucinations of passion, nor the false notions which
distinguish the wicked,--this man progressing and banishing doubt, shall
under my protection arrive at supreme wisdom.

   <span id="pp_27">27.</span> Buddha said to a Shaman: Beware of
placing trust in your thoughts, or they in the end will destroy the
groundwork of all belief. Beware of mixing yourself up in worldly
matters (? shik), for what are these but the cause of all misery? But
the Rahat may trust his thoughts.

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

   <span id="pp_28">28.</span> Buddha thus addressed all the Shamans:
Beware of looking on a woman! if you see one, let it be as seeing her
not! Beware of words with a woman; but if you speak with one, with pure
heart and upright intention say, "I am a Shaman, necessarily in this
impure world; but let me be as a lotus, which grows pure though in the
mud." Is she old? Regard her as your mother. Is she honourable? Consider
her as your elder sister. Is she of small account? Consider her as a
younger sister. Is she a child? Treat her politely according to the
usages of society. Above all, consider in your reasoning that what you
see is only the external appearance, within that body what vileness and
corruption! So, thinking thus, your evil thoughts will be all banished!

   <span id="pp_29">29.</span> Buddha said: A man practising reason, and
(wishful to) expel his lusts, ought to behold himself (or them ?) as
stubble awaiting the fire which will come at the end of the world
(Kalpa). He would then certainly be earnest in removing these desires
and lusts.

   <span id="pp_30">30.</span> Buddha said: There was a man (or there
being a man) who, afflicted with sensual lusts which he could not
repress, was sitting on sharp knives in order to destroy the members
which ministered to his passion (or in order to eradicate his passions
or senses); on which Buddha addressed him thus:--"If you should succeed
in removing those lustful members, what is this in comparison with the
removal of the (lustful) heart? It is the heart which is the workman (at
the bottom of all); if you rightly compose this, then all these evil
thoughts will be dissipated. But the heart not composed, what profit can
arise from removing the member? What is this but mere bodily death?"
Buddha said: So it is the world commonly mistakes on these matters.

   <span id="pp_31">31.</span> There was a certain lewd woman who had
made an engagement to meet a certain man. When she came not he began to
repent himself (of his wickedness), and said: "Lust is but the offspring
of my own thought. There being no thought, lust cannot be born." Buddha
passing by and hearing this, said to the Shaman: "I recollect this as a
saying of Kasyapa Buddha, and it now has become common in the world."
Buddha said: "Man by lustful desires engenders sorrow; from sorrow
springs apprehension (of evil); there being no lust, then there is no
sorrow and no apprehension."

   <span id="pp_32">32.</span> Buddha said: A man practising reason
(aiming at the attainment of supreme reason) may be compared to a single
warrior fighting against ten thousand. Whilst other soldiers, armed for
the battle, rush from the gate, desirous to fight, he yet fears in <span
id="page_347">p. 347</span> his exhausted state that victory would be
difficult, and so retreats from the field. When half way he returns to
the conflict resolved to fight and die. This man, having attained the
victory, and returning to his country, will (deservedly) be raised to
high rank. So the man who is able to hold to the same mind, and,
persevering against all obstacles, advances in his work (or profession),
uninfluenced by any worldly follies or enticements, his evil desires
destroyed, his wicked acts at an end, he must attain perfect wisdom.

   <span id="pp_33">33.</span> There was a Shaman who during a night
kept reciting his prayers (the Sutra, or book containing the words of
Buddha), the sound of his voice piteous, and worn with fatigue, desiring
(by so doing) to bring himself to repent of his sinful thoughts (of
returning to the world). Buddha addressing the Shaman, said: "When you
were living in the world as a member of a household, what was your
particular pursuit?" He replied: "I was constantly practising the lute."
Buddha said: "The strings being slack, what then?" He replied: "There
would be no musical sound." "And the strings too tight, what then?" He
said: "The sound would be over-sharp." "But if they were tuned to a just
medium between the slack and over-tight, what then?" He replied: "All
the sounds would be concordant and harmonious." Buddha addressed the
Shaman: "The way of supreme learning is even so. Only keep your heart in
harmony and union, so you will attain perfect knowledge."

   <span id="pp_34">34.</span> Buddha said: A man practising the
attainment of reason is as the place where (or the mode in which) they
found metals, gradually dropping down and separating from the dross; the
vessel made from this will be good. The way of wisdom (in like manner,
is) by gradually ridding away the corruption of the heart, with earnest
perseverance to go on, and thus complete perfect knowledge. If any other
way be tried, it is only the cause of weariness to the body, this causes
vexation of mind, this transgression in life, and this is only to
practise the way of the wicked (or, and this the accumulation of guilt).

   <span id="pp_35">35.</span> Buddha said: A man who is aiming to
attain supreme reason has many sorrows, like him that is not engaged in
this pursuit; for, considering a man's experience from the time of his
birth to his old age, from this period to the time of his sickness, and
from this to his death,--what countless sorrows does he endure! But the
heart laden with regrets, guilt stored up, endless life and
death,--these sorrows how difficult to speak of!

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

   <span id="pp_36">36.</span> Buddha said: For a man to avoid the three
evil ways of birth (viz., beast, demon, or in hell), and to be born a
human being, is difficult; being so, to be born a man and not a woman,
is difficult; being so, to have the six passions all well arranged (? to
have perfect mind and body, "mens sana in corpora sano"), is difficult;
being so, to be born in the middle country (India ?) is difficult; being
so, to attain to the knowledge of Buddha's doctrine is difficult; being
so, to become eminent in the knowledge of Buddha is difficult; being so,
to be born in the family of a Bosat is difficult; being so, to be born
in the age of a Buddha, and heartily to believe in the three precious
ones (Buddha, the Law, and the Community) is difficult.

   <span id="pp_37">37.</span> Buddha asked all the Shamans, "What is
the time of a man's life (or in what does a man's life consist)?" One
replied, "(in) a few days (only)." Buddha said, "Son, you are not yet
able to attain supreme wisdom." Again he asked a single Shaman the same
question, who answered, "The time of a meal (or of taking a meal)."
Buddha answered, "Son, you are not yet capable of attaining supreme
reason." Again he asked the same question of another Shaman, who
replied, "Man's life is but a breath, a sigh!" Buddha answered, "Well
said, son! you are able to speak of attaining supreme wisdom."

   <span id="pp_38">38.</span> Buddha said: A disciple removed from me
by a distance of several thousand lis, yet thinking on me and keeping my
commandments (nim = observing by recollection), must in the end obtain
supreme wisdom. Whilst another who dwells with me, and yet allows
rebellious thoughts and does wickedly, he shall in the end not attain
supreme reason. Truth of profession resides (or is exhibited) in correct
conduct. If a man consorting with me does still not conform to my
commandments in his conduct, what benefit will ten thousand precepts be
to him?

   <span id="pp_39">39.</span> Buddha said: A man who is practising the
attainment of reason, is like one eating honey, which is sweet
throughout. So my Scriptures (Sutras) are likewise sweet: the system
advocated in them is altogether a source of pleasure. Those who practise
it shall attain supreme knowledge.

   <span id="pp_40">40.</span> Buddha said: A man practising the
attainment of supreme wisdom, and able to extirpate the root of his
lusts and desires, is like one who strikes the suspended gem. (The
allusion is either to striking a temple bell, for the assembly or
dispersion of the congregation, or it may be to the act of striking or
grinding a substance in a mortar, *ex. gr.*). At every stroke the
collection of people, <span id="page_349">p. 349</span> (or the compact
substance), is broken up (*i.e.*, for the purpose of resorting to
worship). So when all a man's wicked desires are broken up and
dispersed, he will attain supreme wisdom.

   <span id="pp_41">41.</span> Buddha said: All the Shamans who are
engaged in the practice of religion ought to regard themselves as oxen
carrying loads, and going through the mud; tired with their burdens,
they dare not look (or wander) an inch (the least portion) to the right
or the left; desiring above all things to get out of the mud, they go
straight on, in order that they may obtain some ease and repose
themselves. So a Shaman, regarding his lusts and passions as more
troublesome than that mud, with a steadfast purpose bending his mind to
(the attainment of) reason, will be able to avoid all sorrow.

   <span id="pp_42">42.</span> Buddha said: I regard kings, princes, as
to their dignities, only as patches of dust; gold, jewels, as to their
value, only as clay fragments; dresses of silk and sarsnet, only as
playthings (? pai-pak); the great chiliocosm as the letter 'a'; the four
barren or weedy seas (? nan-shui) only as a miry road (?); the system of
complete deliverance, only as a boat for carrying treasure; the highest
vehicle (referring, probably, to the Mahayana), only as the gilt sheen
of a dream; seeking the wisdom of Buddha only as a flower (which appears
in fancy) before the eye; seeking any inferior standing ground, only as
(su-ni-chiio ?); seeking Nirvana, as a dead sleep; arriving at rest, as
the dancing of the six dragons (?); the state of perfect equanimity, as
the one true standing point; the power of endless transformation, as the
trees and flowers of the four seasons;--all these things are thus great
in comparison only. To hear the law of Buddha is the chief source of
joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
