[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc24005)  [Next](cc24007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the third year of the reign of
Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto
Jerusalem, and besieged it.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Anno tertio regni Jehoiakim regis
Jehudah venit Nebuchadnezzar rex Jerosolyma Babylonis, et obsedit eam.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of
Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God: which
he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he
brought the vessels into the treasure house of his God.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et tradidit Deus in manum regis
Jehoiakim Regem Jehuda, et partem vasorum domus Dei, et traduxit ea,
 <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) in terram Sinear in domum dei sui
 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) quod vas a posuerit in domo
thesauri dei sui.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span><span id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>These are not two different things, but the
Prophet explains and confirms the same sentiments by a change of phrase,
and says that the vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had brought into the land
of Shinar were laid up in the house of the treasury. The Hebrews, as we
know, generally use the word “house” for any place, as they call the
temple God’s “house ” Of the land of Shinar, it must be remarked, that
it was a plain adjacent to Babylon; and the famous temple of Belus, to
which the Prophet very probably refers, was erected there.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>Here Daniel marks the time in which he was
led into captivity together with his companions, namely, in the third
year of Jehoiakim A difficult question arises here, since Nebuchadnezzar
began to reign in the fourth year of Jehoiakim. How then could he have
besieged Jerusalem in the third year, and then led away the people
captives according to his pleasure? Some interpreters solve this
difficulty by what appears to me a frivolous conjecture, that the four
years ought to refer to the beginning of his reign, and so the time may
be brought within the third year. But in the second chapter we shall see
Daniel brought before the king in the second year of his reign. They
explain this difficulty also by another solution. They say — the years
are not reckoned from the beginning of the reign, and, — this was the
second year from the Conquest of the Jews and the taking of Jerusalem;
but this is too harsh and forced. The most probable conjecture seems to
me, that the Prophet is speaking of the first King Nebuchadnezzar, or at
least uses the reign of the second, while his father was yet alive. We
know there were two kings of the same name, father and son; and as the
son did many noble and illustrious actions, he acquired the surname of
Great. Whatever, therefore, we shall afterwards meet with concerning
Nebuchadnezzar, cannot be understood except of the second, who is the
son. But Josephus says the son was sent by his father against the
Egyptians and the Jews and this was the cause of the war, since the
Egyptians often urged the Jews to a change of affairs, and enticed them
to throw off the yoke Nebuchadnezzar the younger was carrying on the war
in Egypt at the death of his father, and speedily returned home, lest
any one should supersede him. When, however, he found all things as he
wished, Josephus thinks he put off that expedition, and went to
Jerusalem. There is nothing strange, nay, it is very customary to call
him King who shares the command with his father. Thus, therefore, I
interpret it. In the third year or the reign of Jehoiakim,
Nebuchadnezzar came, under the command and direction of his father, or
if any one prefers it, the father himself came. For there is nothing out
of place, whether we refer it to the father or to the son.
*Nebuchadnezzar,* then, *king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem,* that is,
by the hand of his son besieged Jerusalem. But if a different
explanation is preferred, since he was there himself and carried on the
war in person, that view not be taken still, the events happened in the
third year of Jehoiakim’s reign. Interpreters make many mistakes in this
matter. Josephus, indeed, says this was done in the eighth year, but he
had never read the Book of Daniel.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)
He was an unlearned man, and by no means familiar with the Scriptures;
nay, I think he had never read three verses of Daniel. It was a dreadful
judgment of God for a priest to be so ignorant a man as Josephus. But in
another passage on which I have commented, he seems to have followed
Metasthenes and others whom he cites, when speaking of the destruction
of that monarchy. And this seems to suit well enough, since in the third
year of the reign of Jehoiakim the city was once taken, and some of the
nobles of the royal race were led away in triumph, among whom were
Daniel and his companions. When Jehoiakim afterwards rebelled, his
treatment was far more severe, as Jeremiah had predicted. But while
Jehoiakim possessed the kingdom by permission of King Nebuchadnezzar,
Daniel was already a captive, so that Jeremiah’s prediction was
fulfilled — the condition of the figs prematurely ripe was improved; for
those who were led into exile last thought themselves better off than
the rest. But the Prophet deprives them of their vain boast, and shows
the former captives to have been better treated than the remnant of the
people who as yet remained safe at. home. (<span
id="vii.i-p12.3"></span>[Jer. 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#008)<span id="vii.i-p12.3"></span>.) I
assume, then, that Daniel was among the first fruits of the captivity;
and this is an instance of God’s judgments being so incomprehensible by
us. For had there been any integrity in the whole people, surely Daniel
was a remarkable example of it for Ezekiel includes him among the three
just men by whom most probably God would be appeased. (<span
id="vii.i-p12.4"></span>[Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)<span id="vii.i-p12.4"></span>.)
Such, then, was the excellence of Daniel’s virtues, that he was like a
celestial angel among mortals; and yet he was led into exile, and lived
as the slave of the king of Babylon. Others, again, who had provoked
God’s wrath in so many ways, remained quiet in their nests the Lord did
not deprive them of their country and of that inheritance which was a
sign and pledge of their adoption.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68)

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>Should any wish here to determine why Daniel
was among the first to be led into captivity, will he not betray his
folly? Hence, let us learn to admire God’s judgments, which surpass all
our perceptions; and let us also remember the words of Christ,

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>“If these things are done in the green
tree,  
what will be done in the dry?” (<span id="vii.i-p15.2"></span>[Lu
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031)<span id="vii.i-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>As I have already said, there was an angelic
holiness in Daniel, although so ignominiously exiled and brought up
among the kings eunuchs. Then this happened to so holy a man, who from
his childhood was entirely devoted to piety, how great is God’s
indulgence in sparing us? What have we deserved? Which of us will dare
to compare himself with Daniel? Nay, we are unworthy, according to the
ancient proverb, to loosen the tie of his shoes. Without the slightest
doubt Daniel, through the circumstances of the time, wished to manifest
the singular and extraordinary gift of God, since this trial did not
oppress his mind and could not turn him aside from the right course of
piety. When, therefore, Daniel saw himself put forward as an example of
integrity, he did not desist from the pure worship of God. As to his
assertion that Jehoiakim was delivered into the hand of King
Nebuchadnezzar *by* God’s command, this form of speech takes away any
stumbling block which might occur to the minds of the pious. Had
Nebuchadnezzar been altogether superior, God himself might seem to have
ceased to exist, and so his glory would have been depressed. But Daniel
clearly asserts that King Nebuchadnezzar did not possess Jerusalem, and
was not the conqueror of the nation *by* his own valor, or counsel, or
fortune, or good luck, but because God wished to humble his people.
Therefore, Daniel here sets before us the providence and judgments of
God, that we may not think Jerusalem to have been taken in violation of
God’s promise to Abraham and his posterity. He also speaks by name of
the vessels of the temple. Now, this might seem altogether out of place,
and would shock the minds of the faithful. For what does it mean? That
God’s temple was spoiled by a wicked and impious man. Had not God borne
witness that his rest was there? This shall be my rest for ever, here
will I dwell because I have chosen it. (<span
id="vii.i-p16.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="vii.i-p16.1"></span>.)
If any place in the world were impregnable, here truly honor ought to
remain entire and untainted in the temple of God. When, therefore, it
was robbed and its sacred vessels profaned, and when an impious king had
also transferred to the temple of his own god what had been dedicated to
the living God, would not, as I have said, such a trial as this cast
down the minds of the holy? No one was surely so stout-hearted whom that
unexpected trial would not oppress. Where is God, if he does not defend
his own temple? Although he does not dwell in this world, and is not
enclosed in walls of either wood or stone, yet he chose this
dwelling-place for himself, (<span id="vii.i-p16.2"></span>[Ps
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p16.2"></span>,
and <span id="vii.i-p16.3"></span>[Ps
99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p16.3"></span>,
and <span id="vii.i-p16.4"></span>[Isa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#016)<span
id="vii.i-p16.4"></span>,)and often by means of his Prophets asserted
his seat to between the Cherubim. What then is the meaning of this? As I
have already said, Daniel recalls us to the judgment of God, and by a
single word assures us that we ought not to be surprised at God
inflicting such severe punishments upon impious and wicked apostates.
For under the name of God, there is a silent antithesis; as the Lord did
not deliver Jehoiakim into the hand of the Babylonians without just
reason: *God,* therefore, exposed him as a prey that he might punish him
for the revolt of his impious people. It now follows —

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the
master of his eunuchs, that he should bring *certain* of the children of
Israel, and the of the king’s seed, and of the princes;

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et mandavit1  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) Rex Aspenazo  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) principi eunuchorum, ut educeret e filiis
Israel et ex semine regio, et ex principibus.  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span><span id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>Here Daniel pursues his narrative, and shows
the manner in which he was led away together with his companions. The
king had demanded young men to be brought, not from the ordinary
multitude, but from the principal nobility, who stood before him, that
is, ministered to him. Hence, we ascertain why Daniel and his companions
were chosen, because they were noble young men and of the royal seed, or
at least of parents who surpassed others in rank. The king did this
purposely to show himself a conqueror; he may also have taken this plan
designedly, to retain hostages in his power; for he hoped, as we shall
see, that those who were nourished in his palace would be degenerate and
hostile to the Jews, and he thought their assistance would prove useful
to himself. He also hoped, since they were born of a noble stock, that
the Jews would be the more peaceable, and thus avoid all danger to those
wretched exiles who were relations of the kings and the nobles. With
regard to the words, he calls this *Aspenaz* the prince of eunuchs,
under which name he means the boys who were nourished in the king’s
palace to become a seminary of nobles; for it is scarcely possible that
this Aspenaz was set over other leaders. But we gather from this place,
that the boys whom the king held in honor and regard were under his
custody. The Hebrews calls eunuchs <span id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>סריסים,
*serisim,* a name which belongs to certain prefects; for Potiphar is
called by this name though he had a wife. So this name is everywhere
used in Scripture for the satraps of a king; (<span
id="vii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ge 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036)<span
id="vii.ii-p9.2"></span>; <span id="vii.ii-p9.3"></span>[Gen.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#002),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#007)<span id="vii.ii-p9.3"></span>;) but
since satraps also were chosen from noble boys, they were probably
called eunuchs, though they were not made so, yet Josephus ignorantly
declares these Jewish children to have been made eunuchs. But when
eunuchs existed among the luxuries of Oriental kings, as I have already
said, those youths were commonly called by this name whom the king
brought up as a kind of school of nobles, whom he might afterwards place
over various province.

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span>*The king,* therefore, *commanded some of
the children of Israel of the royal seed and of the nobles to be brought
to him.* So the sentence ought to be resolved; he did not command any of
the common people to be brought to him, but some of the royal race, the
more plainly to show himself their conqueror by doing all things
according to his will. He means those “elders” who yet were in chief
authority under the king of Judah. And Daniel also was of that tribe, as
we shall afterwards see. The word <span id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>פרתמים,
*pharthmim,* “princes,” is thought to be derived from *Perah,* which is
the Euphrates, and the interpreters understand prefects, to whom the
provinces on the banks of the Euphrates were committed; but this does
not suit the present passage where Jews are treated of. We now see the
general signification of this name, and that all the elders ought to be
comprehended under it.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) — The rest
tomorrow.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou settest
before us so clear a mirror of thy wonderful providence and of thy
judgments on thine ancient people, that we may also be surely persuaded
of our being under thy hand and protection — Grant, that relying on
thee, we may hope for thy guardianship, whatever may happen, since thou
never losest sight of our safety, so that we may invoke thee with a
secure and tranquil mind. May we so fearlessly wait for all dangers
amidst all the changes of this world, that we may stand upon the
foundation of thy word which never can fail; and leaning on thy promises
may we repose on Christ, to whom thou hast committed us, and whom thou
hast made the shepherd of all thy flock. Grant that he may be so careful
of us as to lead us through this course of warfare, however troublesome
and turbulent it may prove, until we arrive at that heavenly rest which
he has purchased for us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Second

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**4.** Children in whom *was* no blemish, but
well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and
understanding science, and such as *had* ability in them to stand in the
king’s palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of
the Chaldeans.

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>**4.** Pueros, quibus nulla esset macula
 <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) et pulchros aspectu,  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) et intelligente in omni prudentia,  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) et intelligentes scientia et diserte
exprimentes cognitionem, et in quibus vigor, ut starent in palatio
regis, et ad docendum ipsos literaturam et linguam Chaldaeorum.

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span><span id="vii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>In yesterday’s Lecture we saw how the prefect
or master of the eunuchs was commanded to bring up some noble youths,
the offspring of the king and the elders; and Daniel now describes their
qualities, according to Nebuchadnezzar’s order. They were *youths, not*
so young as seven or eight years, but growing up, in *whom there was no
spot;* that is, in whom there was no defect or unsoundness of body. They
were also of *beautiful aspect,* meaning of ingenuous and open
countenance, he adds also, *skilled in all prudence, and understanding
knowledge;* and then, *expressing their thoughts* I think those
interpreters right who take this participle actively, otherwise the
repetition would be cold and valueless. Their eloquence seems to me
pointed out here; because there are some who inwardly understand
subjects presented to them, but cannot express to others what they
retain in their minds; for all have not the same dexterity in expressing
exactly what they think Daniel, therefore, notices both qualifications
here — the acquisition of knowledge, and the power of communicating it.

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span>*And in whom was vigor* for <span
id="vii.v-p10.1"></span>כח, *cach,* usually signifies fortitude, as in
Isaiah. (<span id="vii.v-p10.2"></span>[Isa
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)<span id="vii.v-p10.2"></span>.)
Those who fear God shall change their fortitude, or renew their rigor.
Then in <span id="vii.v-p10.3"></span>[Psalm
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#000)<span id="vii.v-p10.3"></span>,
(<span id="vii.v-p10.4"></span>[Ps
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)<span id="vii.v-p10.4"></span>,)
my strength or rigor has failed.” He adds, the fortitude or vigor of
intelligence, knowledge, and eloquence; or a healthy habit of body,
which is the same thing.  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) *That
they might stand in the king*’*s palace, and be taught literature,* (I
cannot translate the particle <span id="vii.v-p11.1"></span>ספר,
*sepher,* otherwise, verbally it is a “*letter,*” but it means learning
or discipline,) *and the language of the Chaldees* We now see how the
king regarded not only their rank, when he ordered the most excellent of
the royal and noble children to be brought to him; but he exercised his
choice that those who were to be his servants should be clever; they
were of high birth, as the phrase is; so they ought to prevail in
eloquence and give hopeful promise of general excellence in both body
and mind. Without doubt he wished them to be held in great estimation,
that he might win over other Jews also. Thus, if they afterwards
obtained authority, should circumstances allow of it, they might become
rulers in Judea, bearing sway over their own people, and yet remain
attached to the Babylonian empire. This was the king’s design; it
affords no reason why we should praise his liberality, since it is
sufficiently apparent that he consulted nothing but his own advantage.

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span>Meanwhile, we observe, that learning and the
liberal arts were not then so despised as they are in this age, and in
those immediately preceding it. So strongly has barbarism prevailed in
the world, that it is almost disgraceful for nobles to be reckoned among
the men of education and of letters! The chief boast. of the nobility
was to be destitute of scholarship — nay, they gloried in the assertion,
that they were “no scholars,” in the language of the day; and if any of
their rank were versed in literature, they acquired their attainments
for no other purpose than to be made bishops and abbots’ still, as I
have said, they generally despised all literature. We perceive the age
in which Daniel lived was not so barbarous, for the king wished to have
these boys whom he caused to be so instructed, among his own princes, as
we have said, to promote his own advantage; still we must remark upon
the habit of that age. As to his requiring so much knowledge and skill,
it may seem out of place, and more than their tender age admitted, that
they should be so accomplished in prudence, knowledge, and experience.
But we know that kings require nothing in moderation when they order
anything to be prepared, they often ascend beyond the clouds. So
Nebuchadnezzar speaks here; and Daniel, who relates his commands, does
so in a royal manner. Since the king commanded all the most accomplished
to be brought before him, if they really manifested any remarkable
qualities, we need not be surprised at their knowledge, skill, and
prudence. The king simply wished those boys and youths to be brought to
him who were ingenious and dangerous, and adapted to learn with rapidly;
and then those who were naturally eloquent and of a healthy constitution
of body. For it follows directly, *that they might learn,* or *be
taught* *the literature and language of the Chaldees* We perceive that
King Nebuchadnezzar did not demand teachers, but boys of high birth, and
good talents, and of promising abilities; he wished them to be liberally
instructed in the doctrine of the Chaldees he was unwilling to have
youths of merely polished and cultivated minds without natural
abilities. His desire to have them acquainted with the language of
Chaldea arose from his wish to separate them by degrees from their own
nation, to introduce them to forget their Jewish birth, and to acquire
the Chaldean manners, since language is a singular bond of
communication. Respecting their learning, we may ask, whether Daniel and
his companions were permitted to learn arts full of imposition, which we
know to be the nature of the Chaldean learning. For they professed to
know every one’s fate, as in these days there are many impostors in the
world, who are called fortune-tellers. They abused an honorable name
when they called themselves mathematicians, as if there were no
scientific learning separate from those arts and diabolic illusions. And
as to the use of the word, the Caesars, in their laws, unite Chaldeans
and mathematicians, treating them as synonymous. But the explanation is
easy, — the Chaldeans not only pursued that astrology which is called
“Judicial,” but were also skilled in the true and genuine knowledge of
the stars. The ancients say, that the course of the stars was observed
by the Chaldeans, as there was no region of the world so full of them,
and none possessed so extensive an horizon on all sides. As the
Chaldeans enjoyed this advantage of having the heavens so fully exposed
to the contemplation of man, this may have led to their study, and have
conduced to the more earnest pursuit of astrology. But as the minds of
men are inclined to vain and foolish curiosity, they were not content
with legitimate science, but fell into foolish and perverse
imaginations. For what fortune-tellers predict of any one’s destiny is
merely foolish fanaticism. Daniel, therefore, might have learned these
arts; that is, astrology and other liberal sciences, just as Moses is
said to have been instructed in all the sciences of Egypt. We know how
the Egyptians were infected with similar corruption’s; but it is said
both of Moses and of our Prophet, that they were imbued with a knowledge
of the stars and of the other liberal sciences. Although it is uncertain
whether the king commanded them to proceed far in these studies, yet we
must hold that Daniel abstained, as we shall see directly, from the
royal food and drink, and was not drawn aside nor involved in these
Satanic impostures. Whatever the king’s commandment was, I suppose
Daniel to have been content with the pure and genuine knowledge of
natural things. As far as the king is concerned, as we have already
said, he consulted simply his own interests; wishing Daniel and his
companions to pass over into a foreign tribe, and to be drawn away from
their own people, as if they had been natives of Chaldea. It now follows
—

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005)<span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>**5.** And the king appointed them a daily
provision of the king’s meat, and of the wine which he drank: so
nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand
before the king.

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et constituit illis rex demensum diei
in die suo  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) ex frusto  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) cibi regis, et ex vino potus ejus. Et ut
educarentur annis tribus et a fine illorum  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) starent coram rege.

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span><span id="vii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p9"></span>In this verse, Daniel shews that the king
had ordered some youths to be brought to him from Judea, and to be so
nourished as to be intoxicated with delicacies, and thus rendered
forgetful of their own nation. For we know that wherever there is any
cunning in the world, it reigns especially in kings palaces! So
Nebuchadnezzar, when he perceived he was dealing with an obstinate
people, (and we know the Jews to have been of a hard and unsubdued
spirit,) wished to acquire servants spontaneously obedient, aid thus
endeavored to soften them with luxuries. This was the reason why he
provided for them *an allotment of his own meat and drink;* as at
present it is the greatest honor at princes’ tables to be served with a
*bon-bouche,* as they say. Nebuchadnezzar wished this Daniel and his
companions, though but captives and exiles, to be brought up not only
splendidly but royally, if of the royal race. Through his right of
conquest he, had drawn them away violently from their country, as we
said yesterday. Hence he does not act thus from any feeling of
liberality, and his feeding those miserable exiles from his own table
should not be esteemed a virtuous action; but, as we have said, he
cleverly reconciles the minds of the boys to be reckoned Chaldeans
rather than Jews, and thus to deny their own race. This, then, was the
king’s intention; but we shall see how God governed Daniel and his
companions by His Spirit, and how they became aware of these snares of
the devil, and abstained from the royal diet, lest they should become
polluted by it. This point will hereafter be treated in its place — we
are now only commenting on the craftiness of the king. He, commanded a
daily portion of diet to be distributed to them, not that the spirit of
parsimony dictated this daily portion, but the king wished their food
should be exactly the same as his own and that of the chiefs.

<span id="vii.vi-p10"></span>He adds, *that they should be educated for
three years;* meaning, until they were thoroughly skilled in both the
language and knowledge of the Chaldeans. Three years were sufficient for
both these objects, since he had selected youths of sufficient talent to
learn with ease both languages and sciences. As they were endued with
such capacity, it is not surprising that the space of three years had
been prescribed by the king. At length, he says, *at the end of them,*
meaning of the three years. We have shown how this ought not to be
referred to the boys, as if the king afterwards selected some of them,
for we shall see in its own place that a distinct time was fixed
beforehand; hence no long refutation is needed. It is certain, then,
that the Prophet speaks of the close of the three years. It had been
said just before, *that they with stand in the palace;* but this ought
also to be understood of the time of which mention has been made. They
did not stand before the king immediately, but were reserved for this
purpose. Since the king commanded them to be brought up for the purpose
of using their services afterwards Daniel twice repeats — they were
splendidly educated — seeing the king wished them to become his servants
at table and in other duties.

<span id="vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p1"></span><span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006)<span id="vii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p2"></span>**6.** Now among these were of the children
of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:

<span id="vii.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Et fuit in illis ex filiis Jehudah
Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, et Azariah.

<span id="vii.vii-p4"></span>**7.** Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs
gave names: for he gave unto Daniel *the name* of Belteshazzar; and to
Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of
Abednego.

<span id="vii.vii-p5"></span>**7.** Et imposuit illis princeps
eunuchorum  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) nomina imposuit inquam,
Danieli Balthsazar, et Hananiae Sadrak, et Misael Mesack, et Azariae
Abednego.

<span id="vii.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.vii-p8"></span><span id="vii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p9"></span>The Prophet now comes to what properly
belongs to his purpose. He did not propose to write a full narrative,
but he touched shortly on what was necessary, to inform us how God
prepared him for the subsequent discharge of the prophetic office. After
he had stated their selection from the royal and noble seed, as
excelling in talent, dexterity, and eloquence, as well as in rigor of
body, he now adds, that he would his companions were among them. He
leaves out the rest, because he had nothing to record of them worthy of
mention; and, as I have said, the narrative hitherto is only subsidiary.
The Prophet’s object, then, must be noticed, since he was exiled, and
educated royally and sumptuously in the palace of King Nebuchadnezzar,
that he might afterwards be one of the prefects, and his companions be
elevated to the same rank. He does not say that he was of the royal
house, but only of the tribe of Judah; but he was probably born of a
noble rather than of a plebeian family, since kings more commonly
selected their prefects from their own relations than from others.
Moreover, since the kingdom of Israel was cut off, perhaps through a
feeling of modesty, Daniel did not record his family, nor openly assert
his origin from a noble and celebrated stock. He was content with a
single word, — he and his companion were of the tribe of Judah, and
brought up among the children of the nobility. He says — *their names
were changed;* so that by all means the king might blot out of their
hearts the remembrance of their own race, and they might forget their
own origin. As far as interpretations are concerned, I think I have said
enough to satisfy you, as I am not willingly curious in names where
there is any obscurity, and especially in these Chaldee words. As to the
Hebrew names, we know Daniel’s name to mean the judge, or judgment of
God. Therefore, whether by the secret instinct of God, his parents had
imposed this name, or whether by common custom, Daniel was called by
this name, as God’s judge. So also of the rest; for Hananiah has a fixed
meaning, namely, one who has obtained mercy from God; so Misael means
required or demanded by God; and so Azariah, the help of God, or one
whom God helps. But all these flyings have already been better explained
to you, so I have only just touched on these points, as the change has
no adequate reason for it. It is enough for us that the names were
changed to abolish the remembrance of the kingdom of Judah from their
hearts. Some Hebrews also assert these to have been the names of wise
men. Whether it was so or not, if, was the kings plan to draw away those
boys that they should have nothing in common with the elect people, but
degenerate to the manners of the Chaldeans. Daniel could not help the
prince or master of the eunuchs changing his name, for it was not in.
his power to hinder it; the same must be said of his companions. But
they had enough to retain the remembrance of their race, which Satan, by
this artifice, wished utterly to blot out. And yet this was a great
trial, because they suffered from their badge of slavery. Since their
names were changed, either the king or his prefect Aspenaz wished to
force them under the yoke, as if he would put before their eyes the,
judgment of their own slavery as often as they heard their” names. We
see, then, the intention of the change of name, namely, to cause these
miserable exiles to feel themselves; in captivity, and cut off from the
race of Israel; and by this mark or symbol they were reduced to slavery,
to the, king of Babylon and his palace. This was, indeed, a hard trial,
but it mattered not to the servants of God to be contemptuously treated
before men, so long as they were not infected with any corruption; hence
we conclude them to have been divinely governed, as they stood pure and
spotless. For Daniel afterwards says —

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span><span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)<span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span>**8.** But Daniel purposed in his heart
that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king’s meat,
nor with the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince
of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et posuit Daniel super cor suum,
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) ne pollueretur in portione cibi
regis, et in vine potuum ejus, et quaesivit a magistro  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Eunuchorum, ne pollueretur.

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span><span id="vii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>Here Daniel shows his endurance of what he
could neither cast off nor escape; but meanwhile he took care that he
did not depart from the fear of God, nor become a stranger to his race,
but he always retains the remembrance of his origin, and remains a pure,
and unspotted, and sincere worshipper of God. He says, *therefore,* —
*he determined in his heart not to pollute himself with the kings food
and drink, and that he asked the prefect,* under whose charge he was,
that he should not be driven to this necessity. It may be asked here,
what there was of such importance in the diet to cause Daniel to avoid
it? This seems to be a kind of superstition, or at least Daniel may have
been too morose in rejecting the king’s diet. We know that to the pure
all things are pure, and this rule applies to all ages. We read nothing
of this kind concerning Joseph, and very likely Daniel used all food
promiscuously, since he was treated by the king with great honor. This,
then, was not perpetual with Daniel; for he might seem an inconsiderate
zealot, or this might be ascribed, as we have said, to too much
moresoness. If Daniel only for a time rejected the royal food, it was a
mark of levity and inconsistency afterwards to allow himself that
liberty from which he had for the time abstained. But if he did this
with judgment and reason, why did he not persist in his purpose? I
answer, — Daniel abstained at first from the luxuries of the court to
escape being tampered with. It was lawful for him and his companions to
feed on any kind of diet, but he perceived the king’s intention. We know
how far enticements prevail to deceive us; especially when we are
treated daintily; and experience shows us how difficult it is to be
moderate when all is affluence around us, for luxury follows immediately
on plenty. Such conduct is, indeed, too common, and the virtue of
abstinence is rarely exercised when there is an abundance of provisions.

<span id="vii.viii-p9"></span>But this is not the whole reason which
weighed with Daniel. Sobriety and abstinence are not simply praised
here, since many twist this passage to the praise of fasting, and say
Daniel’s chief virtue consisted in preferring pulse to the delicacies of
a palace. For Daniel not only wished to guard himself against the
delicacies of the table, since he perceived a positive danger of being
eaten up by such enticements; hence he simply determined in his hem not
to taste the diet of the court, desiring by his very food perpetually to
recall the remembrance of his country. He wished so to live in Chaldea,
as to consider himself an exile and a captive, sprung from the sacred
family of Abraham. We see, then, the intention of Daniel. He desired to
refrain from too great an abundance and delicacy of diet, simply to
escape those snares of Satan, by which he saw himself surrounded. He
was, doubtless, conscious of his own infirmity, and this also is to be
reckoned to his praise, since; through distrust of himself he desired to
escape from all allurements and temptations. As far as concerned the
king intention, this was really a snare of the devil, as I have said.
Daniel rejected it, and there is no doubt that God enlightened his mind
by his Spirit as soon as he prayed to him. Hence he was unwilling to
cast himself into the snares of the devil, while he voluntarily
abstained from the royal diet. This is; the full meaning; of the
passage.

<span id="vii.viii-p10"></span>It may also be asked, Why does Daniel
claim this praise, as His own, which was shared equally with his
companions? for he was not the only one who rejected the royal diet. It
is necessary to take notice, how from his childhood he was, governed by
the Spirit of God, that the confidence and influence of his teaching
might be the greater; hence he speaks peculiarly of himself, not for the
sake of boasting, but to obtain confidence in his teaching, and to show
himself to have been for a long period formed and polished by God for
the prophetic office. We must also remember that he was the adviser of
his companions; for this course might never have come into their minds,
and they might have been corrupted, unless they had been admonished by
Daniel. God, therefore, wished Daniel to be a leader and master to his
companions, to induce them to adopt the same abstinence. Hence also we
gather, that as each of us is endued more fruitfully with the grace of
the Spirit, so should we feel bound to instruct others. It will not be
sufficient for any one to restrain himself and thus to discharge his own
duty, under the teaching of God’s Spirit, unless he also extend his hand
to others, and endeavor to unite in an alliance of piety, and of the
fear and worship of God. Such an example is here proposed to us in
Daniel, who not only rejected the delicacies of the palace, by which he
might be intoxicated and even poisoned; but he also advised and
persuaded his companions to adopt the same course. This is the reason
why he calls tasting the king’s food pollution or abomination, though,
as I have said, there was nothing abominable in it of itself. Daniel was
at liberty to eat and drink at the loyal table, but the abomination
arose from the consequences. Before the time of these four persons
living in Chaldea., they doubtless partook of ordinary food after the
usual manner, and were permitted to eat whatever was offered to them.
They did not ask for pulse when at an inn, or on their journey; but they
began to desire it when the king wished to infect them with his
delicacies, and to induce them if possible to prefer that condition to
returning to their own friends. When they perceived the object of his
snares, then it became both a pollution and abomination to feed on those
dainties, and to eat, at the king’s table. Thus we may ascertain the
reason why Daniel thought himself polluted if he fared sumptuously and
partook of the royal diet; he was conscious, as we have already
observed, of his own infirmities, and wished to take timely precautions,
lest he should be enticed by such snares, and fall away from piety and
the worship of God, and degenerate into the manners of the Chaldeans, as
if he were one of their nation, and of their native princes. I must
leave the rest till tomorrow.

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as long as our
pilgrimage in this world continues, that we may feed on such diet for
the necessities of the flesh as may never corrupt us; and may we never
be led aside from sobriety, but may we learn to use our abundance by
preferring abstinence in the midst of plenty. Grant also, that we may
patiently endure want and famine, and eat and drink with such liberty as
always to set before us the glory of thy Name. Lastly, may our very
frugality lead us to aspire after that fullness by which we shall be
completely refreshed, when the glory of thy countenance shall appear to
us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span>Lecture Third.

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Now God had brought Daniel into
favour and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs.

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Dederat autem Deus Danielem  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) in clement am et mistrationes coram
prefecto eunuchorum.

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span><span id="vii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span>Daniel, yesterday, related what he had asked
from the master to whose care he had been committed, he now inserts his
sentence, to show this demand to be quite unobjectionable, since the
prefect of the eunuchs treated him kindly. The crime would have been
fatal had Daniel been brought into the king’s presence. Although very
probably he did not use the word “pollution,” and openly and directly
call the royal diet a “defilement,” yet it, may be easily conjectured
from these words which he now records, that he asked the prefect to be
permitted to eat pulse, because he did not think himself permitted to
partake of the royal diet. We yesterday gave the reason; but the king of
Babylon would immediately have been angry, had he known this. What! he
would say, I honor those captives, when I might abuse them as slaves;
nay, I nourish them delicately like my own children. and yet they reject
my food, as if I were polluted. This, therefore, is the reason why
Daniel here relates his being in favor with that prefect. For, as we
shall see in the next verse, the prefect simply denied his request.
Where was then any favor shown? But though he was not willing to
acquiesce in the prayers of Daniel, he showed a singular kindness in not
taking him before the king, since courtiers are ready for any accusation
for the sake of obtaining favor. Then, very probably, the prefect would
know that this had been granted to Daniel by his servant. If then there
was any connivance on the part of the prefect, this is the favor and
pity of which Daniel now speaks. His intention, then, is by no means
doubtful, since he did not hesitate to adopt a different course of life,
in order to remain pure and spotless, and uncontaminated with the
delicacies of the palace of Babylon. He expresses how he escaped the
danger, because the perfect treated him kindly, when he might have
instantly caused his death. But we must notice the form of speech here
used; — *God placed him in favor and pity before that prefect* He might
have used the usual phrase, merely saying he was favorably treated; but,
as he found a barbarian so humane and merciful, he ascribes this benefit
to God. This phrase, as we have expounded it, is customary with the
Hebrews; as when it is said, (<span id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>[Ps
106:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046)<span id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>,)
God gave the Jews favor in the sight of the heathen who had led them
captive; meaning, he took care that their conquerors should not rage so
cruelly against them as they had done at first. For we know how the Jews
were often treated harshly, roughly, and contemptuously. Since this
inhumanity was here mitigated, the Prophet attributes it to God, who
prepared mercies for his people. The result is this, — Daniel obtained
favor with the prefect, since God bent the heart of a man, otherwise
unsoftened, to clemency and humanity. His object in this narrative is to
urge us to greater earnestness in duty, if we have to undergo any
difficulties when God calls us.

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span>It often happens that we cannot discharge
everything which God requires and exacts without imminent danger to our
lives. Sloth and softness naturally creep over us, and induce us to
reject the cross. Daniel, therefore, gives us courage to obey God and
his commands, and here states his favor with the prefect, since God
granted his servant favor while faithfully performing his duty. Hence
let us learn to cast our care upon God when worldly terror oppresses us,
or when men forbid us with threats to obey God’s commands. Here let us
acknowledge the power of God’s hand to turn the hearts of those who rage
against us, and to flee us from all danger. This, then, is the reason
why Daniel says the prefect was kind to him. Meanwhile, we gather the
general doctrine from this passage, that men’s hearts are divinely
governed, while it shows us how God softens their iron hardness, and
turns the wolf into the lamb. For when he brought his people out of
Egypt, he gave them favor with the Egyptians, so that they carried with
them their most precious vessels. It is clear enough that the Egyptians
were hostile towards the Israelites. Why then did they so freely offer
them the most valuable of their household goods? Only beck, use the Lord
inspired their hearts with new affections. So, again, the Lord can
exasperate our friends, and cause them afterwards to rise up in
hostility against us. Let us perceive, then, that on both sides the will
is in God’s power, either to bend the hearts of men to humanity, or to
harden those which were naturally tender. It is true, indeed, that every
one has a peculiar disposition from his birth some are ferocious,
warlike, and sanguinary; others are mild, humane, and tractable. This
variety springs from God’s secret ordination; but God not only forms
every one’s disposition at his birth, but every day and every moment, if
it seems good to him, changes every one’s affections. He also blinds
men’s minds, and rouses them again from their stupor. For we sometimes
see the rudest men endued with much acuteness, and show a singular
contrivance in action, and others who excel in foresight, are at fault
when they have need of judgment and discretion. We must consider the
minds and hearts of men to be so governed by God’s secret instinct, that
he changes their affections just as he pleases. Hence there is no reason
why we should so greatly fear our enemies, although they vomit forth
their rage with open mouth, and are overflowing with cruelty; for they
can be turned aside by the Lord. And thus let us learn from the example
of Daniel to go on fearlessly in our course, and not to turn aside, even
if the whole world should oppose us; since God can easily and readily
remove all impediments and we shall find those who were formerly most
cruel, become humane when the Lord wishes to spare us. We now understand
the sense of the words of this verse, as well as the Prophet’s
intention. It follows —

<span id="vii.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#010)<span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And the prince of the eunuchs and
unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and
your drink: for why should he see your faces worse liking than the
children which *are* of your sort? then shall ye make *me* endanger my
head to the king.

<span id="vii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et dixit praefectus eunuchorum
Danieli, Timeo ego Dominum meum regem qui, constituit  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) cibum vestrum, et potus vestros, quare
videbit facies vestros tristes,  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)
prae pueris, qui sunt vobis similes,  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) et obnoxium  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) reddetis caput meum regi.

<span id="vii.xii-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.xii-p9"></span><span id="vii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p10"></span>Daniel suffers a repulse from the prefect;
and truly, as I have lately remarked, his humanity is not praised
through his listening to Daniel’s wish and prayer; but through his
burying in silence whatever might have brought him into difficulties.
And his friendship appears in this; for although he denies his request,
yet he does so mildly and civilly, as if he had said he would willingly
grant it unless he had feared the king’s anger. This, therefore, is the
meaning, — the prefect, though he did not dare to comply with Daniel’s
request, yet treated both him and his companions kindly by not
endangering their lives. He says, — he *was afraid of the king who had
ordered the food* He is not to be blamed as if he feared man more than
the living God, for he could not have any knowledge of God. Although he
may have been persuaded that Daniel made his request in the earnest,
pursuit of piety, yet he did not think himself authorized to comply; for
he thought the Jews had their peculiar method of worship, but meanwhile
he clung entirely to the religion of Babylon. Just as many profane
persons now think us quite right in casting away superstitions, but yet
they slumber in this error, — it is lawful for themselves to live in the
ancient manner, since they were so brought up and instructed by their
forefathers. Hence they use rites which they allow to be disapproved by
us. So also this prefect might feel rightly concerning Daniel and his
associates; at the same time he was not so touched by them as to desire
to learn the difference between the two religions. Therefore he simply
excuses himself, as not being at liberty to grant Daniel’s request,
since this would endanger his own head with the king. It now follows —

<span id="vii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom
the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah,

<span id="vii.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Et dixit Daniel ad Meltsar, quem
constituerat praefectus eunuchorum super Danielem, Hananiah, Misael, et
Azariah,

<span id="vii.xiii-p4"></span>**12.** Prove thy servants, I beseech
thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink.

<span id="vii.xiii-p5"></span>**12.** Proba  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) servos tuos diebus decem, et apponantur
nobis de leguminibus,  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) et
comedemus,  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) aet aquae, quas
bibamus.

<span id="vii.xiii-p9"></span>**13.** Then let our countenances be
looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the children that eat of
the portion of the king’s meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy
servants.

<span id="vii.xiii-p10"></span>**13.** Et inspiciantur coram facie tua
vultus nostri, et vultus puero- rum, qui vescuntur portione  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) cibi regis et quemadmodum videris fac cum
servis tuis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiii-p13"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p14"></span>Since Daniel understood from the answer
of the prefect that he could not obtain his wish, he now addresses his
servant. For the prefect had many servants under him, according to the
custom of important stewardships. Most probably the steward’s duty was
similar to that of the Chief Steward of the Household,  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) as it exists at this time in France.
Daniel and his companions were under the care of one of these servants;
Daniel descends to this remedy and obtains his wish, though, as we shall
see, not without some artifice. And here Daniel’s singular constancy is
observable, who after trying the matter once in vain, did not cease to
pursue the same object It is a clear and serious proof of our faith,
when we are not fatigued when anything adverse occurs, and never
consider the way closed against us. Then if we do not retrace our steps,
but try all ways, we truly show the root of piety fixed in our hearts.
It might have seemed excusable in Daniel, after he had met with his
first repulse; for who would not have said he had discharged his duty,
and that an obstacle had prevailed over him! But; since he did not
prevail with the chief prefect, he goes to his servant. Thus voluntarily
to incur risk was the result of no common prudence. For this servant
could not make the same objection, as we have just heard the prefect
did. Without doubt he had heard of Daniel’s request, and of his repulse
and denial; hence Daniel is beforehand with him, and shows how the
servant may comply without the slightest danger; as if he had said, —
We, indeed, did not obtain our wish from the prefect because he was
afraid of his life, but I have now thought of a new scheme by which you
may both gratify us and yet not become chargeable with any crime, as the
whole matter will be unknown. *Try thy servants, therefore, for ten
days,* and prove them; *let nothing but pulse be given us to eat and
water to drink* If after that time our faces are fresh and plump, no
suspicion will attach to time, and no one will be persuaded that we are
not treated delicately according to the king’s commandment. Since, then,
this proof will be sufficiently safe for thee, and cautious enough for
us both, there is no reason why you should reject our prayers. Besides,
without the slightest doubt, when Daniel brought this forward, he was
directed by God’s Spirit to this act of prudence, and was also impelled
to make this request. By the singular gift of the Holy Spirit Daniel
invented this method of bending the mind of the servant under whose care
he was placed. We must hold, then, that this was not spoken rashly or of
his own will, but by the instinct of the Holy Spirit. It would not have
been duty but rashness, if Daniel had been the author of this plan, and
had not been assured by the Lord of its prosperous issue. Without doubt
he had some secret revelation on the subject; and if the servant allowed
him and His associates to feed on pulse, it was a happy answer to his
prayers. Hence, I say, he would not have spoken thus, except under the
guidance and command of the Spirit. And this is worthy of notice, since
we often permit ourselves to do many things which turn out badly,
because we are carried away by the mere feelings of the flesh, and do
not consider what is pleasing to God. It is not surprising, then, when
men indulge in various expectations, if they feel themselves deceived at
last, since every one occasionally imposes upon himself by foolish
hopes, and thus frustrates his designs. Indeed, it is not our province
to promise ourselves any success. Hence let us notice how Daniel had not
undertaken or approached the present business with any foolish zeal; and
did not speak without due consideration, but was assured of the event by
the Spirit of God.

<span id="vii.xiii-p16"></span>But he says, *let pulse be put before us
to eat, and water to drink* We see, then, that the foul youths did not
abstain from the royal food for fear of pollution; for there was no law
to prevent any one drinking wine, except the Nazarites, (<span
id="vii.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Nu
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002)<span id="vii.xiii-p16.1"></span>,)
and they might eat of any kind of flesh, of which there was abundance at
the royal table. Whence then sprang this scrupulousness? because, as we
said yesterday, Daniel was unwilling to accustom himself to the
delicacies of the palace, which would cause him to become degenerate. He
wished, therefore, to nourish his body not only frugally, but
abstemiously, and not to indulge in these tastes; for although he was
raised to the highest honors, he was always the same as if still among
the most wretched captives. There is no occasion for seeking other
reasons for this abstinence of Daniel’s. For he might have fed on
ordinary bread and other less delicate food; but he was content with
pulse, and was continually lamenting and nourishing in his mind the
remembrance of his country, of which he would have been directly
forgetful if he had been plunged into those luxuries of the palace. It
follows —

<span id="vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#014)<span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p2"></span>**14.** So he consented to them in this
matter, and proved them ten days.

<span id="vii.xiv-p3"></span>**14.** Et a audivit eos in hoc verbo, et
probavit eos decem diebus.

<span id="vii.xiv-p4"></span>**15.** And at the end of ten days their
countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children
which did eat the portion of the king’s meat.

<span id="vii.xiv-p5"></span>**15.** Et a fine decem dierum visus est
vultus eorum pulcher,  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) et *ipsi*
pinguiores carne prae omnibus pueris,  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) qui comedebant portiones cibi regii.

<span id="vii.xiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiv-p9"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p10"></span>Now this surprising event took place, —
Daniel contracted neither leanness nor debility from that mean food, but
his face was as shirting as if he had continued to feed most delicately;
hence we gather as I have already said, that he was divinely impelled to
persist firmly in his own design, and not to pollute himself with the
royal diet. God, therefore, testified by the result that he had advised
Daniel and his companions in this their prayer and proposal. It is clear
enough that there is no necessary virtue in bread to nourish us; for we
are nourished by God’s secret blessing, as Moses says, Man lives not by
bread alone, (<span id="vii.xiv-p10.1"></span>[De
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="vii.xiv-p10.1"></span>,)
implying that the bread itself does not impart strength to men, for the
bread has no life in it; how then can it afford us life? As bread
possesses no virtue by itself, we are nourished by the word of God; and
because God has determined that our life shall be sustained by
nourishment, he has breathed its virtue into the bread — but, meanwhile,
we ought to consider our life sustained neither by bread nor any other
food, but by the secret blessing of God. For Moses does not speak here
of either doctrine or spiritual life, but says our bodily life is
cherished by God’s favor, who has endued bread and other food with their
peculiar properties. This, at least, is certain, — whatever food we feed
on, we are nourished and sustained by God’s gratuitous power. But the
example which Daniel here mentions was singular. Hence God, as I have
said, shews, by the event, how Daniel could not remain pure and spotless
with his companions, otherwise than by being content with pulse and
water. We must observe, for our improvement, in the first place, — we
should be very careful not to become slaves of the palate, and thus be
drawn off from our duty and from obedience and the fear of God, when we
ought to live sparingly and be free from all luxuries. We see a this day
how many feel it a very great cross if they cannot indulge at the tables
of the rich, which are filled with abundance and variety of food. Others
are so hardened in the enjoyment of luxuries, that they cannot be
content with moderation; hence they are always wallowing in their own
filth, being quite unable to renounce the delights of the palate. But
Daniel sufficiently shews us, when God not only reduces us to want, but
when, if necessary, all indulgences must be spontaneously rejected.
Daniel indeed, as we saw yesterday, does not attach any virtue to
abstinence from one kind of food or another; and all we have hitherto
learnt has no other object than to teach him to guard against imminent
danger, to avoid passing over to the morals of a strange nation, and so
to conduct himself at Babylon as not to forget himself as a son of
Abraham. But still it was necessary to renounce the luxuries of the
court. Although delicate viands were provided, he rejected them of his
own accord; since, as we have seen, it would be deadly pollution, not in
itself but in its consequences. Thus Moses, when he fled from Egypt,
passed into a new life far different from his former one; for he had
lived luxuriously and honorably in the king’s palace, as if he had been
the king’s grandson. But he lived sparingly in the Desert afterwards,
and obtained his support by very toilsome labor. He preferred, says the
Apostle, the cross of Christ to the riches of Egypt. (<span
id="vii.xiv-p10.2"></span>[Heb
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xiv-p10.2"></span>.) How so? Because he could not be esteemed an
Egyptian and retain the favor which had been promised to the sons of
Abraham. It was a kind of self-denial always to remain in the king’s
palace.

<span id="vii.xiv-p11"></span>We may take this test as a true proof of
our frugality and temperance, if we are able to satisfy the appetite
when God compels us to endure poverty and want; nay, if we can spurn the
delicacies which are at hand but tend to our destruction. For it would
be very frivolous to subsist entirely on pulse and water; as greater
intemperance sometimes displays itself in pulse than in the best and
most dainty dishes. If any one in weak health desires pulse and other
such food which is injurious, he will surely be condemned for
intemperance. But if he feeds on nourishing diet, as they say, and thus
sustains himself, frugality will have its praise. If any one through
desire of water, and being too voracious, rejects wine, this as we well
know would not be praiseworthy. Hence we ought not to subsist on this
kind of food to discover the greatness of Daniel’s virtue. But we ought
always to direct our minds to the object of his design, namely, what he
wished and what was in his power — so to live under the sway of the king
of Babylon, that his whole condition should be distinct from that of the
nation at large, and never to forget himself as an Israelite — and
unless there had been this great difference, Daniel would have been
unable to sharpen himself and to shake off his torpor, or to rouse
himself from it. Daniel necessarily kept before his mind some manifest
and remarkable difference which separated him from the Chaldeans; he
desired pulse and water, through the injurious effects of good living.

<span id="vii.xiv-p12"></span>Lastly, this passage teaches us, although
we should meet with nothing but the roots and leaves of trees, and even
if the earth herself should deny us the least blade of grass, yet God by
his blessing can make us healthy and active no less than those who
abound in every comfort. God’s liberality, however, is never to be
despised when he nourishes us with bread and wine and other diet; for
Paul enumerates, among things worthy of praise, his knowing how to bear
both abundance and penury. (<span id="vii.xiv-p12.1"></span>[Php
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span id="vii.xiv-p12.1"></span>)
When, therefore, God bountifully offers us both meat and drink, we may
soberly and frugally drink wine and cat savory food; but when he takes
away from us bread and water, so that we suffer from famine, we shall
find his blessing sufficient for us instead of all nutriment. For we see
that Daniel and his companions were ruddy and plump, and even remarkably
robust by feeding on nothing but pulse. How could this occur, unless the
Lord, who nourished his people in the Desert on manna alone, when other
diet was deficient, even at this day turns our food into manna, which
would otherwise be injurious to us. (<span id="vii.xiv-p12.2"></span>[Ex
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)<span id="vii.xiv-p12.2"></span>.)
For if any one asks the medical profession, whether pulse and other
leguminous plants are wholesome? they will tell us they are very
injurious, since they know them to be so. But at the same time, when we
have no choice of viands and cannot obtain what would conduce most to
our health, if we are content with herbs and roots, the Lord, as I have
said, can nourish us no less than if he put before us a table well
supplied with every dainty. Temperance does not exist in the food
itself, but in the palate — since we are equally intemperate if pleasure
entices us to gratify the appetite on inferior food — so, again, we may
remain perfectly temperate though feeding on the best diet. We must form
the same opinion of the properties of various viands, which do not
support us by their own inherent qualities, but by God’s blessing, as he
sees fit. We sometimes see the children of the rich very emaciated,
although they may receive the greatest attention. We see also the
children of the country people most beautiful in form, ruddy in
countenance, and healthy in condition; and yet they feed on any kind of
food, and sometimes upon what is injurious. But although they are
deprived of tasty sauces, yet God gives them his blessing, and their
unripe fruit, pork, lard, and even herbs, which seem most unwholesome,
become more nourishing than if the people abounded in every delicacy.
This, therefore, must be remarked in the words of Daniel. It follows —

<span id="vii.xv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#016)<span id="vii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p2"></span>**16.** Thus Melzar took away the portion of
their meat, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse.

<span id="vii.xv-p3"></span>**16.** Et factum est*,* ut Melsar tolleret
sibi portionem cibi illorum et vinum potionum eorum,  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) et daret illis legumina.

<span id="vii.xv-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xv-p6"></span><span id="vii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p7"></span>After Melsar saw it possible to gratify
Daniel and his companions without danger and promote his own profit, he
was humane and easily dealt with, and had no need of long disputation.
For an intervening obstacle often deters us from the pursuit of gain,
and we forbear to seek what we very much crave when it requires
oppressive labor; but when our profit is at hand, and we are freed from
all danger, then every one naturally pursues it. We see, then, what
Daniel means in this verse, namely, when Melsar saw the usefulness of
this plan, and the possibility of his gaining by the diet assigned by
the king to the four youths, then he gave them pulse. But we must notice
also Daniel’s intention. He wishes to shew that we ought not to ascribe
it to the kindness of man, that he and his companions could preserve
themselves pure and unspotted. Why so? Because he never could have
obtained anything from this man Melsar, until he perceived it could be
granted safely. Since, therefore, Melsar consulted his own advantage and
his private interest, and wished to escape all risks and hazards, we
easily gather that the benefit is not to be ascribed entirely to him.
Daniel and his companions obtained their wish, but God’s providence
rendered this man tractable, and governed the whole event. Meanwhile,
God openly shews how all the praise was due to himself, purposely to
exercise the gratitude of Daniel and his associates.

<span id="vii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are now
encompassed by so many enemies, and the devil does not cease to harass
us with fresh snares, so that the whole world is hostile to us, that we
may perceive even the devil himself to be restrained by thy bridle.
Grant, also, that all the impious may be subjected to thee, that thou
mayest lead them whithersoever thou wishest. Do thou direct their
hearts, and may we be experimentally taught how safe and secure we are
under the protection of thy hand. And may we proceed, according to thy
promise, in the course of our calling, until at length we arrive at that
blessed rest which is laid up for us in heaven by Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Fourth.

<span id="vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017)<span id="vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p2"></span>**17.** As for these four children, God
gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had
understanding in all visions and dreams.

<span id="vii.xviii-p3"></span>**17.** Et pueris illis quatuor, dedit,
*inquam,* illis Deus cognitionem et scientiam in omni literatura et
sapientia et Daniel intellexit in omni visione et somniis.

<span id="vii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="vii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet here shows what we have
already touched upon, how his authority was acquired for exercising the
prophetic office with greater advantage. He ought to be distinguished by
fixed marks, that the Jews first, and foreigners afterwards, might
acknowledge him to be endued with the prophetic spirit. But a portion of
this favor was shared with his three companions; yet he excelled them
all, because God fitted him specially for his office. Here the end is to
be noticed, because it would be incorrect to say that their reward was
bestowed by God, because they lived both frugally and heavenly, and
spontaneously abstained from the delicacies of the palace; for God had
quite a different intention. For he wished, as I have already said, to
extol Daniel, to enable him to shew with advantage that Israel’s God is
the only God; and as he wished his companions to excel hereafter in
political government, he presented them also with some portion of his
Spirit. But it is worthwhile to set Daniel before our eyes; because, as
I have said, before God appointed him his Prophet, he wished to adorn
him with his own *insignia,* to procure confidence in his teaching. He
says, therefore, *to those four boys,* or youths, *knowledge and science
were given in all literature and wisdom* Daniel was endued with a very
singular gift — he was to be an interpreter of dreams, and an explainer
of visions. Since Daniel here speaks of literature, without doubt he
simply means the liberal arts, and does not comprehend the magical arts
which flourished then and afterwards in Chaldea. We know that nothing
was sincere among unbelievers; and, on the other hand, I have previously
admonished you, that Daniel was not imbued with the superstitions in
those days highly esteemed in that nation. Through discontent with
genuine science, they corrupted the study of the stars; but Daniel and
his associates were so brought up among the Chaldeans, that they were
not tinctured with those mixtures and corruptions which ought always to
be separated from true science. It would be absurd, then, to attribute
to God the approval of magical arts, which it is well known were
severely prohibited and condemned by the law itself. (<span
id="vii.xviii-p6.1"></span>[De
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.) Although God abominates those magical
superstitions as the works of the devil, this does not prevent Daniel
and his companions from being divinely adorned with this gift, and being
very well versed in all the literature of the Chaldees. Hence this ought
to be restricted to true and natural science. As it respects Daniel, he
says, he *understood even, visions and dreams* and we know how by these
two methods the Prophets were instructed in the will of God. (<span
id="vii.xviii-p6.2"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xviii-p6.2"></span>.) For while God there blames Aaron and
Miriam, he affirms this to be his usual method; as often as he wishes to
manifest his designs to the Prophets, he addresses them by visions and
dreams. But Moses is treated out of the common order of men, because he
is addressed face to face, and mouth to mouth. God, therefore, whenever
he wished to make use of his Prophets, by either visions or dreams, made
known to them what he wished to be proclaimed to the people. When,
therefore, it is here said, — *Daniel understood dreams and visions,* it
has the sense of being endued with the prophetic spirit. While his
companions were superior masters and teachers in all kinds of
literature, he alone was a Prophet of God.

<span id="vii.xviii-p7"></span>We now understand the object of this
distinction, when an acquaintance with visions and dreams was ascribed
peculiarly to Daniel. And here our previous assertion is fully
confirmed, namely, that Daniel was adorned with the fullest proofs of
his mission, to enable him afterwards to undertake the prophetic office
with greater confidence, and acquire greater attention to his teaching.
God could, indeed, prepare the in a single moment, and by striking
terror and reverence into the minds of all, induce them to embrace his
teaching; but he wished to raise his servant by degrees, and to bring
him forth at the fitting time, and not too suddenly so that all might
know by marks impressed for many years how to distinguish him from the
common order of men. It afterwards follows:

<span id="vii.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p1"></span><span id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p2"></span>**18.** Now at the end of the days that the
king had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs
brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="vii.xix-p3"></span>**18.** Et a fine dierum, quibus edixerat
Rex ut producerentur introduxit eos princeps  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) eunuchorum coram Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="vii.xix-p5"></span>**19.** And the king communed with them;
and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah: therefore stood they before the king.

<span id="vii.xix-p6"></span>**19.** Et loquutus est cum illis rex et
non inventus est ex omnibus sicut Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, et Azariah,
et steterunt coram rege.

<span id="vii.xix-p7"></span>**20.** And in all matters of wisdom *and*
understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times
better than all the magicians *and* astrologers that *were* in all his
realm.

<span id="vii.xix-p8"></span>**20.** Et in omni verbo, sapientia et
intelligentia, quod sciscitatus est ab eis rex, invenit eos decuplo
supra omnes genethliacos et astrologos  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) qui erant in toto regno ejus.

<span id="vii.xix-p10"></span> 

<span id="vii.xix-p11"></span><span id="vii.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p12"></span>Now, Daniel relates how he and his
companions were brought forward at a fixed time, since three years was
appointed by the king for their instruction in all the science of the
Chaldees and on that account the prefect of the eunuchs produces them.
He shews how he and his companions were approved by the king, and were
preferred to all the rest. By these words he confirms my remark, that
the Lord through a long interval had adorned them with much favor, by
rendering them conspicuous throughout the royal palace, while the king
himself acknowledged something uncommon in them. He, as well as the
courtiers, ought all to entertain such an opinion concerning these four
youths, as should express his sincere reverence for them. Then God
wished to illustrate his own glory, since without doubt the king was
compelled to wonder how they could surpass all the Chaldeans. This
monarch had spared no expense on his own people, and had not neglected
to instruct them; but when he saw foreigners and captives so superior, a
spirit of rivalry would naturally spring up within him. But, as I have
already said, God wished to extol himself in the person of his servants,
so that the king might be compelled to acknowledge something divine in
these young men. Whence, then, was this superiority? for the Chaldeans
boasted of their wisdom from their birth, and esteemed other nations as
barbarians. The Jews, they would argue, are eminent beyond all others;
verily the God whom they worship distributes at his will talent and
perception, since no one is naturally gifted unless he receives this
grace from heaven. God, therefore, must necessarily be glorified,
because Daniel and his comrades very far surpassed the Chaldeans. Thus
God usually causes his enemies to gaze with wonder on his power, even
when they most completely shun the light. For what did King
Nebuchadnezzar propose, but to extinguish the very remembrance of God?
For he wished to have about him Jews of noble family, who should oppose
the very religion in which they were born. But God frustrated this plan
of the tyrant’s, and took care to make his own name more illustrious. It
now follows.

<span id="vii.xx"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p1"></span><span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021)<span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p2"></span>**21.** And Daniel continued *even* unto the
first year of king Cyrus.

<span id="vii.xx-p3"></span>**2l.** Et fuit Daniel usque ad annum primum
Cyri regis.

<span id="vii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xx-p5"></span><span id="vii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p6"></span>Expositors are puzzled with this verse,
because, as we shall afterwards see, the Vision occurred to Daniel in
the third year of Cyrus’s reign. Some explain the word <span
id="vii.xx-p6.2"></span>היה, *haiah,* by to be “broken;” but this is by
no means in accordance with the history. Their opinion is right who say
that Daniel continued to the first year of the reign of Cyrus in the
discharge of the prophetic office, although expositors do not openly say
so; but I state openly what they say obscurely. For since he afterwards
set out into Media, they say this change is denoted here. But we may
understand the words better in the sense of Daniel’s flourishing among
the Chaldeans and Assyrians, and being acknowledged as a celebrated
Prophet; because he is known to have interpreted King Belshszzar’s
vision, on the very night on which he was slain. The word here is simple
and complete — *he was* — but it depends on the succeeding ones, since
he always obtained the confidence and authority of a Prophet with the
kings of Babylon. This, then, is the true sense.  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc24006.htm#fr_65) <span
id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> Or *eos.* Either may be read; for the
Hebrews do not use the neuter gender; yet I had rather use the neuter
gender, on account of what follows. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc24006.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span> This would not suit either the king or the
captives: hence the Prophet seems to speak of “vessels;” and a
repetition of the same sentence afterwards *follows.* — *Calvin,.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc24006.htm#fr_67) <span
id="vii.i-p11.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span> Calvin’s expression is <span
id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>*tam brutus homo* in Latin, and <span
id="vii.i-p12.2"></span>*si stupide et brutal* in French; but he is
evidently too severe on so valuable an analyst, who, in so many
passages, confirms and elucidates the scriptural narrative. Besides,
Calvin seems to have overlooked the passage in his Antiq., lib. 11. cap.
8, section 5, where this Book is mentioned, and its contents alluded to
at length.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc24006.htm#fr_68) <span
id="vii.i-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span> Much light has been. thrown upon the
chronology of these times since the age of Calvin: later Commentators
have dated from the third year of Jehoiakim’s restoration to his kingdom
after his rebellion. See <span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>[2 Kings
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>. The
subject is discussed with clearness by Bleek in his Theology.
Zeitschrist. Pt. in. p. 28O, etc.; and R. Sal. Jarchi on this passage
may be consulted, p. 735, edit. Gotham, 1713. See Dissertation at the
end of this Volume.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc24006.htm#fr_69) <span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> Or, declared — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc24006.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span> Or, said to Aspenaz, as those who retain
the Hebrew phrase translate it. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc24006.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> Or, elders — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc24006.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> ‘This word has caused great difference of
opinion among commentators. Theodotion does not attempt to explain it.
Symmaehus takes it for the Parthians. Jerome interprets it by <span
id="vii.ii-p11.1"></span>*tyranni,* and Saadias by their off-spring.
Aben-Ezra considers it a foreign word; and R. Salom. Jarehi calls it
Persian, and translates it “leaders” Hottinger and Aug. Pfeiffer both
treat it as Persian, but derive it from different roots. “Nobles” or
“elders” seems its best English equivalent.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc24006.htm#fr_73) <span
id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span> For I omit the Hebrewism which has already
been *explained.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc24006.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span> Or countenance — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc24006.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span> That is, skilled in all *wisdom.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc24006.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vii.v-p10.5"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span> It can scarcely be correct to confound
bodily with mental endowments. *Wintle* explains the three clauses very
appositely, referring the first to “excellent natural abilities,” the
second to “the greatest improvement from cultivation,” and the last to”
the communication of our perceptions in the happiest manner to others.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc24006.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span> <span id="vii.vi-p4.1"></span>דבר*,
deber,*” the matter,” for each *day.* — *Calvin.* “The allotment for
each *day.*” — *Wintle.* It means “daily bread,” as in our Lord’s
Prayer, and occurs often in Exodus.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc24006.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span> Verbally, it here signifies a *portion.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc24006.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span> Some translate it “a part,” meaning “some
part of them,” but there is no doubt that the Prophet means a space of
time, as we shall soon see. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc24006.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p6"></span> That is, the master of the *eunuchs.* —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc24006.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span> Or in his heart: that is, determined or
decreed with himself. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc24006.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span> That is, asked the master. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc24006.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span> Had put Daniel — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc24006.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p4"></span> For <span id="vii.xii-p4.1"></span>מנה,
*minneh*, which is “to relate,” means to “ordain,” “appoint” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc24006.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vii.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p5"></span> Or emaciated, or austere, or sullen: for,
it is derived from the word <span id="vii.xii-p5.1"></span>זעף,
*zegneph*, which signifies “to be angry,” and hence, by a change of
object, faces are called emaciated, austere, of sullen. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc24006.htm#fr_86) <span
id="vii.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p6"></span> Others translate “equals,’ “those who are
like you:” this may be the sense, because they are now like you, but
will afterwards become fat and stout while you are lean. This change
will endanger *me.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc24006.htm#fr_87) <span
id="vii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p7"></span> For <span id="vii.xii-p7.1"></span>כוב,
*chob,* in Hebrew is “debtor:” whence this word is derived: signifying
to “render *subject.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc24006.htm#fr_88) <span
id="vii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p6"></span> Or try. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc24006.htm#fr_89) <span
id="vii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p7"></span> Simply pulse. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc24006.htm#fr_90) <span
id="vii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p8"></span> Which we may eat. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc24006.htm#fr_91) <span
id="vii.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p11"></span> A piece, as we *said.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc24006.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vii.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p15"></span> <span id="vii.xiii-p15.1"></span>Du
grand Escuyer. — Fr. *Trans.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc24006.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p6"></span> Or *plump.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc24006.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p7"></span> Namely, the *rest.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc24006.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p4"></span> That is wine, which the king had appointed
them to *drink.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc24006.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p4"></span> Or, *prefect.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc24006.htm#fr_97) <span
id="vii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p9"></span> That is, superior to all the soothsayers
and *astrologers.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc24006.htm#fr_98) <span
id="vii.xx-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p7"></span> See the Dissertations at the end of this
Volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc24007)
