[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc24002)  [Next](cc24004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>DEDICATORY EPISTLE.

<span id="iv-p2"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="iv-p3"></span>To ALL THE Pious WORSHIPPERS OF GOD WHO DESIRE
THE KINGDOM OFCHRIST TO BE RIGHTLY  
CONSTITUTED IN FRANCE.

<span id="iv-p4"></span>HEALTH

<span id="iv-p5"></span>Although I have been absent these six-and-twenty
years, with little regret, from that native land which I own in common
with yourselves, and whose agreeable climate attracts many foreigners
from the most distant quarters of the world; yet it would be in no
degree pleasing or desirable to me to dwell in a region from which the
Truth of God, pure Religion, and the doctrine of eternal salvation are
banished, and the very kingdom of Christ laid prostrate! Hence, I have
no desire to return to it; yet it would be neither in accordance with
human nor Divine obligation to forget the people from which I am sprung,
and to put away all regard for their welfare. I think I have given some
strong proofs, how seriously and ardently I desire to benefit my
fellow-countrymen, to whom perhaps my absence has been useful, in
enabling them to reap the greater profit from my studies. And the
contemplation of this advantage has not only deprived my banishment of
its sting, but has rendered it even pleasant and joyful.

<span id="iv-p6"></span>Since, therefore, throughout the whole of this
period I have publicly endeavored to benefit The Inhabitants OF France,
and have never ceased privately to rouse the torpid, to stimulate the
sluggish, to animate the trembling, and to encourage the doubtful and
the wavering to perseverance, I must now strive to the utmost that my
duty towards them may not fail at a period so urgent and so pressing. A
most excellent opportunity has been providentially afforded to me; for
in publishing the Lectures which contain my Interpretation Of The
Prophecies Of Daniel, I have the very best occasion of showing you,
beloved brethren, in this mirror, how God proves the faith of his people
in these days by various trials; and how with wonderful wisdom he has
taken care to strengthen their minds by ancient examples, that they
should never be weakened by the concussion of the severest storms and
tempests; or at least, if they should totter at all, that they should
never finally fall away. For although the servants of God are required
to run in a course impeded by many obstacles, yet whoever diligently
reads this Book will find in it whatever is needed by a voluntary and
active runner to guide him from the starting-post to the goal; while
good and strenuous wrestlers will experimentally acknowledge that they
have been sufficiently prepared for the contest.

<span id="iv-p7"></span>First of all, a very mournful and yet profitable
history will be recorded for us, in the exile of Daniel and his
companions while the kingdom and priesthood were still standing, as if
God, through ignominy and shame, would devote the choicest flower of his
elect people to extreme calamity. For what, at first sight, is more
unbecoming, than that youths endued with almost angelic virtues should
be the slaves and captives of a proud conqueror, when the most wicked
and abandoned despisers of God remained at home hi perfect safety? Was
this the reward of a pious and innocent life, that while the impious
were sweetly flattering themselves through their escape from punishment,
the saints should pay the penalty which they had deserved? Here, then,
we observe, as in a living picture, that when God spares and even
indulges the wicked for a time, he proves his servants like gold and
silver; so that we ought not to consider it a grievance to be thrown
into the furnace of trial, while profane men enjoy the calmness of
repose.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>Secondly, we have here an example of most manly
prudence and of singular consistency, united with a magnanimity truly
heroic. When pious youths of a tender age are tempted by the enticements
of a Court, they not only overcome the temptations presented to them by
their temperance, but perceive themselves cunningly enticed to depart by
degrees from the sincere worship of God; and then, when they have
extricated themselves from the snares of the devil, they boldly and
freely despise all poison-stained honor, at the imminent risk of instant
death. A more cruel and formidable contest will follow when the
companions of Daniel, as a memorable example, of incredible constancy,
are never turned aside by atrocious threats to pollute themselves by
adoring the Image, and are at length prepared to vindicate the pure
worship of God, not only with their blood, but in defiance of a horrible
torture set before their eyes. Thus the goodness of God shines forth at
the close of this tragedy, and tends in no slight degree to arm us with
invincible confidence.

<span id="iv-p9"></span>A similar contest and victory of Daniel himself
will be added; when he preferred to be cast among savage lions, to
desisting from the open profession of his faith three times a-day; lest
by perfidious dissembling he should prostitute the Sacred Name of God
to. the jests of the impious. Thus he was wonderfully drawn out of the
pit which was all but his grave, and triumphed over Satan and his
faction. Here philosophers do not come before us skillfully disputing
about the virtues peacefully in the shade; but the indefatigable
constancy of holy men in the pursuit of piety, invites us; with a loud
voice to imitate them. Therefore, unless we are altogether untouchable,
we ought to learn from these masters, if Satan lays the snares of
flattery for us, to be prudent and cautious that we are not entangled in
them; and if he attacks us violently, to oppose all his assaults by a
fearless contempt of death and of all evils. Should any one object, that
the examples of either kind of deliverance which we have mentioned are
rare, I confess indeed that God does not always stretch forth his hand
from heaven in the same way to preserve his people; but it ought to
satisfy us that he has promised that he will be a faithful guardian of
our life, as often as we are harassed by any trouble. We cannot be
exposed to the power of the impious without his restraining their
furious and turbulent plots against us, according to his pleasure. And
we must not look at the results alone; but observe how courageously holy
men devoted themselves to death for the vindication of God’s glory; and
although they were snatched away from it, yet their willing alacrity in
offering themselves as victims is in no degree less deserving of praise.

<span id="iv-p10"></span>It is also worth while to consider how
variously the Prophet was tossed about and agitated during the Seventy
years which he spent in exile. No King treated him so humanely as
Nebuchadnezzar, and yet he found him act like a wild beast. The cruelty
of others was greater, until after the sudden death of Belshazzar and
the taking of the City, he was delivered up to its new masters, The
Medes and Persians. Their hostile irruption struck terror into the minds
of all, and there is no doubt that the Prophet partook of the general
feeling. Although he was kindly received by Darius, so that his slavery
was rendered tolerable, yet the envy of the nobles and their tricked
conspiracy against him subjected him to the greatest dangers. But he was
more anxious for the common safety of the Church than for his own
personal security. He evidently suffered the greatest grief, and was
distracted with the utmost anxiety, when the position of affairs
discovered no limit to so severe and miserable an oppression of the
people. He acquiesced indeed, in the Prophecy of Jeremiah; still it was
a proof of his incomparable forbearance that his hope, so long
suspended, did not languish; nay, that when tossed hither and thither
amidst tempestuous waves, it was not entirely drowned.

<span id="iv-p11"></span>I come now to the Prophecies themselves. The
former part were uttered against the Babyloians; partly, because God
wished to adorn his servants with sure testimonies, which might compel
that most proud and victorious Nation to revere him; and partly, because
His Name ought to be held in reverence with the profane. Thus he would
exercise the prophetic gift among his own people more freely, through
being endued with authority. After his name had become celebrated among
The Chaldeans, God entrusted him with Prophecies of greater moment,
which were peculiar to his elect people. Moreover, God so accommodated
them to the use of his Ancient people, and they so soothed their sorrows
by suitable remedies, and sustained their vacillating minds till The
Advent Of Christ — that they have no less value in our time; for
whatever was predicted concerning the changing and vanishing splendor of
these Monarchies, and the perpetual existence of Christ’s Kingdom, is
*in these days no* less useful to be known than formerly. For God shows
how all earthy power which is not founded on Christ must fall; and he
threatens speedy destruction to all Kingdoms which obscure Christ’s
glory by extending themselves too much. And those Kings whose sway is
most extended shall feel by sorrowful experience how horrible a judgment
will fall upon them, unless they willingly submit themselves to the sway
of Christ! And what is less tolerable than to deprive Him of his right
by whose protection their dignity remains safe? And we see how few of
their number admit The Sons Of God; nay, how they turn every;stone and
try every possible scheme to prevent his entrance into their
territories! Many of their Councilors studiously use their utmost
endeavors and influence to close every avenue against him. For while
they put forward the name of Christianity, and boast themselves to be
the best. defenders of the Catholic Faith, their frivolous vanity is
easily refuted, if men hold the true and genuine definition of the
Kingdom of Christ. For his throne or scepter is nothing else but the
doctrine of the Gospel. Nor does his Majesty shine elsewhere, nor his
Empire otherwise exist, than when all, from the highest to the lowest,
hear His voice with the calm docility of sheep, and follow wherever he
calls them. These Kings not only completely reject this doctrine, which
contains the substance of True Religion, and the lawful Worship of God,
in which the eternal salvation of men and their true happiness consists;
but they drive it far away from them by threats and terrors, by the
sword and flame, nor do they omit any violence in their efforts to
exterminate it. How great, how prodigious this blindness, when they
cannot bear that those whom the only-begotten Sort of God invites
mercifully to himself should era.-brace him! But many in their own
pride, forsooth, think themselves reduced. to the common level, if they
lower their ensigns of royalty to the Supreme King others are unwilling
to bridle their lusts, and since hypocrisy seizes on all their senses,
they seek darkness, and dread to be dragged into light. No plague is
worse than this fear, like Herod’s as if tie who offers a celestial
empire to the least and most despised of the people, would snatch away
the kingdoms of the earth from its monarchs. In addition to this, when
each regards the c, pinion of others, this mutual league retains them
all bound in a distinctive bond under the yoke of impiety. For if they
would seriously apply their minds to inquire what is true and right;
nay, if they would only open their eyes, they could not fail to discover
it.

<span id="iv-p12"></span>Since it has often been found, by experience,
that when Christ goes forth with his Gospel serious commotion’s arise,
thus Kings have a plausible pretext for rejecting the heavenly doctrine
by consulting for the public safety. I confess, indeed, that all change
which occasions disturbance ought to be esteemed odious; but the
injustice to God is great, unless this also is attributed to his
*power,* that whatever tumults arise he allays them, and thus the
kingdom of his Son is established! Although the heavens should mingle
with the earth, the worship of God is so precious, that not even the
least diminution of it can be compensated at any price. But those who
pretend that the Gospel is the source of disturbances, accuse it falsely
and unjustly. (<span id="iv-p12.1"></span>[Hag
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)<span id="iv-p12.1"></span>..md) It is
indeed true, that God thunders therein with the vehemence of His voice,
which shakes heaven and earth; but while the Prophet gains attention to
its preaching by this testimony, such concussion is to be wished for and
expected. And, surely if God’s glory did not shine forth his its own
degree, until all flesh was humbled, it would be necessary that man’s
pride shone to be humbled by the bold and strong hand of God; since that
pride raise, itself against him, and never yields of its own accord. But
if the earth trembled at the promulgation of the Law, (<span
id="iv-p12.2"></span>[Ex 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv-p12.2"></span>,)it is not surprising that the force and efficacy
of the Gospel should appear more resplendent. Wherefore, it becomes us
to embrace that consoling doctrine which raises the dead from the grave,
and opens heaven, and implants unaccustomed rigor in those whom the
earth is unworthy to sustain, as if all the elements were subservient to
our salvation.

<span id="iv-p13"></span>But, lo! storms and tempests now flow from
another fountain! Because the Rulers and Governors of the world do not
willingly submit to the yoke of Christ, now even the rude multitude
reject what is salutary before they even taste it. Some delight
themselves in filth, like pigs, and others excited by fury rejoice in
slaughter. The devil instigates by especial fury those whom he has
enslaved to himself to tumults of all sorts. Hence the clash of
trumpets; hence conflicts and battles. Meanwhile, The Roman Protest — a
Heliogabalus — with his red and sanguinary cohorts and horned beasts,
 <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) rages with a hasty rush against
Christ and fetches from every side his allies from the filth of his foul
Clergy,  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) all of whom sup the food
on which they subsist from the same pot, though it be not equally
dainty. Many hungry fellows also run up to offer their assistance. Most
of the Judges are accustomed to gratify their appetites at these
sumptuous banquets, and to fight for the kitchen and the kettle! and
besides this, the haunts of the Monks,  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) and the dens of the Sorbonne,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) send forth their gluttons who add fuel to
the flame. I omit the clandestine arts and wicked conspiracies of which
my best witnesses are these notorious enemies to piety! I mention no one
by name, it is enough to point with the finger to those who are too well
known to you. In this confused assault of wild beasts, it is not
surprising if those who depend only on the complicated events of things
hesitate through perplexity, while they unjustly and unfairly throw the
blame of their distrust upon the Sacred Gospel of Christ. Let us suppose
that all the infernal regions with their furies should offer us battle,
will God sit at ease in heaven, and desert and betray his own cause? and
when he has entered into the conflict, will either the crafty cunning,
or the impetuous rush of men deprive Him of his victory?

<span id="iv-p18"></span>The Pope they say will draw with him a large
faction — it is the just reward of unbelief to tremble at the sound of a
falling leaf!(<span id="iv-p18.1"></span>[Le
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036)<span id="iv-p18.1"></span>..md)
*Why, O ye* counselors, have ye so little fore-sight? Christ will take
care that no novelty shall disturb you. In a short time ye will feel how
far more satisfactory it is to have God propitious, to despise terrors
as of no moment, and to rest in His protection, than to harass Him by
open warfare, through that of the wrath of the evil and the
hypocritical. In truth, after all these discussions, the superstition
which has hitherto reigned is with the defenders of the Pope, nothing
else but well-placed evil,  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) and
they think it cannot be removed, because the attempt would occasion
irreparable damage. But those who regard the glory of God, and are
endued with sincere piety, ought to have far higher objects in view, and
so to submit themselves to the will of God as to approve of all the
events of his providence. If he had not promised us anything, there
might be just cause for fear and constant vacillation; but since he has
so often declared, that his help shall never be wanting in upholding the
kingdom of his Christ, the reliance on this promise is the one sole
basis of right action.

<span id="iv-p20"></span>Hence it is your duty, dearest brethren, as far
as lies in your power, and your calling demands it, to use your hearty
endeavors, that true religion may recover its perfect state. It is not
necessary for me to relate how strenuously I have hitherto endeavored to
cut off all occasion for tumult; yea, I call you all with the angels to
witness before the Supreme Judge of all men, that it is no fault of mine
if the kingdom of Christ does not progress quietly without any injury.
And I think it is owing to my carefulness that private persons have not
transgressed beyond their bounds. Now, although God by his wonderful
skill has carried forward the restoration of his Church further than I
had dared to hope for, yet it is well to remember what Christ taught his
disciples, namely, that they should possess their souls in patience.
(<span id="iv-p20.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span id="iv-p20.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv-p21"></span>This is one object of the Vision which Daniel
has explained. The Stone by which those kingdoms were destroyed, which
had made war on God, was not formed by the hand of man and although it
was rude and unpolished, yet it increased to a great mountain. I thought
that ye required reminding of this, that ye may remain calm amidst the
threatening thunders, while the empty clouds vanish away through being
dispersed by heavenly agency. It does not escape me, while I pass by the
numberless fires of thirty years, that ye have endured very great
indignities during the last six months. How often in many places an
irruption was made against you by a ferocious populace, and how often ye
were attacked at one time by stones, and at another by swords! How your
enemies plotted against you, and repressed your peaceful assemblies by
sudden and unlocked for violence! How some were slain in their
dwellings, and others by the wayside while the bodies of your dead were
dragged about as a laughing-stock, your women ravished, and many of your
party wounded, and even the pregnant female with her offspring pierced
through, and their homes ransacked and made desolate. But, although more
atrocious things should be yet at hand, that ye may be approved as
Christ’s disciples, and be wisely instructed in his school, you must use
every effort, that no madness of the impious who act thus intemperately,
should deprive you of that moderation by which alone they have thus far
been conquered and broken down. And if the length of your affliction
should cause you weariness, bear in mind that celebrated prophecy in
which the Church’s condition is depicted to the life. God therein shews
his Prophet what contests and anxieties, troubles and difficulties,
awaited the Jews from the close of their exile, and from their joyful
return to their country until the advent of Christ.

<span id="iv-p22"></span>The similarity of the times adapts these
predictions to ourselves, and fits them for our own use. Daniel
congratulated the wretched Church which had so long been submerged in a
deluge of evils, when he collected from the computation of the years,
that the day of deliverance predicted by Jeremiah was at hand. (<span
id="iv-p22.1"></span>[Jer 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv-p22.1"></span>, and <span id="iv-p22.2"></span>[Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="iv-p22.2"></span>..md) But
he receives for an answer, that the lot of the people from the time of
their permission to return would be more bitter, so that they would
scarcely breathe again under a continual series of oppressive evils.
With the bitterest grief, and with many sorrows, the people had dragged
on in hope for seventy years, but now God increases the period
sevenfold, and inwardly inflicts A deadly wound on their heart. He not
only pronounces that the people, after their return home, should collect
their strength and build their city and temple, and then suffer new
anxieties, but he predicts fresh troubles amidst the very commencement
of their joy, whilst they had scarcely tasted the sweetness of grace.
Then with regard to the calamities which shortly followed, the multiform
catalogue here presented affrights us even who have only heard of them:
then how bitter and how distressing were they to that rude nation! To
see the temple profaned by the audacity of a sacrilegious tyrant, its
sacred rites shamefully mingled with foul pollution’s, all the books of
the law cast into the fire, and the whole of the ceremonies abolished, —
how horrible the spectacle! Since all who professed to persist boldly
and constantly in the worship of God were seized and subjected to the
same burning, how could the tender and weak behold this without the
greatest consternation! Yet this was the tyrant’s plan, that the cruelty
might excite the less earnest to deny their faith. Under the Maccabees,
some relaxation seems to have taken place, but yet such as is soon
deformed by the most cruel slaughters, and was never without its share
of lamentation and woe. For since the enemy far excelled them in forces
and in every equipment for war, nothing was left for those who had taken
up arms for the defense of the Church but to hide themselves in the dens
of wild beasts, or to wander through the woods in the greatest distress,
and in utter destitution. Another source of temptation was added, since
impious and abandoned men, in the boasting of a fallacious zeal as
Daniel says, joined the party of Judas and his brethren, by which
artifice of Satan infamy became attached to the band which Judas had
collected, as if it had been a band of robbers. (<span
id="iv-p22.3"></span>[Da 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv-p22.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv-p23"></span>But nothing was a source of greater sorrow to
the righteous, than to find the priests themselves betraying the temple
and worship of God, by wicked compacts according to the prompting of
their interested ambition. For not only was that sacred dignity both
bought and sold, but it was purchased by mutual murders and parricides.
Hence it happened, that men of all ranks grew more and more profane, and
corruption’s multiplied everywhere with impunity, although circumcision
and the sacrifices still remained in use, so that the expectation of the
kingdom of God, when Christ appeared, was a strange and unheard of
marvel. Very few, indeed, are entitled to even this praise. If then, in
that unworthy deformity of the Church, if in the midst of its many
dispersions and its dreadful terrors, of the devastation of the lands,
the destruction of the dwellings and the consequent dangers to life
itself, this prophecy of Daniel sustained the spirit of the pious, when
the religious ceremonies were involved in obscure shadows, and doctrine
was almost extinct, when the priests were most degenerate, and all
sacred ordinances abolished, — how ashamed should we be of our
cowardice, if the clearness of the Gospel, in which God shews to us his
paternal face, does not raise us above all obstacles, and prop us up
with unwearied constancy?

<span id="iv-p24"></span>There is no doubt that the servants of God
accommodated to their own times the predictions of this Prophet
concerning the exile at Babylon, and thus lightened the pressure of
present calamities. Thus, also, we ought to have our eyes fixed on the
miseries of the Fathers, that we may not object to be joined with the
body of that Church to which it was said,

<span id="iv-p25"></span>“O, thou little flock, borne down by the
tempest and deprived of comfort, behold, I take thee up.” (<span
id="iv-p25.1"></span>[Isa 54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv-p26"></span>And, again, after she has complained that her
back had been torn by the ungodly, like a field cut up by the course of
the furrows, yet she boasts immediately afterwards, that their cords
were cut away by a just God, so that they did not prevail against her.
(<span id="iv-p26.1"></span>[Ps
129:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)<span id="iv-p26.1"></span>..md)
The Prophet, then, not only animates us to hope and patience, by the
example of those times, but adds an exhortation dictated by the Spirit,
which extends to the whole reign or Christ, and is applicable to us.
Wherefore it is no hardship to us to be comprehended in the number of
those whom he announces shall be proved and purified by fire, since the
inestimable happiness and glory which springs from this process more
than compensates for all its crosses and distresses. And although these
things are insipid to the majority, lest their sloth and stupidity
should render us too sluggish, we should fix deeply in our hearts the
denunciation of the Prophets, namely, that the ungodly will act
impiously, since they understand nothing; while the sons of God will be
endued with wisdom to hold on the course of their divine calling. It is
worth while, then, to perceive the origin of that gross blindness which
is commonly observed, so that the heavenly doctrine may make us wise.
Hence, it too often happens that the multitude revile Christ and his
Gospel; they indulge themselves without either care, or fear, or any
perception of their dangers, and they are not aroused by God’s wrath to
an ardent and serious desire for that redemption which alone snatches us
from the abyss of eternal destruction. In the meantime they are caught
or rather fascinated by luxuries, pleasures, and other enticements, and
pay no regard to the prospect of a happy eternity. Although there are
many sects who contemptuously despise the teaching of the Gospel, some
are remarkable for pride, others for imbecility, some for want of
sobriety of mind, and others for a sleepy torpidly, yet we shall find
that contempt flows from profane security, since no one descends into
himself to shake off his own miseries by finding a remedy for them. Yet,
when God’s curse rests upon us, and his just vengeance urges us, it is
the height of madness to cast aside all anxiety, and to please ourselves
as if we need fear nothing. Yet it is a very common fault for those who
are guilty of a thousand sins, and deserve a thousand eternal deaths, to
discharge with levity a few frivolous ceremonies towards God, and then
give themselves up to sloth and lethargy. Moreover, Paul denounces the
savor of the Gospel (<span id="iv-p26.2"></span>[1Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)<span id="iv-p26.2"></span>.md) to be
deadly towards all whose minds are fascinated by Satan; so that to taste
of its life-giving savor, it is necessary for us to stand at God’s
tribunal, and there also to cite out own consciences when wounded with
serious terror.

<span id="iv-p27"></span>Thus, we esteem, according to its proper worth
and value, that reconciliation which Christ procured for us by his
precious blood. Thus, the angel, that he might acquire reverence and
respect for Christ’s authority, brings a message concerning eternal
justice which he sealed by the sacrifice of his death, and expresses the
mode and plant by which iniquity was abolished and expiated. *Thus,*
while the world revels in its lusts, let the knowledge of the
condemnation which we have deserved inspire us with fear, and humble us
before God and while the profane involve themselves in the whirl of
earthly gratification’s, let us eagerly embrace this incomparable
treasure, in which solid blessedness is laid up. Let our enemies jeer as
they please, every man ought to take care to have God propitious to him,
and it is clear that the very foundation of the faith is overthrown by
those who think he is to be doubtfully invoked. Let them deride our
faith with as much petulance as they please, but let us be sure of this,
that no one obtains this privilege except by God’s good gift, for men
can only call God “Father” by relying on the advocacy of Christ, through
a free and peaceful confidence. But the pursuit of piety will never
flourish in us as it ought, until we learn to raise our minds upwards,
since they are too inclined to grovel upon earth, and we should exercise
them in continual meditation upon the heavenly life. And in this
respect, the surprising vanity of the human race manifests itself, since
though all speak eloquently, like philosophers, on the shortness of
life, yet no one aspires to that perpetual existence. So that when Paul
contends the faith and charity of the Colossians, he very truly says,
that they were animated by a hope laid up in the heavens. (<span
id="iv-p27.1"></span>[Col 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv-p27.1"></span>.) And when discussing elsewhere the results of the
grace which is open to us in Christ, he says — we must be so built. up
therein, that all impiety and worldly desires must be mortified, and we
must live soberly, justly, and piously in this world, and wait for the
blessed hope, and glorious advent of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. (<span id="iv-p27.2"></span>Titus 2:12, 13.)

<span id="iv-p28"></span>Let, then, this expectation free us from all
hindrances, and draw us towards itself, and though the world is steeped
in more than epicurean pollution, lest the contagion should reach us, we
ought to strive the more earnestly until we arrive at the goal. Although
it is truly a matter of grief, that so great a multitude should
willfully perish, and rush devotedly on their own destruction, yet their
foolish fury need not disturb us; for another admonition of Daniel
should succor us, namely, that certain salvation is laid up for all who
have been found written in the book. But although our election is hidden
in God’s secret counsel, which is the prime cause of our salvation, yet,
since the adoption of all who are inserted into the body of Christ, by
faith in the gospel, is by no means doubtful, be ye content with this
testimony, and persevere in the course which ye have happily begun. But
if ye must contend still longer, (and I announce, that contests more
severe than ye contemplate yet remain for you,) by whatsoever attack the
madness of the impious bursts forth, as if it stirred up the regions
below, remember that your course has been defined by a heavenly Master
of the contest, whose laws ye must obey the more cheerfully, since he
will supply you with strength unto the end.

<span id="iv-p29"></span>Since, then, it is not lawful for me to desert
the station to which God has appointed me, I have Dedicated to you this
my labor, as a pledge of my desire to help you, until at the completion
of my pilgrimage our heavenly Father, of his immeasurable pity, shall
gather me together with you, to his eternal inheritance.

<span id="iv-p30"></span>May the Lord govern you by His Spirit, may He
defend my most beloved brethren by His own protection, against all the
plots of their enemies, and sustain them by his invisible power.

<span id="iv-p31"></span>John Calvin.  
Geneva, August 19, 1561

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc24003.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p14"></span> The Cardinals and Bishops.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc24003.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p15"></span> The Romish priesthood.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc24003.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p16"></span> The monasteries.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc24003.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p17"></span> The Sorbonne was a Popish seminary

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc24003.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv-p19"></span> Latine, “malam, <span
id="iv-p19.1"></span>*bene positum:*” the French translation takes the
phrase as a proverbs” <span id="iv-p19.2"></span>*comme dit le proverb,
un mal qui est bien en repos* ” Anglice, “well-poised.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calvin's Prayer](cc24004.md)
