[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc24009)  [Next](cc24011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Belshazzar the king made a great feast
to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Beltsazar rex fecit convivium magnum
proceribus suis mille, et coram mille vinum bibit.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span><span id="xi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>Daniel here refers to the history of what
happened at the taking of Babylon; but meanwhile he leaves those
judgments of God to the consideration of his readers, which the Prophets
had predicted before the people had become exiles. He does not use the
prophetic style, as we shall afterwards see, but is content with simple
narrative; while the practice of history may be learnt from the
following expressions. It is our duty now to consider how this history
tends towards building us up in the faith and fear of God. First of all
we notice the time at which Belshazzar celebrated this banquet. Seventy
years had passed away from the time when Daniel had been led into exile
with his companions. For although Nebuchadnezzar will soon be called the
father of Belshazzar, yet it is clear enough that Evil-Merodach lived
between them; for he reigned twenty-three years. Some reckon two kings
before Belshazzar; for they place Regassar after Labassardach; and these
two will occupy eight years. Metasthenes has stated it so, and he has
many followers. But Nebuchadnezzar the Great, who took Daniel captive,
and was the son of the first king of that name, evidently reigned
forty-five years. Some transfer two years to the reign of his father; at
any rate, he held the regal power for forty-five years; and if the
twenty-three years of Evil-Merodach are added, they will make
sixty-eight years — in which Belshazzar had reigned eight years. We see,
then, how seventy-two years had passed away from the period of Daniel
being first led captive. Metasthenes reckons thirty years for the reign
of Evil-Merodach; and then, if we add eight years, this makes more than
eighty years — which appears probable enough, although Metasthenes seems
to be in error in supposing different kings instead of only different
names.  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) For Herodotus does not
call Belshazzar, of whom we are now speaking, a king, but calls his
father Labynetus, and gives him the same name.  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) Metasthenes makes some mistakes in
names, but I readily embrace his computation of time, when he asserts
Evil-Merodach to have reigned thirty years. For when we treat of the
seventy years which Jeremiah had formerly pointed out, we ought not to
begin with Daniel’s exile, no,’ yet with the destruction of the city,
but with the slaughter which occurred between the first victory of king
Nebuchadnezzar, and the burning and ruin of the temple and city. For
when the report concerning the death of his father was first spread
abroad, as we have elsewhere said, he returned to his own country, lest
any disturbance should occur through his absence. Hence we shall find
the seventy years during which God wished the people’s captivity to
last, will require a longer period for the reign of Evil-Merodach than
twenty-three years; although there is not any important difference, for
soon after Nebuchadnezzar returned, he carried off the king, leaving the
city untouched. Although the temple was then standing, yet God had
inflicted the severest punishment upon the people, which was like a
final slaughter, or at least nearly equal to it. However this was, we
see that Belshazzar was celebrating this banquet just as the time of the
deliverance drew nigh.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>Here we must consider the Providence of God,
in arranging the times of events, so that the impious, when the time of
their destruction is come, cast themselves headlong of their own accord.
This occurred to this wicked king. Wonderful indeed was the stupidity
which prepared a splendid banquet filled with delicacies, while the city
was besieged. For Cyrus had begun to besiege the city for a long time
with a large army. The wretched king was already half a captive; and
yet, as if in spite of God, he provided a rich banquet, and invited a
thousand guests. Hence we may conjecture the extent of the noise and of
the expense in that banquet. For if any one wishes to entertain only ten
or twenty guests, it will occasion him much trouble, if he wishes to
treat them splendidly. But when it was a royal entertainment, where
there were a thousand nobles with the king’s wife and concubines, and so
great a multitude assembled together, it became necessary to obtain from
many quarters what was required for such a festival; and this may seem
incredible! But Xenophon though he related many fables and preserved
neither the gravity nor the fidelity of a historian, because he desired
to celebrate the praises of Cyrus like a rhetorician; although he
trifles in many things, yet here had no reason or occasion for
deception. He says a treasure was laid up, so that the Babylonians could
endure a siege of even ten or more years. And Babylon was deservedly
compared to a kingdom; for its magnitude was so large as to surpass
belief. It must really have been very populous, but since they drew
their provisions from the whole of Asia, it is not surprising that the
Babylonians had food in store, sufficient to allow them to close their
gates, and to sustain them for a long period. But in this banquet it was
most singular that the king, who ought to have been on guard, or at
least have sent forth his guards to prevent the city from being taken,
was as intent upon his delicacies as if he had been in perfect peace,
and exposed to no danger from any outward enemy. He had a contest with a
strong man, if any man ever was so. Cyrus was endued with singular
prudence, and in swiftness of action by far excelled all others. Since,
then, the king was so keenly opposed, it is surprising to find him so
careless as to celebrate a banquet. Xenophon, indeed, states the day to
have been a festival. The assertion of those Jews who think the
Chaldeans had just obtained a victory over the Persians, is but
trifling. For Xenophon — who may be trusted whenever he does not falsify
history in favor of Cyrus, because he is then a very grave historian,
and entirely worthy of credit; but when he desires to praise Cyrus, he
has no moderation — is here historically correct, when he says the
Babylonians were holding a usual annual festival. He tells us also how
Babylon was taken, viz., by Gobryas and Gadatas his generals. For
Belshazzar had castrated one of these to his shame, and had slain the
son of the other in the lifetime of his father. Since then the latter
burnt with the desire of avenging his son’s death, and the former his
own disgrace, they conspired against him. Hence Cyrus turned the many
channels of the Euphrates, and thus Babylon was suddenly taken. The city
we must remember was twice taken, otherwise there would not have been
any confidence in prophecy; because when the Prophets threaten God’s
vengeance upon the Babylonians, they say their enemies should be most
fierce, not seeking gold or silver, but desiring human blood; and then
they narrate every kind of atrocious deed which is customary in war.
(<span id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>[Jer
50:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#042)<span id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>.)
But nothing of this kind happened when Babylon was taken by Cyrus; but
when the Babylonians freed themselves from the Persian sway by casting
off their yoke, Darius recovered the city by the assistance of Zopyrus,
who mutilated his person, and pretended to have suffered such cruelty
from the king as to induce him to betray the city. But then we collect
how hardly the Babylonians were afflicted, when 3000 nobles were
crucified! And what usually happens when 8000 nobles are put to death,
and all suspended on a gallows — nay, even crucified? Thus it easily
appears, how severely the Babylonians were punished at the time,
although they were then subject to a foreign power, and treated
shamefully by the Persians, and reduced to the condition of slaves. For
they were forbidden the use of arms, and were taught from the first to
become the slaves of Cyrus, and dare not wear a sword. We ought to touch
upon these things shortly to assure us of the government of human events
by the judgment of God, when he casts headlong the reprobate when their
punishment is at hand. We have an illustrious example of this in King
Belshazzar.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>The time of the deliverance predicted by
Jeremiah was at hand — the seventy years were finished — Babylon was
besieged. (<span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>[Jer
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011)<span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>.)
The Jews might now raise up their heads and hope for the best, because
the arrival of Cyrus approached, contrary to the opinion of them all;
for he had suddenly rushed down from the mountains of Persia when that
was a barbarous nation. Since, therefore, the sudden coming of Cyrus was
like a whirlwind, this change might possibly give some hope to the Jews;
but after a length of time, so to speak, had elapsed in the siege of the
city, this might east down their spirits. While king Belshazzar was
banqueting with his nobles, Cyrus seems able to thrust him out in the
midst of his merriment and hilarity. Meanwhile the Lord did not sit at
rest in heaven; for he blinds the mind of the impious king, so that he
should willingly incur punishments, yet no one drew him on, for he
incurred it himself. And whence could this arise, unless God had given
him up to his enemy? It was according to that decree of which Jeremiah
was the herald. Hence, although Daniel narrates the history, it is our
duty, as I have said, to treat of things far more important; for God who
had promised his people deliverance, was now stretching forth his hand
in secret, and fulfilling the predictions of his Prophets. (<span
id="xi.i-p10.2"></span>[Jer 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026)<span
id="xi.i-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>It now follows — *King Belshazzar was
drinking wine before a thousand* Some of the Rabbis say, “he strove with
his thousand nobles, and contended with them all in drinking to excess;”
but this seems grossly ridiculous. When he says, *he drank wine before a
thousand,* he alludes to the custom of the nation, for the kings of the
Chaldeans very rarely invited guests to their table; they usually dined
alone, as the kings of Europe now do; for they think it adds to their
dignity to enjoy a solitary meal. The pride of the kings of Chaldea was
of this kind. When, therefore, it is said, Belshazzar drank wine before
a thousand*,* something extraordinary is intended, since he was
celebrating this annum banquet contrary to his ordinary custom, and he
deigned to treat his nobles with such honor as to receive them as his
guests. Some, indeed, conjecture that he drank wine ordeals, as he was
accustomed to become intoxicated when there were no witnesses present;
but there is no force in this comment: the word *before* means in the
presence or society of others. Let us go on:

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine,
commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which *was* in Jerusalem;
that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might
drink therein.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Beltsazar princepit  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) in gustu, *vel, sapore,* vini, ut
afferrent vasa auri et argenti,  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)
quae asportaverat, *vel, extulerat,* Nebuchadnezer pater ejus ex temple
quod *est* in Jerusalem, ut biberent in illis rex, et proceres ejus,
uxores et concubine.  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243)

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>Here king Belshazzar courts his own
punishment, because he furiously stirred up God’s wrath against himself,
as if he was dissatisfied with its delay while God put off his judgment
for so long a period. This is according to what I have said. When the
destruction of a house is at hand, the impious remove the posts and
gates, as Solomon says. (<span id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>[Pr
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#019)<span id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>.)
God therefore, when he wishes to execute his judgments, impels the
reprobrate by a secret instinct to rush forward of their own accord, and
to hasten their own destruction. Belshazzar did this. His carelessness
was the sign of his stupidity, and also of God’s wrath, when in the
midst of his own pride and crimes he could delight in reveling. Thus his
blindness more clearly points out God’s vengeance, since he was not
content with his own intemperance and excesses, but must openly declare
war against God. *He ordered, therefore, says he, the gold and silver
vessels to be brought to him which he had taken away from
Nebuchadnezzar* These vessels appear to have been laid up in the
treasury; hence Nebuchadnezzar had never abused these vessels in his
lifetime; we do not read that Evil-Merodach did anything of this kind,
and Belshazzar now wishes purposely to inflict this insult on God. There
is no doubt he brought forth those vessels by way of ridicule, for the
purpose of triumphing over the true God, as we shall afterwards see.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>We have already explained the sense in which
the Prophet calls Nebuchadnezzar the father of Belshazzar, since it is
usual in all languages to speak of ancestors as fathers; for Belshazzar
was of the offspring of Nebuchadnezzar, and being really his grandson,
he is naturally called his son; and this will occur again. There are
some who think Evil-Merodach was stricken with that grievous affliction
mentioned in the last chapter: possibly his name was Nebuchadnezzar, but
there is no reason for adopting their opinion;  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) it is frivolous to fly directly to
this conjecture when the name of the father occurs. the Prophet says
*Belshazzar committed this under the influence of wine* Since <span
id="xi.ii-p11.1"></span>טעם, *tegnem,* signifies “to taste,” no doubt he
here speaks of tasting; and since this may be metaphorically transferred
to the understanding, some explain it to mean being impelled by wine,
and thus his drunkenness took the place of reason and judgment. Nights
and love and wine, says Ovid, have no moderation in them.  <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) This explanation I think too forced;
it seems simply to mean, when Belshazzar grew warm with wine, he
commanded the vessels to be brought to him; and this is the more usual
view. When, therefore, the savor of the wine prevailed, — that is, when
it seized upon the king’s senses, *then he ordered the vessels to be
brought* It is worth while to notice this, to induce us to be cautious
concerning intemperance in drinking, because nothing is more common than
the undertaking many things far too rashly when our senses are under the
influence of wine. Hence we must use wine soberly, that it may
invigorate not only the body but the mind and the senses, and may never
weaken, or enervate, or stupify our bodily or mental powers. And this
is, alas! too common, since the vulgar proverb is well known — pride
springs from drunkenness. For this reason the poets supposed Bacchus to
have horns, since intemperate men are always puffed up, and the most
wretched fancy themselves kings. What then must happen to monarchs, when
in their forgetfulness they dream themselves kings of kings, and even
deities? The Prophet wishes to mark this fault when he says,
*Belshazzar, under the influence of wine, ordered vessels to be brought
to him* It now follows, —

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Then they brought the golden vessels
that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which *was* at
Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines,
drank in them.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Tunc attulerunt vasa aurea quae
extulerant ex temple domus Dei quae erat in Jerusalem: et biberunt in
illis rex, et proceres ejus, et uxor,  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) et concubinae ipsius.

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>The Prophet uses the word “*golden,*”
probably, because the most precious vessels were brought; silver might
also have been added, but the more splendid ones are noticed. He does
not say that Nebuchadnezzar carried them off, but implies it to be the
common act of all the Babylonians. They obtained the victory under the
direction of this king, hence he used the spoils; and since they were
all engaged in the victory, the Prophet speaks of them all. In using the
phrase, “the temple,” he *expresses* more than before, by saying, not
from Jerusalem only but from the temple of God’s house.

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**4.** They drank wine, and praised the gods
of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Biberunt vinum, et laudarunt deos
aureos, et argenteos, aereos, ferreos, ligneos, et lapideos.

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span><span id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet shews more distinctly and
clearly how the king insulted the true and only God, by ordering his
vessels to be brought to him. For when they had been brought forth,
*they praised,* says he, *all their gods of gold and silver;* meaning in
defiance of the true God they celebrated the praises of their false
deities, and thanked them, as we find in Habakkuk. (<span
id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>[Hab 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span
id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>.) Although there is no doubt they sacrificed
heartily the produce of their industry, as the Prophet there expresses
it, yet they exalted their own gods, and thus obliterated the glory of
the true God. And this is the reason why the Prophet now takes pains to
state those vessels to have been brought from *the temple of God*’*s
house* For he here strengthens the impiety of the king and his nobles
for erecting their horns against the God of Israel. There is then a
great contrast, between God who commanded his temple to be built at
Jerusalem, and sacrifices to be offered to him and false gods. And this
was the head and front of Belshazzar’s offending, because he thus
purposely rose up against God, and not only tyrannically and miserably
oppressed the Jews, but triumphed over their God — the Creator of heaven
and earth. This madness accelerated his ultimate destruction, and it
occurred for the purpose of hastening the time of their deliverance.
Hence I have represented him to have been drawn by God’s great instinct
to such madness that vengeance might be ripened.

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>*They drank,* says he, *wine, and praised
their gods.* The Prophet does not ascribe the praise of their gods to
drunkenness, but he obliquely shews their petulance to have been
increased by drink. For if each had been sober at home, he would not
have thus rashly risen up against God; but when impiety exists in the
heart, intemperance becomes an additional stimulus. The Prophet seems to
me to mean this, when he repeats, *they were drinking;* for he had said,
*the king and his nobles, his wife, and concubines, were drinking* He
now inculcates the same thing in similar words, but adds, *they drank
wine,* — meaning their madness was the more inflamed by the excitement
of the wine. *Then they praised the gods of silver,* etc. The Prophet
here reproachfully mentions *gods of gold, silver, brass, wood, and
stone,* since we know God to have nothing in common with either gold or
silver. His true image cannot be expressed in corruptible materials; and
this is, the reason why the Prophet calls all the gods which the
Babylonians worshipped, *golden, silver, brazen, wooden, and stone.*
Clearly enough the heathen never were so foolish as to suppose the
essence of Deity to reside in gold, or silver, or stone; they only
called them images of their deities; but because in their opinion the
power and majesty of the deity was included within the material
substance, the Prophet is right in so completely condemning their
criminality, because we hear how carefully idolaters invent every kind
of subtlety. In the present times, the Papacy is a glaring proof how men
cling to gross superstitions when they desire to excuse their errors;
hence the Prophet does not here admit those vain pretenses by which the
Babylonians and other heathens disguise their baseness, but he says,
*their gods were of silver and gold* And why so? for although they
orally confessed that gods reign in heaven, (so great was the multitude
and crowd of their deities that the supreme God was quite shrouded in
darkness,) although therefore the Babylonians confessed their gods to
have dwelt in heaven, yet they fled to statues and pictures. Hence the
Prophet deservedly chides them *for adoring gods of gold and silver.* As
to his saying, *then the vessels were brought,* it shews how the slaves
of tyrants obey them in the worst actions, because no delay intervened
in bringing the vessels from the treasury. Daniel therefore signifies
how all the king’s servants were obedient to his nod, and desirous of
pleasing a person brutish and drunken; at the same time he shews the
shortness of that intemperate intoxication; for he says, —

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**5.** In the same hour came forth fingers of
a man’s hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister
of the wall of the king’s palace: and the king saw the part of the hand
that wrote.

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span>**5.** In ilia hora egressi sunt digiti manus
hominis, et scribebant e regione lucernae  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) super calcern parietis  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) palatii regis, et rex cernebat palmam
 <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) manus scribentis.

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span><span id="xi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span>Here Daniel begins his narration of the change
which took place, for at that instant the king’ acknowledged something
sorrowful and disturbing to be at hand. Yet, as he did not at once
understand what it was, God gave him a sign as an omen of calamity,
according to the language of the profane. In this way God sent him
warning when he saw the king and his nobles raging with mad
licentiousness. *There appeared,* then, *the hand of a man,* says the
Prophet, using this expression from its similitude and form. We are sure
it was not a man’s hand; it had the appearance of one, and hence was
called so. Scripture often uses this method of expression, especially
when treating external symbols. This is, then, a sacramental form of
speech,  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) if I may use the
expression. God, indeed, wrote the inscription by his own power, but he
shews King Belshazzar the figure as if a man had written it on the wall;
hence *the fingers of a hand were put forth.* This expression conduces
in no slight degree to the reality of the miracle; for if Belshazzar had
seen this on the wall from the very first, he might have supposed some
artifice had placed the hand there; but when the wall was previously
bare, and then the hand suddenly appeared, we may readily understand the
hand to have been a sign from heaven, through which God wished to shew
something’ important to the king. *The fingers of a hand,* then, *were
put forth, and wrote from the midst of the candlestick,* or lamp.
Clearly, then, this was a feast by night, and Babylon was taken in the
midst of the night. No wonder their banquets were protracted to a great
length, for intemperance has no bounds. When men are accustomed to spend
the day in luxury, I confess indeed they do not usually continue their
banquets till midnight; but when they celebrate any splendid and
remarkable feast, they do not find the daylight sufficient for their
festivites and the grosser indulgences of the table.

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>Hence *the hand appeared from the
candlesticks* to render it the more conspicuous. That hand, says the
Prophet, wrote on the surface of the palace wall. If any one had
announced to the king this appearance of a human hand, he might have
doubted it; but he says the king was an eye-witness, for God wished to
terrify him, as we shall afterwards see, and hence he set before him
this spectacle. *The king,* then, *perceived it;* perhaps his nobles did
not; and we shall afterwards see how the terror operated upon the king
alone, unless, indeed, some others trembled with him. When, therefore,
they saw his countenance changed and exhibiting proofs of terror, they
began to fear, although they were all desirous of affording him some
consolation. Hence God wished to summon this impious king to His
tribunal when the hand of a man appeared before him in the act of
writing. We shall see what it wrote in its proper place.

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are so prone to
forgetfulness and to our own indulgence in the desires and pleasures of
the flesh, — Grant, I say, to each of us to be recalled to the
contemplation of thy judgments; and may we be anxious to walk as in thy
sight. May we be afraid of thy just vengeance, be careful not to provoke
it by our petulance and other vices; but may we submit ourselves to
thee, be held up, and propped up by thy hands, and proceed in the sacred
course of thy calling, until at length thou shalt raise us to thy
heavenly kingdom, which has been acquired for us by the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Fourth

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006)<span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>**6.** Then the king’s countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins
were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.

<span id="xi.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Tunc Regis vultus  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) mutatus est: et cogitationes ejus
terruerunt eum, et ligamina lumborum ejus solvebantur,  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) et poplites ejus invicem collisi sunt.

<span id="xi.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.viii-p7"></span><span id="xi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p8"></span>Here Daniel shews how the king’s mind was
struck with fear, lest any one should think his fright without
foundation. But he expresses, by many *circumstances,* how disturbed the
king was, and thus the sufficiency of the reason would easily appear. It
was needful for him to be so struck, that all might understand how God
was seated on his throne, and summoned him as a criminal. We mentioned
before how Daniel impresses us with the pride of this king, and his
careless security is a clear proof of it. When the daily siege of the
city ought to have rendered him anxious, he was celebrating his usual
banquets, as if in profound peace. Whence he appears to be corrupted by
a kind of spiritual drunkenness, so as not to feel his own calamities.
This, then, is the reason why God roused him up and awakened him from
his lethargy, because no ordinary means were effectual in recalling him
to soundness of mind. The fear which he experienced might seem a
convenient preparation for penitence. But we see the same thing in this
case as we do in that of Esau; for he was not only touched with
contrition when he saw himself cut off, but he uttered a loud and
piercing’ lamentation when seeking his father’s “blessing,” and yet he
was too late. (<span id="xi.viii-p8.1"></span>[Ge
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#024)<span id="xi.viii-p8.1"></span>.)
A similar occurrence is related here of King Belshazzar, but we must
remark upon everything in order. Daniel says. *The king’s countenance
was changed;* then, *the joints of his limbs were loosened, and he was
disturbed,* or frightened, *in his thoughts;* and lastly, he adds, *his
knees smote together* The word properly signifies, to strike one against
another. By these signs the Prophet shews how King Belshazzar was
frightened by the vision already mentioned. Without doubt, as I have
just said, God inspired him with this terror, for we know even when God
has openly ascended to his own tribunal, how stupid the reprobate
remain, and how immovable! But God wished to affect the mind of this
impious king, and to render his ignorance without excuse.

<span id="xi.viii-p9"></span>Here we may remark, generally, in how many
ways God touches men’s hearts — not those of the reprobate only, but
also of his elect, for we see even the best men slow and slothful when
God summons them to his judgment-seat. It becomes necessary to chastise
them with rods, otherwise they never approach God of their own accord.
He might, indeed, move their minds without violence; but he wishes to
set before us, as in a glass, our slowness and slothfulness, since we do
not obey his word with natural willingness. Hence he tames his children
with cords when they will not profit by his word. With regard to the
reprobate, he often chides their obstinacy, because, before he
undertakes the office of judge, he kindly entices them; when they do not
profit by this, he threatens; and when his threats are useless and
devoid of efficacy, he then calls them to his tribunal. Respecting the
fate of the King of Babylon, God had suffered Daniel to be silent, for
his ingratitude and pride had closed the door, so as to prevent Daniel
from undertaking the office of a teacher as he was prepared to do; hence
the King of Babylon continued without one. But God suddenly appeared as
a judge, by the writing of which we have shortly spoken, and of which we
shall say more in the proper place. Whatever its meaning may be: we see
King Belshazzar not only admonished by an outward sign of his
approaching death, but inwardly stirred up to acknowledge himself to be
dealing with God. For the reprobate often enjoy their own pleasures, as
I have said, although God shews himself to be their judge. But he treats
King Belshazzar differently: he desires to inspire him with terror, to
render him more attentive to the perusal of the writing. This time was,
as I have said, a preparation for repentance; but he failed in the midst
of his course, as we see too many do who tremble at the voice of God and
at the signs of his vengeance, as soon as he admonishes them; but these
feelings are but evanescent; thus proving how little they have learnt of
the necessary lesson.

<span id="xi.viii-p10"></span>The example of Esau is similar to this,
since he despised God’s grace when he heard himself deprived of the
inheritance divinely promised him. (<span id="xi.viii-p10.1"></span>[Ge
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#033)<span
id="xi.viii-p10.1"></span>.) He treated the blessing as a fable, till he
found it a serious matter; he then began to lament, but all in vain.
Such also was the fright of King Belshazzar, as we shall soon perceive.
Even when Daniel explained the writing to him, he was by no means moved
by it, but adorned Daniel with royal tokens of regard. Yet the object
and use of this was totally different, for when the nobles were moved,
and the reality became manifest, God in this way demonstrated his glory:
and Darius, who took the city, with his son-in-law Cyrus, understood how
his own valor and perseverance were not the sole cause of his victory,
and how the satraps, Gobryas and Gadata, would not have assisted him so
materially unless the whole affair had been under God’s auspices. Thus
God shewed himself as in a glass to be the avenger of his people, as he
had promised seventy years previously. It now follows: —

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007)<span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>**7.** The king cried aloud to bring in the
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. *And* the king spake,
and said to the wise *men* of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this
writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with
scarlet, and *have a* chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the
third ruler in the kingdom.

<span id="xi.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Clamavit rex fortiter, ut
introducerentur magi, Chaldaei, et astrologi,  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) et loquutus est rex, et dixit
sapientibus Babylonis, Quisquis legerit scripturam hanc, et
interpretationem ejus indieaverit mihi, purpura vestietur, et torques ex
auro, *hoc est, aureus,* super collum ejus, et tertius in regno
dominabitur.

<span id="xi.ix-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.ix-p6"></span><span id="xi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p7"></span>The Prophet narrates how King Belshazzar
sought a remedy for his anxiety; hence we gather how his mind was so
immediately wounded, and how he felt he could not escape God’s hand,
otherwise he would not have called the wise men so suddenly in the midst
of the banquet. Again, when the Prophet says, *He cried out loudly,* he
was clearly so astonished as to forget his being king, for to cry out at
table was not consistent with his dignity. But God expelled all pride
from him, by compelling him to burst forth into a cry, like a man
completely beside himself. We must now consider the remedy to which he
resorted: he ordered *the Chaldeans, and magi, and astrologers to be
called* We learn from this how exceedingly prone men are to vanity,
lying, and falsehood. Daniel ought to have been first, even among the
Chaldeans, for that was an answer worthy of remembrance which he had
given to the grandfather of this king, when he predicted his becoming
like the beasts of the forest. Since this prophecy was verified by the
event, his authority ought to have flourished even to a thousand years.
He was daily in the king’s sight, and yet he was neglected, while the
king sent for all the Chaldeans, and astrologers, and diviners, and
magi. Truly enough, these men were then in so great repute that they
deservedly obscured the fame of Daniel, for they were indignant at a
captive being preferred to native teachers, when they knew their own
glory amongst all peoples depended upon the persuasion of their being
the only wise men. As, therefore, they wished to retain their good
opinion, as being God’s counselors, no wonder they despised this
stranger. But this feeling cannot avail for a moment before God: for
what can be urged in defense of the king’s impiety? His grandfather was
a memorable instance of God’s vengeance, when rejected from the company
of men, and compelled to dwell among the wildest beasts of the forest.
This, truly, could not appear a matter of chance. God, then, had first
admonished him by a dream, and next sent his own Prophet as the
interpreter of the oracle and the vision. As I have said, the fame of
this event ought to have been perpetual among the Chaldeans, yet the
grandson of King Nebuchadnezzar had forgotten his example, insulted the
God of Israel, profaned the vessels of the temple, and triumphed with
his idols! When God sets before him the sign of his judgment, he calls
together the magi and the Chaldeans, and passes by Daniel. And what
possible excuse can he have for this? We have seen, as I have said, how
very prone men are to be deluded by Satan’s impostures, and the
well-known proverb becomes true, — The world loves to be deceived!

<span id="xi.ix-p8"></span>This, also, is worthy of notice, because in
the present day, and in troublous times, many protect themselves behind
the shield of their ignorance. But the explanation is at hand — they are
willingly blind; they shut their eyes amidst the clearest light; for if
God considered King Belshazzar without excuse when the Prophet was once
*presented to* him, what excuse can the ‘blind of these days allege? Oh!
if I could determine what God’s will is for me, I would submit myself
instantly to it, because God daily and openly calls to us and invites
us, and shews us the way; but none answer him, none follow him, or at
least how very few! Hence we must diligently consider the example of the
King of Babylon when we see him full of anxiety, and yet not seeking God
as he ought. And why so? He wanders about in great hesitation; he sees
himself constrained, and yet he cannot fly from the judgment of God, but
seeks consolation in magi, Chaldeans, and other impostors; for, as we
have seen, they had been once or twice proved so, and this ought to have
been sufficiently celebrated and notorious to all men. We see, then, how
blind King Belshazzar was, since he closed his eyes to the light offered
him. So in the present day almost all the world continues in blindness;
it is not allowed to wander in darkness, but when light shines upon it,
it closes its eyes, rejects God’s grace, and purposely desires to cast
itself headlong. This conduct is far too common.

<span id="xi.ix-p9"></span>Now the Prophet *says,* — *The king promised
the wise men a present of a chain of gold to whoever read the writing;*
and besides this*, raiment of purple, and the third rank in the
kingdom!* This shews him not to have been sincerely touched by the fear
of God. And this repugnance is worthy of observation in the wicked, who
dread God’s judgments, and yet the pride of their hearts is not
corrected and subdued, as we saw in the case of this king. For *his
knees smote one against the other, and the joints of his loins were
loosened:* he trembles throughout his entire frame, and becomes half
dead with fear, because God’s terror seizes on all his senses.
Meanwhile, we see a hidden pride lurking in his mind, which breaks forth
in the promise, *whoever shall interpret the writing, shall be the third
in rank in the kingdom!* God had already deprived him of his royal
dignity; yet he still wishes to raise others on high in defiance of God!
What, then, is the meaning of this? We see how often the wicked are
terrified, and how deeply they cherish a hidden contumacy, so that God
never subdues them. They shew, indeed, many signs of repentance; but if
any one carefully weighs all their words and deeds, he will find the
Prophet’s narration concerning King Belshazzar completely verified,
because they rage against God, and are never teachable or obedient, but
utterly stupefied. We saw this partly in former verse, and shall see it
again more clearly at the end of the chapter. As to the latter clause of
the verse, *he shall rule as third in the kingdom,* it is uncertain
whether he promises the third portion or the third rank; for many think
the queen, of whom mention will soon be made, was the wife of King
Nebuchadnezzar, and grandmother of King Belshazzar. It follows: —

<span id="xi.x"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p1"></span><span id="xi.x-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#008)<span id="xi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p2"></span>**8.** Then came in all the king’s wise *men*:
but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the
interpretation thereof.

<span id="xi.x-p3"></span>**8.** Tunc ingressi sunt omnes sa-pientes
regis, et non potuerunt scripturam legere, et interpreta-tionem ejus
patefacere regi.

<span id="xi.x-p4"></span>**9.** Then was king Belshazzar greatly
troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were
astonied.

<span id="xi.x-p5"></span>**9.** Tunc rex Beltsazar multum territus
fuit, et vultus ejus mutatus fuit super eum, *in eo:* et principes *ejus
fuerunt* obstupefacti.  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254)

<span id="xi.x-p7"></span> 

<span id="xi.x-p8"></span><span id="xi.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p9"></span>Here Daniel relates how deceived the king was
in his opinion, in hoping for any interpretation of the writing from
either the magi or the astrologers, the Chaldeans or the soothsayers;
for none of them could read it. Hence he pays here the punishment of his
ingratitude in passing over God’s Prophet, while he knew he had
predicted truth to his grandfather just as it had happened, as well as
Daniel’s general excellence in wisdom, Hence the proofs of his calling
were sufficiently numerous and trustworthy. Since, then, he had so
despised God’s unparalleled benefit, he is destitute of counsel:, and
sees himself call in vain upon all the Chaldeans and astrologers. For
Daniel says, *There was no one who could read the writing or reveal its
interpretation to the king* Because this seems absurd, many Rabbis have
hazarded various conjectures. Some think the letters were transposed;
others guess that they were changed into their counterparts and
equivalents; and others think the char-actors were changed. But we have
elsewhere shewn how bold the Jews are in their conjectures, whenever
they have no certain guide. We do not require their guesses, because,
very probably, the writing was visible to the king and concealed from
all the Chaldeans, or else they were so blind that they could see
nothing; just as God denounced against the Jews a stupor of this kind.
We see what he pronounces, by Isaiah, (<span
id="xi.x-p9.1"></span>[Isaiah 29](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#000)<span
id="xi.x-p9.1"></span>: 11,) “Your law shall be like a. sealed book: If
it shall be said to any one, ‘Read it,’ he shall say, ‘The book is
sealed, I cannot:’ or the book may be opened and ye shall all become
blind: even those who seem to be sharper than all others, shall say they
are ignorant and unlettered men.” Whatever God threatened against the
Jews we know was fulfilled, and is fulfilled to this day, since a veil
is put before their eyes, as Paul says. (<span
id="xi.x-p9.2"></span>[2Co 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)<span
id="xi.x-p9.2"></span>.) Hence they were blind in the midst of the
brightest light. What wonder then if the same thing happened to the
Chaldeans, so flint they could not read the writing? There is no
necessity to conjecture any transposition of letters, or any inversion
of their, order, or any change of one into another; for the word <span
id="xi.x-p9.3"></span>תקל, *tekel,* went first, and afterwards <span
id="xi.x-p9.4"></span>מנא, <span id="xi.x-p9.5"></span>מנא *Mena, Mena.*
These guesses then are frivolous; and thus much is certain, God wished
the king to be made aware of his approaching destruction; next, his soul
was moved, not with repentance, but only enough to render his sloth
without excuse; and hence, whether willingly or not, he was compelled to
send for some remedy, since he knew himself to be dealing with God.

<span id="xi.x-p10"></span><span id="xi.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p11"></span>Now, with regard to the writing itself, God
could not be a free agent unless he possessed the power of addressing
one man at one time, and a number of men at another. He wished King
Belshazzar to be conscious of this writing, while the magi were all as
unable to read it as if they were blind. And then, with reference to the
interpretation, their perplexity need not surprise us. For God spoke
enigmatically, when he said Mene, Mene, and then Tekel, that is
*weighed,* and Peres, *divided.* If the magi could have read these words
a hundred times over, they could never either *conjecture* or comprehend
their true meaning. The prophecy was allegorical, until an interpreter
was divinely ordained for it. So far as the mere letters are concerned,
there is no reason why we should be surprised at the eyes of the magi
being blinded, since God pleased it to be so, and wished to *cite* the
king to his tribunal, as we have already said. The Prophet says, *The
king was frightened, his countenance was changed, and the princes also
were disturbed* The publicity of the event ought to have increased the
sense of God’s judgment, for, as we shall afterwards see, King
Belshazzar himself was slain that very night. Cyrus entered while the
Babylonians were feasting, and enjoying their luxuries in security. So
remarkable an example of God’s justice might have been instantly buried
in that drunken revel, had it not been rendered conspicuous to many
bystanders. Hence Daniel repeats, *The king was disturbed,* after he saw
no prospect of either aid or advice from his magi and astrologers. He
says also, *his princes were astonished,* because not only the king
ought to be troubled but the whole Court, and the report ought to flow
forth not only through the city, but to foreign nations, since there is
no doubt that Cyrus was afterwards informed of this prophecy; for he
would not have courted Daniel so much, nor honored him so remarkably,
unless this *occurrence* had been made known to him. It afterwards
follows:

<span id="xi.xi"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010)<span id="xi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p2"></span>**10.** *Now* the queen, by reason of the
words of the king and his lords, came into the banquet house; *and* the
queen spake and said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts
trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed:

<span id="xi.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Regina propier verba regis et
procerum in domum symposii,  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255)
ingressa est, loquuta est et dixit, Rex, in aeternum vive: ne terreant
to cogitationes tuae, et vultus tuus ne mutetur.

<span id="xi.xi-p5"></span>**11.** There is a man in thy kingdom in whom
*is* the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light
and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in
him; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, *I say,* thy
father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, *and*
soothsayers;

<span id="xi.xi-p6"></span>**11.** Est vir in regno tuo, in quo spiritus
*est* deorum sanctorum: et in diebus parris tui intelligentia  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) et scientia, et sapientia quasi
sapientia deorum reperta est in eo: et Rex Nebuchadnezer pater tuus
magistrum magorum,  <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257)
astrologorum, Chaldaeorum, aruspicum constituit ipsum, pater tuus rex,
*inquam.*

<span id="xi.xi-p9"></span> 

<span id="xi.xi-p10"></span><span id="xi.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p11"></span>Here Daniel relates the occasion of his
being brought before the king, as the reader and interpreter of the
writing. The queen, he says, did this. It is doubtful whether it was the
wife of King Belshazzar, or his grandmother. She was probably an old
woman, as she refers to events in the time of King Nebuchadnezzar This
conjecture has no sufficient foundation, and hence it is better to
suspend our judgment than to assert anything rashly; unless, as we
before saw, his wife was at table with him. As far as we can gather the
words of the Prophet with certainty, we must diligently notice them, and
thus convict the king of ingratitude, because he did not admit Daniel
among the magi, Chaldeans, and astrologers. The holy man had no wish to
be reckoned in that company; he would have deserved to lose God’s
prophetic spirit had he thus mingled with impostors; and he is clearly
to be distinguished from them. King Nebuchadnezzar had set him over all
the magi; he had no wish to exercise this honor, unless, as I have just
said, he would deprive himself of the singular gift of prophecy; for we
must always take care how far we can go. We know how very prone we are
to be enticed by the blandishments of the world, *especially* when
ambition blinds us and disturbs all our senses. No plague is worse than
this, because when any one sees a prospect of the acquisition of either
profit or honor, he does not regard either what he ought to do or what
God permits, but is hurried on by a blind fury. This would have happened
to Daniel, unless he had been restrained by a sense of true piety, and
hence he repudiated the honor offered him by King Nebuchadnezzar. He
never wished to be reckoned among soothsayers, and astrologers, and
impostors of this kind, who deluded that nation with prodigies. Here the
queen enters and mentions Daniel; but this does not render the king
without excuse; for, as we have already said, Daniel had acquired a name
of renown among men of all ages, and God wished to signalize him by a
distinct mark, to fix the minds of all upon him, as if he were an angel
from heaven. As King Belshazzar was ignorant of the existence of such a
Prophet in his kingdom, this was the result of his gross and brutish
indifference. God, therefore, wished King Belshazzar to be reproved by a
woman, who said, *Let not thy thoughts disturb thee!* She calms him
quietly, because she saw how frightened he was; but, meanwhile, she
shews him the grossness of his error in wandering about in uncertainty,
when the way was plain before him. God had put his torch in the
Prophet’s hand for the very purpose of lighting the king, unless he
willfully desired to wander in darkness, as all the wicked do. Hence, we
may learn from the example of this king, the common fault of our nature;
for no one runs out of the right way, unless he indulges in his own
ignorance, and desires all light to be extinct within him. As to the
language of the queen, *The spirit of the holy gods is in Daniel!* we
have elsewhere explained its meaning. It is not surprising that the
profane use this language, since they cannot discern between the one God
and angels. Hence they promiscuously call anything divine and celestial,
*a god.* Thus also the queen calls angels, *holy gods,* and places the
true God among them. But it is our privilege to acknowledge the true God
as shining forth alone, and the angels as all taking their own ranks
without any excellence in heaven or earth to obscure the glory of the
only God. The writing has this tendency — the exaltation of God in the
highest degree, and the magnifying of his *excellency* and his majestic
supremacy. We here see how needful it is for us to be instructed in the
essential unity of God, since from the very beginning of the world men
have always been persuaded of the existence of some Supreme Deity; but
after they became vain in their imaginations, this idea entirely escaped
them, and they mingled God and angels in complete confusion. Whenever we
perceive this, let us feel our need of Scripture as a guide and
instructor which shines on our path, urging us to think of God as
inviting us to himself and willingly revealing himself to us.

<span id="xi.xii"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou dost
constantly address us by thy Prophets, and permittest us not to wander
in the darkness of error, — Grant us, I say, to be attentive to thy
voice, and make us docile and tractable towards thee; especially when
thou settest before us a Master in whom are included all treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Grant us further, I pray thee, to be subject to
thine only-begotten Son, to hold on in the right course of our holy
calling, and to be always pressing onwards to that goal to which thou
callest us, until we are successful in all our contests with this world,
and at length arrive at that blessed rest which thou hast obtained for
us through the blood of the same thy Son. — Amen.

<span id="xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Fifth

<span id="xi.xiii-p2"></span>WE began yesterday to explain the passage
where Daniel relates how the queen advised King Belshazzar to send for
the Prophet. We shewed how the king was here convicted of ingratitude,
in suffering such a Prophet of God to be in obscurity so long, because
that memorable prophecy, already treated, ought to have been well known
and in everybody’s mouth, as conferring a permanent authority on the
holy man. Now, when Daniel says, *the queen entered the
banqueting-room;* very probably she was not the king’s wife, but his
grandmother. I have expressed my intention of not contending the point,
since in doubtful cases every one ought to enjoy his own unbiased
judgment. But it is incongruous to say, The king was feasting with his
wife and concubines, and then to add, “the queen entered the
banqueting-room.” Hence we suppose her to be called Queen, through the
honor, rank, and respect which she still enjoyed, without any power. The
testimony of Herodotus confirms this view, for he praises the queen of
King Nebuchadnezzar for her singular prudence, calling him Labynetus and
her Nitocris.  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) It is far more
probable that this matron was absent from a banquet unsuitable to her
age and gravity, since she would scarcely be feasting with those who
were thus devoting themselves to luxury. When she enters the room, she
reminds the king of Daniel, and she now gives the reason why he
surpasses all the magi and soothsayers, the diviners and the Chaldees.

<span id="xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#012)<span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** Forasmuch as an excellent spirit,
and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of
hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel,
whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will
shew the interpretation.

<span id="xi.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Propterea quod spiritus excellens,
et intelligentia, et cognitio, interpretatio somniorum, et arca. norton
norum, et solutio nodorum  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259)
inventa est in eo, *nempe* Daniel, cui rex imposuerit nomen Beltsazar:
et nunc Daniel vocetur, et interpre-tationem patefaciat.

<span id="xi.xiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiv-p6"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p7"></span>The queen here assigns the reason why Daniel
had obtained the honor of being esteemed the prince and master of all
the wise men; because she said, *An excellent spirit was found in him,
as he interpreted dreams, revealed secrets, and solved difficulties* The
three gifts in which Daniel *excelled* are here enumerated, and this
proves him to have surpassed the other magi, since none of them could be
compared with him. The magi boasted in their ability to interpret
dreams, to solve all difficulties, and explain enigmas; but this boast
of theirs was twice shewn to be vanity and folly. The queen therefore
deservedly claims these three qualities for Daniel, while shewing his
superiority to all others. *Hence* she reasons with authority when she
says, A name was imposed upon him by the king. We have already spoken of
this name, Belteshazzar; but the queen now refers to this name, to
inform the king in what great esteem and honor he was held by his
grandfather. The name of his father is here expressed, since Belshazzar
might despise all strangers; yet reason would dictate the propriety of
deferring to the judgment of his grandfather, whom every one knew to be
a most remarkable character, whom God humbled for a time, as we saw, and
as Daniel will now allude to it. Let us proceed, —

<span id="xi.xv"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#013)<span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p2"></span>**13.** Then was Daniel brought in before the
king. *And* the king spake and said unto Daniel, *Art* thou that Daniel,
which *art* of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my
father brought out of Jewry?

<span id="xi.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Tunc Daniel adductus est coram rege:
loquutus est rex, et dixit Danieli, Tu me *est*  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) *the* Daniel, qui, ex filiis
caprivitatis Jehudah, quem abduxit rex pater mens e Jehudah.

<span id="xi.xv-p5"></span>**14.** I have even heard of thee, that the
spirit of the gods *is* in thee, and *that* light and understanding and
excellent wisdom is found in thee.

<span id="xi.xv-p6"></span>**14.** Et audivi de to, quod spiritus deorum
in to, et intelligentia, et cognitio, et sapientia excellens, inventa
sit in re.

<span id="xi.xv-p7"></span>**15.** And now the wise *men,* the
astrologers, have been brought in before me, that they should read this
writing, and make known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they
could not shew the interpretation of the thing:

<span id="xi.xv-p8"></span>**15.** Et nunc producti sunt coram me
sapientes, arioli,  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) qui
scripturam hanc legerent, et interpretationem ejus patefacerent mihi: et
non potuerunt interpretationem sermonis indicate.

<span id="xi.xv-p10"></span>**16.** And I have heard of thee, that thou
canst make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read
the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt
be clothed with scarlet, and *have* a chain of gold about thy neck, and
shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.

<span id="xi.xv-p11"></span>**16.** Et ego audivi de to, quod possis
nodos solvere, et arcana explicare: nunc si poteris scripturam legere et
interpretationem ejus patefacere mihi, purpura vestieris, et torques ex
auro super collum tuum, et tertius in regno dominaberis.

<span id="xi.xv-p12"></span> 

<span id="xi.xv-p13"></span><span id="xi.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p14"></span>Here the king does not acknowledge his own
folly, but without any modesty he interrogates Daniel, and that, too, as
a captive, — *Art thou, that Daniel, of the captives of Judah, whom my
father led away?* He seems to speak contemptuously here, to keep Daniel
in servile obedience; although we may read this sentence as if
Belshazzar inquired*, Are you that Daniel? In truth, I have heard of
thee!* He had heard before, and had said nothing; but now, when extreme
necessity urges him, he pays the greatest respect to Daniel. *I have
heard,* therefore, *that the spirit of the gods is in thee, since thou
canst unravel intricacies and reveal secrets* With regard to the spirit
of the gods, we have already mentioned how King Belshazzar, by the
common custom of all nations, promiscuously mingled angels with God;
because those miserable ones could not extol God as they ought, and
treat angels as entirely under his feet. But this sentence shews men
never were so brutal as not to ascribe all excellence to God, as we see
in profane writers; whatever promotes human advantage, and is remarkable
for superiority and dignity, they treat as benefits derived from the
gods. Thus the Chaldeans called the gift of intelligence a spirit of the
gods, being a rare and singular power of penetration; since men
acknowledge they do not acquire and attain to the prophetic office by
their own industry, but it is a heavenly gift. Hence men are compelled
by God to assign to him his due praise; but because the true God was
unknown to them, they speak implicitly, and, as I have said, they called
angels gods, since in the darkness of their ignorance they could not
discern which was the true God. Whatever be the meaning, Belshazzar here
shews in what estimation he holds Daniel, saying, he depends on the
reports received from others, and thus displaying his own slothfulness.
He ought to have known the Prophet by personal experience; but from his
being content with simple rumor, he proudly neglected the teacher
offered to him, and neither reflected upon nor wished to confess his own
disgrace. But thus God. often extracts a confession from the impious, by
which they condemn themselves, even if they wish exceedingly to escape
censure.

<span id="xi.xv-p15"></span><span id="xi.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p16"></span>The following phrase has the same meaning: —
*All the wise men were brought before me, and the soothsayers or
diviners, to read this writing to me, and to reveal its interpretation;
and they could not do it,* said he; for God punished him by shewing how
profitless were all the Chaldeans and soothsayers, in whom he trusted at
the moment of his extremity. While he was thus disappointed in his
hopes, he acknowledges himself to have been deceived; and when he
preferred the magi and soothsayers, he thought himself fortified by
their counsel, as long as they were on his side. Meanwhile his rejection
of the holy Prophet was deservedly intolerable to God. Belshazzar
confesses this without intending to do so; hence I said his confession
was not ingenuous or voluntary, but violently extorted by the secret
instinct of God. He also promises Daniel what he had previously promised
the *magi,* — *Thou shalt be clothed in purple if thou canst read this
writing, and wear a golden chain round thy neck, and thou shalt reign as
the third person in the kingdom* But the end of his reign was now close
at hand, and yet in security he offers this dignity to Daniel. This
shews how rapidly the terror which God had occasioned him had vanished
away. He is agitated by the greatest uneasiness, just like madmen, for
they having no certainty exult amidst their terror, and wish to leap or
fly towards heaven itself. Thus also this tyrant though he trembles at
God’s judgment, yet retains a hidden obstinacy in his heart, and
imagines his kingdom will permanently continue, while he promises wealth
and honors to others. It now follows, —

<span id="xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#017)<span id="xi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p2"></span>**17.** Then Daniel answered and said before
the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another;
yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make known to him the
interpretation.

<span id="xi.xvi-p3"></span>**17.** Tunc respondit Daniel, et dixit
coram rege, Dona tua tibi sint,  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262)
et munera tua alteri da: tamen scripturam legam regi, et
interpretationem *ejus* patefaciam ei.

<span id="xi.xvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xvi-p6"></span><span id="xi.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p7"></span>First of all, Daniel here rejects the
proffered gifts. We do not read of his doing so before; he rather seemed
to delight in the honors conferred by King Nebuchadnezzar. We may
inquire into the reason for this difference. It is not probable that the
intention, feeling, or sentiments of the Prophet were different. What
then could be his intention in allowing himself to be previously
ennobled by Nebuchadnezzar, and by now rejecting the offered dignity?
Another question also arises. At the end of this chapter we shall see
how he was clothed in purple, and a herald promulgated an edict, by
which he became third in the kingdom. The Prophet seems either to have
forgotten himself in receiving the purple which he had so magnanimously
rejected, or we may ask the reason why he says so, when he did not
refuse to be adorned in the royal apparel. With respect to the first
question, I have no doubt of his desire to treat the impious and
desperate Belshazzar with greater asperity, because in the case of King
Nebuchadnezzar there still remained some feelings of honor, and hence he
hoped well of him and treated him more mildly. But with regard to King
Belshazzar, it was *necessary* *to* treat him more harshly, because he
had now arrived at his last extremity. This, I have no doubt, was the
*cause* of the difference, since the Prophet proceeded straight forward
in his course, but his duty demanded of him to distinguish between
different persons, and as there was greater pertinacity and obstinacy in
King Belshazzar, he shews how much less he deferred to him than to his
grandfather. Besides, the time of his subjection was soon to be
finished, and with this end in view he had formerly honored the Chaldean
empire.

<span id="xi.xvi-p8"></span>As to the contrast apparent between his
reply and his actions, which we shall hereafter see, this ought not to
seem absurd, if the Prophet had from the beginning borne his testimony
against the king’s gifts, and that he utterly re-jeered them. Yet he
does not strive very vehemently, lest he should be thought to be acting
cunningly, for the purpose of escaping danger. In each case he wished to
display *unconquered* greatness of mind; at the beginning he asserted
the king’s gifts to be valueless to him, for he knew the end of the
kingdom to be at hand, and afterwards he received the purple with other
apparel. If he had entirely refused them, it would have been treated as
a fault and as a sign of timidity, and would have incurred the suspicion
of treason. The Prophet therefore shews how magnificently he despised
all the dignities offered him by King Belshazzar, who was already half
dead. At the same time he shews himself intrepid against all dangers;
for the king’s death was at hand and the city was taken in a few hours —
nay, in the very same hour! Daniel therefore did not reject this purple,
she wing his resolution not to avoid death if necessary. He would have
been safer in his obscurity, had he dwelt among the citizens at large,
instead of in the palace; and if he had resided among the captives, he
might have been free from all danger. As he did not hesitate to receive
the purple, he displays his perfect freedom from all fear. Meanwhile he,
doubtless, wished to lay prostrate the king’s foolish arrogance, by
which he was puffed up, when he says, Let *thy gifts remain with thee,
and give thy presents to another! I* care not for them. Because he so
nobly despises the king’s liberality, there is no doubt of his desire to
correct the pride by which he was puffed up, or at least to wound and
arouse his mind to feel God’s judgment, of which Daniel will soon become
both the herald and the witness. It now follows, —

<span id="xi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#018)<span id="xi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p2"></span>**18.** O thou king, the most high God gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:

<span id="xi.xvii-p3"></span>**18.** O rex,  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) Deus excelsus imperium, et
magnitudinem, et praestantiam, et splendorem dedit Nebuchadnezer patri
tuo.

<span id="xi.xvii-p5"></span>**19.** And for the majesty that he gave
him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him:
whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he
would he set up; and whom he would he put down.

<span id="xi.xvii-p6"></span>**19.** Et ob magnitudinem quam dederat ei,
omnes populi, gentes et linguae tremuerunt, et formidarunt a conspectu
ejus: quem volebat, occidebat:  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)
et quem volebat *percutere,* percutiebat: et quem volebat *attol-lere,*
attollebat: et quem volebat *dejicere,* dejiciebat.

<span id="xi.xvii-p8"></span>**20.** But when his heart was lifted up,
and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne,
and they took his glory from him:

<span id="xi.xvii-p9"></span>**20.** Quando autem elevatum fuit cor
ejus, et spiritus ejus roboratus est  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) ad superbtam, dejectus fuit e solio
regni, et gloriam abstulerunt ab eo.

<span id="xi.xvii-p11"></span> 

<span id="xi.xvii-p12"></span><span id="xi.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p13"></span>Before Daniel recites the writing, and
adds its interpretation, he explains to King Belshazzar the origin of
this prodigy. He did not begin the reading at once, as he might
conveniently have done, saying *Mene, Mene!* as we shall see at the end
of the chapter, since the king could not have pro-fired by his abrupt
speech. But here Daniel shews it to be by no means surprising, if God
put forth his hand and shewed the figure of a hand describing the king’s
destruction, since the king had too obstinately provoked his anger. We
see then why Daniel begins by this narrative, since King Nebuchadnezzar
was a most powerful monarch, subduing the whole world to himself and
causing all men to tremble at his word, and was afterwards hurled from
the throne of his kingdom. Hence it more clearly appears that Belshazzar
did not live in ignorance, for he had so signal and remarkable an
example \[hat he ought to have conducted himself with moderation. Since
then that domestic admonition did not profit him, Daniel shews the time
to be ripe for the denunciation of God’s wrath by a formidable and
portentous sign. This is the sense of the passage. Passing on to the
words themselves, he first says, *To King Nebuchadnezzar God gave an
empire, and magnificence, and loftiness, and splendor;* as if he had
said, he was magnificently adorned, as the greatest monarch in the
world. We have stated elsewhere, and Daniel repeats it often, that
empires are bestowed on men by divine power and not by chance, as Paul
announces, There is no power but of God. (<span
id="xi.xvii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="xi.xvii-p13.1"></span>.)
God wishes his power to be specially visible in kingdoms. Although,
therefore, he takes care of the whole world, and, in the government of
the human family even the most miserable things are regulated by his
hand, yet his singular providence shines forth in the empire of the
world. But since we have often discussed this point at length, and shall
have many opportunities of recurring to it, it is now sufficient just
briefly to notice the principle, of the exaltation of earthly kings by
the hand of God, and not by the chances of fortune.

<span id="xi.xvii-p14"></span>When Daniel confirms this doctrine, he
adds, On *account of the magnificence which God conferred upon him, all
mortals trembled at the sight of him!* By these words he shews how God’s
glory is inscribed on kings, although he allows them to reign supreme.
This indeed cannot be pointed out with the finger, but the fact is
sufficiently clear; kings are divinely armed with authority, and thus
retain under their hand and sway a great multitude of subjects. Every
one desires the chief power over his fellow-creatures. Whence happens
it, since ambition is natural to all men, that many thousands are
subject to one, and suffer themselves to be ruled over and endure many
oppressions? How could this be, unless God entrusted the sword of power
to those whom he wishes to excel? This reason, then, must be diligently
noticed, when the Prophet says, *All men trembled at the sight of King
Nebuchadnezzar,* because God conferred upon him that majesty, and wished
him to excel all the monarchs of the world. God has many reasons, and
often hidden ones, why he raises one man and humbles another; yet this
point ought to be uncontroverted by us. No kings can possess any
authority unless God extends his hand to them and props them up. When he
wishes to remove them from power, they fall of their own accord; not
because there is any chance in the changes of the world, but because
God, as it is said in the Book of Job, (<span
id="xi.xvii-p14.1"></span>[Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)<span
id="xi.xvii-p14.1"></span>,) deprives those of the sword whom he had
formerly entrusted with it.

<span id="xi.xvii-p15"></span>It now follows, *Whom he wished to slay he
slew, and whom he wished to strike he struck* Some think the abuse of
kingly power is here described; but I had rather take it simply, for
Nebuchadnezzar being able to east down some, and to raise others at his
will, since it was in his power to give life to some and to slay others.
I, therefore, do not refer these words to tyrannical lust, as if
Nebuchadnezzar had put many innocent persons to death, and poured forth
human blood without any reason; or as if he had despoiled many of their
fortunes, and enriched others and adorned them with honor and wealth. I
do not take it so. I think it refers to his arbitrary power over life
and death, and over the rise of some and the ruin of others. On the
whole, Daniel seems to me to describe the greatness of that royal power
which they may freely exercise over their subjects, not through its
being lawful, but through the tacit consent of all men. Whatsoever
pleases the king, all are compelled to approve of it, or at least no one
dares to murmur at it. Since, therefore, the regal license is so great,
Daniel here shews how King Nebuchadnezzar was not carried away by his
own plans, or purposes, or good fortune, but was entrusted with supreme
power and rendered formidable to all men, because God had designed him
for his own glory. Meanwhile, kings usually despise what they are
permitted to enjoy, and what God allows them. For powerful as they are,
they must hereafter render an account to the Supreme King. We are not to
gather from this, that kings are appointed by God without any law, or
any self-restraint; but the Prophet, as I have said, speaks of the royal
power in itself. Since kings, therefore, have power over their subjects
for life and death, he says, the life of all men was in the hand of King
Nebuchadnezzar. He now adds, *When his heart was exalted, then he was
cast down* (or ejected) from *the throne of his kingdom, and they
deprived him of his majesty* He follows up his own narrative, tie wishes
to shew King Belshazzar how God bears with the insolence of those who
forget him, when they have obtained the summit of power. Desiring to
make this known, he says, King Nebuchadnezzar, thy grandfather, was a
mighty monarch. He did not obtain this mightiness by himself, nor could
he have retained it, except he had been supported by God’s hand. Now his
change of circumstances was a remarkable proof that the pride of those
who are ungrateful to God can never be endured unto the end, as they
never acknowledge their sway to proceed from his benevolence. *When,*
therefore, says he*, his heart was raised up and his spirit strengthened
in pride, a* sudden change occurred. Hence you and all his posterity
ought to be taught, lest pride still further deceive you, and ye profit
not by the example of your father; as we shall afterwards relate. Hence
this writing has been set before thee, for the purpose of making known
the destruction of thy life and kingdom.

<span id="xi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since our own station
in life has been assigned to us, that we may be content with our lot,
and when thou dost humble us, may we willingly be subject to thee, and
suffer ourselves to be ruled by thee, and not desire any exaltation,
which may lead us down to destruction. Grant us also, to conduct
ourselves so modestly in our various callings, that thou mayest always
shine forth in. us. May nothing else be set before us than to assist our
brethren to whom we are attached, as in thy sight; and thus glorify thy
name among all men, through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xi.xix"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-sixth.

<span id="xi.xix-p2"></span>In the sentence which we began to explain
yesterday, the clause must be noticed where Daniel says, *The heart of
King Nebuchadnezzar was strengthened by pride,* signifying that he was
not suddenly elated by folly, as vain men often swell with pride without
a cause; nor does any interior affection of the mind precede; but he
wishes to express in addition, the length of time during which this
pride had been conceived; as if he had said, he was not seized by any
sudden vanity, but his pride was studied, and obstinacy and obduracy
were added to it. The change of number which afterwards occurs from
singular to plural, some refer to the angels, as if they deprived him by
God’s command; but I rather think these words are taken indefinitely,
implying merely his being deprived of his glory, as we have formerly
observed similar forms of speech. It now follows —

<span id="xi.xx"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p1"></span><span id="xi.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#021)<span id="xi.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p2"></span>**21.** And he was driven from the sons of
men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling *was* with
the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet
with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the
kingdom of men, and *that* he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.

<span id="xi.xx-p3"></span>**21.** Eta filiis hominum exterminatus fuit:
et cor ejus cum bestils positum est: et cum onagris habitatio ejus:
herba sicut tauros ciba-verunt eum: et tore coeli corpus ejus irrigatum
fuit, donec cognos-ceret quod dominetur Deus excelsus in regno hominum,
et quem velit imponat in illo.

<span id="xi.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xx-p5"></span><span id="xi.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p6"></span>First, with respect to the text; verbally, it
is “*he* put,” and thus some translate, “*he* placed his own heart among
the brutes,” which makes a tolerable sense; but others rather refer this
to God, who placed his heart among beasts, and we know how often the
noun substantive is defective in Hebrew and Chaldee; hence we may
translate it verbally, Nebuchadnezzar himself placed his own heart, that
is, assimilated his own senses to the brutes, so as to differ in no
respect from them. It may also mean, God placed his heart among the
brutes, that is, infatuated him so, as to render him like them. Others
take the word <span id="xi.xx-p6.1"></span>שוי, *shevi,* absolutely; but
it ought rather to be explained actively. Again, some translate the next
clause, “Made him taste the grass, like a brute;” and others, that the
grass supported him. The number is changed, but there is no doubt about
the sense; for if we read, “The herb of the field supported him,” the
expression will be indefinite, similar to many others previously
noticed; but if any one prefers using the plural number, the sense will
be equally suitable; for “the herbs of the field gave him nourishment.”

<span id="xi.xx-p7"></span>This verse does not need any long
explanation, since Daniel only repeats what he had formerly written: His
grandfather, Nebuchadnezzar, although not changed into a wild beast, was
driven from the common society of men, and his whole body was deformed,
whilst he abhorred the habits of men and preferred to dwell with the
brutes. This was a horrible prodigy, especially in so great a monarch;
and it was an example worthy of being handed down by posterity even to a
thousand generations, had the monarchy endured so long. But his grandson
quickly forgot this event, and thus he is deservedly convicted of the
basest slothfulness. This is the reason why Daniel repeats the history
again, He *was driven,* says he, *from the children of men; his heart
was placed among the beasts,* meaning he was deprived of reason and
judgment. We know this to be the principal difference between men and
brutes — men understand and reason, but brutes are carried away by their
senses. God, therefore, set forth a memorable example in despoiling this
king of his reason and intelligence, H*is dwelling,* says he, *was with
the wild asses;* formerly he had dwelt in a palace, conspicuous
throughout the world at large, from whom all the people of the East
sought their laws. Since he was habitually worshipped as a god, this was
a horrible judgment, since he afterwards dwelt among wild beasts, and
*like a bull received his sustenance from the grass of the field,* when
he had previously reveled in every delicacy, and was accustomed to
luxurious habits, and to the whole wealth of a kingdom; especially, when
we know how luxuriously the Orientals indulged themselves. Babylon was
the mother of all indulgences, and when the king’s condition was thus
changed, no one could be ignorant of its cause — not mere chance or
accident:, but the rare and singular judgment of God!

<span id="xi.xx-p8"></span>He afterwards adds what he had formerly said,
*His body was moistened by the dews of heaven, until he acknowledged God
to reign supreme in the kingdom of men* Here again the end of the
punishment is expressed — that Nebuchadnezzar might feel himself to have
been created king by divine power, and to shew how earthly kings could
not stand unless God propped them up by his hand and influence. They
think themselves placed beyond the changes of fortune, and although they
verbally boast of reigning by the grace of God, yet they despise every
deity and transfer the glory of the divinity to themselves! We gather
from these words that this is the folly of all kings. For if
Nebuchadnezzar had been persuaded of God’s appointment of kings, of
their dependence upon his will, and of their fall or stability according
to his decree, he had not needed this punishment, as these words clearly
imply, tie excluded God, then, from the government of the world; but
this is common with all earthly kings, as I have lately stated. All
indeed will profess something, but the Holy Spirit does not regard those
false protestations, as they are called. Hence in the character of King
Nebuchadnezzar we have set before us, as in a glass, the drunken
confidence of all kings, in supposing themselves to stand by their own
power, and to free themselves from the authority of God, as if he were
not seated as a judge in heaven, Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, ought to be
humbled, until he acknowledged God’s reign upon earth, since the common
opinion fixed him up in heaven, as if contented with his own ease, and
careless of the affairs of the human race. At length it is added, *and
whom he wills, he exalts,* or sets up. What has been said obscurely is
better expressed, since Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged, by being severely
punished and subdued, the reign of God on the earth. For when earthly
kings see themselves surrounded by guards, powerful in riches, and able
to collect mighty armies by their nod; when they see they inspire
universal terror, they think God deprived of his rights, and are unable
to conceive any change; as it is said in the Psalms of all the proud,
(<span id="xi.xx-p8.1"></span>[Ps
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)<span id="xi.xx-p8.1"></span>,)
and as Isaiah says to the same purport, Even should a blast pass by, or
a deluge overwhelm the whole earth, yet evil shall not touch us. (<span
id="xi.xx-p8.2"></span>[Isa 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span
id="xi.xx-p8.2"></span>.) As if they had said, although God should
thunder from heaven, yet we shall be safe from all disaster and
disturbance. Kings persuade themselves of this. Hence they begin to
acknowledge God as king of the earth, when they feel themselves in his
hand and at his disposal, to east down those whom he has raised up, and
to exalt the lowly and abject, as we have already seen. This clause of
the verse, then, is an explanation of the former sentence. It now
follows:

<span id="xi.xxi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#022)<span id="xi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p2"></span>**22.** And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast
not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this;

<span id="xi.xxi-p3"></span>**22.** Et tu filius ejus Beltsazar, non
humiliasti cor tuum: qua propter  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) totum hoc cognoveras.

<span id="xi.xxi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxi-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p7"></span>Daniel here shews why he, related what we
have hitherto heard concerning King *Nebuchadnezzar*’*s* punishment; for
Belshazzar ought to have been so affected by that domestic example, as
to submit himself to God. We may believe, indeed, that his father
Evil-Merodach had forgotten his punishments, since he would not have
*conducted* himself so petulantly against God, nor trampled on true and
sincere piety; for God spared the wretched tyrant who restrained himself
within the bounds of moderation. But as to his grandfather Belshazzar,
he was altogether intolerable; hence God stretched forth his hand. The
Prophet now teaches this. *Thou art his son,* says he. This circumstance
urges upon him with greater force the duty of not seeking an example in
foreign nations, since he acknowledged himself to have sufficient at
home of what was both necessary and useful. He enlarges upon his crime
in another way, by saying, *Yet thou didst know this* Men are accustomed
to shield themselves under their ignorance with the view of extenuating
the guilt of their crimes, but those who sin knowingly and willfully are
without the slightest excuse. The Prophet therefore convinces the king
of manifest obstinacy; as if he had said, You have provoked God’s anger
on purpose; since he ought to have been aware of the horrible judgment
awaiting all the proud, when he had such a remarkable and singular proof
of it in his grandfather, which he ought to have kept constantly before
his eyes. It follows, —

<span id="xi.xxii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#023)<span id="xi.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p2"></span>**23.** But hast lifted up thyself against
the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house
before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines,
have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and
gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor
know: and the God in whose hand thy breath *is*, and whose *are* all thy
ways, hast thou not glorified:

<span id="xi.xxii-p3"></span>**23.** Et contra Dominum coeli to
extulisti, et vasa domus ejus,  <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267)
protulerunt in conspectum tuum: et tu, et proceres tui, uxores tuae,
 <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) et concubinae tuae vinum
bibistis in illis: et deos argenti, *hoc est, argenteos,* et aureos,
aeneos, ferreos, ligneos, et la-pideos, qui non vident, et non audiunt,
et non intelligunt, laudasti: et Deum, cui *est* in manu ejus anima tua,
 <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) et eujus  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) omnia tua, non honorasti.

<span id="xi.xxii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxii-p9"></span><span id="xi.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p10"></span>The Prophet continues his own sentence,
and confirms what I have said, namely, King Belshazzar was intractable
and willfully blind to God’s judgment. *For thou hast raised thyself,*
says he, *against the Lord of heaven.* If he had raised himself thus
insolently against men, his sin would be worthy of punishment; but when
he had provoked God on purpose, this arrogance neither could nor ought
to be borne. Again, therefore, the Prophet increases the guilt of the
king’s pride by saying, *he raised himself against the King of heaven*
He also expresses the manner of his doing so, *by commanding the vessels
of the temple to be brought to sight; he drank from them* This
profanation was an *indecent* sacrilege, but Belshazzar was not content
with that indignity; he used these vessels for luxury and foul
debauchery, abusing them in the company of concubines and abandoned
women; and added a yet greater reproach against God, *in praising his
gods of silver and gold, brass and iron, wood and stone, which cannot
feel.* This had not been said previously; but since Daniel here sustains
the character of a teacher, he does not relate the events so shortly as
at first. When he said at the beginning of this chapter, Belshazzar
celebrated that impure banquet, he spoke historically; but he now
executes, as I have said, the office of a teacher. *Thou,* says he,
*hast praised the gods made of corruptible material, who neither see,
nor hear, nor understand; but thou hast defrauded the living God of his
honor, in whose hand is thy life,* on which thou dependest, and whence
all in which thou boastest proceeds. Because thou hast so despised the
living God, who had been so gracious unto thee, this ingratitude was
both base and shameful. We see, therefore, how severely the Prophet
reproves the impious tyrant of sacrilege, and mad rashness, and foul
ingratitude towards God. I pass over these things lightly, since they
have been treated elsewhere. It now follows, —

<span id="xi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#024)<span id="xi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p2"></span>**24.** Then was the part of the hand sent
from him; and this writing was written.

<span id="xi.xxiii-p3"></span>**24.** Tunc a conspectu ejus missa est
particula manus,  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) et scriptura
haec *notata fuit.*

<span id="xi.xxiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxiii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p7"></span>Some stress must be laid upon the adverb
<span id="xi.xxiii-p7.1"></span>באדין, *badin,* “*at* that time,”
because God’s wrath, or at least its denunciation, was now ripe. Daniel,
therefore, shews how very patiently God had borne with King Belshazzar
in not instantly talking up arms and inflicting punishment; but he now
begins to come forth as a judge, and to ascend his judgment seat; for
the haughtiness was now desperate, and the impiety no longer tolerable.
We observe with what emphasis the word *then* is used; as if he had
said, Thou canst not complain of the swiftness of the penalty, as if God
had exacted it before the time. Thou canst not here complain of God’s
swiftness in punishing thee; for think and consider in how many ways,
and for how long a time, thou hast provoked his anger. And with ‘regard
to thy last crime, thou certainly hadst arrived at the height of
impiety, when that hand appeared to thee. God, therefore, now drags thee
to punishment in proper time, since he has hitherto borne with thee and
thy sins. After this forbearance, what remains to prevent his destroying
thee, because thou hast so proudly insulted him, and art utterly
hardened, without the slightest hope of amendment.

<span id="xi.xxiii-p8"></span>He says *also, from himself;* for
Belshazzar need not inquire whence the hand proceeded, it *came from the
presence of God;* that is, This hand is a witness to the wrath of
heaven; do not consider it as a specter which will vanish away, but see
in this appearance a proof of God’s displeasure at thy wickedness; and
because thou hast arrived at thy last extremity, thy punishment is also
ready for thee. *And this writing, says he, has been marked;* as if he
had said, The eyes of King Belshazzar were not deceived, since this was
really God’s hand, being sent from his sight as a certain testimony of
his wrath. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="xi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025)<span id="xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p2"></span>**25.** And this *is* the writing that was
written, Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin

<span id="xi.xxiv-p3"></span>**25.** Et haec *est* scriptura quae notata
*est,*  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) Mene, Mene, numera-tum
est, numeratum est, Tekel, appensum est,  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) Upharsin, et dividentes.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p6"></span>**26.** This *is* the interpretation of the
thing: Mene; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p7"></span>**26.** Haec interpretatio est ser-monis:
Mene, numeravit Deus regnum tuum et complevit.  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274)

<span id="xi.xxiv-p9"></span>**27.** Tekel; Thou art weighed in the
balances, and art found wanting.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p10"></span>**27.** Tekel, appende, *vel, appensum
est,* appensus es in trutina,  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275)
et inventus es deficiens.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p12"></span>**28.** Peres; Thy kingdom is divided, and
given to the Medes and Persians.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p13"></span>**28.** Peres *pro upharsin,* divisum est
regnum tuum, et datum Medis et Persis.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p14"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxiv-p15"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p16"></span>Daniel here explains these four verses
which were written upon the wall. The king could not read them, either
through stupor, or because God blunted all his senses, and blinded his
eyes, as was formerly said. The same thing must be said of the magi and
the soothsayers, for they could have read, had they not been rendered
blind. First of all, Daniel recites the four words, Mene, Mene, Tekel,
Upharsn, and then adds their interpretation. He repeats the word Mene
twice. Some conjecture this to apply to the numbering of the years of
the king’s life, and also to the time of his reign; but the guess seems
to be without any foundation. I think the word is used twice for the
sake of confirmation; as if the Prophet meant the number to be
completed, since men usually allow calculations to be liable to error.
To impress upon Belshazzar that his ‘life and kingdom were at stake, God
affirms the number to be complete, meaning, not a moment of time can be
added to the boundary already determined. So also Daniel himself
interprets it: *God,* says he, *has numbered thy kingdom;* implying, God
has appointed and prescribed a fixed end to thy kingdom; hence it must
necessarily come to an end, since its period is fulfilled.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p17"></span>Although God here addresses but one king
by the writing set before his eyes, we may still gather this general
instruction — God has prescribed a certain time for all kingdoms. (<span
id="xi.xxiv-p17.1"></span>[Job
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)<span id="xi.xxiv-p17.1"></span>.)
The Scripture bears the same witness concerning the life of *each* of
us. If God has prescribed to each of us the length of his life, surely
this applies more forcibly to public empires, of so much greater
importance. Hence we may know how not only kings live and die according
to God’s pleasure, but even empires are changed, as we have formerly
said. He fixes alike their origin and their destiny. *Hence* we may seek
consolation, when we see tyrants rushing on so impetuously, and
indulging their lust and cruelty without moderation. When, therefore,
they rush on, as if they would mingle heaven and earth, let us remember
this instruction, Their years are numbered! God knows how long they are
to rage; He is not deceived; He knows whether it is useful to the Church
and his elect, for tyrants to prevail for a time. By and bye he will
surely restrain them, but since he determined the number of their days
from the beginning, the time of his vengeance is not yet quite at hand,
while he allows them a little longer to abuse without restraint the
power and the sway which he had divinely granted them.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p18"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p19"></span>The exposition of the word Tekel, *to
weigh,* now follows: — *Since thou hast been weighed in the balance, or
scale, and found wanting* Here Daniel shews God so moderating his
judgments, as if he was carrying a balance in his hand. The emblem is
taken from the custom of mankind; for men know the use of the balance
for accurate measurement. So also God is said to treat all things by
weight and measure, since he does nothing with confusion, but uses
moderation; and, according to ordinary language, nothing is more or less
than it should be. (<span id="xi.xxiv-p19.1"></span>[Wisdom
11:21](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#021)<span
id="xi.xxiv-p19.1"></span>.) For this reason, Daniel says God *weighed
Belshazzar in a balance,* since he did not make haste to inflict
punishment, but exacted it with justice according to his own uniform
rule of government. *Since he was found deficient,* that is, was found
light and without weight. As if he had said, Thou thinkest thy dignity
must be spared, since all men revere thee; thou thinkest thyself worthy
of honor; thou art deceived says he, for God judges otherwise; God does
not use a common scale, but holds his own, *and there art found
deficient;* that is, thou art found a man of no *consequence,* in any
way. From these words there is no doubt that the tyrant was greatly
exasperated, but as his last end was approaching, he ought to hear the
voice of the herald. And God, without doubt, restrained his fierceness,
that he should not rise up against Daniel.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p20"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p21"></span>The word <span
id="xi.xxiv-p21.1"></span>פרס, Pheres, is added, for the word Phersin,
meaning *his kingdom was divided* among the Medes and Persians. I have
no doubt that by this word God signified the dispersion of the Monarchy
which was at hand. When, therefore, he says Upharsin, *and they shall
divide,* it signifies the instability of the Monarchy, since he wished
to destroy or utterly abolish it. But the Prophet alludes *very*
appositely to the division made between the Medes and Persians; and thus
his disgrace was *increased* by the Babylonians being compelled to serve
many masters. This is indeed a grave and serious disgrace, when a people
has obtained a wide and extensive empire, to be afterwards conquered and
subjected to the yoke of a single master; but when it suffers under two
masters, then the indignity is greatly *increased.* So Daniel here shews
how God’s wrath was complicated in the destruction of the monarch of
Babylon, since it added to the severity of their punishment, to be
subdued by both Medes and Persians. The city, indeed, was truly taken by
the valor and industry of Cyrus; but since Cyrus admitted his
father-in-law to the great honor of allowing him to partake of the royal
authority, hence the Medes and Persians are said to have divided the
kingdom, although there was properly no division of the kingdom. Cyrus
afterwards engaged in other expeditions, as he was led away by his
insatiable avarice and ambition. But Darius, as we shall afterwards see,
died at the age of sixty years, dwelt quietly at home, and it is very
well known that he was a Mede; and if we may believe the majority of
historians, his sister, the mother of Cyrus, had been banished to
Persia, in *consequence* of the oracle concerning the fortune and
greatness of Cyrus. Since his grandfather had exposed him, he afterwards
avenged the injury, yet, not so cruelly as to take his life,-for he
desired him to retain some dignity, and hence appointed him a satrap.
But his son afterwards reigned over the Medes, with the full permission
of Cyrus, who next married his daughter; and thus, on account of this
relationship, and through the influence of this new alliance, he wished
to have him as a partner in the empire. In this sense, then, Daniel
narrates the division of the Monarchy to be at hand, since the Medes and
the Persians should divide it among them. It follows, —

<span id="xi.xxv"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029)<span id="xi.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p2"></span>**29.** Then commanded Belshazzar, and they
clothed Daniel with scarlet, and *put* a chain of gold about his neck,
and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third
ruler in the kingdom.

<span id="xi.xxv-p3"></span>**29.** Tunc jussit Beltsazar, et vestierunt
Danielem purpura, et torques aureus super collum ejus:  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) et clamabant coram ipso quod
dominaretur tertius in regno.

<span id="xi.xxv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxv-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p7"></span>This order of the king may excite surprise,
since he had been so sharply reproved by the Prophet. He next seemed to
have lost all spirit, for he had grown pale a hundred times, and would
have devoted the holy Prophet of God to a thousand deaths! How happens
it, then, that he ordered him to be adorned with royal apparel, and next
to be proclaimed by his own herald the third person in the kingdom? Some
think this was done because the laws of kings were sacred among the
Babylonians; nay, their very words were held as binding, and whatever
they proclaimed, they desired it to be esteemed firm and inviolable.
They suppose King Belshazzar to have acted thus through ambition, that
he might keep his promises. My opinion is, that he was at first utterly
astonished, and through listening to the Prophet he became like a stock
or a stone! I think he did so to consult his own ease and safety;
otherwise he would have been contemptible to his nobles. To shew himself
unmoved, he commands Daniel to be clothed in these robes, as if his
threat had been perfectly harmless. He did not despise what the Prophet
had said, but he wished to persuade his nobles and all his guests of his
perfect indifference to God’s threats, as if he did not utter them for
the purpose of executing them, but only of terrifying them all. Thus
kings, when greatly terrified, are always exceedingly careful not to
shew any sign of their timidity, since they think their authority would
become materially weakened. To continue, therefore, his reverence among
his subjects, he is desirous of appearing exceedingly careless and
undisturbed; and I do not hesitate to pronounce this to have been the
tyrant’s intention in ordering Daniel to be clad in purple and in royal
magnificence.

<span id="xi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.xxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou didst
once send forth a proof of thy wrath against all the proud, so it may be
useful to us in these days. May we be admonished by the punishment
inflicted on this man, and thus learn to conduct ourselves with
moderation and humility. May we not desire any greatness which can be
displeasing to thee; and may we so remain in our station of life as to
serve thee, and to extol and glorify thy sacred name, without being even
separated from thee. Grant us also so to bear thy yoke in this world,
and to suffer ourselves to be ruled by thee, that we may at length
arrive at that happy rest and portion in thy heavenly kingdom, which
thou hast prepared and procured for us, through the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xi.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvii-p1"></span>Lecturer Twenty-Seventh.

<span id="xi.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
5:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030)<span
id="xi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p2"></span>**30.** In that night was Belshazzar the
king of the Chaldeans slain.

<span id="xi.xxviii-p3"></span>**30.** In ilia nocte occisus fiut
Beltsazar rex Chaldaeorum.

<span id="xi.xxviii-p4"></span>**31.** And Darius the Median took the
kingdom, *being* about threescore and two years old.

<span id="xi.xxviii-p5"></span>**31.** Et Darius Medus accepit reg num,
cum natus *esset* annos sexaginta et duos.

<span id="xi.xxviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxviii-p7"></span><span id="xi.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p8"></span>Here Daniel shortly relates how his
prophecy was fulfilled that very night. As we have before explained it,
a customary feast-day had occurred which the Babylonians celebrated
annually, and on this occasion the city was betrayed by two satraps,
whom Xenophon calls Gobryas and Gadatas. On this passage the Rabbis
display both their impudence and ignorance; as, according to their usual
habit, they babble with audacity about what they do not understand. They
say the king was stabbed, because one of his guards heard the Prophet’s
voice, and wished to execute that heavenly judgment; as if the sentence
of God depended upon the will of a single heathen! We must pass by these
puerile trifles and cling to the truth of history; for Belshazzar was
seized in his own banqueting-room, when he was grossly intoxicated, with
his nobles and concubines. Meanwhile, we must observe God’s wonderful
kindness towards the Prophet. He was not in the slightest danger, as the
rest were. He was clad in purple, and scarcely an hour had passed when
the Medes and Persians entered the city. He could scarcely have escaped
in the tumult, unless God had covered him with the shadow of his hand.
We see, then, how God takes care of his own, and snatches us from the
greatest dangers, as if he were bringing us from the tomb. There is no
doubt that the holy Prophet was much agitated amidst the tumult, for he
was not without sensibility.  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277)
But he ought to be thus exercised to cause him to acknowledge God as the
faithful guardian of his life, and to apply himself more diligently to
his worship, since he saw nothing preferable to casting all his cares
upon him!

<span id="xi.xxviii-p10"></span><span id="xi.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p11"></span>Daniel adds, *the kingdom was
transferred to the king of the Medes,* whom he calls Darius, but
Xenophon terms him Cyaxares. It is clear enough that Babylon was taken
by the skill and under the auspices of Cyrus; since he was a persevering
warrior possessed of great authority, though he is not mentioned here.
But since Xenophon relates that Cyaxares, here called Darius, was
Cyrus’s father-in-law, and thus held in the highest honor and
estimation, it is not surprising to find Daniel bringing that king
before us. Cyrus was content with his own power and with the praise and
fame of his victory, and readily conceded this title to his
father-in-law, whom he perceived to be now growing aged and infirm. It
is uncertain whether he was the son of Astyages, and thus the uncle of
Cyrus. Many historians concur in stating that Astyages was the
grandfather of Cyrus who married his daughter to Cambyses; because the
astrologers had informed him how an offspring should be born of her who
should possess the sovereignty over all Asia! Many add the story of his
ordering the infant Cyrus to be slain, but since these matters are
uncertain, I leave them undecided. I rather think Darius was the uncle
of Cyrus, and also his father-in-law; though, if we believe Xenophon, he
was unmarried at the capture of Babylon; for his uncle, and perhaps his
father-in-law, had sent him to bring supplies when he was inferior in
numbers to the Babylonians and Assyrians. However this may be, the
Prophet’s narrative suits the circumstances well enough, for Darius, as
king of the Medes, obtained the royal authority. Cyrus was, indeed,
higher than he in both rank and majesty, but he granted him the title of
King of Babylon, and under this name he reigned over the Chaldeans. It
now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc24010.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span> See the Dissertations at the end of this
volume, in which these historical points are treated at length.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc24010.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xi.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span> Herod., lib. 1, sect. 188. Comp. *Cyropoed.,*
lib. 4 and 7.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc24010.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> Verbally it means said, but here it
signifies *commanded.* — *Calvin,.*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc24010.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span> Made of gold and *silver.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc24010.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span> Some translate his wife, since there was one
principal wife, who alone was the king’s companion, and she received the
name of Queen, as we shall afterwards *see.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc24010.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span> This is the view of the Duke of Manchester;
it is ably supported in his learned volume on “*The* Times of Daniel.”
As we have had occasion to review the general argument elsewhere, we
merely allude to it here. — See Dissertations.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc24010.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xi.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span> Ars. Amor., Eleg. 6. The French translation
is worthy of notice, —

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>“<span id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>La nuiet,
l’amour, le boire sans mesure,  
N’ induit a rien sinon a toute ordure.”

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc24010.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span> Or, “wives*,*” in the plural number. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc24010.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span> Or, “*candlestick;*” some explain it,
“window.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc24010.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span> Some consider it the surface, others the
roof, which is probable. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc24010.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span> Others translate it “finger.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc24010.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span> This phrase is worthy of notice. The Latin
is “<span id="xi.v-p10.1"></span>*sacramentalis locutio;*” the French,
“<span id="xi.v-p10.2"></span>*est aussi sacramentale* ” See our
*Ezekiel,* volume 2, p. 312 and note, where the Sabbath is termed *a
Sacrament.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc24010.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p4"></span> “The form or figure,” verbally. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc24010.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p5"></span> “His hip-joints,” for the Hebrews and
Chaldees use roundabout expressions. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc24010.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p4"></span> We have previously explained these words. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc24010.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p6"></span> Or, anxious. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc24010.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xi.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p4"></span> It must be translated in this way, because
the noun is derived from <span id="xi.xi-p4.1"></span>שתה *shetheh,* to
drink. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc24010.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p7"></span> Verbally, “light,” used metaphorically. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc24010.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xi.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p8"></span> I do not stop to explain these words. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc24010.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xi.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p3"></span> Herod., lib. i.e. 185 and 188.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc24010.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xi.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p4"></span> That is, he resolved difficulties by
prudence and knowledge, as I said previously. I read it all in one
context, though verbs and nouns are intermingled, for I wish to make it
simple, and to avoid ambiguity — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc24010.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xi.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p4"></span> If we read it interrogatively; or, “Thou art
Daniel?” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc24010.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xi.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p9"></span> Or, conjurers. I do not dwell on this as I
said *before.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc24010.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xi.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p4"></span> That is, may they remain with thee. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc24010.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p4"></span> Verbally, “Thou, O king,” as he addresses
him. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc24010.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xi.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p7"></span> That is, “whom he wished to slay was
slain.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc24010.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xi.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p10"></span> Or, “he was hardened.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc24010.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xi.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p4"></span> Verbally — but it means, “since.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc24010.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xi.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p4"></span> That is, of his *temple.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc24010.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xi.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p5"></span> Or, thy wife. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc24010.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xi.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p6"></span> That is, in whose hand is thy life. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc24010.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xi.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p7"></span> In whose power are all things. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc24010.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xi.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p4"></span> Some translate, “the palm,” but they
understand a hand separate from the body — that portion of a hand, that
is, a hand as if cut off from the body, was sent from God’s presence,
says he. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc24010.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xi.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p4"></span> Or, *engraved.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc24010.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xi.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p5"></span> Some translate, number, number, *weigh.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc24010.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xi.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p8"></span> Or, *finished.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc24010.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p11"></span> Or, in a *balance.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc24010.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xi.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p4"></span> Was placed. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc24010.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xi.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p9"></span> The Latin is “<span
id="xi.xxviii-p9.1"></span>stipes*:*” the French, “<span
id="xi.xxviii-p9.2"></span>une souche de bols;” literally, a log or
block of wood. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc24011)
