[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc24011)  [Next](cc24013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>DISSERTATIONS

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span>Dissertation 1

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>THE THIRD YEAR OF KING JEHOIAKIM.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>DANIEL 1:1

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>A Correct idea of the scope and
interpretation of these prophecies cannot be obtained without a due
attention to the chronology of the events recorded. Hence, throughout
these Dissertations it will be necessary to discuss some apparently
unimportant points, and to combat some seemingly harmless opinions. We
are thus compelled to enter into details which some may pronounce devoid
of interest, but which will prove worth the labor bestowed upon them.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>The necessity for comment on this first
verse arises from the difficulty of reconciling its statement with the
twenty-fifth chapter of Jeremiah. The relation of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar must be harmonized with those of the three last kings of
Judah, to enable us to reconcile Daniel and Jeremiah. We must first
ascertain the historical events which concern Jehoiakim, and fix their
dates by comparing the Books of Kings and Chronicles, and the various
allusions to him in Ezekiel and other prophets. Next, we must accurately
define the events of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign; and afterwards so compare
them as to draw a correct inference from the whole, notwithstanding much
apparent discrepancy. This has been done by some commentators, the
results of whose labors will here, be placed before the reader. Willet’s
remark on Calvin is worthy of notice: “Calvin thinketh to dissolve this
knot by the distinction of Nebuchadnezzar the father, and Nebuchadnezzar
the son; that in one place the one is spoken of, and the other in the
other, but the question is not concerning the year of Nebuchadnezzar’s
reign, but the year of Jehoiakim’s reign wherein Jerusalem should be
besieged; so that the doubt remaineth still.”  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320.md) He also answers Calvin’s solution, by
referring Nebuchadnezzar’s second year not to the period of his reign,
but “rather to the time of Daniel’s ministry and employment with the
king, that in the second year of his service he expounded the king’s
dream.” Many learned Jews are of opinion that the last year of
Jehoiakim’s reign is intended, meaning the last of his independent
sovereignty, since they treat him in former years as simply a tributary
king to either the Egyptians or Babylonians. Josephus in his *Antiq.,*
(Book 10:6,) is supposed to favor this theory; for he places
Nebuchadnezzar’s attack in the eighth year of Jehoiakim’s reign, and
does not allude to any previous one. Wintle, however, does not consider
that the words of Josephus justify this inference,  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321.md) and suggests that the difference in
the methods used by the Jews and Babylonians in computing their years,
may tend to obviate the inconsistency. Wintle suggests some reasons for
dating the commencement of the seventy years’ captivity from the
completion of the siege in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, when Daniel and
his associates were among the first captives. *Prideaux* supposes this
event to have occurred six hundred and six years A.C., or the one
hundred and forty-second year of Nabonassar’s era; *Vignoles* and
*Blair* fix the year following. *Wintle* agrees with the latter date,
supposing the captivity not to continue during seventy solar years, and
fixing their termination about 536 A.C.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>Another commentator, who has paid great
attention to chronology, deserves special notice, since he advocates a
new theory respecting Cyrus and Nebuchadnezzar, which is worthy of
remark, though it has been severely criticized. The Duke Of Manchester
has an elaborate chapter on this date, from which we shall extract the
conclusions at which he has arrived. He understands “Daniel to speak of
Jehoiakim’s independent reign, reckoning from the time that he rebelled
against Nebuchadnezzar.”  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322.md)
Jehoiakim was taken captive in the seventh of Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>The oldest expositors felt the difficulty
of the passage. *Rabbi Solomon Jarchi* asks, “How can this be said?” and
then replies as follows: — This was the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar
and the third of Jehoiakim’s rebellion against him.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>Hengstenberg has not been forgetful to
defend our Prophet from the charge of historical inaccuracy, to which
this verse has given rise. He treats the assumption, that Nebuchadnezzar
took Jerusalem before his accession to the throne, as inadmissible. “The
assertion of his being associated by his father in the co-regency at
that time is not adequately sustained.”  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323.md) Ch. B. Michaelis and Bertholdt have
made various attempts to reconcile the discrepancy. “The assumption,”
says Hengstenberg, “that Nebuchadnezzar undertook his first expedition
in the eighth year of Jehoiakim, is an hypothesis grounded merely on one
passage.” Still, this passage, far from containing an error, affords a
striking proof of the writer’s historical knowledge. *Berosus,* as
quoted by *Josephus,* (*Arch.* 10:11, 1,) narrates the victory of
Nebuchadnezzar at Carchemish, which occurred about the close of
Jehoiakim’s third year. Carchemish was a city on the banks of the
Euphrates, taken by Pharaoh-Necho about three years previously.
Immediately after this victory, the conqueror marched against Jerusalem
and took it. The process by which Hengstenberg arrives at this result,
the various authors whom he quotes, and the complete refutation which he
supplies of all the conjectures of his Neologian opponents, will be
found amply detailed in the valuable work already quoted. Rosenmuller
also discusses the point, but leans too much to those writers whom
Hengstenberg refutes.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>Dissertation 2

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>NEBUCHADNEZZAR — ONE KING OR TWO?

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>Chapter 1:1

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>The difficulty of reconciling the various
statements of Scripture with themselves and with profane history, has
raised the question whether there were two Nebuchadnezzar’s or only one.
The Duke Of Manchester is a strenuous advocate for the former
hypothesis, and his view of the case is worthy of perusal. The first
king he supposes to have overthrown *Necho*’*s* army in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim, as we have already stated. He came from the north into
Judea, and took the people captive after the overthrow of Assyria. His
eleventh year corresponds with the fourth of Zedekiah, while he reigned
on the whole about twenty-nine years. He is to be identified with Cyrus,
the father of Cambyses, well known in Persian history, so that the
second Nebuchadnezzar was Cambyses himself. Although the astronomical
Canon of Ptolemy is a formidable adversary, this writer shews much
ingenuity in bending it to his purpose. The first king of this name
began his reign A.C. 511, while Paulus Orosius determines the taking of
Babylon “by Cyrus” about the time of the expulsion of the kings from
Rome (A.C. 510.) Thus sixty-nine years elapsed between the overthrow of
Necho and the conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar the second; and in the
eighteenth year of the reign of this latter king the golden image was
set up.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>Having identified the second king with
Cambyses, this writer brings forward many testimonies in favor of his
being a Persian, and shews that the Chaldeans were not Babylonians but
Persians. He treats him as identical with the Persian Jemsheed, the
contemporary of Pythagoras and Thales, and the founder of Pasargadæ and
Persepolis, and justifies his positions by the authorities of Diocles,
Hecataeus, Cedrenus, the Maccabees, Abydenus, and Alexander Polyhistor.
“The evidence is deduced from direct testimony, from geographical
position, from similarity in language and religion, in manners and
customs, in personal character and alliances; from Babylonian bricks and
cylinders; as also from historical synchronism’s and identity of
actions.”  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324.md) The statements of
Herodotus are fully discussed and compared with the Egyptian sculptures,
with the view of shewing that the second Nebuchadnezzar was the Cambyses
of Herodotus, the son-in-law of Astyages and the conqueror of Egypt. The
story of his madness, after profaning the temple of Apis, is said to
apply accurately to this second monarch.

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>It could not be expected that a theory of
this kind could be introduced into the world without severe and
searching examination. Accordingly, Birks, in his preface to “*The two
later Visions of Daniel,*” writes as follows: “I have examined closely
the two difficulties which alone give a seeming strength to his Grace’s
theory, — the succession of names in the Persian history, and the two
covenants under Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, — and feel confident I can meet
them both with a full and complete answer. It seems to me surprising
that a paradox of two Scripture Nebuchadnezzar’s, and a Scripture Cyrus,
totally unknown to profane history, in the reign of Longimanus,
contemporary with Cimon and Pericles, can ever be received by any mind
accustomed to pay the least regard to the laws of evidence. Every fresh
inquiry has only increased my confidence in the usual chronology derived
from the Canon of Ptolemy, and its truth, I believe, may be almost
entirely established even by Scripture evidence alone.” Vaux, the
learned author of “*Nineveh and Persepolis,*” furnishes a clear sketch
of Nebuchadnezzar’s career, by combining the accounts of Herodotus and
the Scriptures. In the thirty-first year of Josiah’s reign, Necho fought
the battle of Megiddo, in which Josiah was mortally wounded. He then
took Cadytis, “the holy city” of the Jews, and at length returned to
Egypt with abundance of spoil. After a lapse of three years he invaded
the territory of the king of Babylon. The reigning monarch —
Nabopolassar — was aged and infirm; he gave the command of his army to
his son Nebuchadnezzar, who defeated the Egyptians at Carcesium or
Carchemish, and drove them out of Asia. He marched to Jerusalem, and
reinstated Jehoiakim as its king, in subjection to himself; he spoiled
the temple of the chief ornaments and vessels of value, and among the
prisoners transmitted to Babylon were Daniel and his three friends. He
next carried on war against the Egyptians, till the news of his father’s
death caused his return. The revolt of Jehoiakim caused a second attack
upon the city, and the carrying off of many prisoners, among whom was
Ezekiel, to the banks of the distant Chebar. Zedekiah, the brother of
Jehoiakim, having been placed on the throne, and having made an alliance
with Pharaoh Hophra, the Apries of Herodotus, he is deposed by the King
of Babylon, and carried captive in blindness and chains. Thus for the
third and last time this conqueror invaded Judea and profaned the
temple. After a lapse of four years he besieged Tyre; for thirteen years
it resisted his arms, but was at length razed to the ground. He next
succeeded in an expedition against Egypt, dethroned Apries, and leaving
Amasis as his viceroy, returned to his imperial city. In the language of
Jeremiah, “he arrayed himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd
putteth on his garment.” He next occupies himself in beautifying the
city, and erecting a palace of extraordinary magnificence, and in
constructing those hanging gardens mentioned by Diodoras, Megasthenes,
and Arrian. The remainder of his history is easily gathered from the
Prophet’s narrative. “A careful consideration of the authorities seems
to shew that Clinton is right in his supposition that the reign of this
prince was about forty-four years in duration, and that he was succeeded
after a short interval by Belshazzar.”  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325.md) *Willet* arrives at the same
conclusion as to the length of his reign by a different process of
reasoning. The following dates are extracted from *Prideaux,* whose
caution and accuracy are most commendable: —

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>A.C.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>**586.** Tyre besieged.

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**570.** The death of Apries, coincident
with the dream of the tree, (<span id="xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Daniel
4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#000)<span id="xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>,.md)
after his last return from Egypt.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>**569.** <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>[Da
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>.
Driven out into the fields.

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>**563.** Restored after seven years.

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span>**562.** Death, after about forty-four
years’ reign.

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>Another series of dates has been displayed
by the author of “The *Times of Daniel,*” founded on a different
chronological basis; we can only extract a few of them from pages 282,
*et seq.:* —

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span>B.C.

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span>**510.** Babylon taken by Cyrus, and kings
expelled from Rome.

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>**507.** Commencement of Jehoiakim’s
independent reign. <span id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Da
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span>**500.** Nebuchadnezzar II. appointed; his
dream. <span id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Daniel
2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span>**494.** Golden Image set up. <span
id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Daniel
3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span>**483**. Nebuchadnezzar 1. died.

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span>**441**. Nebuchadnezzar 2. died.

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span>*Dr. Wells* has the following
chronological arrangement of the chief events of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign:
—

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span>A.C.

<span id="xiii.ii-p26"></span>**607.** He is this year taken by his
father “as partner” in the kingdom, falling in with the latter part of
the third year of Jehoiakim, (<span id="xiii.ii-p26.1"></span>[Daniel
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)<span id="xiii.ii-p26.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.ii-p27"></span>**606.** Jehoiakim carried to Babylon with
Daniel and others.

<span id="xiii.ii-p28"></span>The first of the seventy years’ captivity.

<span id="xiii.ii-p29"></span>**605.** His father died. Nabopolassar in
Ptolemy’s Canon, the son’s name being Nabocolassor. The Canon allows him
forty-three years from this period.

<span id="xiii.ii-p30"></span>**603.** Daniel interprets his dream.
<span id="xiii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Daniel
2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p31"></span>**588.** He re-takes Jerusalem and
Zedekiah.

<span id="xiii.ii-p32"></span>**569.** Returned to Babylon, is afflicted
with insanity. <span id="xiii.ii-p32.1"></span>[Daniel
4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="xiii.ii-p33"></span>**562**. He dies “a few days” after being
restored to reason.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span>Dissertation 3.

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>THE ANCESTORS AND SUCCESSORS OF
NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span>To understand aright the history of these
times, we must take a cursory glance at the period both preceding and
following that of the great Chaldean chieftain. His ancestors were
largely concerned in the overthrow of the Assyrian empire. The origin of
this monarchy is involved in great obscurity, and we are at this moment
in a transition state with respect to our knowledge of its history. The
deciphering of those inscriptions which have lately been brought home is
rapidly proceeding, and will lead to a more complete knowledge of the
events of this obscure epoch. Early in the Book of Genesis we read of
Nimrod, the grandson of Ham, as the founder of an extensive monarchy in
the land of Shinar. Out of this land he went forth into Ashur, or
perhaps it is Ashur who went forth and built Nineveh and other cities.
The records of succeeding ages are too few to enable us to follow the
stream of history: we have nothing to guide us but myths, and legends,
and traditionary sovereigns, whose names are but the fictions of
imagination. It must never be forgotten that many centuries elapsed
between Noah and Solomon, and that the most ancient profane history is
comparatively modern. The late discoveries in Egypt, and the high state
of civilization attained by these “swarthy barbarians,” have led the
learned to the conclusion that we have hitherto lost many centuries
between the flood and Abraham; and since the long list of Egyptian
dynasties, as given by Manetho, has been proved accurate, it may fairly
be supposed that the Assyrian sculptures will rather add to the credit
of Ctesias than detract from it. At all events, Nineveh was “no mean
city” when Athens was a marsh, and Sardis a rock. Whether Ninus is a
fabulous creation or not, monarchs as mighty as the eagle-headed
worshipper of Nisroch his god, swayed the scepter for ages over a
flourishing and highly civilized people. Herodotus gives us a hint of
the antiquity and pre-eminence of Assyria when he says, “The Medes were
the first who began to revolt from the Assyrians, who had possessed the
supreme command over Upper Asia for five hundred and twenty years.”
Whether we adopt the view of Bishop Lowth or not, that Ninus lived in
the time of the Judges,  <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) we may
correctly assume that some successful conqueror enlarged and beautified
Babylon, five hundred years before the Chaldean era of Nabonassar, 747
A.C. Whatever the source of this wealth, whether derived from the spoils
of conquered nations, according to Montesquieu, or from intercourse with
India through Egypt, according to Bruce,  <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) the lately discovered remains imply a
very high style of art at a very remote period in the history of
Assyria. The “Pul” of <span id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>[2Ki
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>,
was by no means the founder of the monarchy, as Sir Isaac Newton and
others have supposed; he was but one amidst those “servants of Bar,”
whose names are now legible on the Nimroud obelisk in the British
Museum. The next king mentioned in Scriptures is Tiglath-Pileser, whose
name we have lately connected with Pul and Ashur; and after him follow
Shalmaneser, Sennacherib, and Esarhaddon, the three kings who are
thought to have built the palace at Khorsabad, founded Mespila, and
constructed the lions in the south-west palace of Nimroud. As the Medes
revolted first, so the Chaldeans rebelled afterwards, according to the
usual law of separation from the parent stock, when the tribe or race
grows strong enough to establish its independence. The first prince who
is known to have lived after this revolt is Nabonassar, the founder of
the era called by his name. In process of time, other kings arose and
passed away, till in the thirty-first year of Manasseh, Esarhaddon died,
after reigning thirteen years over Assyria and Babylon united. He was
succeeded by his son Laosduchius, the Nabuchodonosor of the Book of
Judith, whose successor commenced his reign in the fifty-first year of
Manasseh, being the hundred and first of the above mentioned era. From
this effeminate king his Chaldean general Nabopolassar wrested Babylon,
and reigned over his native country twenty-one years. This revolt is
said to have taken place in the eighteenth year of King Josiah, when the
powers of Media uniting with the power of Babylonia, took and destroyed
the great city of Nineveh, and reduced the people under the sway of the
rising monarchy. His son Nebuchadnezzar is said to have married the
daughter of Astyages, the king of the Medes, and thus brings down the
history to the times of our Prophet.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>Among the ancient cities of the world,
Nineveh is conspicuous for its grandeur. The phrase of Jonah, “that
great city,” is amply confirmed by the historian, Diodorus Siculus,
(lib. 2 section. 23.) who uses precisely the same expression, recording
its circumference as four hundred and eighty stadia, with high and broad
walls. The inference from the statement of the Book of Jonah is, that it
was populous, civilized, and extensive. The language of both Jonah and
Nahum imply exactly what the buried sculptures have exhibited to us, a
state of society highly organized, with various ranks, from the
sovereign to the soldier and the workman, yet effeminated by luxury and
self-indulgence. The expressions of Scripture give us exalted ideas of
its size and splendor, while they assign its wickedness as a reason for
the complete destruction by which it was annihilated. Prophet after
prophet recognizes its surpassing opulence, its commercial greatness,
and its deep criminality. The voice of Zephaniah is soon followed by the
sword of Arbaces, and Sennacherib and Sardanapalus are eclipsed by the
rising greatness of Nabopolassar and Cyaxares. Its temples and its
palaces had become so encrusted in the soil during eight centuries of
men, that Strabo knows it only as a waste, and Tacitus treats it as a
*Castellum;* and in the thirteenth century of our era, Abulfaragius
confirms the prophecy of Nahum and the narrative of Tacitus, by
recording nothing but the existence of a small fortification on the
eastern bank of the Tigris.  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>The dates assigned to these events vary
considerably; the following may be trusted as the result of careful
comparison. In the year A.C. 650, Nebuchodonosor is found on the throne
of Assyria, “a date,” says Vaux, “which is determined by the coincidence
with the forty-eighth year of Manasseh, and by the fact that his
seventeenth year was the last of Phraortes, king of Media, A.C. 634. The
Book of Judith informs us of an important engagement at Ragau between
this Assyrian king and Arphaxad the king of the Medes. This victory at
Ragau, or Rhages, occurred A.C. 634, just “fifty-seven years after the
loss of Sennacherib’s army.”  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md)
After returning from Ecbatana, the capital of Media, the conqueror
celebrated a banquet at Nineveh which lasted one hundred and twenty
days. Cyaxares, the son of Phraortes, at length avenged his father’s
death at Rhages, and by the aid of Nabopolassar, threw off the yoke of
Assyria, attacked and took Nineveh about 606 A.C., and thus, by fixing
the seat of empire at Babylon, blotted out the name of Nineveh from the
page of the world’s history.

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>This renowned general is usually held to
be the father of Nebuchadnezzar, on the authority of Berosus, as quoted
by Josephus, and of the *Astronomical Canon* of *Ptolemy.* But the
author of “The Times of Daniel” endeavors to identify him with either
Sardanapalus or Esarhaddon; the arguments by which this supposition is
supported will be found in detail in the work itself, while the original
passages in Josephus and Eusebius are found at length in the notes to
Grotius on “*The truth of the Christian religion.*”  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) He died A.C. 695.

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>His Successors. — According to the Canon
of Ptolemy, Evil-Merodach succeeded Nebuchadnezzar, reigned two years,
and was slain by his brother-in-law Neri-Glissar, who reigned four
years; his son, Laborosoarchod, reigned nine months, though quite a
child, and was slain by Nabonadius, supposed to be Belshazzar, a
grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, who reigned seventeen years. Evil-Merodach
is mentioned in <span id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>[2Ki
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>, and <span id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>[Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>, but not by Daniel, and this gives some
countenance to the supposition, that Belshazzar was the son and not the
grandson of Nebuchadnezzar. It is not easy to assign with certainty the
correct dates to each of these kings, the reckoning of Josephus is here
followed, which he derives from Berosus. The testimony of profane
antiquity to the truth and historical accuracy of Daniel may be found in
a convenient form in *Kitto*’*s Bibli. Cyclop., Art. Nebuchadnezzar,*
page 406. The authorities are quoted at length, and the whole subject is
ably elucidated. The limited space necessarily allowed for illustrating
these Lectures, must be our apology for merely indicating where valuable
information is to be obtained.

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>In the *New Monthly Magazine* for August
and September 1845, there are two articles very full of illustration of
our subject, by *W. F. Ainsworth,* entitled, *The Rivers and Cities of
Babylonia.*

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>Dissertation 4

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>THE CHALDEANS.

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>Chapter 1:5

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>To determine the question which was
raised in our last Dissertation, we must investigate the origin of the
Chaldeans, as it was the tribe whence Nebuchadnezzar sprung. “The
question,” says Heeren, “what the Chaldeans really were, and whether
they ever properly existed as a nation, is one of the most difficult
which history presents.”  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md) They
are first mentioned in Genesis (<span id="xiii.iii-p19.1"></span>[Ge
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p19.1"></span>,) as *Casdim,* (*Lecture 5*;) they were
situated north of Judea, and are identical with the people who should,
according to Jeremiah, destroy the temple from the north. (<span
id="xiii.iii-p19.2"></span>[Jer. 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p19.2"></span>,
etc.) They are not mentioned by name again in the books of Scripture
till many centuries afterwards they had become a mighty nation. The word
*Chasdim* in the Hebrew and *Chasdaim* in the Chaldee dialects, is
clearly the same as the Greek <span id="xiii.iii-p19.3"></span>Χαλδαῖοι;
and Gesenius supposing the root to have been originally *card,* refers
them to the race inhabiting the mountains called by Xenophon *Carduchi.*
Forster, indeed, has argued at considerable length in favor of their
Arabian origin, and supposes them the well known Beni Khaled, a horde of
Bedouin Arabs.  <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md) From this
opinion we entirely dissent. The view of Gesenius in his Lectures at
Halle in 1839, quoted in “The Times of Daniel,” appears preferable, —
“The Chaldeans had their original seat on the east of the Tigris, south
of Armenia, which we now call Koordistan; and, like the Koords in our
day, they were warlike mountaineers, without agriculture, shepherds and
robbers, and also mercenaries in the Assyrian army; so Xenophon found
them.”  <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) Vaux quotes Dicaearchus,
a Greek historian of the time of Alexander the Great, as alluding to a
certain Chaldean, a king of Assyria, who is supposed to have built
Babylon; and in later times, Chaldea implied the whole of Mesopotamia
around Babylon, which had also the name of Shiner.  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>Their religion and their language are
also of importance. The former consisted in the worship of the heavenly
bodies. They are supposed to have brought with them to Babylon a
knowledge of astronomy superior to any then known, since they reduced
their observations on the sun, moon, five planets, signs of the zodiac,
and the rising and setting of the sun, to a regular system; and the
Greeks are said by Herodotus to have derived from them the division of
the day into twelve equal parts.  <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) The lunar year was in common use, but
the solar year, with its division of months similar to the Egyptian, was
employed for astronomical purposes. The learned class gradually acquired
the reputation and position of “priests,” and thus became astrologers
and soothsayers, and “wise men” in their day and generation. Michaelis
and Sehlozer consider their origin to be Sclavonic, and, consequently,
distinct from the Babylonians, who were descendants of Shem.

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>Their Language. — The original *language*
of this people is a point of great interest to the biblical critic. If
the people were of old northern mountaineers, they spoke a language
connected with the Indo-Persic and Indo-Germanic stem rather than the
Semitic. In treating this question, we should always allow for the
length of time which elapsed between the original outbreak of those
hordes from their native hills; and their conquest of Babylon under
Nebuchadnezzar. Gesenius, in his *Lectures on Biblical Archaeology,*
reminds us of their being first tributary to the Assyrians, of their
subsequent occupation of the plains of Mesopotamia for some centuries
previously to their becoming the conquerors of Asia under successful
leaders.  <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span>From the fourth verse of chapter 2 (<span
id="xiii.iii-p27.1"></span>[Da
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004)<span id="xiii.iii-p27.1"></span>.md)
we learn that they spoke the Aramaic dialect, which the Alexandrine
Version, as well as Theodotion’s, denominates the Syriac. From the
Cyropaedia (Book 7:24) we ascertain that the Syriac was the ordinary
language of Babylon. Strabo also informs us that the same language was
used throughout all the regions on the banks of the Euphrates.  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) Diodorus Siculus calls the Chaldeans
the most ancient inhabitants of Babylonia, and assigns to their
astrologers a similar position to that of the Egyptian priests. Their
devotion to philosophy and their practice of astronomy gained them great
credit with the powerful, which they turned to account by professing to
predict the future and to interpret the visions of the imaginative and
the distressed.  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) The testimony
of Cicero is precisely similar.  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md)
Hengstenberg has tested the historical truthfulness of the author of
this book, by comparing his account of the Chaldean priest-caste with
those of profane history. According to chapter. 2:48, the president of
this caste was also a prince of the province of Babylon. Thus, according
to Diodorus Siculus, Belesys was the chief president of the priests,
“whom the Babylonians call Chaldeans,”  <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) and governor of Babylon. In Jeremiah,
(<span id="xiii.iii-p31.1"></span>[Jer
39:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p31.1"></span>,) the president of the priests belonged to
the highest class in the kingdom, and is called <span
id="xiii.iii-p31.2"></span>רבמג, *rab-mag,* a word of Persian origin,
and clearly applicable to the office as described by Daniel. The views
of Hengstenberg are usually so correct, that the student may generally
adopt them at once as his own.

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span>Dissertation 5

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>I. ASHPENAZ, A CHIEF OF THE EUNUCHS.

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007.md)<span id="xiii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span>This proper name is interpreted by
*Saadias* to mean “the man of a sorrowful countenance;” but
*Rosenmuller* assigns the meaning of the Syriac and Arabic corresponding
words as more probable, viz., “helping” and “alert.” The Alexandrine
Greek substitutes Abiezer for Aspenaz, being a Hebrew patronymic,
signifying “father of help.” “The chief of the eunuchs” seems the
correct definition of his office.<span id="xiii.iv-p4.2"></span>סריס ,
*saris,* is equivalent to the Greek *eunouchos,* and the office is
similar to that at present exercised at the courts of Turkey and Persia
as the *kislar agha,* “high-chamberlain of the palace.” So much
confidence was necessarily reposed in these domestic officers, that many
affairs of the utmost importance and delicacy were intrusted to their
care. Thus the children of the royal and noble families of Judea were
committed to the care of Aspenaz. The word <span
id="xiii.iv-p4.3"></span>ספר, *sepher,* “book,” in which he was to
instruct them, must be extended to all the literature of the Chaldees.
Oecolampadius treats it as including rhetoric, eloquence, and all those
elevating pursuits which cultivate the mind and refine the manners. He
then proceeds to treat the narrative as an allegory; the “prince of
Babel, or, of the world,” represents Satan; Daniel and his companions,
the elect members of Christ. The family of David is supposed to imply
this spiritual household of God, and the word <span
id="xiii.iv-p4.4"></span>פרתמים, *pharth-mim,* nobles, is pressed into
this service by a preference for the rendering of Saadias, “perfect
fruit.” The eunuch is said to typify those spiritual flatterers who
entice the children of God by flatteries and allurements to sin, and by
substituting worldly sophistry for true wisdom, draw souls from Christ.
Although such reflections are very profitable, yet Calvin has shewn his
matured judgment by excluding all fanciful allegory from his comments.
Oecolampadius supposes the king to be liberal and benevolent in ordering
the captives to be fed from his table, and prudent in proposing this
indulgence as a reward for their diligence in study. Here also the
king’s character is allegorized; he becomes a model of Satan enticing
God’s elect, and offering them to partake of his own dainties, that he
may win them more blandly to himself.

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>In commenting, too, on the change of names,
*Oecolampadius* gives the usual meaning to the Hebrew words, but
observes, how the name of God was omitted from them all, and the
worthiness attributed to the creature. This, he thinks, to have been the
eunuch’s intention, while he points to the change as an instance of the
contrast between human and divine wisdom. The conduct of Daniel may be
illustrated by the practice of the early Christians, against whom it was
objected by Caecilius, that they abhorred meats offered to idols when
commanded to partake of them.  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md)
*Willet* has discussed the questions — “Whether Daniel and the rest
learned the curious arts of the Chaldeans?” and, “Whether it be lawful
to use the arts and inventions of the heathen?” by collecting various
opinions and summing them up with practical wisdom.  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md)

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span>II.THE NAMES OF THE THREE CHILDREN.

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>IT is the well-known custom of the East to
change the names of persons on their admission to public office or to
families of distinction. The change here recorded most probably arose
from a desire to draw these young Jews away from all the associations of
home, and to naturalize them as much as possible among their new
associates. Hananiah is supposed to come from <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.2"></span>חנן, *chanan, to* be gracious, and <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.3"></span>יה*, yah,* Jehovah, meaning “favored of God.”
Mishael from <span id="xiii.iv-p9.4"></span>יש*, ish,* he is, and <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.5"></span>אל, *el,* God, meaning “the powerful one of
God.” Azariah from <span id="xiii.iv-p9.6"></span>עזר, *gnezer,* help,
and <span id="xiii.iv-p9.7"></span>יה, *yah,* Jehovah: “the help of
Jehovah.” A variety of conjectures have been hazarded concerning the
Chaldee equivalents. Shadrach is probably from <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.8"></span>שדא, *sheda,* to inspire, and <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.9"></span>רך, *rak,* king, being a Babylonian name for
the sun; others connect it with an evil deity. Meshach retains a portion
of its Hebrew form, and substitutes <span id="xiii.iv-p9.10"></span>שך,
*shak,* for <span id="xiii.iv-p9.11"></span>אל, *el,* that is, the
female deity *Schaca,* which answers to the Venus of the Greeks. <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.12"></span>עבד-נגו, *gnebed-nego,* is the Chaldaic phrase
for “servant of Nebo,” one of their deities, or perhaps, servant of
burning fire. The deity Nebo furnished names to many chiefs and
sovereigns among the Assyrians and Chaldees, and modern researches and
discoveries have enabled us to trace similar derivations with great
accuracy. Compounds of Pul were used in a similar way: thus
Tiglath-Pileser is Tiglath Pul-Asser; and Nabo-Pul-Asser is interpreted
as Nabo, son of Pul, lord of Assyria.

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span>The name of Daniel was also changed. The
word is derived from <span id="xiii.iv-p10.1"></span>דון, *dun,* to
judge, and <span id="xiii.iv-p10.2"></span>אל, *el,* God, meaning “a
divine judge;” while his new name relates to the idol Bel, meaning
“keeper of the treasures of Bel.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>III. THE PULSE.

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Daniel
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#012.md)<span id="xiii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span>Calvin’s view of this verse is rather
peculiar, and especially his comment on <span
id="xiii.iv-p13.2"></span>[De 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiii.iv-p13.2"></span>; on <span id="xiii.iv-p13.3"></span>[Da
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#014.md)<span id="xiii.iv-p13.3"></span>.
The word “pulse,” <span id="xiii.iv-p13.4"></span>הזרעים, *hazerognim,*
signifies the same as the Latin *legumen,* and may perhaps be extended
to the *cerealia* as well. Vegetable diet generally is intended. The
food provided from the royal table was probably too stimulating, and the
habitual temperance of Daniel and his companions is here pointed out as
conducing remarkably to their bodily health and appearance. Thus, while
conscience refused to be “polluted,” obedience to the laws of our
physical nature produces a corresponding physical benefit. *Wintle* very
appositely quotes *Virgil, Georg.* 1:73, 74, to illustrate the kind of
food intended.

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>Dissertation 6

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span>CORESH — WAS HE CYRUS THE GREAT?

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span><span id="xiii.v-p4.1"></span>[Daniel
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021.md)<span id="xiii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span>The last verse of this chapter is connected
with an interesting inquiry, viz., Was the Coresh here mentioned Cyrus
The Great, or any other Cyrus? The noble author of “*The Times of
Daniel*” has thrown much “life” into the subject by his elaborate
defense of a theory which we now proceed to state and discuss. Cyrus the
Great he thinks identical with Nebuchadnezzar the First, and Cambyses
with his son Nebuchadnezzar the Second; the exploits of the hero of
Herodotus and Xenophon are attributed to the former, while Coresh
becomes but a minor character, contemporary with Darius the Mede, after
whom he is said to reign, and before Darius the son of Ahasuerus. This
view also brings the story of Esther within the period of the captivity
of Babylon. It has always been a subject of great difficulty with
commentators on Daniel, to reconcile the scriptural narrative with those
of both Herodotus and Xenophon. The majority finding this impossible,
have decided in favor of one or the other of these historians; and the
best modern writers usually prefer Herodotus. *Lowth,* in his Notes on
*Isaiah,* says, “the Cyrus of Herodotus was a very different character
from that of the Cyrus of the Scriptures and Xenophon;” and *Archbishop
Secker* has taken great pains to compare all the profane historians with
Scripture, and shews that the weight of the argument lies against the
truth of the Cyropaedia. Whether Cyrus was the grandson of Astyages or
not, many believe with Ctesias that he overcame him in battle, and
founded the Persian empire upon the ruins of the Median dynasty. It is
scarcely possible that it should be left for this nineteenth century to
discover the identity between a first Nebuchadnezzar and this conqueror
of the East; and while the clearing up of every historical discrepancy
is impossible, yet it is desirable to reconcile the occurrences which
are related by both Herodotus and Xenophon. The son of Cambyses the
Persian, and of Mandane the daughter of Astyages king of the Medes, is
said to have conquered Craesus king of Lydia, enlarged the Persian
empire, subdued Babylon and the remnant of the Assyrian power, and
placed his uncle Cyaxares over the united territories of Media and
Babylon. After the death of this relative, he reigned over Asia, from
India to Ethiopia, a territory consisting of 127 provinces. The manner
of his death is uncertain, all the historians differ in their accounts,
but the place of his burial is allowed to be Pasargadae, as Pliny has
recorded in his Natural History. This tomb was visited by Alexander the
Great, and has lately been noticed and described by European travelers.
The plains of Murghab are watered by a river which bears the name of
Kur, and is thought to be identical with the Greek Cyrus. A structure in
a ruinous state has been found there, apparently of the same date as the
remains at Persepolis, bearing cuneiform inscriptions which are now
legible. The legend upon one of the pilasters has been interpreted, “I
am Cyrus the Achaemenian;” and no doubt is entertained by the learned
that this monument once contained the remains of the founder of the
Persian monarchy. A single block of marble was discovered by Sir R. K.
Porter, on which he discovered a beautiful sculpture in bas-relief,
consisting of the figure of a man, from whose shoulders issue four large
wings, rising above the head and extending to the feet.  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) The whole value of such an inscription
to the reader of Daniel is the legend above the figure, in the
arrow-headed character, determining the spot as the tomb of Cyrus the
Great. It shews, at the least, that he cannot be identified with
Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span>The manner in which the author of “*The
Times of Daniel*” has commented on the prophecies relating to the
overthrow of Babylon, is worthy of notice here. <span
id="xiii.v-p7.1"></span>[Isa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014.md)<span id="xiii.v-p7.1"></span>,
is referred by *Dr. Keith* to Cyrus, and objection is made to the
supposed fulfillment in the person of Cyrus, *Keith* is said to apply to
Cyrus the primary historical fulfillment of all the prophecies relating
to the overthrow of Babylon, and the justness of this inference is
doubted. <span id="xiii.v-p7.2"></span>[Isa
13:1-14:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiii.v-p7.2"></span>, is one of the passages where the asserted
allusion to Cyrus is questioned, since it relates to a period in which
the power of Assyria was in existence. The Assyrian is supposed to be
Sennacherib, to whose predecessor both Babylon and Media were subject.
“The Chaldeans, mentioned in <span id="xiii.v-p7.3"></span>[Isa
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019.md)<span id="xiii.v-p7.3"></span>, I
have already explained to have been a colony of astronomers, planted in
Babylon by the Assyrian kings to carry on their astronomical
observations, in which science they excelled.” Again, <span
id="xiii.v-p7.4"></span>[Isa 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002.md)<span
id="xiii.v-p7.4"></span>, “Go up, O Elam; besiege, O Media,” is applied
by *Dr. Keith* to Cyrus, to which the noble author objects, as well as
to the supposition “that the overthrow of Belshazzar during his drunken
revelry was predicted in Scripture, and that the minute fulfillment by
Cyrus is recorded by Xenophon.” “The feast of Belshazzar,” it is added,
“does not appear to correspond with the festival described by Xenophon,
which was apparently periodical, and which, not a portion of the nobles,
but all the Babylonians, observed by drunkenness and revelry during the
whole night.” “It also agrees with the mode in which Zopyrus got
possession of Babylon.” *Calvin* seems to give it this turn, “A
treacherous one shall find treachery,” etc. Further comments are then
made upon <span id="xiii.v-p7.5"></span>[Isaiah
44](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.v-p7.5"></span> and
45, and on <span id="xiii.v-p7.6"></span>[Jeremiah
50](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.v-p7.6"></span> and
51, evading the force of their application to Cyrus, and combating with
some degree of success the assertions of *Keith;* for the noble author,
who is earnest in pulling down, is ingenious in building up. “From this
short examination, it appears that the prophecy of Jeremiah (<span
id="xiii.v-p7.7"></span>[Jeremiah
50](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.v-p7.7"></span> and
51) corresponds with the capture of Babylon by Darius the Mede of
Scripture, and by Darius Hystaspes, according to Herodotus.” Some
writers have supposed Cyrus to be identical with this Darius the Mede;
and *Archbishop Secker* acknowledges some ground for such a conjecture.
“The first year of Darius the Mede is by the LXX. translated the first
year of Cyrus,”  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md) and the Canon
of Ptolemy favors the identity. “Now all agree, as far as I have seen,”
says *Wintle,* “that the year of the expiration of the captivity, or the
year that Cyrus issued his decree in favor of the Jews, was the year 212
of the era of Nabonassar, or 536 A.C.; and there is no doubt but Darius
the Mede, whoever he was, reigned, according to Daniel, from the capture
of Babylon, till this same first year of Cyrus, or till the commencement
of the reign alloted by Scripture to Cyrus the Persian.” “The Canon
certainly allots nine years’ reign to Cyrus over Babylon, of which space
the two former years are usually allowed to coincide with the reign of
Cyaxares or Darius the Mede, by the advocates of Xenophon.” (Prelim.
Dissertation.) Herodotus, Xenophon, and Ctesias all agree in the
original superiority of the Medes, till the victories of Cyrus turned
the scale, and gave rise to the Persian dynasty. At the fall of Babylon,
and during the life of Darius, the Medes are mentioned by Daniel as
superior, but at the accession of Cyrus this order is reversed, and
Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther, all assign the foremost place to the
Persians.

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span>The life of Daniel, *Rosenmuller* reminds
us, was prolonged beyond the first year of king <span
id="xiii.v-p9.1"></span>כרוש, *Coresh,* for the tenth chapter informs us
of his vision in the third year of that monarch’s reign. He explains the
apparent contradiction, by saying that it was enough for Daniel to live,
or to the liberation of the Jews in the first year of the reign of
Coresh; that was the crowning event of his prolonged existence. The
conjectures of *Bertholdt* and *Aben-Ezra* are mentioned, only to be
disposed of by a few words of censure. An ingenious conjecture of a
French critic is found in the *Encycl. Theol.,* Liv. 27. The objection
of Bleek, Ewald, Winer, and De Wette, are ably treated at length by
*Hengstenberg,* and really meet with more serious attention than they
deserve. It is a useless waste of precious time to enter minutely into
every “phantasy” of the restless neology of Germany, while the
chronology of Daniel’s life will form the subject of a subsequent
Dissertation. As some Neologians dwell much on the historian Ctesias,
and lest the unlearned reader should be misled by their confident
assertions, we may here state that we have only an epitome of his work
preserved by the patriarch Photius. *Bahr* states that he lived about
400 B.C., in the reign of Darius Nothus, being a Greek physician who
remained seventeen years at the Persian court. Diodorus informs us that
he obtained his information from the royal archives, but there are so
many anachronisms and errors of various kinds, that his statements
cannot be safely followed as if historically correct. Ctesias, for
instance, denies all relationship between Cyrus and Astyages. According
to him, he defeated Astyages, invested his daughter Amytis with the
honors of a queen, and afterwards married her. F. W. Newman, indeed,
prefers this narrative to that of both Herodotus and Xenophon, and
thereby renders their testimony to the scriptural record uncertain and
valueless. He also treats “the few facts” in regard to the Persian wars,
“which the epitomator has extracted as differing from Herodotus,” as
carrying with them “high probability.” The closing scene of his career,
as depicted in the narrative of Ctesias, is pronounced “beyond
comparison more credible” than that of Herodotus. This great conqueror
died the third day after his wound in a battle with “the Derbices,” and
was buried in that monument at Pasargadae, which the Macedonians broke
open two centuries afterwards, (*Strabo,* lib. 15 Section 3; *Arrian,*
lib. vi. Section 29,) and which has lately been explored and described
by Morier and Sir R. K. Porter.  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md)

<span id="xiii.v-p11"></span>Notwithstanding the hypothesis which has
lately found favor with the modern writers whose worlds we have quoted,
we feel that the views of the older critics are preferable; and, on the
whole, Calvin’s exposition can only be improved upon in minor details.
The authorities enumerated by *Archbishop Secker,* as given by *Wintle*
in his preface, page 18 and following, are worthy of attentive perusal;
and we must refer again to *Hengstenberg*’*s* able replies to a variety
of objections which we are unable to notice. See <span
id="xiii.v-p11.1"></span>[Da 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006.md)<span
id="xiii.v-p11.1"></span> and following, *Edit. Ed.*

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span>Dissertation 7.

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>THE KING’S DREAM.

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span>Its Date. — The assertion of the first
verse has created some difficulty, in consequence of its not allowing
time enough for the Jewish youth to become a man. Jerome attempts to
solve it by supposing the point of departure to be not his reign over
Judea, but of his dominion over other nations, as the Assyrians and
Egyptians. He seems justified in this view by the words of Josephus,
(*Antiq.,* lib. 10 chapter 10. Section 3,) who distinctly refers the
dream to the second year “after the laying waste of Egypt.”
*Rosenmuller* objects to this explanation, and to that of *C. B.
Michaelis,* and adopts that of *Saadias,* who supposes the dream to have
happened in the second year, but not to be interpreted till the
conclusion of the third.

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span>Its Origin. — Nothing is more difficult to
reduce to philosophic laws than the theory of dreams and their
interpretation. The researches of physical science have thrown more
light on the subject than all the guesses of ancient or modern divines.
Jerome, for instance, thought that in this case, “the shadow of the
dream remained,” a sort of breath (*aura*) and trace remaining in the
mind of the king. It is of no use whatever to seek for much light on
these subjects in the works of the ancients, whether Fathers or
Reformers; they are constantly displaying their ignorance whenever they
treat of subjects within the domain of psychological science. The
physician has now become a far safer guide than the divine. Although
Nebuchadnezzar’s dream was supernatural in its origin, yet it seems like
ordinary ones in its departing from the sleeper while he is completely
unconscious of its subject.

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span>Physical researches have proved the truth
of Calvin’s assertion on verse third, that “*Scientia est generalis et
perpetua.*” Explanations have happily passed away from the theologian
and the metaphysician to the physician and the chemist. The brain is now
admitted to be the organ through which the mind acts during both the
activity and the repose of the body, and dreams are now known to depend
upon *physical causes* acting through the nerves upon the brain. The
late researches of the celebrated chemist Baron Reichenbach seem to have
led us one step nearer to the true explanation of these singular
phenomena; the discovery of *odyle,* a new imponderable agent, like
caloric and electricity, has enabled the modern philosopher to trace
some of the laws of natural and artificial sleep. The existence of odyle
in magnets, crystals, and the animal frame, and its intimate connection
with lucidity, and impressions conveyed to the sensorium during magnetic
sleep, seems now to be received by the best psychologists; their
experiments will, doubtless, lead to our ascertaining the laws which
regulate dreaming; and if the results said to be obtained by Mr. Lewis,
Major Buckley, and Dr. William Gregory of Edinburgh, are ultimately
admitted as facts by the scientific world, a new method of explaining
the operations of the mind in sleep will be completely established. —
See the “Letters” published by the Professor of Chemistry in the
University of Edinburgh, 1 volume 12mo. 1851.

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span>This contrast between the ancient and
modern methods of explanation is strikingly exemplified by Calvin’s
reference to the *Daimones* on page 119, which requires some elucidation
to render it intelligible to the general reader.

<span id="xiii.vi-p8"></span>The philosophers of Greece held various
theories concerning them, among which that recorded by Plato in the
Phaedrus is the most singular. He commences by asserting the immortality
of the soul, and its essential existence from all eternity. The
explanation of this idea, as it really is, he treats as divine, but its
similitude as human and readily comprehended. The simile is remarkable.
The deities have all a chariot and horses, which are perfect, but ours
have two horses, each of contrary dispositions. A whole armament of
these winged spirits are led on under the concave of heaven, Jupiter
himself leading the armament of gods and daimones. In attempting to
ascend, the perfect horses of the deities succeed in reaching the convex
surface, which no poet ever has described or will describe worthily; but
some charioteers fail in their efforts, because one of their horses is
depraved, and ever tends downwards towards the earth. In consequence of
this depravity, the utmost confusion occurs — the daimones loose their
wings and fall to earth, and become human souls. But the various ranks
which arise from them deserve especial notice. Those who have beheld
most of the glories beyond the heavenly concave become philosophers, and
the next to them kings and warriors. Seven other classes of men spring
up in the following order: — politicians, physicians, prophets, poets,
farmers, sophists, and tyrants. After ten thousand years, the soul may
recover its wings, and be judged — some in heaven and others in courts
of justice under the earth, while some pass into beasts and then return
again to bodies of men. This notion of the origin of the soul from the
daimones is a very singular one, and helps us to understand the double
sense of the word, like that of angels among us, both good and bad.
Though it is not difficult to perceive its connection with dreaming, as
the medium of intercourse between the souls of men and the disembodied
spirits, yet such conjectures throw no light whatever upon the king’s
dream before us.

<span id="xiii.vi-p9"></span>The passages alluded to by Calvin from
Cicero are found in the First and Second Books *De Divinatione.* They
consist of extracts from Ennius, and relate the fabled dreams of Priam,
Tarquinius Superbus, and the mother of Phalaris, as well as that
remarkable one which the magi are said to have interpreted for Cyrus. In
the Second Book, Cicero argues wisely and strenuously against the divine
origin of dreams. To pay the slightest attention to them he deems the
mark of a weak, superstitious, and driveling mind. He inveighs strongly
against the pretense to interpret them, which had become a complete
traffic, and displayed the imposture which always flourishes wherever
there are dupes to feed it. He combats the views of Aristotle, which
Calvin quotes, and supplies much material for discussion though but
little illustration of our subject. The passages above referred to will
be found quoted and explained in *Colquhoun*’*s History of Magic,*
volume 1, while some useful observations on *sleep and dreams* occur in
page 60 and following.

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span>Dissertation 8.

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>THE IMAGE AND ITS INTERPRETATION.

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038.md)<span id="xiii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span> “Thou art this head of gold.” A question
has arisen whether this expression relates to Nebuchadnezzar personally,
or to his empire and dynasty continued to his grandson. The principle is
an important one, although history has already removed all difficulty as
to the facts. *C. B. Michaelis, Willet, Wells,* and others, consider the
monarch as the representative of his empire, not only during his life
but until its overthrow. In the quaint language of *Willet,* “In this
short sentence, *thou art the head of gold,* there are as many figures
as words.” *Thou,* that is, thy kingdom; *art,* meaning signifiest or
representest; *head,* means “the antiquity and priority of that kingdom,
and the knowledge and wisdom of that nation;” *gold,* “betokeneth their
riches, prosperity, and flourishing estate.” Compare also <span
id="xiii.vii-p4.2"></span>[Isa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004.md)<span id="xiii.vii-p4.2"></span>,
and <span id="xiii.vii-p4.3"></span>[Jer
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007.md)<span id="xiii.vii-p4.3"></span>,
where the epithet golden alludes to the majesty and wealth of the city.
*Wintle* interprets the golden head as representing the duration of the
empire of Babylon from Ninus to Belshazzar, a period of 700 years; but
this is objectionable, since the father of *Nebuchadnezzar* was of a
different race from the early sovereigns of Babylon, and the vision
becomes far more emphatic, by being limited to Nebuchadnezzar and his
immediate successors. *Oecolampadius* limits the period to his own
times, and gives an ingenious reason for the head being of gold. He
quotes the authorities for the extensive dominion of this king, viz.,

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span>*Berosus* known to us through Josephus,
and *Megasthenes* through Eusebius, as well as *Orosius,* who extend his
sway over Syria, Armenia, Phoenicia, Arabia, Lybia, and even Spain; but
this commentator is not satisfied with this allusion. He explains it of
the justness of his administration. His earlier years were more
righteous than his later, and though many faults may be detected in him,
yet he was less open to the charge of injustice than the Persians and
Greeks who succeeded him.

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p6.1"></span>[Da
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039.md)<span id="xiii.vii-p6.1"></span>
The Second Kingdom is the Medo-Persian, denoted according to Josephus by
the two arms. Wintle very appositely quotes Claudian —

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p7.1"></span>Medus
ademit  
Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses  <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md)

<span id="xiii.vii-p9"></span>The Vulgate here introduces the adjective
“silver,” adopting it from <span id="xiii.vii-p9.1"></span>[Da
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#032.md)<span id="xiii.vii-p9.1"></span>,
not as a translation, but, according to *Rosenmuller,* as a *modus
interpretamenti.*

<span id="xiii.vii-p10"></span>The Third Kingdom is that of the Greeks,
but the Fourth is variously interpreted. It relates to either the
successors of Alexander or to the Romans. The majority of the older
commentators agreed with Calvin in thinking it to mean the Roman empire,
viz., Oecolampadius, Bullinger, Melancthon and Osiander, while Grotius
and Rosenmuller, and Cosmas, the Indian traveler whom we have previously
referred to as known to us through Montfaucon, advocate its reference to
the Seleucidae and Lagidae. *Poole*’*s Synopsis* will furnish the reader
with long lists of varying opinions, each fortified by its own reasons,
and *Willet* has carefully collected and arranged the arguments on both
sides. The divines of Germany have added their conjectures to those
which have preceded them. Kuinoel in his theological commentaries has
preserved the view of *Velthusen*  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md) and others; while the absurdities
which some of them propose may be understood from the opinion of
*Harenberg,* who thinks the stone which destroyed the image to be the
sons and grandsons of Nebuchadnezzar, and *Doederlein* in his notes to
*Grotius,* and *Scharfenberg* in his “*Observations on Daniel,*” approve
the foolish conjecture.

<span id="xiii.vii-p12"></span>A third view, very different from those
which preceded it, has been ably stated and laboriously defended. Dr.
Todd of Dublin, in his valuable “*Lectures on Antichrist,*” considers
the fourth empire as yet to come. The kingdoms of Nebuchadnezzar,
Darius, and Cyrus, are said to be signified by the golden head, that of
Alexander by the silver breast and arms, the Roman by the brass, while
the iron prefigures the cruel and resistless sway of Antichrist, which
shall not be overthrown till the second advent of Messiah. We shall have
future opportunities for discussing this theory more at length; it has
necessarily enlisted him in the ranks of the Futurists, whom *Birks* has
confuted at length in his “*First Elements of Sacred Prophecy.*” *We*
refer the student to these two worlds, each excellent of its kind, while
we defer the discussion of this most interesting question till we treat
the chapters contained in our second volume.

<span id="xiii.vii-p13"></span>In descending to details, the arms of the
image have been treated as symbols of the Medo-Persian empire;
*Theodoret* considering the right arm to represent one, and the left the
other. Various reasons have been given for the implied inferiority.
*Willet* adopts one the direct contrary of C*alvin*’*s.* While one
author treats the inferiority as moral, in consequence of a general
corruption of manners, *Willet* thinks the “government more tolerable
and equal toward the people of God.” Some have thought the silver to
refer to remarkable wealth, and others to superior wisdom and eloquence.
The belly and thighs being of brass, are thought to prefigure the
intemperance, and yet the firmness of the Grecian powers. Alexander’s
personal debauchery and extravagance is said to be hinted at. The brass
is said to imply his warlike disposition and his invincible spirit. The
iron is thought to be peculiarly characteristic of the conquests of
Rome; the mingling with clay signifies “the division and dissension of
the kingdom,” says Willet; while others refer it to the marriages
between the Roman generals and the barbarians, or generally to the
intermingling of the conquerors of the world with the tribes whom they
subdued. The two legs are said to be the two great divisions of the
Roman empire after the time of Constantine, though those who treat them
as belonging to the successors of Alexander, think they mean Egypt and
Syria. The mingling with the seed of men (<span
id="xiii.vii-p13.1"></span>[Da
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043)<span id="xiii.vii-p13.1"></span>.md)
is interpreted of the admission of the subject allies to the freedom of
the state (*donati civitate*)*,* and also of the fusion between the
barbarians and the Romans, in the late periods of the declining empire.
Whether the toes represent individual kings or distinct kingdoms, has
been discussed by *Birks* in his “*Elements of Prophecy.*”

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span>Dissertation 9.

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>THE STONE CUT WITHOUT HANDS.

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045.md)<span id="xiii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span>The Stone “Cut Out Of The Mountain” is
generally interpreted of the kingdom of Messiah, some writers applying
it to his first Advent, and others to his second. If the fourth kingdom
be the Roman, then the stone was cut “without hands,” either at the
birth of Christ, or, as Calvin when answering Abarbanel prefers, at the
first spread of the Gospel. The reason why a “stone” here symbolizes
“the kingdom of the heavens,” is because Christ is spoken of in
Scripture as a chief corner-stone. The passages in the Psalms, Isaiah,
and Matthew, and others, are too familiar to the reader to require
quotation. The mountain is supposed to be, either the Virgin Mary, or
the Jewish people; without hands, may allude to our Savior’s marvelous
birth, or to his spiritual independence of all human agency. The ancient
fathers, as well as the modern reformers, agree in this allusion to
Christ. See *Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryph*., section 32; Irenaeus adv.
Haer., verse 21; Tertullian, De Resur., page 61; Apolog., page 869;
Cyprian adv. Jud., lib. 2. section 17; Augustine in <span
id="xiii.viii-p4.2"></span>[Psalm
98](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.viii-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span>The question of the greatest interest is,
whether this prophecy has been fulfilled at the first Advent, or is yet
to be accomplished at the second. Willet has taken Calvin to task for
his “insufficient” answers to the “Rabbine Barbanel,” but as they vary
only on minor points, it is not necessary to quote the corrections of
his thoughtful monitor.

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span>The theory of Joseph Mede, the great
advocate of the year-day system, may be noticed here. He supposes the
stone cut out at the first Advent, but not to smite the image till the
second. This involves the existence of the Roman empire, throughout the
whole Christian dispensation — an admission that Calvin would not make,
and should not be hastily allowed. Dr. Todd correctly remarks, “it
assumes the Roman empire to be still in existence,” and it further
assumes that the prophecies revealed to Daniel advance beyond the first
Advent of Messiah. Calvin and the older commentators treat them as
terminating with the establishment of the Gospel dispensation.
Tertullian, indeed, applies this passage to the second Advent, but
Maldonatus considers that expositor as “insanus,” who thinks the Roman
empire to be still existing. Yet both Bellarmine, and Birks argue for
its present continuance, and each founds upon it his own views of
Scripture prophecy.

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span>As we shall have other opportunities for
discussing these questions in our second volume, we simply state that
Calvin and our chief Reformers considered all Daniel’s prophecies summed
up and satisfied by the first Advent of Christ. As they did not adopt
the year-day system, they treated these predictions as pointing the Jews
to the coming of their Messiah, and as depicting the various kingdoms
and sovereigns which should arise, and affect by their progress and
dissensions the Holy Land. It never once occurred to them that the Book
of Daniel relates in any way to the details of the history of modern
Europe, and of either the Court or the Church of Rome.

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span>Another view hinted at, but disapproved
by Bishop Newton, is that the third empire relates solely to Alexander,
the fourth to his successors in Syria and Egypt, and the stone cut
without hands to the Roman dominion. But with this popular writer as
well as with Joseph Mede — the received view of the iron portion of the
image is “little less than an article of faith.”  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md) The stone he reminds us was quite
different from the image, so the kingdom of Christ was utterly distinct
from the principalities of this world. He asserts that its smiting power
was displayed at the first Advent, and is continued throughout the
subsequent history of the world. But as Bishop Newton is an advocate of
the historical system of interpreting days for years, which Calvin did
not uphold, it is unnecessary to quote him further. The reader will,
however, derive benefit from consulting the authorities which he has
brought forward in rich abundance.  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349.md) As he is a valuable and a popular
expounder of prophecy, it is necessary to make this passing allusion to
so valuable an author; while the reader of these Lectures must be
cautioned against adopting any views of prophecy which are inconsistent
with the great principle upon which the Almighty deals with us, in our
new covenant through Christ our Lord.

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>Oecolampadius in his comment upon <span
id="xiii.viii-p11.1"></span>[Da
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044.md)<span
id="xiii.viii-p11.1"></span>, treats the kingdom of Christ as spiritual
and eternal; like other earnest writers, he considers the troubles of
his own days as peculiarly the marks of Antichrist. The blasphemy of the
Mahometans, and the arrogance of the “Cata-baptists,” seem to him
intolerable. He is especially vehement against those who urge the
necessity of a second baptism, and deny the value of outward ordinances,
as the ministry and the sacraments; and argues for the permanence of
external ceremonies till the second Advent of Christ.

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span>He considers verse forty-five to relate
to the second coming of Christ and the resurrection of mankind to
judgment, but does not condemn the opinion of Jerome and other
“fathers,” who refer it to the incarnation of our Lord. The mountain,
says he, is Zion, and the people the Jews, and by his crucifixion,
Christ is said to grow into a mountain and fill the earth. He quotes
Hippolytus as sanctioning its reference to the second Advent; and
objects to the views of Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Lactantius, who as
Chiliasts turned this passage to their purpose. The gross ideas of some
Jews and Christians, respecting a thousand years of carnal enjoyment
upon earth, are wisely reprobated, and some very profitable remarks are
made upon the spiritual reign of Christ in the hearts and souls of his
people. Oecolampadius is on this occasion remarkably practical and
searching in his comment; he is not so critical and literal as Calvin,
but he develops more of the deep feelings of the mature Christian than
any other Reformer does on the Old Testament.

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span>Dissertation 10.

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>THE COLOSSUS AT DURA.

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span>Many points of interest are connected with
the narrative of this chapter.

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span>**1.** The *time* of its erection. This is
unknown; various conjectures have been offered, but not the slightest
historical foundation proved for any of them. *Theodoret* and
*Chrysostom* fix upon the eighteenth year of the king’s reign.

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span>**2.** The *object* of its erection. It was
probably intended to entrap the Jews and all conscientious worshippers
of Jehovah. Calvin’s view is adopted by the best writers.

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span>**3.** In whose honor was it erected?
Willet agrees with Calvin in thinking it was consecrated to some deity,
as Bel, the chief object of his worship.

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span>**4.** The *place* of its erection was the
plain called by *Ptolemy*, Deira, between Chaltopis and Cissia, in the
region of Susan.  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350.md) The editor of
the Chisian Codex derives it from the Persian word *dooran*, meaning an
enclosure, thus strengthening the view of Jerome, that it was erected in
an enclosure within the city.

<span id="xiii.ix-p10"></span>A singular feature in the earliest
commentators is the mystical application of such subjects. *Chrysostom,*
for instance, takes it to denote covetousness;  <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) and *Jerome,* (*in loc.,*.md) false
doctrine and heresy; and *Irenaeus,* the pomp and pride of the world,
under the mastery of Satan.  <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md)

<span id="xiii.ix-p13"></span>The disproportion of its form has
occasioned some difference among expositors. *Bertholdt,* as usual, is
full of faultfinding. “How was it possible for it to stand of itself?”
But there is no proof that the statue had throughout a human form.
Columns with a human head on the top were often erected by the Asiatics
in honor of their deities. *Münter* in his *Religion of the
Babylonians,* treats it as similar to the Amyclaean Apollo, a simple
column, to which a head and feet were added. *Gesenius,* too, has
observed that the ruins of the tower of Belus are imposing only from
their colossal size, and not from their proportions; the Babylonians
preferred everything huge, irregular, and grotesque. Idol-pillars were
commonly erected by the Assyrians in honor of their deities. If,
however, we strictly limit the word <span id="xiii.ix-p13.1"></span>צלם,
*tzelem,* to a human figure complete in all its parts, we may still
vindicate the truth of Daniel by allowing for a pedestal which would be
necessary. The proportion of six to one is correct: for a human figure;
hence with a pedestal, ten to one by no means violates the principles of
art. Of the difficulty of raising it we are no judges. The able remarks
of *Heeren* are exactly suited to the occasion, — “The circle of our
experience is too limited for us to assign at once the scale of what is
possible in other lands, in a different clime, and under other
circumstances. Do not the Egyptian pyramids, the Chinese wall, and the
rock temple at Elephanta, stand, as it were, in mockery of our
criticism, which presumes to define the limits of the united power of
whole nations?”  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md)

<span id="xiii.ix-p15"></span>The material of the Colossus is worthy of
notice. It is scarcely possible that it could be all of gold. Some, have
thought it to have been hollow like the Colossus of Rhodes, which
exceeded it in height by ten cubits. (*Pliny His. Nat.,* 34 Section 18.)
*Chrysostom* thought it made of wood, and only covered with gold
plating, and certainly we have authority for such a view from <span
id="xiii.ix-p15.1"></span>[Ex
39:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#038.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p15.1"></span>,
where an altar made of acacia wood, and covered with gold, is termed
golden; and that in <span id="xiii.ix-p15.2"></span>[Ex
39:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#039.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p15.2"></span>,
merely covered with brass, is termed brazen. The immense treasures
heaped together at Babylon favor the possibility of sufficient gold
being at hand to cover so large a statue; while the weight of the golden
statue of Bel, with its steps and seat, as recorded both by Herodotus
and Diodorus, is far from sufficient to allow of their being massive
gold throughout. Thus profane history becomes exceedingly valuable in
enabling us to interpret correctly the language of the Old Testament.
Many minds are inclined at once to discredit the erection of any such
colossus all of gold; the mechanical and artistic difficulties are far
too great; but when we find such historians giving us accounts of
similar erections made of plated wood, or consisting of a mere hollow
case, plated over, the whole of the difficulties vanish, everything is
reduced at once within the bounds of credibility, the historical
accuracy of Daniel is vindicated, the captious insinuations of
disbelievers are repelled, and the mind of the earnest inquirer is at
rest on the firm rock which patient investigation has provided for it.

<span id="xiii.ix-p16"></span>*Hengstenberg*’*s* attention is occupied
throughout this chapter with noticing the objections of his Neologian
predecessors. *De Wette, Bertholdt, and Bleek,* have each attempted to
discredit the historical veracity of Daniel. The period of the erection
of the image — if ever erected at all — was that of Antiochus Epiphanes,
say they, and his character is the supposed original of the fabulous
Nebuchadnezzar, and the writer “merely invented these tales in order to
inspire the Jews with fortitude under the religious persecutions of
Antiochus.”  <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md) *Bertholdt* also
considers the address of the three Jews to the king as an instance of
“revolting insolence and levity;” while *Theodoret* is quoted as “being
amazed at the courage of these youths, their wisdom, their piety,” in
language exactly in the spirit of Calvin himself.  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md) The preparation of the furnace has
created some difficulty, especially when *Chardin* relates that a whole
month has been taken up with feeding two ovens with fire, for the
purpose of destroying criminals; but this objection is removed by the
natural supposition that the king anticipated refusal, and had prepared
beforehand to execute summary vengeance on all who disobeyed. “What
result is gained by the miracle?” ask the disbelievers. “How
disproportionate was the colossus,” he exclaims, “no such statue ever
existed, no such miracle was ever performed.” But history puts to flight
a whole host of conjectures, for Herodotus mentions a statue in the
temple of Belus, and Diodorus Siculus confirms his account.  <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md) *Hengstenberg* has collected a long
list of authorities in proof of the erection of such statues by the
ancient monarchs of the East, and we refer to his valuable labors for a
reply to objections, which are happily unknown to the majority of our
readers.

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span>Dissertation 11.

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span>THE NAMES OF THE MAGISTRATES.

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span><span id="xiii.x-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002.md)<span id="xiii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span>Calvin has very judiciously declined to
enter into the signification of each of these officers, as there is
great difficulty in ascertaining the exact duties to be assigned to
each. The best method of determining this point is to follow up the
meaning of the corresponding words in the cognate languages of the East,
and to bear in mind the officers of state at present in use. We will
here state a few results of our researches, referring the reader for
fuller information to *Castell*’*s* valuable Lexicon, and
*Rosenmuller*’*s* and *Wintle*’*s* comments, and punctuating the words
after the best foreign scholars.

<span id="xiii.x-p5"></span><span id="xiii.x-p5.1"></span>אחשדרפניא,
*achas-dar-penaja,* is derived from the Persian by both Castell and
Rosenmuller; its meaning is majestatis janitores. Wintle translates
correctly satraps.

<span id="xiii.x-p6"></span><span id="xiii.x-p6.1"></span>סגניא
*signaja,* is also Persian; *Rosenmuller* renders it *supremus
præfectus,* and *Wintle,* “senators,” implying a viceroy of the first
rank.

<span id="xiii.x-p7"></span><span id="xiii.x-p7.1"></span>פחותא,
*pach-vatha,* is clearly equivalent to the Oriental “pasha.”

<span id="xiii.x-p8"></span><span id="xiii.x-p8.1"></span>אדרגזדיא,
*adar-gaz-raja,* the Septuagint translates by “consuls,” and
*Theodotion* and *Jerome* by “leaders,” and *Wintle* by “judges.”

<span id="xiii.x-p9"></span><span id="xiii.x-p9.1"></span>גדבריא,
*gedab-raja,* is commonly rendered “treasurers.”

<span id="xiii.x-p10"></span><span id="xiii.x-p10.1"></span>דתבריא,
*dethab-raja,* signifies the superior officers of the law.

<span id="xiii.x-p11"></span><span id="xiii.x-p11.1"></span>תפתיא,
*tiph-taya,* is clearly connected with the Turkish word *mufti*, who is
the chief religious officer of the Mohamedan faith.

<span id="xiii.x-p12"></span><span id="xiii.x-p12.1"></span>שלטני,
*sil-tonei,* a general expression for “governors” *Joseph Jacchiades*
has explained it fully in his Chaldee paraphrase.

<span id="xiii.x-p13"></span>*Poole*’*s Synopsis* may also be consulted
with advantage. *Oecolampadius* departs here from his usual custom, by
entering into the criticism of these words, and quoting *Rabbi Saadias,*
the Septuagint, and the Chaldee paraphrasts.

<span id="xiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p1"></span>Dissertation 12.

<span id="xiii.xi-p2"></span>THE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.

<span id="xiii.xi-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005.md)<span id="xiii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p4"></span>It is not possible to define, as *Calvin*
reminds us, what these instruments were. Researches have been made into
the etymology of the Chaldee words, and a comparison instituted between
the properties implied and those of modern use and construction.
Travelers in the East have compared the music of the present day with
that recorded in this verse. A similarity, too, has been pointed out
between the instruments of the Syrians and Greeks. As no practical
advantage can arise from quoting the conjectures of various writers, we
simply refer to *Wintle* and *Rosenmuller in loc.,* where some
interesting information is given *in extenso. Poole*’*s Synopsis* also
supplies much verbal criticism. *Oecolampadius* passes by altogether any
explanation of these instruments, but makes some very appropriate
practical comments. True religious worship, he justly observes, does not
need this variety of external incentive; a pure conscience with trust in
God and obedience to his laws is the best music in his eyes, while he
applauds Plato’s description of the best music which a soul can offer to
its Creator. Antichrist, he asserts, delights in such outward and
sensual gratification’s, while the advanced Christian worships in
spirit, calmly, quietly, and inwardly. True religion is thus the
antagonist of all outward and idolatrous service; it is not prompted by
fear nor promoted by a tyrant’s command, but requiring no visible parade
of instrumental minstrelsy, it worships with a cheerful heart and a free
and buoyant spirit, inspired by the hope of everlasting life through the
promises of God in Christ. This sentiment, although 300 years old, is
worthy of the Reformer who uttered and maintained it.

<span id="xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p2"></span>Dissertation 13.

<span id="xiii.xii-p3"></span>THE SON OF GOD.

<span id="xiii.xii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p4.1"></span>[Daniel
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025.md)<span id="xiii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p5"></span>This translation of the Chaldee words
<span id="xiii.xii-p5.2"></span>לבר אלהין, *leber-alehin,* in our
version is liable to mistake. *Wintle* has more correctly rendered them
“a son of a god.” It was far more likely that the heathen king would
express his astonishment in this way than allude to what he could not
comprehend, the appearance of the Logos in human form. *Calvin*
correctly states it to be “one of the angels.” Angels are called in
Scripture, says *Wells,* sons of God, as in <span
id="xiii.xii-p5.3"></span>[Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006.md)<span id="xiii.xii-p5.3"></span>,
and <span id="xiii.xii-p5.4"></span>[Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007.md)<span id="xiii.xii-p5.4"></span>.
“Some angelic appearance” is the correct comment of *Wintle. Jerome*
takes it as a type of Christ descending into Hades, and *Munter* asserts
it to be our Lord himself. *Wells* neither affirms nor denies this view,
which has been held by a number of commentators who consider that the
Logos appeared in human form on several occasions during patriarchal and
Ante-Messianic times. *Justin Martyr* makes the same assertion when
describing the pre-existence of the Logos to his philosophic
persecutors. *Willet* leans to this view, after summing up a variety of
opinions from able writers. Some of his reflections on the general
narrative are edifying; but his discussion on the nature of angels is
fancifully unprofitable, and his ignorance of natural science is
singularly displayed in his treatment of the ordinary and extraordinary
action of fire. *Rosenmuller* translates, “like a son of the gods,” that
is an angel, and the writers quoted by *Poole* come to the same
conclusion; but *Oecolampadius,* thinks the appearance to be that of
Immanuel himself, and refers to other instances of his being visible to
Abraham, Jacob, and Moses. He fortifies his view by quotations from
*Chrysostom, Apollinarius,* and other ecclesiastical authorities.

<span id="xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p2"></span>Dissertation 14.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p3"></span>A WATCHER.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.xiii-p4.1"></span>[Daniel
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013.md)<span id="xiii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p5"></span>This is the correct rendering of the word
<span id="xiii.xiii-p5.2"></span>עיר, *gnir,* but it has been
conjectured that its meaning is the same as <span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.3"></span>ציר, *tzir,* being the Chaldee word for “a
messenger.” *Jerome* ingeniously conjectures it to be the same as the
Greek word *Iris,* the messenger of heaven. In <span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.4"></span>[Job
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030.md)<span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.4"></span>, the Hebrew is <span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.5"></span>איר, *air,* where Origen reads *Irin*
according to *Archbishop Seeker. Willet* replies to the question “why
the angels are called watchmen,” and quotes *Calvin*’*s* reason with
approbation. *Rosenmuller* approves of *Jerome*’*s* conjecture, and
adduces Hom. Odys., lib. 18:5, in confirmation of it. He takes “the
watcher and holy one” as a *hendia-dys,* reminding us that in <span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.6"></span>[Job
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015.md)<span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.6"></span>, angels are called “holy ones” by the figure
*autonomasia.* The Scholia of the Alexandrine Codex interpret the word
*eir,* as equivalent to angel, and *Isidorus Pelusiota,* according to
*Rosenmuller,* (<span id="xiii.xiii-p5.7"></span>Ep. 177<span
id="xiii.xiii-p5.7"></span>*,* lib. 2,) considers the word to refer to
the chief of angels. The Syrians in their hymns join watchers with
angels as rejoicing over converted sinners, according to the learned
editors of the Chisian Codex, page 127, edit. Rom. See also *Critica
Sacra,* volume 7, edit. Frcof. The view of Oecolampadius is similar to
those already expressed, but he takes the word “watcher” in the sense of
an exciter or herald of divine punishment. *R. Saadias* supposes a
terrible destroyer to be intended.

<span id="xiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p1"></span>Dissertation 15.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p2"></span>THE MADNESS OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025.md)<span id="xiii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p4"></span>THE narrative of this chapter has met with
much disbelief among the skeptical school of theology. The want of
corresponding profane history is a subject of complaint. *Origen* found
himself deserted by all ancient historians, and *Jerome* searched them
in vain for any confirmation of the sacred text. We must remember,
however, that the historians whom we reckon ancient, are very modern
with reference to these early times. *Megasthenes,* for instance, wrote
rather earlier than *Berosus,* about 280 A.C., at the court of Seleucus
Nicator, king of Babylon, and we have only portions of their writings
second hand. *Diocles,* the author of a Persian history, and *Abydenus,*
of an Assyrian and Median, obtained their materials from Chaldee
traditions, many ages after the events recorded. The Chaldee
chroniclers, *Hengstenberg* assures us, were, notorious for their
national vanity and boasting,  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357.md)
and were not likely to record anything derogatory to their earliest
hero. But even *Bertholdt* is compelled to confess that Abydenus has
preserved a legend similar to the narrative of this chapter. “On
ascending the roof of his palace, he became inspired by some god, and
delivered himself as follows: — Babylonians! I Nebuchadnezzar foretell
you a calamity that is to happen, which neither my ancestor Bel nor
queen Beltis can persuade the Fates to avert. There shall come a Persian
mule, (one having parents of different countries,) having your own gods
in alliance with him, and shall impose servitude upon you, with the head
of a Mede, the boast of the Assyrians.”  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) Now madness and inspiration were
usually connected by the ancients; the time and place too, correspond
with Daniel’s narrative; the extasis occurred after the completion of
his conquests, and the phrase, “by some god,” refers to a foreign deity,
whom we know to be the Jehovah of the Hebrews. The narrative of the
frenzy which rendered him unfit for government, is allowed to be
credible by the chief skeptics of the continent. *Michaelis* allows
“that this calamity more frequently attacks great and extraordinary
minds than ordinary men.” Our physicians can now explain the reason
through their improved knowledge of the brain and its functions.
Pathological and psychological science is here more useful than all the
conjectures of disbelieving theologians. In the early days of the
Church, the greatest difficulty was found in taking this narrative
literally: hence expositors treated it as an allegory. The king was held
to represent Satan falling from heaven, and the whole account of his
dwelling with the beasts of the field was taken figuratively, and
rejected historically. *Jerome,* however, while he records this view at
great length, adheres to the literal account.  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md)

<span id="xiii.xiv-p8"></span>The disbelief of the narrative above
referred to may have arisen from an erroneous interpretation of the
sacred text. For some writers have affirmed a complete metamorphosis of
the man into the beast; a conclusion by no means warranted by the
language of the passage. *Tertullian* has correctly explained the
clause, “his hair became like eagle’s feathers,” by *capilli incuria
horrorem aquilinum præferente,* since it was a natural consequence of
his wild mode of life, and a usual mark of the sensualizing effect of
prolonged insanity. And with reference to the time of this affliction,
*Hengstenberg* quotes *Calvin* with approbation, for agreeing with the
idea of an indefinite period implied by the word “seven.” *Calvin,*
however, inclines too much towards the theory of the indefinite use of
definite numbers. There seems no good reason why the number “seven”
should not be taken strictly and literally, nor why the word “times”
<span id="xiii.xiv-p8.1"></span>עדנון, *gni-danin,* should not mean
years. Even *Hengstenberg* gives way too much to the plausible conceits
of his wily antagonists. *Rosenmuller* correctly limits the expression
to seven years, a period by no means unnatural for the continuance of a
highly excited state of the brain, producing mania, accompanied by all
the symptoms mentioned in this chapter. *Oecolampadius* views it as a
case of mental disease, and quotes many similar narratives from
*Aben-Ezra, Pausanias,* and *Augustine,* bringing forward the fables of
the heathen poets, as illustrating the passage. For the opinion of
*Tertullian,* and various Jewish and continental writers, *Kitto*’*s
Bibl. Cyclop.* may be consulted, especially as the view there set forth
by *Dr. Wright* is sound, judicious, and practical.

<span id="xiii.xv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p1"></span>Dissertation 16.

<span id="xiii.xv-p2"></span>THE EDICT OF PRAISE.

<span id="xiii.xv-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xv-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037.md)<span id="xiii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p4"></span>This monarch probably lived but a single
year after his recovery; and some writers have thought that his
restoration produced a conversion to the worship of the one true God.
But *Hengstenberg* agrees with our author: “Compare Calvin on the
passages,” says he, “who strikingly proves from them the incorrectness
of the opinion of very many expositors as to the radical and entire
conversion of Nebuchadnezzar.” *Calvin* is clearly right, for it was
customary with the Persians to blend the doctrines of Zoroaster with the
Babylonian astrology.  <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md) The
scriptural language of the king has been treated as an argument against
the authenticity of the decree. *Eichhorn and Bertholdt* object to his
speaking like an orthodox Jew in the phraseology of the Old Testament.
But the affinity of certain phrases with other passages of Scripture, is
no argument against its authenticity. The monarch had held much
intercourse with Daniel; he had doubtless heard his method of expressing
reverence and respect for the one true God, and he would repeat such
expressions the more exactly in proportion to his want of personal
experience of their meaning. In the case of the edict of Cyrus, brief as
it is, several references are found to the prophecies of Isaiah.  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md) As to the change of person from the
third to the first, *Hengstenberg* approves of *Calvin*’*s* suggestion.
*Oecolampadius* considers the king really converted, and through knowing
the angel to be the Christ, he supposes him not only a convert, but an
apostle. This is far too favorable a view of his character; but it is
instructive to ascertain the decisions of various eminent Reformers, and
to observe which of them stands the scrutinizing test of an appeal to
posterity.

<span id="xiii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p1"></span>Dissertation 17.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p2"></span>BELSHAZZAR AND THE FEAST.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xvi-p3.1"></span>[Dan.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002.md)<span id="xiii.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p4"></span>This monarch is here said to be the son of
Nebuchadnezzar. The Duke of Manchester takes this literally, while the
usual opinion is that he was his grandson. “No king,” says he, “in
Berosus, Megasthenes, or Polyhistor, corresponds with him. The Scripture
says that Nebuchadnezzar was his father, which most people say means
grandfather, and it is not to be denied, that by son, grandson may be
intended; but in this case it is contrary to all the evidence we have on
the subject. The author of the Scholastical History reports that
Belshazzar was son of the daughter of Darius. Nebuchadnezzar the Second
did, as I conceive, marry the daughter of Darius, which would make
Belshazzar his son. But admitting that Belshazzar was paternal grandson
of Nebuchadnezzar, none of the successors of Nebuchadnezzar could have
been in that relation to him.” The Persian writer Merkhond is the next
quoted, by whose help the duke identifies Ka’oos with Nebuchadnezzar the
First, Afrasiab with Astyages, and Siyawesh, the son of Ka’oos, with
Belshazzar. It is then conjectured that this king never reigned except
during his father’s lifetime: if he was “the king” during his father’s
madness, the omission of his name by profane historians is thus
accounted for. An Oxford MS. is quoted to shew “that Nebuchadnezzar and
Belshazzar were reigning at Babylon when Darius and Coresch were
reigning over Persia.  <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md)

<span id="xiii.xvi-p6"></span>This hypothesis interferes so much with
the ordinary deductions from ancient historians, that we must not pass
it over without special notice.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p7"></span>The received hypothesis has been so
clearly stated by *Wells,* that reference to it is all that is needed.
 <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) Jeremiah (<span
id="xiii.xvi-p8.1"></span>[Jer
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006)<span id="xiii.xvi-p8.1"></span>.md)
had predicted that Nebuchadnezzar’s kingdom was to be prolonged through
the life of his son and his son’s son. Ptolemy’s Astronomical Canon is
the best known authority for the history of Nebuchadnezzar’s successors,
as we have detailed them in a former Dissertation, and they are also
found in a readable form in *Stackhouse*’*s* History of the Bible.
 <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md) The last of these kings is
Nabonadius, and he is supposed to be the same as the Nabonnedus of
Berosus, the Labynetus of Herodotus, and the Belshazzar of Daniel.
 <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md) During his reign, says Berosus,
the walls of the city near the river were strengthened by brick-work and
bitumen; and in its seventeenth year Cyrus advanced against Babylon, the
king met him with a large army, but was defeated, and then enclosed
himself within Borsippa. Cyrus then took Babylon, and having determined
to pull down its outer fortifications, he returned to Borsippa and
besieged it. Nabonnedus then gave himself up, and Cyrus permitted him to
close his life peaceably in Carmania, where he remained till his death.
The narrative of Herodotus is slightly at variance with this. Cyrus made
war against Labynetus, the son of Nitocris, a very spirited and powerful
queen, and succeeded to the kingdom of Assyria “from his fathers.”
 <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) Having turned the stream of the
river Euphrates, he entered the city through its bed, and when the
center was captured, those who dwelt at the extremities were ignorant of
their disaster, for they “were celebrating a festival that day with
dancing and all manner of rejoicing, till they received certain
information of the general fate. And thus Babylon was the first time
taken.” Herodotus also records its second capture through the treachery
of Zopyrus, in the reign of Darius Hystaspes, (lib. 3 section. 159;) and
with this second capture the noble duke supposes the scriptural
narrative to be co-incident.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p12"></span>The Cyropaedia of Xenophon affords its
testimony to a similar event, and as its historic value has been
altogether denied, we cannot certainly pronounce the event *the same.*
Vitringa has vindicated its historical truth, and *Gesenius* and
*Bertholdt* have admitted it. *Hengstenberg* quotes lib. 7 section. 5,
combines it with Herod., lib. 1 section. 191, and remarks, “This
testimony of Xenophon, too, is so much the more in our favor, as it
confirms the particular circumstance that the nobles were at the feast
assembled at the table of the king.”  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md) He adds, “The precise agreement of
Daniel with Herodotus and Xenophon is acknowledged by *Munter,* 50 100
page 67, to be astonishing, and even *Gesenius, Z. Jes.* 1, page 655,
cannot help calling it very astonishing.” For a fuller discussion of all
details, we refer at length to his conclusive work, merely giving our
vote in his favor, and against the ingenious hypothesis which it has
become necessary to state and explain.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p14"></span>The Great Feast. — The original word for
feast is “bread,” and this being united with “wine,” becomes the usual
mode of describing an eastern feast, where the people are all great
eaters of bread. “To eat bread,” and to “set on bread,” is the
scriptural method of indicating a feast. The number of the guests may
not have amounted to a thousand, as this is an eastern expression for a
large and surprising number, yet it is not incredible, since Harmer has
informed us that “a quadrangular court, within the first or outer gate
of the palace, was made use of for this purpose.”  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) *Willet* reminds us of this eastern
way of multiplying numbers by alluding to the 10,000 guests said to be
present at Alexander’s feast, and each of whom received a golden cup.
Ptolemy, the father of Cleopatra, made a similar banquet for Pompey. It
is supposed to have been an annual solemnity in honor of some deity, and
the art of “tasting of the wine” (verse 2) alludes to the custom of
tasting the libation previous to the sacrifice. *Wintle* very appositely
quotes *Virgil, AEn.* lib. i. 741, —

<span id="xiii.xvi-p16"></span>“<span
id="xiii.xvi-p16.1"></span>Primaque libato summo tenus attigit ore.”

<span id="xiii.xvi-p17"></span>This view is rendered highly probable by
the Chaldean custom recorded by Athenaeus,  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369.md) of sacrificing to small images, of
various metals, in human shape, an idolatry described in Baruch, <span
id="xiii.xvi-p18.1"></span>[Daniel
6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xvi-p18.1"></span>: 3.
*Willet* quotes Junius as stating that this feast occurred on the 16th
day of the month Loon, when it approached in character the Saturnalia
and Bacchanalia of the Greeks. “Tasting the wine” is rendered by the
Vulgate and the Alexandrine version as if its sense were “drunken,” and
thus the general idea of licentious revelry is carried out.

<span id="xiii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p1"></span>Dissertation 18.

<span id="xiii.xvii-p2"></span>THE QUEEN.

<span id="xiii.xvii-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xvii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010.md)<span id="xiii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p4"></span>Calvin doubts whether this was the wife
or grandmother of Belshazzar. But there is another possible solution.
*Prideaux* supposes she was the mother of the king, following the
narrative of Herodotus, though *Grotius* and *Josephus* represent her as
the widow of Nebuchadnezzar. The author of “The Times of Daniel” differs
from the received view of the times of Nitocris; she reigned, he
concludes, “in the generation before Nebuchadnezzar’s father.” Her name
is not found in the Astronomical Canon, and consequently either
Herodotus or the Canon must be mistaken. Nitocris, says Herodotus, lived
five generations after Semiramis, but then, according to *Bryant,* eight
different periods have been assigned for his reign, between A.C. 2177
and 713. Notwithstanding the celebrity which Herodotus has conferred
upon his name, it is impossible now to ascertain whether she was the
queen-mother alluded to in the text, but it is equally injudicious to
pronounce positively that she was not. *Hengstenberg* has discussed this
question with his usual sagacity. *Heeren* makes her the contemporary of
Nebuchadnezzar, and probably his wife; but *Hengstenberg* inclines to
the view of her being the queen-mother. “We may then justly compare what
Herodotus says of Nitocris with that which occurs here of the queen, and
it only need be quoted to shew a perfect agreement.”  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370.md) *Rosenmuller* agrees with Jerome in
thinking her the widow of Nebuchadnezzar, and *Oecolampadius* adopts the
same view, when commenting with great spirit and animation on this
point.

<span id="xiii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xviii-p1"></span>Dissertation 19.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p2"></span>THE HAND-WRITING ON THE WALL.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p3"></span><span
id="xiii.xviii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025.md)<span id="xiii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xviii-p4"></span>We are constantly reminded of the
necessity of a knowledge of words, if we would interpret aright the Word
of God. That record which is emphatically “The Word,” is composed in
detail of many words, and it is literally impossible so to understand
Holy Scripture as to expound it fully, without a knowledge and use of
single expressions. This remark is peculiarly applicable in the present
instance. Calvin takes each word separately in the perfect tense, while
in the Arabic, the past participle is used, viz., *mensuratum, appensum,
divisum.*

<span id="xiii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xviii-p5.1"></span>מנא*,
mene,* is the participle *pihel* of the verb <span
id="xiii.xviii-p5.2"></span>מנא*, mana, numeravit,* meaning to set
bounds to the continuance of anything.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p6"></span><span id="xiii.xviii-p6.1"></span>תקל*,
tekel,* is the Chaldee word for the Hebrew <span
id="xiii.xviii-p6.2"></span>שקל*, shekel,* to weigh — the shekel being a
standard weight of silver money. The reference is to the Almighty
weighing in the balances of Justice the conduct of the king.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p7"></span><span
id="xiii.xviii-p7.1"></span>ופרסיף*, upharsin* —<span
id="xiii.xviii-p7.2"></span> *et dividentes; Calvin* thus literally, and
*Rosenmuller* explains that the active participle plural is taken
impersonally, and is thus equal to the part. pass. sing. The ending
<span id="xiii.xviii-p7.3"></span>ן*,* n, it must be recollected, is the
Chaldee equivalent for the Hebrew <span id="xiii.xviii-p7.4"></span>ם

<span id="xiii.xviii-p8"></span>The allusion to the balance in relation
to a kingdom is common among ancient classical writers. Homer, Iliad,
lib. 22 and Virgil, AEn., lib. 12, contain instances; as well as the
Paradise Lost, Book 6.

<span id="xiii.xix"></span>

<span id="xiii.xix-p1"></span>Dissertation 20.

<span id="xiii.xix-p2"></span>THE MEDES AND PERSIANS.

<span id="xiii.xix-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xix-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#028.md)<span id="xiii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xix-p4"></span>IT is highly interesting to the student of
prophecy to trace the origin and progress of these empires which have
gained repute in the history of our race. This interest is increased
when we discover that the narratives of profane writers illustrate the
sacred text. And as great efforts have been made to impugn the
authenticity of this Book, we must again refer to some of the arguments
which induce the best divines to rely on its historical accuracy.

<span id="xiii.xix-p5"></span>The history of Media and its people
frequently impinges upon the eccentric orbit of the Jewish tribes. It
has been supposed that the name of the country was derived from <span
id="xiii.xix-p5.1"></span>כדי*, chadi,* the third son of Japhet, but
this conjecture is rendered futile, when we remember that the first
establishment of the kingdom dates only 150 years before Cyrus. It must
never be forgotten, when treating of these early times, how very modern
all writers are who lived after the times of Solomon. *To us* they
appear ancient, and their authority for the truth of an event
conclusive; but those historians of Asia, upon whom we are compelled to
rely, lived many ages after the occurrences which they record. It seems
now to be admitted, that we have lost many centuries between the flood
and Abraham; hence the attempt to assign the origin of any empire to the
immediate descendants of Noah is highly deceptive. We can only take the
best testimony which we have, but with it we must correct the
uncertainty of even the most positive assertions. The Medes, if we may
trust Herodotus, were an offset from the Assyrians. They broke off from
their sway, after the Assyrians had held the empire of Upper Asia for
five hundred and twenty years. The interesting story of Deioces, and the
foundation of Ecbatana is recorded, the account of that city
corresponding precisely with that handed down to us in the Book of
Judith.  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371.md) In process of time the
neighboring tribes were subdued and united, till Phraortes, having
reduced the Persians under his dominion, led the united nations against
the Assyrians. Cyaxares his son succeeded him, and both extended and
consolidated the Median sway. Astyages, the grandfather of Cyrus, was
his son and successor; and during the whole period of these monarchs’
reigns province after province was added to the growing empire. The
constant testimony of history from Herodotus to Ctesias asserts the
acquisition of Media by Cyrus to have been a forcible seizure. Here our
chief object is to impress upon the reader the scantiness of our early
materials, and the distance of time at which some of the historians who
record them lived after the events. Ctesias, for instance, was a young
physician at the Court of Artaxerxes, the brother of Cyrus the younger.
Although he wrote twenty-three books of Persian history, we have but a
few fragments collected by the diligence of Photion. Our attention is
therefore turned with the greatest earnestness towards the deciphering
of the monuments which abound on the banks of the rivers of Babylonia,
and throughout the whole land of Shinar. These have become the best
evidence in favor of the trustworthiness of Daniel, and against the
ingenious and inconsistent guesses of neology.

<span id="xiii.xix-p7"></span>*M. M. J. Baillie Fraser* and *W. Francis
Ainsworth* have treated the geological and geographical portion of the
subject with great success; the former in his work on “Mesopotamia and
Assyria,” and the latter in “Geological Researches.” See also the two
papers on “*The rivers and cities of Babylonia*” by the latter writer,
in the *New Monthly Magazine,* August and September, 1845. *The Duke of
Manchester* has collected much information from ancient historians, but
has not availed himself of the antiquarian researches, which describe
and identify the mounds and ruins at present in existence. *Vaux*’*s*
“Nineveh and Persepolis” also affords much material illustrative of this
portion of Daniel.

<span id="xiii.xx"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p1"></span>Dissertation 21.

<span id="xiii.xx-p2"></span>DARIUS THE MEDE.

<span id="xiii.xx-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xx-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031.md)<span id="xiii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p4"></span>THE received views respecting this
celebrated monarch have lately been impugned by the noble author of “The
Times of Daniel.” He gives five reasons for believing him to be Darius
Hystaspes instead of the Cyaxares of Xenophon, the uncle and
father-in-law of Cyrus. This assertion will therefore require some
notice in detail, and compel us to repeat some statements with which the
student of ancient history is familiar.

<span id="xiii.xx-p5"></span>The views of the author already alluded to
are, thus expressed, — “Three kings,” it is said, “of the name of Darius
occur in Scripture; must we not presume that the first Darius there
corresponds with Darius the first in profane history? that the second in
each equally agree; and that the third Darius, with whom the list
terminates in Scripture, is the third Darius with whom the line of
Persian kings closes?” There are strong marks in corroboration of the
Median of this verse being Hystaspes; some of these are as follows: —
*First,* each is said to have taken Babylon. Both levied taxes, so that
the second verse of chapter. 6 is said to be parallel to Herodotus, Book
3, and Strabo,  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372.md) Book 15. This
levying taxes leads to a similar assertion respecting Ahasuerus in
Esther, <span id="xiii.xx-p6.1"></span>[Es
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.xx-p6.1"></span>,
who reigned “from India even to Ethiopia.” (<span
id="xiii.xx-p6.2"></span>[Es 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiii.xx-p6.2"></span>.) “Now, Ahash-verosh, (meaning Ahasuerus,) who
succeeded Darius the Median, reigned over India,” and, according to
Herodotus, Darius Hystaspes conquered India; hence this Mede was Darius
Hystaspes. Pliny’s testimony is brought forward to shew that Susa was
built by this Darius;  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373.md) Ahasuerus
resided at Shushan, which is identical with Susa, hence the conclusion
is the same. Other reasons are given, and other collateral assertions
made. Authorities are quoted by which it is laid down that Ahasuerus was
Xerxes, the history of Esther occurred during the captivity, the son of
Ahasuerus was Darius Nothus, the third Darius was Codomanus. “To
complete the evidence, I will contrast the identification which I
propose with that which is now most generally approved of.”  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md)

<span id="xiii.xx-p9"></span>CANON OF PTOLEMY

<span id="xiii.xx-p10"></span>SCRIPTURE AS I PROPOSE

<span id="xiii.xx-p11"></span>Darius the First

<span id="xiii.xx-p12"></span>Darius the Median.

<span id="xiii.xx-p13"></span>Xerxes

<span id="xiii.xx-p14"></span>Ahashverosh.

<span id="xiii.xx-p15"></span>Artaxerxes the First.

<span id="xiii.xx-p16"></span>Artaxerxes the First, (Coresch.)

<span id="xiii.xx-p17"></span>Darius the Second.

<span id="xiii.xx-p18"></span>Darius the Second.

<span id="xiii.xx-p19"></span>Artaxerxes the Second.

<span id="xiii.xx-p20"></span>Son of Ahashverosh.

<span id="xiii.xx-p21"></span>Ochus

<span id="xiii.xx-p22"></span>Artaxerxes the Second.

<span id="xiii.xx-p23"></span>Arostes.

<span id="xiii.xx-p24"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xx-p25"></span>Darius the Third.

<span id="xiii.xx-p26"></span>Darius the Third, (fourth from Coresch,
<span id="xiii.xx-p26.1"></span>[Daniel
11](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#000)<span id="xiii.xx-p26.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.xx-p27"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xx-p28"></span>It is also suggested that <span
id="xiii.xx-p28.1"></span>[Jeremiah
50](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xx-p28.1"></span> and
<span id="xiii.xx-p28.2"></span>[Jeremiah
51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xx-p28.2"></span> of
Jeremiah apply to this Darius and not to Cyrus, as Dr. Keith asserts.
<span id="xiii.xx-p28.3"></span>[Jer
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011.md)<span id="xiii.xx-p28.3"></span>
and 28, are said to apply to Zopyrus, and the language of the chapter is
on the whole more suitable to the capture of Babylon by this Darius,
according to Herodotus, Book 3, than to that by Cyrus.

<span id="xiii.xx-p29"></span>The commonly received view is stated
shortly by *Rosenmuller,* — that this Mede was the Cyaxares II. of
Xenophon,  <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) the son of Astyages,
the uncle and father-in-law of Cyrus. AEschylus, in his tragedy of the
*Persae,*  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md) introduces Darius the
son of Hystaspes, recounting his origin from Darius the Mede.
*Josephus,* in the tenth Book of his Antiquities, says he was the son of
Astyages; and *Theodoret,* in his Commentary, identifies him with
Cyaxares. *Jerome* states that, in conjunction with his uncle Cyrus, he
subverted the Chaldean empire.

<span id="xiii.xx-p32"></span>“If Xenophon’s account of Cyrus be in
general admitted,”  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md) says
*Wintle,* “we cannot be at a loss to determine who was Darius the Mede;
and if even the defeat of Astyages be received according to Herodotus,
and it be placed in the tenth year of Cyrus’s reign over Persia Proper,
yet there seems no necessity to conclude but that the kingdom of Media
might still, with the consent of Cyrus, be continued to Cyaxares, his
mother’s brother, who might retain it till his death, after the conquest
of Babylon, which Herodotus attributes to Cyrus, after he had reduced
the neighboring powers.” He next proceeds to obviate one or two
chronological difficulties often considered as weighty objections to
Xenophon’s account. “The name of Darius is omitted in the Canon,
although he is allowed to have reigned more than one year, if he reigned
at all. How shall we then reconcile his history with the Canon? and
where or in what part must this reign be placed? The same answer will
serve for both inquiries. The Canon certainly allots nine years to Cyrus
over Babylon, of which space the two former years are usually allowed to
coincide with the reign of Cyaxares or Darius the Mede by the advocates
of Xenophon.” A MS. of *Archbishop Secker* is then quoted, in which he
gives reasons why Berosus might have overlooked this reign as
short-lived and nominal. *Prideaux* and *Usher,* and the *Ancient
Universal History,* are referred to for additional information.  <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378.md) With reference to the period before
us, it is concluded, from the close of this <span
id="xiii.xx-p34.1"></span>[Daniel
5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xx-p34.1"></span>,
“that Darius the Mede did not begin his reign till after the capture of
Babylon; and this event I am inclined to place in the next year after
the 17th of Nabonadius, in the 210th year of the Chaldean era, or 538
years before Christ, which was the first of Cyrus’s nine years. Whether
the defeat of Nabonadius and the taking of the city happened near the
same time, I need not determine; but it seems clear from Daniel, (<span
id="xiii.xx-p34.2"></span>[Da
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031)<span id="xiii.xx-p34.2"></span>,.md)
as well as from Xenophon, that the king was slain on the same night that
the city was taken; and this, I apprehend, must have happened about the
real year of the captivity 67, supposing the fourth of Jehoiakim to
agree with the year 605 before Christ, according to Blair.”

<span id="xiii.xx-p35"></span>Here again the researches of
*Hengstenberg* afford us valuable aid in discussing and reconciling the
various statements of historians. The silence of Herodotus and Ctesias
concerning a Median king of Babylon is noticed, and even concealment on
the part of the Persians is shewn to be highly probable.

<span id="xiii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p1"></span>Dissertation 22.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p2"></span>CAPTURE OF BABYLON.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031.md)<span id="xiii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p4"></span>IF the period of the city’s capture could
be accurately determined, many difficulties would be cleared up. Calvin
supposes it to have occurred in the last and eighth year of Belshazzar’s
reign, but the majority of commentators place it in the seventeenth or
eighteenth year. *Willet* makes his third year his last, as also
*Bullinger* and *Oecolampadius,* and this is done by following the short
Hebrew Chronicle, which places it at the fifty-second year of the
desolation of Jerusalem, and the seventieth of the kingdom of Babylon.
The Oriental Chronicle, according to the author of “*The Times of
Daniel,*” assigns twenty years, and the Alexandrian Chronicle only four
to this monarch; and such being the conflicting testimony of the most
ancient and authentic documents, it naturally happens that modern
writers select their own dates and their own systems according, first,
to their own acquaintance with the subject; and next, to their own
judgment of the best selection of authorities which can be made. The
only class of divines who appear disingenuous in such selections are
those Germans who attempt to impugn the historical accuracy of this
Prophet, by tacitly assuming that there is no real, and positive, and
consistent knowledge to be obtained from profane writers, and then by
asserting that a pseudo-Daniel has displayed either ignorance,
carelessness, or deception. They appeal to the historians of Greece, as
if they were contemporary with the events which they record, and prefer
throwing doubt upon the sacred narrative, to sifting the evidence upon
which they believe the profane.

<span id="xiii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p1"></span>Dissertation 23.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p2"></span>THE THREE PRESIDENTS.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p3"></span><span id="xiii.xxii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002.md)<span id="xiii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p4"></span>This division of the kingdom into 120
provinces is exactly in accordance with the assertion of Xenophon, who
says that Cyrus appointed satraps over the conquered nations. *Usher,*
in his *Annals,* thinks that Darius followed the suggestion of Cyrus,
who instituted this method of government. This verse is reconciled with
the first of Esther, by remembering that after the conquest of Egypt by
Cambyses, and of Thrace and India by Darius Hystaspes, seven provinces
were added to the number. *Junius,* according to *Willet,* states, that
after spending a year in settling the affairs of Babylon, he resigned
all power to Darius. He approves of Calvin’s phrase, “*regnare in
commune,*” implying the joint reign of both kings. *Josephus* is in
error in multiplying the number by three. The reason for the appointment
of these presidents may be understood variously. The Latin interpreter,
says *Willet,* translates<span id="xiii.xxii-p4.2"></span>נזק , *nezek,*
by *molestiam,* meaning “trouble,” Darius is represented as sixty-two
years of age, and naturally fatigued by the wear and tear of an active
life. Daniel is elevated to an office equivalent to that of the Turkish
grand Vizier, and the crime imputed to him seems similar to that of Rome
— “crimen laesae *majestatis,*” a kind of high treason. The word <span
id="xiii.xxii-p4.3"></span>עלה, *gnillah,* (<span
id="xiii.xxii-p4.4"></span>[Da
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004)<span id="xiii.xxii-p4.4"></span>,.md)
is translated by *Wintle* very appropriately “action” in the forensic
sense, equivalent to the Greek *aijtiva.* These presidents and princes
came in concourse and tumultuously before the king. The Vulgate
“surripuerunt,” came by stealth, is disapproved by *Wintle.*

<span id="xiii.xxii-p5"></span>**<span
id="xiii.xxii-p5.2"></span>[Daniel
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007.md)<span
id="xiii.xxii-p5.2"></span>.** The Decree by which Daniel was entrapped
has occasioned the special cavil of *Bertholdt* and his adherents. They
have treated it as an erroneous fiction, but have been appositely
refuted by *Hengstenberg.* Oriental kings, he reminds us, were often
treated as objects of exclusive worship. *Heeren* has stated “that the
kings of the Medes and Persians were regarded and worshipped as
representations and incarnations of Ormuzd.”  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379.md) In the sacred books of the Zend
religion, “Iran, the Medo-Bactrian kingdom under Gustasp, is to him the
image of the kingdom of Ormuzd; the king himself the image of Ormuzd;
Turan, the northern nomad land, where Afrasiat rules, is the image of
the kingdom of darkness, under the rule of Ahriman.” The king was the
visible manifestation of Ormuzd, like him, commanding, with unlimited
power, the seven princes of the empire; next in rank to him were the
representatives of the seven Amshaspands, who stood round the throne of
Ormuzd. Similar testimony respecting the worship paid to the monarchs of
the East, is given by Plutarch, Xenophon, Socrates, and Arrian. Curtius
distinctly asserts, that the Persians worshipped their kings among their
gods, so that the credibility of Daniel is fully vindicated by the
records of profane antiquity. On the royal tombs at Persepolis, there
are various sculptures representing the Persian kings as gods, and in De
Sacy’s Persian inscriptions, they are termed the offspring of gods.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p7"></span>**<span
id="xiii.xxii-p7.2"></span>[Daniel
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiii.xxii-p7.2"></span>** Daniel’s Conduct And Prayer, as here
recorded, have been questioned by some German critics, on the ground of
practices and usages as yet unknown in Upper Asia. The custom of praying
towards Jerusalem, it is said, did not arise among the Jews living
abroad, till after the rebuilding of the temple. But it must not be
forgotten that it prevailed among the Jews from early times. David
prayed towards the sanctuary, and raised his hands towards it. The
Dedication prayer of Solomon contains a distinct injunction to the same
effect. The very place, says Stolberg, where the temple had stood and
was again to stand, was holy to Daniel.  <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) The hours, at which the Prophet
offered up his prayer are said to belong to the fine-spun religiousness
of the later Jews. But this assertion is made in forgetfulness of the
ancient custom of all nations to have fixed and invariable periods for
the worship of their deities. *Willet* approves of *Calvin*’*s* comments
on this passage, and *Oecolampadius* considers it a thanksgiving for the
encouraging beginning, happy success, and prosperous end of our
undertakings. *Willet* also discusses the propriety of Daniel’s exposing
himself thus openly to the malice of his enemies, after he knew of the
king’s decree. He agrees on the whole with the practical comment of
*Calvin,* and adduces it as an example of perseverance in the line of
duty, in full confidence of the protecting power of God, and in defiance
of all the malice of the most inveterate foes.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p9"></span>**<span
id="xiii.xxii-p9.2"></span>[Daniel
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiii.xxii-p9.2"></span>.** The Open Windows Towards Jerusalem. —
Various writers have supposed this action of the Prophet’s to be the
result of ostentation. *Calvin* has treated this point ably, and
*Wetstein,* in his Notes on <span id="xiii.xxii-p9.3"></span>[Ac
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013.md)<span id="xiii.xxii-p9.3"></span>,
has explained the nature of “the upper chamber” in the Jewish houses,
and their use either as oratories or for other solemn or festive
purposes. *Shaw,* in his Travels, alludes to their structure and use.
The light was usually admitted into these upper rooms through large
windows, and the Jews naturally turned towards Jerusalem in prayer, with
earnest longing for speedy deliverance. The “three times a-day” has been
used by *Bellarmine*  <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) as an
argument for the canonical hours of the Romish Church, and *Pintus* goes
further to insist on seven, according to <span
id="xiii.xxii-p10.1"></span>[Psalm
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xxii-p10.1"></span>.
But all these arguments which enforce Christian duties by Jewish
practices are erroneous. *Calvin*’*s* principle is judiciously stated,
but it is founded on enlightened and Christian common sense, and not in
a blind adherence to Jewish traditions. Similar principles should guide
us as to praying towards the east. *Oecolampadius* refers to the
supposed Apostolic tradition of worshipping towards the east, but he
reprobates it as superstitious. *Nos patriam nostram in cælis habemus,
et a Deo originem.* Irenaeus  <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382.md)
ascribes this superstition as a heresy to the Ebionites. Daniel’s open
profession of his faith in God has been censured as too bold and in
judged for our imitation, but it has also been ably vindicated as an
example of perseverance in religious duty when our conscience justifies
us in maintaining God’s truth before men. *Willet* approves of
*Calvin*’*s* distinction “of Confession, that it is of two sorts, *cum
palam testamur, quod est in animo, et ne aliquod perversoe simulationis
signum demus.*”

<span id="xiii.xxii-p12"></span>While this sheet is passing through the
press, a very illustrative work, confirming the historical accuracy of
Daniel, has been published, entitled “Nineveh And Its Palaces: *the
Discoveries of Botta and Layard applied to the elucidation of Holy Writ;
by* Joseph Bonomi, F.R.S.L.” It contains the latest and best
interpretations of the cuneiform inscriptions, and is worthy of
attentive perusal.

<span id="xiii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p1"></span>Dissertation 24

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p2"></span>THE KING’S DECEASE.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p3"></span><span
id="xiii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>[Daniel
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028.md)<span id="xiii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p4"></span>Could we ascertain accurately when death
closed “the reign of Darius,” most of the controversies concerning the
history of these times and personages would be set at rest. We have
first to determine *who Darius was?* and secondly, to discover whether a
portion of his reign is contemporaneous with that of Cyrus? With respect
to the first point, it ought to be fully understood that there is no
actual correspondence between this monarch and any well-attested ruler
mentioned in profane history. The balance of probabilities is in favor
of his being Cyaxares, but we have already stated how Xenophon, Ctesias,
and Herodotus differ on the point; and we are careful to repeat this,
because the futility of the Neologian arguments might otherwise entrap
the unwary. For instance, *Dr. Wells* has the following Note: — “It is
to be observed that in Ptolemy’s Canon the two years of Darius the
Mede’s reign are reckoned to Cyrus, who accordingly has therein nine
years assigned for his reign; whereas Xenophon assigns but seven years
to it, reckoning the first year the same as Ezra doth, viz., from the
death of Darius and Cambyses.” *Wintle* again states, “there is no doubt
but Darius the Mede, whoever he was, reigned, according to Daniel, from
the capture of Babylon till this same first year of Cyrus, or till the
commencement of the reign allotted by Scripture to Cyrus the Persian.”
(Preface, where reference is made to a Memoir by *M. Freret,* containing
many just and accurate dates assigned to the life and transactions of
Cyrus.) The reader cannot fail to perceive that this sentence leaves the
two important questions in as much doubt as ever. Dr. Eadie, of the
American Presbyterian Church, states, too, positively, “The kingdom of
Babylon was given by Cyrus to Darius the Mede, or Cyaxares II., as a
reward for his services; and after his death, at the end of two years,
this kingdom returned to Cyrus, and hence Cyrus is spoken of as if he
were the successor of Darius at Babylon. <span
id="xiii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>[Da
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>.” — (Art., *Daniel,* in his *Bibl. Cycl.*)
*Willet* informs us that *Tertullian* and *Cyril of Jerusalem* took
Darius for Darius Hystaspes, and the noble Duke, to whom we have already
referred, agrees in this opinion, and argues very elaborately in its
favor.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p5"></span>The German Neologians have not been slow
to construct a charge of inaccuracy against Daniel, in consequence of
these historic difficulties. Bertholdt, Bleek, and De Wette, treat it as
an error to call Cyaxares II by the name of Darius, and suppose it a
confusion with the son of Hystaspes. But before the commentator on
Scripture ventures to use the phrase, “historic inaccuracy,” he must
first clearly ascertain what historic accuracy really is. An unlearned
reader might suppose from their reasonings that all the profane
historians agreed in their accounts, and that the only element of
confusion was that introduced by the narrative of Scripture. But the
truth is far otherwise. No two authors agree in their statements
throughout. Ancient history is, in fact, simply an ideal deduction from
a variety of conflicting traditions. Of Cyaxares II., for instance,
neither Herodotus nor Justin say anything. Neither of them mention any
son of Astyages. Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and Polyaenus, agree with
them in asserting that the Median empire closed with Astyages, and the
Persian began at once with Cyrus; and yet there is evidence to shew that
Darius the Mede was a real person. “Still farther,” says Hengstenberg,
“the author agrees in another special fact with profane history.
Xenophon relates  <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383.md) that soon
after the taking of Babylon, the conquered lands were divided into
provinces, and governors set over them. All this is stated in our book,
too.” Are we, indeed, to infer, from a mere difference of names, that
the author is chargeable with confounding them? The Cambyses of profane
writers is called in the book of Ezra, Achaschverosh (Ahasuerus).
Pseudo-smerdis bears in profane writers two different names — in
Ctesias, Spendates; in Justin, Oropastes; and in Ezra he appears under a
third name, Artachshasta (Artaxerxes). “Now, why is this appearance in
all other cases unanimously explained on the ground that the names of
kings were not *nomina propria,* but surnames, whilst, on the contrary,
in this single instance, this explanation is not once proposed as
possible? And yet in this very case this explanation is quite natural,
since it is generally allowed that the name Darius in particular is an
appellation. That it was a mere title appears from this, that several
different kings bear it.” Herbelot says the name Dara is Persian, and
appellative, signifying “sovereign.”  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384.md)

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p9"></span>When we descend to the historians of the
Christian era, we find in the Armenian Chronicle of Eusebius a
confirmation of the narrative under review. In a short appendix to a
fragment of Abydenus, found also in the *Praeparatio Evangelica,* Darius
is distinctly mentioned as king; so that if it be impossible to be
certain as to the identity of this king with Cyaxares, yet it must be
remembered that profane history, *independently of Scripture,* is at
variance with itself, and that no new clement of discord is introduced
by our Prophet. Let the objector first settle what the events connected
with the overthrow of Babylon from uninspired authorities really were,
and we shall then be prepared to shew that the writer of this book was
free from inaccuracies, and that all the obscurity hovering over the
subject arises from our very imperfect knowledge of the occurrences of
this period. And the more fully the assertions of the Neologists are
investigated, the more baseless will their charges against this Prophet
of Jehovah appear.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p10"></span>THE PROLONGATION OF DANIEL’S LIFE.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p11"></span><span
id="xiii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>[Daniel
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p12"></span>THE prolongation of our Prophet’s life
till the era specified in this verse, is worthy of our notice, that we
may, if possible, accurately ascertain his age at leading periods of his
history. We cannot ascertain precisely the year of his entrance into
public life. He was born shortly before King Josiah’s death, probably
about 620 B.C.; and thus he had many opportunities of cultivating that
early piety for which he was conspicuous. He was about fourteen years
old when taken captive to Babylon. Three years afterwards, the king of
Israel threw off the Babylonian yoke, and thus he and his companions
became hostages and forerunners of the capture of the whole nation. From
*Jahn*’*s Biblical Antiquities,* we learn how skilled he was in various
sciences after three years’ training, (pages 99, 100;) and the high
opinion which was entertained of his integrity, wisdom, and piety, is
confirmed by this remarkable honor paid to him by the Prophet *Ezekiel.*
He is connected, *while alive,* with Noah and Job. (See <span
id="xiii.xxiii-p12.2"></span>[Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiii-p12.2"></span>, and Calvin’s comment on the passage in
our Edition, volume 2.)

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p13"></span>The dream and its interpretation in
<span id="xiii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>[Daniel
2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>
occurred during Daniel’s youth, and resulted in his promotion with his
three friends to the highest offices of the kingdom. We now lose sight
of him for thirty years, and it is impossible to determine whether he
sat at the king’s gate during the whole of this period. The erection of
the image on the plains of Dura, and the subsequent punishment of his
three companions, seem inconsistent with his residence at that time at
Babylon as an adviser of his sovereign. The three “children,” as they
are termed in <span id="xiii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>[Da
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>, were now about fifty years of age; and it
has become necessary to remark this, because some have spoken of them as
still children when thus miraculously delivered from destruction. We too
often take for granted impressions of this kind, which we have
imperceptibly imbibed in our earliest days; and besides this, the works
of the great masters in painting have fostered the error. These splendid
productions of European art are often glaringly untrue, yet while based
upon fabulous anachronisms, they too often adhere to the imagination,
and influence our thoughts in days of more mature advancement. At the
period of the dream in <span id="xiii.xxiii-p13.3"></span>[Daniel
4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xxiii-p13.3"></span>
Daniel was about fifty years of age; and thus we have another gap of
about fifteen years. Belshazzar had now ascended his grandfather’s
throne. The mystic characters on the wall soon reveal a fearful reality.
Darius the Mede still esteems the upright counselor, and he had become a
venerable “ancient of days” before he is thrust into the lion’s den.
During the first year of King Darius, he learned, from the Book of
Jeremiah, the approaching period of Judah’s deliverance. During the
third year of Cyrus, he is favored with a vision on the banks of the
Tigris. (<span id="xiii.xxiii-p13.4"></span>[Jer
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiii-p13.4"></span>.) We cannot ascertain how long he lived
after this period, but he was at least eighty years of age when he died.
Various assertions and traditions exist among the Jews respecting both
the time and place of his decease, and these have passed current,
through the unsuspecting simplicity of some of our older expounders, who
record as certain the hazardous statements of the authorities on which
they rely. *Dr. Wells,* after comparing various dates, concludes, “that
Daniel was about eighty-nine or ninety years old in the third year of
Cyrus;” he pays no regard to the conjectures of some, who make him to
have lived one hundred and thirty-eight, or one hundred and fifty years,
and adds the possibility of his reaching one hundred years.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p14"></span>Our object in view in impressing this
chronology is to disabuse the public mind of the Romish ideas connected
with what they term, “The song of the three children.” Their usual
method of treating these three martyrs for truth and holiness is utterly
erroneous, and like every other error of theirs, injurious and
pernicious in proportion as it deviates from the Written And Infallible
Word Of The Living God.

<span id="xiii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p1"></span>Concluding Remarks.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p2"></span>Having brought our Dissertations on the
Historical portion of this sacred book to a close, we have still another
duty to discharge in editing these Commentaries. We have already
defended our Reformer from the charges of the German Neologist, and from
the censures of the fanciful expounders of prophecy; We have now merely
to offer a few comments on the Practical Inferences which Calvin so ably
draws from the inspired narrative. While perusing this volume, the
reader must often have felt the difference between the state of the
world in the days of Nebuchadnezzar and his own. Those were emphatically
days of visions, and marvels, and visibly divine interpositions. We, on
the contrary, pass on along the even tenor of the walk of life, without
expecting to behold a hand-writing on the wall, or to experience the
all-devouring heat of a “burning fiery furnace.” We see no vision in the
night season foretelling the wonders of an unknown future, and expect
neither magician nor prophet to expound with the authority of heaven the
images of our sleeping hours. Yet, with our Reformer, we see the world
agitated in all quarters with unexpected revolutions. Oppression, and
intrigue, and tyranny, prevail among the rulers of Europe and of
Christendom, and there seems no human means adequate to the task of
stemming the tide of recklessness and infidelity as it overflows the
nations. If these comments on scriptural prophecy are to be useful in
our day and generation, they need some connecting links of
interpretation which may apply the general principles enunciated to the
practical problem to be worked out. Otherwise, we either make no
intelligent use of such a history as this volume contains, or else we
apply it wrong. The latter error is a very common one; and as many are
liable to its commission, we trust these Concluding Remarks will be
found suitable and instructive. It may appear to many readers that
Calvin in his Practical Exhortations overlooks this difference between a
miraculous dispensation and the ordinary condition of God’s people under
the New Covenant. If he be somewhat open to this charge, it is readily
accounted for by the times in which he lived. Calvin, like Daniel, was
an exile from his fatherland. The house of Valois and their tyrant kings
were to him the exact counterparts of the Babylonian monarchs. They were
absolute sovereigns, and most ferocious persecutors of the people of the
Lord. The Medici, the Guises, and the Lorraines of his day were to him
the very antitypes of the nobles who fawned upon Nebuchadnezzar, and of
the presidents who inveigled Darius. In his Dedicatory Epistle prefixed
to this volume, the pious in France are represented as in a position
exactly similar to that of the Jews during their captivity. The parallel
being in each case so striking and so different to what we see and
experience in these days, we need not be surprised at Calvin’s
expectation of special interpositions, and at our own backwardness to
appreciate the full suitability of his comments. Now there is clearly a
sense in which such “special deliverance’s” are real, and a sense in
which they are not. And as this is a point of some importance involving
the idea of the Almighty which our Reformer has presented to us in the
preceding pages, we shall comment at some length on a few passages of
importance.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p3"></span>For instance, on <span
id="xiii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>[Da
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>,
and following, we have a full reply to unbelieving objections to God’s
providential government of the world. The profane are said to consider
all things acted upon by a “blind impulse,” and “others affirm the human
race to be a kind of sport to God, since men are tossed about like
balls.” The chief cavils of the Reformation Period were those which
proceeded from complete skepticism. Philosophers having thrown off the
superstitions of Popery naturally doubted and disputed all things. The
reasoners of Calvin’s days were something like those intelligent Hindoos
who are now worshippers of neither Brahma nor Christ. They are in a
transition state, and having unlearned so much, they scarcely know where
to lay the foundation-stone of trustworthy belief. Throughout these
Lectures, our author is constantly answering the arguments of those
contemporaries who felt the hollowness of Rome, and had not yet tried
the firmness of Geneva. Still *to us* his replies may not be convincing.
This remark applies to the following passage. “If the sun always rose
and set at the same period, or at least certain symmetrical changes took
place yearly, without any casual change; if the days of winter were not
short, and those of summer not long, we might then discover the same
order of nature, and in this way God would be rejected from his
dominion.” Here we must remember that in Calvin’s days most men were
ignorant of those general laws and all-pervading principles by which the
Author of nature governs and sustains the universe. In his day, there
was scarcely any choice between the system which represented the
Almighty removed in a kind of Epicurean repose far away from the works
of his hand, and a system which supposed him to interfere arbitrarily
and suddenly in favor of one party, and to rim discomfiture of another.
Since this period, the researches of modern science have discovered for
us the numerous, the simple, and seemingly self-acting principles,
according to which the days of winter are short, and those of summer
long. We can contemplate humbly “the same order of nature” from year to
year with undeviating regularity, and yet never be tempted “to reject
God from his dominion.” Yea, the marvel is this, the more we are trained
to view the comprehensive theories of physical astronomy, and chemistry,
and magnetism, the more are we led to adore and to magnify the Great and
the All-powerful Original. Such studies do not lead us to “erect nature
into a deity,” and to reject the Creator from his own dominion. They
rather lead us to detect the fallacy in the expression “nature does this
or that;” they prove to us that there is no such existence as “nature,”
but that the word is but an expression for a complex and comprehensive
idea of external objects, in the minds of men. The Almighty is seen by
the true naturalist, in all his works, not as interposing visibly and
surprisingly at one time, and leaving all things to themselves at
another; but rather as impressing on every created particle of matter
its own condition of obedience to certain laws which we call either
mechanical or chemical, vital or organic. And it is the merciful
arrangement of providence that a persevering study of God’s works
prepares the mind for an intelligent perusal of his word. The habit of
looking for such general principles as gravitation, attraction,
organization, and development, of applying these theories to practice by
the process of mathematical reasoning, or anatomical dexterity, and of
arriving at results indisputably true, — this habit of mind is an
excellent preparative for the equally discursive pursuit of revealed
theology. Thus we readily detect the fallacy of ascribing the events of
life to either fortune, or chance, or nature. Calvin had to contend with
them as if they were realities; we may profit by Locke’s chapter on
complex ideas, and treat them as expressions comprehending many separate
existence’s, so related to each other that we form “a collective idea”
of the whole.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4"></span>By continuing this process of thought we
are enabled to explain, although not to defend certain phrases of
Calvin’s respecting the prerogatives of God. On <span
id="xiii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>[Da
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>,
men are said to “mingle God and angels in complete confusion,” and on
<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>[Da
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#021.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>,
God is said to be “excluded from the government of the world,” The
moment our attention is turned to the point, we perceive that the ideas
only of God and angels can be mingled, and in imagination only can men
exclude the Almighty from his sway over the wills of mankind. Such
phrases, we must remember, are the remnants of that *realism* which
lingered in the minds of many of the Reformers, and still clings to the
writings of some of their successors. Such expressions as we meet with
on <span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.3"></span>[Da
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.3"></span>,
“Draw down God from heaven,” and on <span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.4"></span>[Da
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4.4"></span>,
“to deprive the Almighty of his sway,” are better avoided. The same
thought may be expressed in language more adapted to our enlarged views
of the glory of our Creator. The Hebrew Prophets, it has been said,
“dramatized the particulars of their mission,” and their symbolical
portraits of the Almighty were afterwards received as exact and literal
descriptions of his character. The Jewish people, even in the time of
Daniel, were but in the infancy of moral and intellectual growth; and to
them the well-known proverb most aptly applies, “*Omne ignotum, pro
magnifico.*” Everything marvelous was attributed at once to the direct
agency of a deity, disturbing rather than controlling the occurrences of
life. Thus the world, and its surprising tumults, successes, struggles,
and reverses, appeared but a scene of fortuitous and capricious chance.
But the more we advance from infancy to manhood, the more we gain power
to methodize these moral phenomena under some fixed and intelligible
arrangement.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p5"></span>It is possible to present from the word
of God another reply to the Epicurean suppositions of Calvin’s day, on
principles in advance of those which he adopts. While he represents
kings as actually contending with the Almighty, and really attempting to
hurl him from his throne in heaven, we must remember that such language
can only be suggestive. The foundation of all true reverence for Deity
is the idea of an infinite and invisible Being, of whose wisdom and
might the material universe is the product, and of whose moral nature
the conscience of man is the image. When asked for rigid proof of this
assertion, we are constrained to refer it to that faith which is
peculiarly his gift. The double postulate of that essential existence
which is spiritual, and of something in ourselves, which is his image,
is the necessary rock upon which we must be placed before we can
understand our origin and our destiny — our position in the universe —
our moral relation to that system of providence into which we find
ourselves born. And this series of providential occurrences is in many
respects exactly the opposite to that described in these six chapters of
Daniel. Miraculous and supernatural agency is here variously employed to
counteract what are known to us as the ordinary laws of nature. The
simple will of the Almighty annihilates the effect of fire in the
furnace, and the ferocity of lions in their den. A sweeping act of his
power converts one despot into the appearance of a beast of prey, and
affrights another by the ominous appearance of a hand writing vengeance
on a wall. We cannot expect such special revelations, judgments, or
deliverance’s. Our study of the character of Deity is contained in the
revealed record of such wonders, and in the present and past history of
man and of the physical world. Moral and natural philosophy, under the
guidance of revealed religion, is for us the exponent of the idea of
Deity. The omnipresence of mind in outward nature is now all but visible
to every student. Vast as the universe is, we know it to be pervaded by
a moral purpose, and this presents that view of Deity which provides for
adoration, and love, and reverence, without limit, and satisfies the
longings for worship which are implanted deeply in the human soul. Thus
we clothe the idea of an infinite spirit with the attributes of a human
conscience; we are not satisfied with “a dynamic center of the
universe,” we desire to feel our souls overflow with that mingled wonder
and love which constitutes the highest and noblest worship of him who is
Good. The history of nations and of families impresses upon us the idea
of a personal providential Divinity, having fellow-feeling with the
wants and distresses, the joys and the sorrows of mankind. Now, we also
believe that there are general, harmonious, ever-acting laws of his
providential government as well as of his physical. And the study of
ordinary sciences disciplines the mind, and qualifies it to perceive,
and arrange, and reason upon analogous laws in the moral and religious
government of our immortal spirits. A firm persuasion that there is no
disorder or disturbance in God’s moral sway — that he is not influenced
by caprice, or swayed by favoritism, or turned aside by passionate
entreaty, is necessary as the key-stone to the arch of Christian wisdom.
Those very confusions of which our Reformer writes so vigorously in his
Dedicatory Epistle, ascribing them to the “red and sanguinary cohorts
and horned beasts,” were all in accordance with those uniformity’s of
action which we now designate *general laws.* So far from considering it
possible for God to “sit at ease in heaven and desert and betray his own
cause,” our firm reliance on the permanence of those principles which
underlie and encompass all others, is thereby tested and increased. The
phenomena of political government, of religious persecution, and of
social outbursts of fury and fanaticism, obey laws as orderly and as
undeviating as those which regulate the motion of a planet or the
passage of electricity along the wire. Through and by means of this
“setting up and pulling down of kings,” the Almighty speaks a language
addressed alike to our reason, our conscience, and our faith. But the
great guarantee of our spiritual improvement is the fundamental belief
that there is harmony, and classification, and inflexible regularity
throughout the whole moral government of God. The very possibility of
accident, or favoritism, or isolated marvel, must be banished from our
thoughts. We know, by long course of proof and experience, that they do
not exist in the physical world, and we cannot allow them a single
foot-print within the domain of our moral and spiritual nature. Nothing
here can be an anomaly, nothing an exception. In the uncultivated mind,
there is an avidity for the marvelous, and a morbid eagerness for a
cheap and easy solution of the solemn mysteries concerning God and the
soul; but our educated religious life is like “a star hovering on the
horizon’s verge between night and morning.” Thus, by faith we stand at
the parting of the two roads, imagined by Plate’s great Parmenides,
between the seeming and the true. As this star shines brighter over our
path, mere external ceremonies and notional expressions become more and
more objects of distrust; and the ideas of God and of the soul, of sin
and of conscience, of heaven and of glory, become more and more vivid
and real to us. And if any are afraid that the pursuit of either
scientific, or moral, or religious truth, according to the principles
here laid down, will injure true religion or saving faith, the single
antidote to this fear is found in the exhortation, “Have faith in God.”
(<span id="xiii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>[Mr
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#022.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>.) Throughout these Lectures our Reformer
ever clings to this scriptural principle, and even illustrates his
subject ably, practically, and improvingly; while he all along labors
under the difficult task of rendering a narrative interspersed with
miracle available for the improvement of modern Christians who live
under a totally different dispensation.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p6"></span>As another illustration of this
difficulty, we may turn to <span id="xiii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>[Da
6:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025.md)<span
id="xiii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>, where our commentator asserts of the
profane, that they so unite minor deities with the true that “he lies
hid in a crowd, although he enjoys a slight pre-eminence.” Such simple
and racy language is easily intelligible, but scarcely dignified enough.
It justifies the assertion that in the infancy of great truths, language
is an index of our ignorance rather than of our knowledge. Truly enough
all men “wander confusedly” when they attempt to render palpable to
others their contemplations of a Deity. This idea is the most vague and
comprehensive of all — a universal solvent of all problems in the early
stage of our religious existence. The Egyptians and the Greeks saw a god
everywhere — in hill, in brook, in bird and beast. They manifested no
lack of faith in the existence of beings far superior to themselves; and
when the priest set up the ugly idol in its gorgeous temple, he never
imagined he was creating a god for either himself or the people. He only
attempted, after his fashion, to give fixity and embodiment to the ideas
of Deity which were floating about indefinitely in the minds of the
multitude. But the interval was wide indeed between these metaphorical
symbols and the simple abstract idea of one self-acting Being ruling the
conscience and swaying the future destinies of all men. When the tree of
knowledge was separated from the tree of life, a dark and forlorn
interval succeeded, during which mankind underwent long struggles of
disquietude in “feeling after” the Almighty One. And we have been
permitted to find him. To believe in his permanent presence and
providence, to cling to him with the trust of a child to a parent, to
follow after him, with no voice but his word acting on conscience and
cheering while it guides, to trust him even amid the darkest prospects,
— this it is to have faith in God. And this trust is not the mere result
of reason, or understanding, or sentiment, or speculation. It is woven
into our deepest instincts and our noblest aspirations. It unites them
all. It is completed in love. What the profane call Nature, all who
sympathize in Darius’s proclamation concerning Daniel’s God, feel to be
a legislation of love. A parent whose government is unerring and
complete is ever setting before us the unalterable Law as an exhibition
of unchanging love. The very severity and uncompromising character of
this idea of Deity proves the crowning beneficence of his kingship over
the powers of this world. Inflexible justice and unerring certainty
become the highest proofs of all-pervading benevolence. Herein lies the
perfection of constancy and truth. The conscience is thus felt to be the
vicegerent of this Divinity within. Forms of thought and expression must
change, and since Calvin’s time, in the course of three centuries, they
have passed through many changes; and man’s religious condition must
always be modified by the extension of his knowledge, his experience,
and his educated capacities. Many habitual modes of thought current in
the days of *Oecolampadius* and *Willet* have been set aside; the
disturbance of feeling which this occasioned has subsided, and our
comprehension of God’s moral sway over the affairs of men has been
enlarged and purified by the change. His hand-writing is now legible to
us on ten thousand walls where of old it was a blank. The wonder which
has been removed from special facts has been transferred to general
laws; and if “the dream and its interpretation” are not now sent as
proofs of his providence, there has sprung up instead equally striking
indications of it in every dewdrop and in every flower.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p7"></span>The Practical Improvement which is so
appositely made of every occurrence throughout this historical portion
of the Lectures, constitutes a large share of their value. They always
plead fervently for justice; always and everywhere they place justice
first. They shew us that the absolute will of the most unbending tyranny
must ultimately yield to the Divine omnipotence of justice, and that all
defenses which human power may raise against human rights are utterly
vain. He who would be god-like must first be just, and whatever else may
be avoided, there is no escape from an avenging judge and a
self-torturing conscience. These Lectures encourage us to harbor no
distrust that permanent evil will arise to us from doing manfully our
duty; they banish all fear that religion should suffer from the
withdrawing of any supports which are proved to be unsound. They stir us
up to do the work assigned to us while yet it is day with affectionate
fidelity and all earnestness of zeal, and are specially instructive in
an age like ours, more remarkable for the variety of its creeds than the
intensity of its faith. Certainly the ancient spirit of righteousness,
which flourished so vigorously under the crushing despotism of the House
of Valois, is not strong within us. That spirit may be characterized as
moral courage and religious earnestness combined with love to Christ and
readiness to peril life for his name. And while it has almost died out
in these days, the practical exhortations of these Lectures may, by
God’s blessing, aid in its revival.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8"></span>Connected with the practical exposition
of our Prophet, we find a passage in <span
id="xiii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>[Daniel
5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>
which demands our notice. In commenting on <span
id="xiii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>[Da
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005.md)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>,
and explaining that the hand which wrote upon the wall was not real, but
only a figure, it is said, “Scripture often uses this form of speech,
and especially when treating external symbols.” “*Est ergo haec etiam
sacramentalis loquutio, ut ita loquar.*” It would surprise us to find
the word “sacramental” introduced here, if we were unacquainted with the
modes of thought and expression in which Calvin was brought up. But when
we remember the very strong hold which the phraseology of the schoolmen
had upon the minds of all who were early imbued with it, we enter at
once into the fullness of its meaning. We have already stated in our
Dissertations On Ezekiel, that the theology of Europe was, during the
middle ages, entirely moulded according to the teaching of either the
Realists or the Nominalists. It was so then, and it is so now. These two
classes of mental cultivation still govern the theological studies of
mankind, and will probably do so till the end of our Christian
dispensation. The theology of Rome is the growth of the scholastic
philosophy built up by the Realists; the teaching of the Reformers
springs entirely from that of the Nominalists. All leanings to Rome have
in them the essence of Realism, made manifest by some Romanizing
tendencies; and all Ultra-Protestantism verges towards a series of
negatives based upon Nominalism. We have already alluded to the first
nominalist, to whom Luther and Melancthon own their deep obligations.
“The real originator of the Protestant principle,” says the author of
*The Vindication of Protestant Principles,* “the first man who truly
emancipated himself from the trammels of Popish ecclesiolatry, the
first, in fact, who referred everything to Scripture, and asserted the
right of private judgment in its interpretation, was our own countryman,
William of Ockham, in Surrey.” He died at Munich in the year 1347, just
170 years before Luther fastened his ninety-five propositions to the
church doors at Wittenberg. Leopold Ranke also asserts that the
celebrated nominalist, Gabriel Biel, was chiefly an epitomizer of this
favorite writer of Melancthon’s. (See Vindic. Prot. Prin.) The Zurich
Letters (<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8.3"></span>Ep. 23<span
id="xiii.xxiv-p8.3"></span>, Park. Soc.) inform us of the language of
Bishop Jewel when writing to Peter Martyr, 5th November 1559, — “We have
deserted the ranks of Scotus and Aquinas for those of the Occamists and
Nominalists,” 1842. This sentence condenses under a short formula the
very essence of the controversies which now agitate Christendom at
large. We cannot dwell here on the proofs of this important statement;
we can only remind the reader of these Lectures that he will find some
lingering traces of the realism which once pervaded the theology of
Europe, and in which Calvin was brought up. We all know how exceedingly
difficult it is utterly to efface the earliest impressions made upon an
earnest and deeply speculative mind. Whenever, for instance, some of the
expressions with respect to the Almighty seem alien to our present modes
of thinking, we are now able to trace them to their source, and to set
them aside as remnants of a system which our Reformer energetically and
vigorously opposed. He is always leading us to cultivate the idea of a
moral mind pervading all that we know and read of now, and can know
hereafter. This germinant truth shines like light within our souls; the
images and visions, the trials and triumphs of Daniel and his
companions, are no longer insulated atoms in chaos — a mighty maze, and
all without a plan — but portions of one organic whole, in which we are
personally bound up for both time and eternity. And the more we
surrender ourselves to this trust in our Parent Spirit, the more shall
we find our ignorance of the plans of Providence removed, and the cloud
of mystery hanging over the prevalence of evil brightened and dispersed.
Thus the discovery of the laws by which the universe is governed by no
means excludes the Supreme Cause from our contemplation; on the
contrary, he becomes more manifest to us by his pervading and perpetual
presence.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p9"></span>Throughout these Lectures we are ever
taught that we can see God only by being pure in heart. The preparation
for spiritual insight into holy mysteries is purity of conscience and
singleness of eye. But even these able comments do not clear up
everything. Our lot on earth must be to walk more by faith than by
sight. This is the chief exercise of the soul, which is essential to its
vitality and growth. We must have at times our mountains of vision as
well as our valleys of the shadow of death. Never let us doubt the
essential permanence of justice, and righteousness, and truthfulness. By
this we shall be borne up through regions of cloud into realms of light.
Thus will our spirituality be strengthened and refined: thus we shall be
permitted to obtain larger perceptions of God’s character and maturer
judgments of his purposes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc24012.htm#fr_320.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span> Willet’s “<span
id="xiii.i-p6.1"></span>Hexapla in Dan.” Edit. 1610, p. 13.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc24012.htm#fr_321.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span> See his “Daniel.” Edit. Tegg, 1836, p. 2.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc24012.htm#fr_322.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span> “The Times of Daniel,” p. 29, chapter iii.,
where other dates of interest are clearly exhibited.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc24012.htm#fr_323.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span> Dissertations on the Genuineness of
Daniel. Edinburgh, 1848, p. 43.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc24012.htm#fr_324.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span> Times of Daniel, p. 141.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc24012.htm#fr_325.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span> Nineveh and Persep., p. 71, second
edition.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc24012.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span> See his Notes on Isaiah, chapter 23, p.
132; and Herod. Clio. Edit. Gronov., p. 40.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc24012.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span> Travels, Book 2 chapter 1. See
*Prideaux’s* authorities, and his arrangement of the Assyrian kings,
which differs slightly from that here adopted.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc24012.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span> Strabo, lib. 16, p. 737. Tacit. An., lib.
12, section. 13. Hist. Dyn., p. 604.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc24012.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span> Nineveh and Persepolis, p. 37.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc24012.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span> Bk. 3 section. 16, and Euseb. Praepar.,
lib. 9 c. 40 and 41, also Strabo, lib. 15 p. 687.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc24012.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span> Volume 2, chapter 1., Babylon, p. 147,
Eng. Trans.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc24012.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span> Geog. of Arabia, volume 1 p. 54, and
volume 2 p. 210.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc24012.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span> Anab. 4, Sections 3, 5, 6, 7, 8. See
also Strabo, lib. 10, and Freret Rcch. <span
id="xiii.iii-p21.1"></span>Hist. sur les anc. Peuple de l’Asie, volume
3, and other authorities quoted by the Duke of Manchester, pp. 104, 105.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc24012.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span> See Dicaearch. ap. Stephan. de Urb. voce
Caldai’o”, and other authorities quoted by Vaux, p. 41, etc., also
Cicero de Divin.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc24012.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span> Herod. 2, Section 109.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc24012.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span> See Eichhorn’s Report. volume viii., and
Winer’s Chaldee Gr., Introd., also Adelung’s Mithridat, th. 1 p. 314.
ff.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc24012.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span> Lib. 2 t. 1 p. 225, ed. Sieb., also lib.
16.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc24012.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span> Lib. 2 chapter. 20.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc24012.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span> De Divinat., lib. 1 cap. 1, also Pliny’s
N. H., lib. 6 chapter. 26.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc24012.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span> Lib. 2, Section 24, ap Heng., p. 275,
Edit. Ed., 1848.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc24012.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span> Apud Minuc. Fel., lib. 8 Arnob.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc24012.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span> Quaest. 38, 39, p. 28. Edit. Cam., 1610.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc24012.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="xiii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span> An engraving of this statue is given in
Vaux’s Nineveh and Persepolis, p. 322.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc24012.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="xiii.v-p7.8"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span> Wintle’s Transl., prelim. Dissertation.,

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc24012.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="xiii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p10"></span> See Kitto’s Bibl. Cyc., art Cyr., and
Vaux’s Nineveh, p. 316.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc24012.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="xiii.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span> II. Consul., Lib. de Stil., 163, 164.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc24012.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="xiii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p11"></span> Animad. in <span
id="xiii.vii-p11.1"></span>[Da
2:27-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027.md)<span
id="xiii.vii-p11.1"></span>. Helmstad., 1783, preserved by Kuinoel,
volume 5.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc24012.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="xiii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span> Mede’s Works, Book 4, <span
id="xiii.viii-p9.1"></span>[Ep. 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiii.viii-p9.1"></span> p. 736.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc24012.htm#fr_349.md) <span
id="xiii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span> See Dissertation XIII. Edit. Lond.
1832.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc24012.htm#fr_350.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span> Ptol., Geog., lib. 6. cap. 3.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc24012.htm#fr_351.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p11"></span> Hom., 18, in <span
id="xiii.ix-p11.1"></span>[Ep. 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiii.ix-p11.1"></span>. ad Cor.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc24012.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p12"></span> Adv. Haer., lib. 5.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc24012.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p14"></span> See Selden de Diis Syr., c. 3 p. 49;
Jablonski, Panth. AEg., p. 80; Gesenius in Encyc., Art. Babylon, th. 7
p. 24; Munter, p. 59; and Heeren, Ideen, l. 2, p. 170, ap. Heng.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc24012.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p17"></span> Reply to Objections, p. 70.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc24012.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p18"></span> Opp., volume 2, p. 1110, ap. Heng., p.
73; Voy. en Perse, 4, p. 276.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc24012.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p19"></span> Lib. 1, section 183, and lib. 2, section
9.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc24012.htm#fr_357.md) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p5"></span> P. 86. See also as there quoted, Niebuhr
His. Gew., p. 189. Schlosser, Geshichte, etc., p. 172; and Volney,
Recherches, etc., p. 150.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc24012.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p6"></span> Euseb. Praep. Evan., l. 9. Section 41, p.
456, Edit Colon., and Chron. Armen., p. 59.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc24012.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p7"></span> See Rosenmuller’s extract from his
Commentary on this chapter, Dan., p. 171, where the original Greek of
Abydenus is also given at length.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc24012.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p5"></span> Schlosser, p. 279, ap. Heng.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc24012.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="xiii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p6"></span> Kleinert, p. 142, and V. Colln. ap. Heng.,
p. 96.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc24012.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p5"></span> “The Times of Daniel,” pp. 256-258.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc24012.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p8"></span> Annotat., chapter 5, p. 46.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc24012.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p9"></span> p. 984, edit. fol., volume 2, 1744.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc24012.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p10"></span> Berosus ap. Joseph. and ap. Grotius de
Veritat, lib. 3, Note; Hengstenberg’s remarks on this passage in Berosus
are valuable, p. 264.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc24012.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p11"></span> Lib. 1., section. 188.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc24012.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p13"></span> P. 261; see also Vitringa Comment., Z.
Jes. 1 417; and Heeren, 1 2, p. 157, ap. Heng.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc24012.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p15"></span> As quoted by Wintle, p. 79, volume 1, p.
191.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc24012.htm#fr_369.md) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p18"></span> Deipnosophist, chapter. 13:2.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc24012.htm#fr_370.md) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p5"></span> See Prideaux, 1, p. 227; Eichhorn, 1, p.
79; Jahn Archaeol., 2. 1., p. 217.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc24012.htm#fr_371.md) <span
id="xiii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xix-p6"></span> Chapter 1:1, and following.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc24012.htm#fr_372.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p6"></span> Section 89. Jahn points out what he
considers a mistake of Strabo’s, Arch. Bib., chapter 2, sect. 233.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc24012.htm#fr_373.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p7"></span> Lib. 6 chapter. 27

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc24012.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p8"></span> P. 90.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc24012.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p30"></span> Cyrop., lib. i. chaps. 4, 5, and lib.
iii. chapter 3, sect. 20.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc24012.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p31"></span> Line 762.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc24012.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p33"></span> Preliminary Dissertation, p.24.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc24012.htm#fr_378.md) <span
id="xiii.xx-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p34"></span> Con., part 1 Books 2, 3; Annals, pp. 80,
81; History of the Medes and Persians, volume v.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc24012.htm#fr_379.md) <span
id="xiii.xxii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p6"></span> Heeren. Ideen. Augs., 3te, 2 50 p. 474,
and Heng., p. 103, et seq.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc24012.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="xiii.xxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p8"></span> Religionsg., 4, p. 48, ap. Heng., p.
116; also Vitringa de Syn., p. 179. Eisenmenger, 1, p. 584, eod. auct.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc24012.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="xiii.xxii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p10"></span> Lib. 1, De bon oper. in partic., c. 12.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc24012.htm#fr_382.md) <span
id="xiii.xxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p11"></span> Adv. Haeres., lib. 1, cap. 26.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc24012.htm#fr_383.md) <span
id="xiii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p6"></span> Cyropaedia, lib. 8, chapter 6, etc.;
Berth., 2 p. 848, ff.; Rosen. Alterthumsk, 1. 50, p. 369; Jahn. Arch.,
2. 50, p. 244.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc24012.htm#fr_384.md) <span
id="xiii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p7"></span> See Hengstenberg’s Authorities on p.
41, where Gesenius and Winer are quoted as well as Heeren Ideen, 1:1, p.
163; and Volney Rech. Nouv., t. 1, p. 144. Edit. Paris, 1814.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p8"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Daniel 1-6](cc24013.md)
