[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlb06)  [Next](mlb08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V: MORTALS WHO HAVE ASCENDED TO HEAVEN

IN the instances hitherto mentioned, where a rope has been spoken of as
the means of reaching the Heaven country, no explanation is offered as
to the origin of the rope, or the means by which it became available.
There are some stories and legends, possibly older, where the
communication is said to be established through the spider's web. When
Mulungu was compelled to leave the earth, say the Yaos, he said, I
cannot climb a tree (as though that were the obvious way of reaching the
sky), and went to call the spider, who " went on high, and returned
again and said, 'I have gone on high nicely. . . . You now, Mulungu, go
on high.'" That is, we may suppose, he spun his web (the narrator
probably did not see why the spider should not be able to do this upward
as well as downward) till it reached the sky, and spun another thread
coming down. The Subiya also say that Leza ascended to heaven by a
spider's thread.

This notion occurs in a tale\[1\] of, in some respects, much later
development. It comes, like those about Kalunga already given, from
Angola, and relates to "the son of Kimanaweze." Kimanaweze seems to be a
mythical personage, perhaps originally identical with the first man, as,
according to Héli Chatelain, " much of what the natives say of him
corresponds with what the Amazulu tell of their Unkulunkulu." He figures
in more than one folk-tale. The one I am about to give is further
remarkable, not merely for personifying the Sun (which, to a certain
extent, is done by the Wachaga), but for giving him the Moon as a wife.
The Bantu in general speak of the Moon as a man, and say that he has two
wives, the Evening Star and the Morning Star, which they do not realize
to be one and the same.

## The Daughter of the Sun and Moon

Kimanaweze's son, when the time came for him to choose a wife, declared
that he would not "marry a woman of the

\[1. Chatelain, *Folk-tales of Angola*, p. 31.\]

earth, but must have the daughter of the Sun and Moon. He wrote "a
letter of marriage"-a modern touch, no doubt added by the
narrator\[1\]-and cast about for a messenger to take it up to the sky.
The little duiker (*mbambi*) refused, so did the larger antelope, known
as *soko*, the hawk, and the vulture. At last a frog came and offered to
carry the letter. The son of Kimanaweze, doubtful of his ability to do
this, said, "Begone! Where people of life, who have wings, gave it up
dost thou say, 'I will go there But the frog persisted, and was at last
sent off, with the threat of a thrashing if he should be unsuccessful.
It appears that the Sun and Moon were in the habit of sending their
handmaidens down to the earth to draw water, descending and ascending by
means of a spider's web. The frog went and hid himself in the well to
which they came, and when the first one filled her jar he got into it
without being seen, having first placed the letter in. his mouth. The
girls went up to heaven, carried their water-jars into the room, and set
them down. When they had gone away he came out, produced the letter,
laid it on a table, and hid.

After a while "Lord Sun" (Kumbi Mwene) came in, found the letter, and
read it. Not knowing what to make of it, he put it away, and said
nothing about it. The frog got into an empty water-jar, and was carried
down again when the girls went for a fresh supply. The son of
Kimanaweze, getting no answer, refused at first to believe that the frog
had executed his commission; but, after waiting for some days, he wrote
another letter and sent him again. The frog carried it in the same way
as before, and the Sun, after reading it, wrote that he would consent,
if the suitor came himself, bringing his 'first-present'-the usual gift
for opening marriage negotiations. On receiving this the young man wrote
another letter, saying that he must wait till told the amount of the
'wooing-present,' or bride-price (*kilembu*).

He gave this to the frog, along with a sum of money, and it was conveyed
as before. This time the Sun consulted his wife, who was quite ready to
welcome the mysterious son-in-law.

\[1. We often find stories brought up to date in this way.\]

She solved the question of providing refreshments for the invisible
messenger by saying, "We will cook a meal anyhow, and put it on the
table where he leaves the letters." This was done, and the frog, when
left alone, came out and ate. The letter, which was left along with the
food, stated the amount of the bride-price to be "a sack of money." He
carried the letter back to the son of Kimanaweze, who spent six days in
collecting the necessary amount, and then sent it by the frog with this
message: "Soon I shall find a day to bring home my wife." This, however,
was more easily said than done, for when his messenger had once more
returned he waited twelve days, and then told the frog that he could not
find people to fetch the bride. But the frog was equal to the occasion.
Again he had himself carried up to the Sun's palace, and, getting out of
the water-jar, hid in a corner of the room till after dark, when he came
out and went through the house till he found the princess's bed chamber.
Seeing that she was fast asleep, he took out one of her eyes without
waking her, and then the other.\[1\] He tied up the eyes in a
handkerchief, and went back to his corner in the room where the
water-jars were kept. In the morning, when the girl did not appear, her
parents came to inquire the reason, and found that she was blind. In
their distress they sent two men to consult the diviner, who, after
casting lots, said (not having heard from them the reason of their
coming), "Disease has brought you; the one who is sick is a woman; the
sickness that ails her the eyes. You have come, being sent; you have not
come of your own will. I have spoken." The Sun's messengers replied,
"Truth. Look now what caused the ailment." He told them that a certain
suitor had cast a spell over her, and she would die unless she were sent
to him. Therefore they had best hasten on the marriage. The men brought
back word to the Sun, who said, "All right. Let us sleep. To-morrow they
shall take her down to the earth." Next day, accordingly, he gave orders
for the spider to "weave a large cobweb" for sending his daughter down.
Meanwhile the frog had gone

\[1. The frog's magic powers are implied, if not explicitly stated.\]

down as usual in the water-jar and hidden himself in the bottom of the
well. When the water-carriers had gone up again he came out and went to
the village of the bridegroom and told him that his bride would arrive
that day. The young man would not believe him, but he solemnly promised
to bring her in the evening, and returned to the well.

After sunset the attendants brought the princess down by way of the
stronger cobweb and left her by the well. The frog came out, and told
her that he would take her to her husband's house; at the same time he
handed back her eyes. They started, and came to the son of Kimanaweze,
and the marriage took place. And they lived happy ever after-on earth,
for, as the narrator said, "They had all given up going to heaven; who
could do it was Mainu the frog."

In its present form, as will have been noticed, this story is strongly
coloured by Portuguese influence. The water-carriers, the Sun's house,
with its rooms and furniture, the bag of money, all belong to
present-day Loanda. But, for all that, the groundwork is essentially
African. The frog and the diviner would, by themselves, be sufficient to
prove this. (The frog, by the way, is usually a helpful creature in
African folklore.) The glaring improbabilities in the story must not be
regarded too critically; it is constantly taken for granted, as we shall
find when considering the animal stories proper, that any animal may
speak and act like a human being-though the frog, in this instance,
seems to possess more than ordinary human powers. The specially strong
cobweb prepared for the daughter's descent, while the water-carriers had
been going up and down every day without difficulty, may have been
necessitated by the number of the bride's attendants; but we are not
told why they should have returned and left her alone at the foot of the
heavenly ladder.'

\[1. The people of the Lower Congo have a story about the spider
fetching fire from heaven at the request of Nzambi, who is here regarded
as the Earth-mother and the daughter (according to R.E. Dennett) of
Nzambi Mpungu, the "first father," or the personified sky. (Other
authorities insist that everywhere in Africa the relation of sky and
earth is that of husband and wife.) He was helped by the tortoise, the
woodpecker, the rat, and the sandfly, whom he conveyed up by means of
his thread. The story maybe found in Dennett, *Folk-lore of the Fjort*
\[*Fiote*\], p.74\]

In other cases we find people reaching the Heaven country by climbing a
tree, as is done by the mother in the Yao tale of "The Three Women." In
the Zulu story\[1\] of "The Girl and the Cannibals" a brother and
sister, escaping from these ogres, climb a tree and reach the Heaven
country.

## The Heaven-tree

And there is a curious tradition among the Wachaga \[2\] about a
mysterious tree. A girl named Kichalundu went out one day to cut grass.
Finding it growing very luxuriantly in a certain place, she stepped on
the spot and sank into a quagmire. Her companions took hold of her hands
and tried to pull her out, but in vain; she vanished from their sight.
They heard her singing, "The ghosts have taken me. Go and tell my father
and mother," and they ran to call the parents. The whole countryside
gathered about the place, and a diviner advised the father to sacrifice
a cow and a sheep. This was done, and they heard the girl's voice again,
but growing fainter and fainter, till at last it was silent, and they
gave her up for lost. But after a time a tree grew up on the spot where
she had disappeared. It went on growing, until at last it reached the
sky. The herd-boys, during, the heat of the day, used to drive their
cattle into its shade, and themselves climbed up into the spreading
branches. One day two of them ventured higher than the rest, and called
out, "Can you see us still?" The others answered, "No! Do come down
again!" but the two daring fellows refused. "We are going on into the
sky to *Wuhu*, the World Above!" Those were their last words, for they
were never seen again. And the tree was called *Mdi Msumu*," the
Story-tree."

## The Tale of Murile

From the same region of Kilimanjaro comes the story of Murile, who also
reached the Upper World, though neither by a rope nor a tree, and also
came back.\[3\]

\[1. Callaway, *Nursery Tales*, pp. 145 and 147

2 Gutmann, *Volksbuch*, p. 152.

3 Raum, *Versuch*, p. 307.\]

A man and his wife living in the Chaga country had three sons, of whom
Murile was the eldest. One day he went out with his mother to dig up
*maduma*,\[l\] and, noticing a particularly fine tuber among those which
were to be put by for seed, he said, " Why, this one is as beautiful as
my little brother!" His mother laughed at the notion of comparing a
*taro* tuber with a baby; but he hid the root, and, later, when no one
was looking, put it away in a hollow tree and sang a magic song over it.
Next day he went to look, and found that the root had turned into a
child. After that at every meal he secretly kept back some food, and,
when he could do so without being seen, carried it to the tree and fed
the baby, which grew and flourished from day to day. But Murile's mother
became very anxious when she saw how thin the boy was growing, and she
questioned him, but could get no satisfaction. Then one day his younger
brothers noticed that when his portion of food was handed to him,
instead of eating it at once, he put it aside. They told their mother,
and she bade them follow him when he went away after dinner, and see
what he did with it. They did so, and saw him feeding the baby in the
hollow tree, and came back and told her. She went at once to the spot
and strangled the child which was "starving her son."

When Murile came back next day and found the child dead he was overcome
with grief. He went home and sat down in the hut, crying bitterly. His
mother asked him why he was crying, and he said it was because the smoke
hurt his eyes. So she told him to go and sit on the other side of the
fireplace. But, as he still wept and complained of the smoke when
questioned, they said he had better take his father's stool and sit
outside. He picked up the stool, went out into the courtyard, and sat
down. Then he said, "Stool, go up on high, as my father's rope does when
he hangs up his beehive in the forest!" \[2\] And the stool rose

\[1. A kind of arum (*Colocasia*), the roots of which are used as food
by the Wachaga; the *taro* of Polynesia.

2 He would throw one end of a rope up so as to pass over a branch, and
then fasten it to the beehive, which would then be hauled up into place.
These hives (made from the hollowed section of a log) are placed in
trees by many East African tribes and left till full of honey, when the
bees are smoked out, escaping through a hole made for the purpose in the
back of the hive. The Zulus and other South African Bantu appear to
content themselves with taking the honey found in hollow trees or holes
in the rock, where the wild bees make their nests.\]

up with him into the air and stuck fast in the branches of a tree. He
repeated the words a second time, and again the stool moved upward. Just
then his brothers happened to come out of the hut, and when they saw him
they ran back and said to their mother, "Murile is going up into the
sky!" She would not believe them. "Why do you tell me your eldest
brother has gone up into the sky? Is there any road for him to go up
by?" They told her to come and look, and when she saw him in the air she
sang:

Mrile, wuya na kunu!  
Wuya na kunu, mwanako!  
Wuya xa kunu! "

\[Murile, come back hither!  
Come back hither, my child!  
Come back hither!\]

But Murile answered, "I shall never comeback, Mother! I shall never come
back!"

Then his brothers called him, and received the same answer; his father
called him-then his boy-friends, and, last of all, his uncle (*washidu*,
his mother's brother, the nearest relation of all). They could just hear
his answer, "I am not coming back, Uncle! I am never coming back!" Then
he passed up out of sight.

The stool carried him up till he felt solid ground beneath his feet, and
then he looked round and found himself in the Heaven country. He walked
on till he came to some people gathering wood. He asked them the way to
the Moon-chief's kraal,. and they said, "just pick up some sticks for
us, and then we will tell you." He collected a bundle of sticks, and
they directed him to go on till he should come to some people cutting
grass. He did so, and greeted the grass-cutters when he came to them.
They answered his greeting, and when he asked them the way said they
would show him if he would help them for a while with their work. So he
cut some grass, and they pointed out the road, telling him to go on till
he came to some women hoeing. These, again, asked him to help them
before they would show him the way, and, in succession, he met with some
herd-boys, some women gathering beans, some people reaping millet,
others gathering banana-leaves, and girls fetching water-all of them
sending him forward with almost the same words. The water-carriers said,
"Just go on in this direction till you come to a house where the people
are eating." He found the house, and said, "Greeting, house-owners!
Please show me the way to the Moon's kraal." They promised to do so if
he would sit down and eat with them, which he did. At last by following
their instructions he reached his destination, and found the people
there eating their food raw. He asked them why they did not use fire to
cook with, and found that they did not know what fire was. So he said,
"If I prepare nice food for you by means of fire what will you give me?"
The Moon-chief said, "We will give you cattle and goats and sheep."
Murile told them to bring plenty of wood, and when they came with it he
and the chief went behind the house, where the other people could not
see them. Murile took his knife and cut two pieces of wood, one flat and
the other pointed, and twirled the pointed stick till he got some
sparks, with which he lit a bunch of dry grass and so kindled a fire.
When it burned up he got the chief to send for some green plantains,
which he roasted and offered to him. Then he cooked some meat and
various other foods. The Moon-chief was delighted when he tasted them,
and at once called all the people to ether, and said to them, "Here is a
wonderful doctor come from a far country! We shall have to repay him for
his fire." The people asked, "What must be paid to him?" He answered,
"Let one man bring a cow, another a goat, another whatever he may have
in his storehouse." So they went to fetch all these things. And Murile
became a rich man. For he stayed some years at the Moon's great kraal
and married wives and had children born to him, and his flocks and herds
increased greatly. But in the end a longing for his home came over him.
And he thought within himself: " How shall I go home again, unless I
send a messenger before me? For I told them I was never coming back, and
they must think that I am dead."

He called all the birds together and asked them one by one, If I send
you to my home what will you say? " The raven answered, " I shall say,
*Kuruu! kuruu!*" and was rejected. So, in turn, were the hornbill, the
hawk, the buzzard, and all the rest, till he came to Njorovil, the
mocking-bird, who sang:

"Mrile etsha kilalawu  
    Tira ngama.  
Mrile etsha kilalawu  
    Mdeye mafuda na kiliko!"

\[Murile is coming the day after to-morrow,  
Missing out to-morrow.  
Murile is coming the day after to-morrow.  
Keep some fat in the ladle for him! "\]

Murile was pleased with this, and told her to go. So she flew down to
earth and perched on the gate-post of his father's courtyard and sang
her song. His father came out and said, "What thing is crying out there,
saying that Murile is coming the day after to-morrow? Why, Murile was
lost long ago, and will never come back!" And he drove the bird away.
She flew back and told Murile where she had been. But he would not
believe her; he told her to go again and bring back his father's stick
as a token that she had really gone to his home. So she flew down again,
came to the house, and picked up the stick, which was leaning in the
doorway. The children in the house saw her, and tried to snatch it from
her, but she was too quick for them, and took it back to Murile. Then he
said, "Now I will start for home." He took leave of his friends and of
his wives, who were to stay with their own people, but his cattle and
his boys came with him. It was a long march to the place of
descent,\[1\] and Murile began to grow very tired. There

\[1. We are not told how the cattle were to be got down, but probably
they had to go clown the slope where the sky joins the earth at the
horizon, which would account for the journey being longer than Murile's
when he came up by Means of the magic stool!\]

was a very fine bull in the herd, who walked beside Murile all the way.
Suddenly he spoke and said, " As you are so weary, what will you do for
me if I let you ride me? If I take you on my back will you cat my flesh
when they kill me? " Murile answered, No! I will never eat you!" So the
bull let him get on his back and carried him home. And Murile sang, as
he rode along:

Not a hoof nor a horn is wanting!  
    Mine are the cattle-hey!  
Nought of the goods is wanting;  
    Mine are the bairns to-day.  
Not a kid of the goats is wanting;  
    My flocks are on the way.  
Nothing of mine is wanting;  
    Murile comes to-day  
With his bairns and his cattle-hey!

So he came home. And his father and mother ran out to meet him and
anointed him with mutton-fat, as is the custom when a loved one comes
home from distant parts. And his brothers and every one rejoiced and
wondered greatly when they saw the cattle. But he showed his father the
great bull that had carried him, and said, "This bull must be fed and
cared for till he is old. And even if you kill him when he is old I will
never eat of his flesh." So they lived quite happily for a time.

But when the bull had become very old Murile's father slaughtered him.
The mother foolishly thought it such a pity that her son, who had always
taken so much trouble over the beast, should have none of the beef when
every one else was eating it. So she took a piece of fat and hid it in a
pot. When she knew that all the meat was finished she ground some grain
and cooked the fat with the meal and gave it to her son. As soon as he
had tasted it the fat spoke and said to him, "Do you dare to eat me, who
carried you on my back? You shall be eaten, as you are eating me!"

Then Murile sang: "O my mother, I said to you, 'Do not give me to eat of
the bull's flesh!'" He took a second taste, and his foot sank into the
ground. He sang the same words again, and then ate up the food his
mother had given him. As soon as he had swallowed it he sank down and
disappeared.

Other people who tell the story simply say, "He died." Be that as it
may, that was the end of him.

The inhabitants of the Moon country, according to this legend, were very
much like the earth-dwellers, except that they seem to have been less
advanced in culture, having no knowledge of cooking or of fire. I have
not come across any other reference to the Moon-chief, or his kraal,
though, as already stated, the Bantu in general, when they think about
the matter at all, describe the Moon as a man, like the Arabs and our
Saxon forefathers.\[1\] In Nyasaland they give names to the Moon's two
wives: the Evening Star is Chekechani, a poor housekeeper, who, during
the fortnight he spends with her, starves him till he pines away to
nothing. Puikani, the Morning Star, brings him back to life,\[2\] and
feeds him up till he becomes quite round at the end of the month. The
Giryama, in Kenya, call the planet Venus "the Moon's wife," but no one
seems to have recorded any story connected with this expression.

## Tailed Heaven-folk

The Ronga notion, too, as we have seen, appears to be that the dwellers
above the sky are not very different from those beneath it. But we find
here and there (so far only in detached fragments) traces of belief in a
race of Heaven dwellers distinct from ordinary mortals. For instance,
they are sometimes said to have tails. One clan of the Wachaga claims
that its ancestor fell from the sky during a rainstorm. He belonged to a
race called the Wakyambi, living in the sky, "far above the sun," and
having tails. This ancestor, finding himself among tailless beings, and
feeling ashamed of his peculiar appearance, secretly cut off his tail;
consequently his descendants have none. Another legend says

\[1. The Wasu, in Pare (south-east of Kilimanjaro), are an exception:
they say that the sun is the father and the moon the mother of mankind.

2 At new moon they say, *mwezi wafa*, " the moon is dead."\]

that once upon a time a man and a woman came down from the sky on a
cloud and lighted on the hill Molama, in Machame. In the morning the
inhabitants of the place found them standing there, and saw that they
had tails like cows. When asked where they came from they answered, "God
has sent us down on a cloud. We are looking for a place to live in." The
people replied, "If you want to live with us you must have your tails
cut off." They consented, and settled in that place, whither their
descendants still come to sacrifice. It is said that cattle were sent
down to them from the sky; they found them standing in front of their
hut on the second morning.

The Wasu, the neighbours of the Wachaga on the southeast, speak of
certain tailed beings inhabiting the clouds. Their nature is not very
clear, but they are said to be always at war with the "good old people
"-the ghosts of the human dead. "Sometimes," says a missionary long
resident in Pare,\[1\] "they are held to be kind spirits who give people
cattle, sometimes evil beings who bring disaster." It would probably be
nearer the mark to say that, like ordinary human ghosts, they are
beneficent or the reverse, according to their state of mind and the
behaviour of the living.

Some of the Congo tribes, also, believe in the existence of 'Cloud folk'
having tails. It is probable that if we could get at the folklore of all
the tribes intervening between these two widely separated localities we
should find the same notion everywhere. Outside the Bantu area the
Lang'o, in the region of the Upper Nile (who, like the Wachaga, say that
the first human pair had tails), and the Ewe, in West Africa, have
traditions to the same effect, and something not very different comes
out in the folk-tales of the Masai.

Whether, as one writer has suggested, these myths imply some dim
race-memory of an ape ancestry our knowledge is not sufficient to
decide; the general trend of Bantu thought (as shown in stories about
baboons, for instance) would seem to negative such a conclusion. One
might also ask whether the custom among some primitive tribes of

\[1. Dannholz, *Im Banne des Geisterglaubens*, P. 24.\]

wearing an artificial tail (as the principal, if not the sole, article
of dress) could be the origin or the result of the tradition.

## The Celestial Bellman

Murile-who reversed the action of Prometheus in bringing fire *to*, not
*from*, heaven-is a somewhat mysterious figure, perhaps surviving from
some forgotten mythology which, if recovered, would bridge some gaps in
his story. There is a queer, fragmentary legend\[1\] about a person
called Mrule, "the stranger from the sky," who may or may not have been
originally the same as Murile. He had only one leg, and of the rest of
his body only half was like a man; the other side was covered with
grass.\[2\] He first alighted among the Masai (probably in the steppe to
the north-west of Kilimanjaro), and went on thence to "our
hill-country," ascending the mountain at Shira, hopping on his one leg.
He was unable to speak. If he met anyone he only made a sound like
*mremrem*. So it is hardly surprising that the people fled before him
and barricaded themselves in their huts. He wandered on from place to
place, and could get food nowhere. When he came to a homestead the
inmates would call to him through their barred doors to go away.
Naturally displeased, he found his way to the chief's place, but was not
more kindly received there.\[3\] Then at last he spoke:

I am Mrule!  
If ye reject me here below  
Back to heaven I must go!

It was high noon, with the sun just overhead. He sprang into the air,
rose straight up towards the sun, and was never seen on earth again.

\[1. Gutmann, *Volksbuch*, p.150.

2 We shall meet with these half-men everywhere; they will be fully
discussed in Chapter XIII. The grass growing out of one side is curious.
I do not remember anything like it elsewhere, except in Zulu accounts of
the *Inkosazana*, a strange being described as the Queen of Heaven, and
in those of certain mysterious monsters. The half-men usually have
nothing on their non-human side, or else it is made of wax.

3 One is reminded of a story by Mr H. W. Nevinson-one hopes not true-of
an unfortunate Negro sailor shipwrecked on the Norfolk coast.\]

But not long after this the chief fell into the fire, burning himself
badly. His people consulted the diviners, who answered, You have sinned
against Mrule. You all said, 'He will bring ill-luck to the country if
we take him in. Who ever saw a being with one leg?' And the chief never
asked him, What brings you here?' Because no one asked him anything he
went away. But he is surely a great healer." Thus spoke the diviners.
But all this time tortoises had been collecting in the plain. They
gathered themselves into a long procession and came marching up to the
chief's homestead, where they arranged themselves in a circle round the
spot from which Mrule had ascended. And their leader chanted:

"Propitiate, propitiate, and, when ye have done so, asperse!"

The diviners interpreted this saying to the chief, and he at once sent
for a black cow which had lately calved, a sheep, and the "water of
expiation." They sacrificed the cow and the sheep, made a cut in the
neck of the tortoise-chief, and took a drop of blood from him. Then they
mixed this with the blood of the sacrifices and the water, and sprinkled
the chief with it-also the whole of the ground within the circle of
tortoises. So the curse was lifted, the tortoises went their way into
the plain, and the chief recovered from his injuries.

In quite recent times a legend has grown up out of one of those rumours
which arise no one knows how. "It was after the first white men had come
into our country."\[1\] One day at noon a man appeared, floating in the
air. He was light-complexioned, and held a bell in either hand. And he
cried, with a loud voice:

Pay that thou owest to thy brother!  
Hast thou a beast of his, give it back!  
Hast thou a goat of his, give it back!  
    Thus saith the King.  
Let every stranger in the land return to his own home;  
Every child held in pawn shall go free to his father's house.  
Cease from violence; break the spear!  
    Thus saith the King."

\[1. The first European to reach Chaga was Rebmann, in 1848.\]

At sunset he was seen again. Sometimes he appeared in one place,
sometimes in another; but he never touched the earth. The chief of Moshi
(was this the famous Mandara, properly called Rindi?) ordered his men to
keep a look-out for him. They sat and stared at the sky till the cool of
the evening drove them indoors. But they never saw him more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: The Ghosts and the Ghost Country](mlb08)
