[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mlb09)  [Next](mlb11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII: HEROES AND DEMI-GODS

GREAT chiefs, or men otherwise distinguished, whose memory lives on
after many generations, are not only honoured beyond the worship paid to
ordinary ghosts, but become the subjects of many a legend. Some of these
heroes are plainly mythical, others are known to have actually existed,
and some historical persons have become legendary without receiving
divine honours. One knows that the genesis of myths is not confined to
remote ages; they may spring up any day, even in civilized countries:
there have been at least three well-known examples within the last
twenty years. I remember being present at a conversation during which,
as I believe, a legend was nipped in the bud. Some Zulus, after
consulting together in undertones, asked Miss Colenso, very
respectfully, whether it was true that her father had prophesied before
his death that his house (Bishopstowe, near Pietermaritzburg) would be
burned down. She answered that very likely he might have said, some time
or other, that if due precautions were not taken a fire might reach the
house during the grass-burning season-which, in fact, actually happened,
owing, however, to a sudden change of wind rather than to any lack of
care. I fear the questioners were disappointed; but one can imagine how
the story would have grown if not discouraged.

## The Ox-eater

In the countries to the west of Lake Victoria there is a cult of a being
known as Ryang'ombe, or Lyang'ombe, concerning whom curious legends are
current. His name means "Eater of an ox"; in full it is, in the language
of the Baziba, Kashaija Karyang'ombe, "the little man who eats an
\[whole\] ox." The name is distinctly Bantu, and is connected with his
story. In Ruanda and Urundi, where his worship is fully developed, it
does not seem to be entirely understood; and another indication of his
Bantu origin is to be found in the fact that the mysteries of Ryang'ombe
are supposed specially to belong to the Bahutu, the Bantu agricultural
community; and, though the Batusi aristocracy frequently take part in
them, there is a very strict rule that the reigning chief must never
have been initiated into this particular rite. This seems strange, as
Rehse, writing of the Baziba, says that Ryang'ombe is "the spirit of the
cattle, only venerated by the Bahima."\[1\] But there is much in the
whole subject which still awaits investigation. The Baziba tell a story
which differs considerably from the Ruanda legend as given by P.
Arnoux\[2\] and by Johanssen;\[3\] but, for all one knows, both may
circulate side by side-in one of the countries at any rate. Some feats
of his remind one strongly of the Zulu Hlakanyana, but the latter is
merely a trickster, and never, so far as I know, attained the status of
a national hero, or became an object of worship. Ryang'ombe, according
to this story,4 spoke before he was born, and ate a whole ox immediately
after his entrance into the world. His father told him of a terrible
ogre, Ntubugezi, notorious for killing people; Ryang'ombe at once made
for the giant's abode, insulted and defied him, and made him give up
eleven head of cattle, which he (Ryang'ombe) swallowed at once. He then
attacked another ogre, Ntangaire, and swallowed him whole, but did not
long enjoy his triumph, for Ntangaire cut his way out and killed him. In
the Ruanda legend, likewise, Ryang'ombe's mortal career ends
disastrously, though after a different fashion.

## Ryang'ombe in Ruanda

The Banyaruanda give Ryang'ombe's family affairs in great detail. His
father was Babinga, described as the "king of the *imandwa*";\[5\] his
mother, originally called Kalimulore,\[6\] was an uncomfortable sort of
person, who had

\[1. The Bahima are the Hamitic invaders who form the pastoral
aristocracy in Buganda, Bunyoro, and elsewhere. In Ruanda they are
called Batusi.

2\. *Anthropos* (1913),vol.viii.

3\. *Ruanda*, pp.109-111.

4\. H.Rehse, *Kiziba* p. 371

5\. The *imandwa* are a superior order of spirits, distinct from the
common herd of ghosts, who are called *bazimu*, and mostly thought of as
malevolent. All the *imandwa* are known by name; many of them are in one
way or another related to Ryang'ombe, and each has his or her own
special ritual.

6\. After the birth of her son she was known as Nyiraryang'ombe ('Mother
of Ryang'ombe').\]

the power of turning herself into a lioness, and took to killing her
father's cattle, till he forbade her to herd them, and sent some one
else in her place. She so frightened her first husband that he took her
home to her parents and would have no more to do with her. After her
second marriage, to Babinga, there seems to have been no further
trouble. It is not clear how Babinga could have been " king of the
ghosts " while still living, but when he died his son, Ryang'ombe,
announced that he was going to take his father's place. This was
disputed by one-of Babinga's followers named Mpumutimuchuni, and the two
agreed to decide the question by a game of *kisoro*,\[l\] which
Ryang'ombe lost. Perhaps we are to understand by the long story which
follows that he passed some time in exile; for he went out hunting, and
heard a prophecy from some herd-lads which led to his marriage. After
some difficulties with his parents-in-law he settled down with his wife,
and had a son, Binego, but soon left them and returned to his own home.

As soon as Binego was old enough his mother's brother set him to herd
the cattle; he speared a heifer the first day, a cow and her calf the
next, and when his uncle objected he speared him too. He then called his
mother, and they set out for Ryang'ombe's place, which they reached in
due course, Binego having, on the way, killed two men who refused to
leave their work and guide him, and a baby, for no particular reason.
When he arrived he found his father playing the final game with
Mpumutimuchuni. The decision had been allowed to stand over during the
interval, and Ryang'ombe, if he lost this game, was not only to hand
over the kingdom, but to let his opponent shave his head-that is,
deprive him of the crest of hair which marked his royal rank. Binego
went and stood behind his father to watch the game, suggested a move
which enabled him to win, and when Mpumutimuchuni protested stabbed him.
Thus he secured his father in the kingship, which, apparently, was so
far counted to him for righteousness as to outweigh all the

\[1. A game variously known as *mankala*, *mweso*, *bao*, *msuo*, etc.,
and played all over Africa, either on a board or with four rows of holes
scooped in the ground.\]

murders he had committed. Ryang'ombe named him, first as his
second-in-command and afterwards as his successor, and Binego, as will
be seen, avenged his death. Like all the *imandwa*, with the exception
of Ryang'ombe himself, who is uniformly kind and beneficent, he is
thought of as mischievous and cruel, and propitiated from fear,
especially when the diviner has declared, in a case of illness, that
Binego is responsible. During these ceremonies, and also in the
mysteries celebrated from time to time, certain persons are not only
recognized as mediums of Ryang'ombe, Binego, or other *imandwa*, but
actually assume their characters and are addressed by their names for
the time being.

## Ryang'ombe's Death

The story of his death is as follows.

Ryang'ombe one day went hunting, accompanied by his sons, Kagoro and
Ruhanga, two of his sisters, and several other *imandwa*. His mother
tried to dissuade him from going, as during the previous night she had
had four strange dreams, which seemed to her prophetic of evil. She had
seen, first, a small beast without a tail; then an animal all of one
colour; thirdly, a stream running two ways at once; and, fourthly, an
immature girl carrying a baby without a *ngobe*.\[1\] She was very
uneasy about these dreams, and begged her son to stay at home, but,
unlike most Africans, who attach great importance to such things, he
paid no attention to her words, and set out. Before he had gone very far
he killed a hare, which, when examined, was found to have no tail. His
personal attendant at once exclaimed that this was the fulfilment of
Nyiraryang'ombe's dream, but Ryang'ombe only said, "Don't repeat a
woman's words while we are after game." Soon after this they encountered
the second and third portents (the "animal all of one colour" was a
black hyena), but Ryang'ombe still refused to be impressed. Then they
met a young girl carrying a baby, without the usual skin in which it is
supported. She stopped Ryang'ombe

\[1. The skin in which an African woman carries a baby on her back. The
Zulus call it *imbekko*.\]

and asked him to give her a *ngobe*. He offered her the skin of one
animal after another; but she refused them all, till he produced a
buffalo hide. Then she said she must have it properly dressed, which he
did, and also gave her the thongs to tic it with. Thereupon she said,
"Take up the child." He objected, but gave in when she repeated her
demand, and even, at her request, gave the infant a name. Finally, weary
of her importunity, he said, "Leave me alone!" and the girl rushed away,
was lost to sight among the bushes, and became a buffalo. Ryang'ombe's
dogs, scenting the beast, gave chase, one after the other., and when
they did not return he sent his man, Nyarwambali, to see what had become
of them. Nyarwambali came back and reported: "There is a beast here
which has killed the dogs." Ryang'ombe followed him, found the buffalo,
speared it, and thought he had killed it, but just as he was shouting
his song of triumph it sprang up, charged, and gored him. He staggered
back and leaned against a tree; the buffalo changed into a woman, picked
up the child, and went away.

At the very moment when he fell a bloodstained leaf dropped out of the
air on his mother's breast. She knew then that her dream had in fact
been a warning of disaster; but it was not till a night and a day had
passed that she heard what had happened. Ryang'ombe, as soon as he knew
he had got his death-wound, called all the *imandwa* together, and told
first one and, on his refusal, another to go and call his mother and
Binego. One after another all refused, except the maidservant, Nkonzo,
who set off at once, travelling night and day, till she came to
Nyiraryang'ombe's house and gave her the news. She came at once with
Binego, and found her son still living. Binego, when he had heard the
whole story, asked his father in which direction the buffalo had gone;
having had it pointed out, he rushed off, overtook the woman, brought
her back, and killed her, with the child, cutting both in pieces. So he
avenged his father.

Ryang'ombe then gave directions for the honours to be paid him after his
death; these are, so to speak, the charter of the Kubandwa society which
practises the cult of the *imandwa*. He specially insisted that Nkonzo,
as a reward for her services, should have a place in these rites, and,
accordingly, we find her represented by one of the performers in the
initiation ceremony, as photographed by P. Schumacher. Then "at the
moment when his throat tightened" he named Binego as his successor, and
so died.

Here Ryang'ombe appears as a headstrong adventurer, whose principal
virtue is courage, and it is a little difficult to gather from his
story, as here related, why he should have been credited with so many
good qualities. He shows some affection for his mother (though not
sufficient to make him consider her wishes) and for his son, and
gratitude to the poor dependent who fulfilled his last request-but that
is all one can say.

## Spirits inhabiting Volcanoes

The definition of a myth, as laid down by the Folk-Lore Society, is: "A
story told to account for something"; of a legend: "A story told as
true, but consisting either of fact or fiction, or both indifferently."
The story of Ryang'ombe would seem to come under both definitions, for
it is certainly (at least in Ruanda-in Kiziba it is more like an
ordinary fairy-tale) told as true, and it is held to account not only
for the *kubandwa* mysteries (of which P. Arnoux has given a very full
account in the seventh and eighth volumes of *Anthropos*), but for
certain volcanic phenomena.

The Virunga volcanoes, north of Lake Kivu, are a striking feature of the
Ruanda country. They are among the few still active in Africa, and there
have been several remarkable eruptions in quite recent times. It appears
that after his death Ryang'ombe took up his abode in the Muhavura
volcano, the most easterly of the group, where he still lives, though
occasionally migrating to Karisimbi, about midway between Lake Kivu and
the smaller lake, Bolere. The memory of former eruptions is preserved in
accounts of battles between Ryang'ombe and his enemy, Nyiragongo, who
then lived in Mount Mikeno. Ryang'ombe, with his fiery sword, cleft this
mountain from top to bottom, and drove Nyiragongo westward to the
mountain which still bears his name. He then cut off the top of this
peak with his sword, threw Nyiragongo into it, and piled hot stones on
him to keep him down. One is reminded of Enceladus, buried under Etna by
Zeus.

The other *imandwa*, Ryang'ombe's relatives and dependents, are supposed
to be living with him in Muhavura. As already mentioned, they are, in
the main, spiteful and mischievous, and a great part of his energy is
devoted to keeping them within bounds. The inferior ghosts, the bazimu,
are by some said to haunt their former dwelling-places; others say that
the good ones-i.e., those who during their lifetime were initiated into
the *kubandwa* mysteries go to join Ryang'ombe in Muhavura, while the
'profane' (*nzigo*) are sent to Nyiragongo.\[1\] This notion may be due
to the Hamitic invaders, as the idea of a future state of rewards and
punishments is, in general, foreign to Bantu thought. The absence of any
really moral distinction ('good' being simply synonymous with
'initiated'), coupled with the recent date of the earliest missions to
Ruanda, would negative the supposition of Christian influence.

## Names Common to Ruanda and Buganda

Before quitting the subject of Ryang'ombe I should like to call
attention to an interesting point. Dr Roscoe, writing of Buganda, speaks
of "the fetish Lyang'ombe," \[2\] but gives no details about him. In the
absence of any further information it is impossible to determine whether
the name alone was carried from Ruanda into Kiziba, and thence into
Buganda, whether it was accompanied by any elements of the original
story, or whether a fresh one grew up in its new

\[1.*Anthropos* (1912), vol. vii.

2\. *The Northern Bantu*, p. 134. This word-of which anthropologists are
now somewhat shy-is used by Dr Roscoe as the equivalent of *ejembe*,
literally, 'a horn,' because the objects in question are usually horns,
filled with charms of all sorts and believed to be the abode, for the
time being, of some particular spirit. The Baganda speak of "the horn of
Lyang'ombe," "the horn of Nambaga," and so on. It seems hardly correct
to speak of "the fetish Lyang'ombe," as it is the horn, and not the
spirit, which is the 'fetish '-if that word must be used.\]

home. It is evident that some, at any rate, of the Ruanda myths, if they
were ever heard, would be speedily forgotten in a country with no active
volcanoes.

Then there is Mukasa. In Buganda he is the most important of the ' gods
'-*i.e.*, heroes or demi-gods, originally ghosts, and quite distinct
from Katonda, the creator, probably also from Gulu, the sky-god. He has
much the same character as Ryang'ombe in Ruanda, being "a benign god,
who never asked for human life, and, perhaps, a man of old time, deified
on account of his benevolence. But the Banyaruanda make Mukasa the
son-in-law of Ryang'ombe, and so far from being of a kindly disposition
that his wife died of his cruel treatment. He was, curiously enough, the
ferryman on the Rusizi, the river which runs out of Lake Kivu into
Tanganyika. The story of his marriage seems to be connected with some
traditional hostility between two sections of the Ruanda people.

Another point to notice is that the 'mediums'-people possessed by the
'gods' (*balubale*), through whom they give their oracles-are called in
Luganda *emandwa*, which, as mentioned above, is the name for the
superior class of spirits in Ruanda.

## Culture-heroes

Dr Haddon says: "The term hero is usually applied to one who stands out
from among ordinary mortals by his . . . conspicuous bravery or
sustained power of endurance . . . but \[also by\] inventiveness, moral
or intellectual qualities, or the introduction of new cults."\[1\] This
might apply to Ryang'ombe. 'Culture-heroes' are those who have done
anything "to improve the conditions of human existence." I suppose we
might reckon among these the Thonga chief who taught his people to peg
out hides on the ground in order to dress them. The earlier process was
for a number of men to stand round, hold the edges of the hide in their
teeth, and lean back till it was sufficiently stretched. It is not clear
how far this is to be taken seriously, but we have

\[1. *Encyc1opædia of Religion and Ethics*, vol. vi, p. 633\]

a distinct culture-hero in Kintu, who brought goats, sheep, fowls,
millet, and the banana into Buganda. Several tribes have a legend of a
mighty hunter who came into the country with trained dogs and, like
Theseus, cleared out dangerous wild beasts or fought with monsters. Such
was Mbega of the Wakilindi, whom we shall meet in the next chapter.

Such also was Kibwebanduka, the tribal hero of the Wazaramo, who led
them from Khutu to their present home (probably about 1700), and drove
out the cannibal Akamba, who were then occupying it.\[1\] It is said
that his footprints and those of his dog are still to be seen on a rock
somewhere in Khutu, to the north-west of the Zaramo country. The Baziba
have a similar hero, Kibi, who came from Bunyoro.

Sometimes animals figure as culture-heroes; one of the hare's many
adventures turns on this notion, though sometimes the same story is told
of an unnamed man or boy, who combines his benefits with flagrant
cheating. One example of this, though not the best or most typical,
occurs in the story of Hlakanyana (told in Chapter XI, below). Meanwhile
the tale of Sudika-Mbambi will serve to illustrate what has just been
said. It comes, like that of "The Son of Kimanaweze," given in Chapter
V, from Angola.\[2\]

## Sudika-Mbambi the Invincible

Sudika-Mbambi was the son of Nzua dia Kimanaweze, who married the
daughter of the Sun and Moon. The young couple were living with Nzua's
parents, when one day Kimanaweze sent his son away to Loanda to trade.
The son demurred, but the father insisted, so he went. While he was gone
certain cannibal monsters, called *makishi*, descended on the village
and sacked it-all the people who were not killed fled. Nzua, when he
returned, found no houses and no people; searching over the cultivated
ground, he at last came across his wife, but she was so changed that

\[1. I do not know whether there is any warrant for this accusation
against the Akamba. Cannibalism is regarded with horror by the East
African tribes in general, though some of them are very sure that their
neighbours practise it. For Kibwebanduka see Klamroth, in *Zeitschrift
für Kolonialsprachen*, p. 44.

2 Chatelain, *Folk-tales of Angola*, p. 85.\]

he did not recognize her at first. "The *makishi* have destroyed us,"
was her explanation of what had happened.

They seem to have camped and cultivated as best they could; and in due
course Sudika-Mbambi ('the Thunderbolt') was born. Like others who will
be mentioned later, he was a wonder-child, who spoke before his entrance
into the world, and came forth equipped with knife, stick, and "his
*kilembe*"-a 'mythic plant,' explained as "life-tree," which he
requested his mother to plant at the back of the house. Scarcely had he
made his appearance when another voice was heard, and his twin brother
Kabundungulu was born. The first thing they did was to cut down poles
and build a house for their parents. Ryang'ombe and (as we shall see)
Hlakanyana were similarly precocious, but their activities were of a
very different character. Soon after this Sudika-Mbambi announced that
he was going to fight the makishi. He told Kabundungulu to stay at home
and to keep an eye on the *kilembe*: if it withered he would know that
his brother was dead; he then set out. On his way he was joined by four
beings who called themselves *kipalendes* and boasted various
accomplishments-building a house on the bare rock (a sheer impossibility
under local conditions), carving ten clubs a day, and other more
recondite operations, none of which, however, as the event proved, they
could accomplish successfully. When they had gone a certain distance
through the bush Sudika-Mbambi -directed them to halt and build a house,
in order to fight the *makishi*." As soon as he had cut one pole all the
others needed cut themselves. He ordered the *kipalende* who had said he
could erect a house on a rock to begin building, but as fast as a pole
was set up it fell down again. The leader then took the work in hand,
and it was speedily finished.

Next day he set out to fight the *makishi*, with three *kipalendes*,
leaving the fourth in the house. To him soon after appeared an old
woman, who told him that he might marry her granddaughter if he would
fight her (the grandmother) and overcome her. They wrestled, but the old
woman soon threw the kipalende, placed a large stone on top of him as he
lay on the ground, and left him there, unable to move.

Sudika-Mbambi, who had the gift of second-sight, at once knew what had
happened, returned with the other three, and released the *kipalende*.
He told his story, and the others derided him for being beaten by a
woman. Next day he accompanied the rest, the second *kipalende*
remaining in the house. No details are given of the fighting with the
*makishi*, beyond the statement that " they are firing."\[1\] The second
*kipalende* met with the same fate as his brother, and again
Sudika-Mbambi was immediately aware of it. The incident was repeated on
the third and on the fourth day. On the fifth Sudika-Mbambi sent the
*kipalendes* to the war, and stayed behind himself. The old woman
challenged him; he fought her and killed her-she seems to have been a
peculiarly malignant kind of witch, who had kept her granddaughter shut
up in a stone house, presumably as a lure for unwary strangers. It is
not stated what she intended to do with the captives whom she secured
under heavy stones, but, judging from what takes place in other stories
of this kind, one may conclude that they were kept to be eaten in due
course.

Sudika-Mbambi married the old witch's granddaughter, and they settled
down in the stone house. The *kipalendes* returned with the news that
the *makishi* were completely defeated, and all went well for a time.

## Treachery of the Kipalendes

The *kipalendes*, however, became envious of their leader's good
fortune, and plotted to kill him. They dug a hole in the place where he
usually rested and covered it with mats; when he came in tired they
pressed him to sit down, which he did, and immediately fell into the
hole. They covered it up, and thought they had made an end of him. His
younger brother, at home, went to look at the 'life-tree,' and found
that it had withered. Thinking that, perhaps,

\[1. Through the Portuguese occupation (dating from the sixteenth
century) guns would be familiar objects to the Angola natives.\]

there was still some hope, he poured water on it, and it grew green
again.

Sudika-Mbambi was not killed by the fall; when he reached the bottom of
the pit he looked round and saw an opening. Entering this, he found
himself in a road-the road, in fact, which leads to the country of the
dead. When he had gone some distance he came upon an old woman, or,
rather, the upper half of one,\[1\] hoeing her garden by the wayside. He
greeted her, and she returned his greeting. He then asked her to show
him the way, and she said she would do so if he would hoe a little for
her, which he did. She set him on the road, and told him to take the
narrow path, not the broad one, and before arriving at Kalunga-ngombe's
house he must "carry a jug of red pepper and a jug of wisdom." \[2\] It
is not explained how he was to procure these, though it is evident from
the sequel that he did so, nor how they were to be used, except that
Kalunga-ngombe makes it a condition that anyone who wants to marry his
daughter must bring them with him. We have not previously been told that
this was Sudika-Mbambi's intention. On arriving at the house a fierce
dog barked at him; he scolded it, and it let him pass. He entered, and
was courteously welcomed by people who showed him into the guest-house
and spread a mat for him. He then announced that he had come to marry
the daughter of Kalunga-ngombe. Kalunga answered that he consented if
Sudika-Mbambi had fulfilled the conditions. He then retired for the
night, and a meal was sent in to him-a live cock and a bowl of the local
porridge (*funji*). He ate the porridge, with some meat which he had
brought with him; instead of killing the cock he kept him under his bed.
Evidently it was thought he would assume that the fowl was meant for him
to eat (perhaps we have here

\[1. Half-beings are very common in African folklore, but they are
usually split lengthways, having one eye, one arm, one leg, and so on.
This case I thought to be quite unique, but have since come across
something of the same sort in a manuscript from Nyasaland.

2 What is meant by "a jug of wisdom" is not clear, but very likely it is
merely a nonsense expression, used for the sake of the pun: *ndungu* is
'red pepper,' and *ndunge* 'wisdom.'\]

a remnant of the belief, not known to or not understood by the narrator
of the story, that the living must not eat of the food of the dead), and
a trick was intended, to prevent his return to he upper world. In the
middle of the night he heard people inquiring who had killed Kalunga's
cock; but the cock crowed from under the bed, and Sudika-Mbambi was not
trapped.

Next morning, when he reminded Kalunga of his promise, he was told that
the daughter had been carried off by the huge serpent called Kinyoka kya
Tumba, and that if he wanted to marry her he must rescue her.

Sudika-Mbambi started for Kinyoka's abode, and asked for him. Kinyoka's
wife said, "He has gone shooting."\[1\] Sudika-Mbambi waited awhile, and
presently saw driver ants approaching-the dreaded ants which would
consume any living thing left helpless in their path. He stood his
ground and beat them off; they were followed by red ants, these by a
swarm of bees, and these by wasps, but none of them harmed him. Then
Kinyoka's five heads appeared, one after the other. Sudika-Mbambi cut
off each as it came, and when the fifth fell the snake was dead. He went
into the house, found Kalunga's daughter there, and took her home to her
father.

But Kalunga was not yet satisfied. There was a giant fish, Kimbiji,
which kept catching his goats and pigs. SudikaMbambi baited a large hook
with a sucking-pig and caught Kimbiji, but even he was not strong enough
to pull the monster to land. He fell into the water, and Kimbij
swallowed him.

Kabundungulu, far away at their home, saw that his brother's life-tree
had withered once more, and set out to find him. He reached the house
where the *kipalendes* were keeping Sudika-Mbambi's wife captive, and
asked where he was. They denied all knowledge of him, but he felt
certain there had been foul play. "You have killed him.

\[1. This need not mean that we must suppose Kinyoka to have been other
than a real serpent. Readers of "Uncle Remus" will not need to be
reminded that animals in folk-tales perform all sorts of actions which
would be quite impossible if their real character were strictly kept in
view.\]

Uncover the grave." They opened up the pit, and Kabundungulu descended
into it. He met with the old woman, and was directed to Kalunga-ngombe's
dwelling. On inquiring for his brother he was told, "Kimbiji has
swallowed him." Kabundungulu asked for a pig, baited his hook, and
called the people to his help. Between them they landed the fish, and
Kabundungulu cut it open. He found his brother's bones inside it, and
took them out. Then he said "My elder, arise!" and the bones came to
life. Sudika-Mbambi married Kalunga-ngombe's daughter, and set out for
home with her and his brother. They reached the pit, which, it would
seem, had been filled in, for we are told that "the ground cracked," and
they got out. They drove away the four *kipalendes*-one is surprised to
learn that they did not kill them out of hand-and, having got rid of
them, settled down to a happy life.

But the end of the story is decidedly disappointing. Kabundungulu felt
that he was being unfairly treated, since his brother had two wives,
while he had none, and asked for one of them to be handed over to him.
Sudika-Mbambi pointed out that this was impossible, as he was already
married to both of them, and no more was said for the time being. But
some time later, when Sudika-Mbambi returned from hunting, his wife
complained to him that Kabundungulu was persecuting them both with his
attentions. This led to a desperate quarrel between the brothers, and
they fought with swords, but could not kill each other. Both were
endowed with some magical power, so that the swords would not cut, and
neither could be wounded. At last they got tired of fighting and
separated, the elder going east and the younger west. The narrator adds
a curious sentence to the effect that Sudika-Mbambi is the thunder in
the eastern sky and Kabundungulu the echo which answers it from the
west.

Nature-myths of this sort, so far as I am aware, occur very rarely, if
at all, among the Bantu, and I am inclined to doubt whether this
conclusion really belongs to the story.

## The Wonder-child

Many Bantu tribes have a tale which may well come under this heading. It
has points of contact with those of Sudika-Mbambi (though the main theme
is quite different) and Ryang'ombe on the one hand and, on the other,
with the tricksters Huveane and Hlakanyana. The hero-always a
wonder-child, like Ryang'ombe and Hlakanyana-is called by the Yaos
Kalikalanje, by the Anyanja Kachirambe, by the Hehe
Galinkalanganye,\[1\] by the Baronga Mutipi (in another story
Mutikatika), and by the Lambas Kantanga. They all have the following
points in common:

A woman gets into difficulties-usually when alone in the bush-and is
helped by an ogre, a demon, or an animal (in one case a hyena; in
another a lion), on promising to hand over to this being the next child
to which she gives birth.

The birth takes place with unusual circumstances, and the child shows
marvellous precocity.

The mother, about to hand him over to the devourer, finds him too sharp
for her, and devises one stratagem after another, which he always
defeats.

Finally the ogre (or other enemy) is killed.

The opening incident varies considerably in the different stories. In
one the woman cannot lift her load of firewood by herself; in another it
is her water-jar, with which her companions unkindly refuse to help her
(in both these cases the birth is expected very shortly); others
introduce the episode (which also occurs in several quite different
stories) of the woman sent out by her husband to look for water in which
there are no frogs. In the Angola story of Na Nzua the mother has a
craving for fish, which can only be satisfied by her promising the
child, when born, to the river-spirit Lukala. Except in the above
particular, this story differs

\[1. This, from various indications, would seem to be the form whence
the preceding two are derived. It means "the one who was held over the
fire" (from *kalanga*, 'roast,' 'scorch'), because as soon as he was
born he told his mother to put him on a potsherd and hold him over the
fire. This may be connected with a custom of passing new-born babies
through the smoke. The Yao name has the same meaning, but is differently
explained. *Kachirambe*, in Nyanja, has no meaning applicable to the
story.\]

markedly from the rest. That of Kachirambe,\[l\] again, has an entirely
different opening, and is altogether so curious that it may well be
related here.

## Kachirambe of the Anyanja

Some little girls had gone out into the bush to gather herbs. While they
were thus busied one of them found a hyena's egg \[2\] and put it into
her basket. Apparently none of the others saw it; she told them,
somewhat to their surprise, that she had now picked enough, and hastened
home. After she was gone the hyena came and asked them, "Who has taken
my egg?" They said they did not know, but perhaps their companion who
had gone home had carried it off. Meanwhile the girl's mother, on
finding the egg in her basket, had put it on the fire. The hyena arrived
and demanded the egg; the woman said it was burnt, but offered to give
him the next child she had to cat. Apparently this callous suggestion
was quite spontaneous on her part; but as there was no child in prospect
just then she probably thought that the promise was quite a safe one,
and that by the time its fulfilment became possible some way out could
be found. The hyena, however, left her no peace, waylaid her every day
when she went to the stream for water, and kept asking her when the
child was to be produced. At last he said, " If you do not have that
child quickly I will eat you yourself." She went home in great trouble,
and soon after noticed a boil on her shin-bone, which swelled and
swelled, till it burst, and out came a child.\[3\] He was fully armed,
with bow, arrows, and quiver, had his little gourd of charms slung round
his neck, and was followed by his

\[1. Rattray, *Some Folk-lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja*, p.133.

2\. There is no attempt at explaining this, and I have seen no other
mention of a hyena's egg. But this animal is, in popular belief, so
abnormal that anything may be expected of it.

3\. This strange incident has several parallels, though none, so far as
I am aware, in connexion with this particular story. The Wakuluwe
(Tanganyika Territory) say that the first woman brought forth a child in
this way, and the (non-Bantu) Nandi have a tradition that their first
ancestor was an old man who produced a boy and a girl from the calf of
his leg.\]

dogs! He announced himself in these words: "I, Kachirambe, have come
forth, the child of the shin-bone!" The mother was struck with
astonishment, but it does not seem to have occurred to her to go back on
her promise. When next she went to draw water and the hyena met her with
the usual question she replied, "Yes, I have borne a child, but he is
very clever; you will never be able to catch him, but I myself will
beguile him for you. I will tie you up in a bundle of grass, and tell
Kachirambe to go and fetch it." So she tied up the hyena in a bundle of
the long grass used for thatching, and left it lying beside the path.
Kachirambe, when sent to fetch it, stood still a little way off, and
said, "You, bundle, get up, that I may lift you the better!" And the
bundle of grass rose up of itself. Kachirambe said, "What sort of bundle
is this that gets up by itself? I have never seen the like, and I am not
going to lift it, not I!" So he went home.

The hyena, after releasing himself from the grass, came back and said to
the woman, "Yes, truly, that youngster of yours is a sharp one!" She
told him to go in the evening and wait in a certain place; then she
called Kachirambe and said, "I want you to set a trap in such and such a
place for the rats; they have been destroying all my baskets."
Kachirambe went and chose out a large, flat stone; then he cut a forked
stick, and whittled the cross-piece and the little stick for the catch,
and twisted some bark-string, and made a falling trap, of the kind
called *diwa*, and set and baited it. In the evening his mother said to
him, "The trap has fallen. Go and see what it has caught!" He said,
"You, trap, fall again, so that I may know whether you have caught a
rat!" The hyena, waiting beside the trap, heard him, lifted up the
stone, and let it fall with a bang. Kachirambe said, What sort of trap
is it that falls twice? I have never seen such a one."

Next the mother told the hyena that she would send Kachirambe to pick
beans. The boy took the basket and went to the field, but then he turned
himself into a fly, and the hyena waited in vain. Kachirambe returned
home with a full basket, to his mother's astonishment. She was nearly at
her wits' end, but thought of one last expedient; she sent him into the
bush to cut wood. The night before he had a dream, which warned him that
he was in great danger, so he took with him his bow, and his quiver full
of arrows, and his 'medicine-gourd,' as well as a large knife. He
climbed up into a tree which had dead branches, and began to cut.
Presently he saw the hyena below, who said, "You are dead to-day; you
shall not escape. Come down quickly, and I will eat you!" He answered,
"I am coming down, but just open your mouth wide!" The hyena, with his
usual stupidity, did as he was told, and Kachirambe threw down a sharp
stick which he had just cut-it entered the hyena's mouth and killed him.
Kachirambe then came down and went home; when drawing near the house he
shot an arrow towards it, to frighten his mother, and said, "What have I
done to you, that you should send wild beasts after me to eat me?" She,
thoroughly scared, begged his pardon, and we are to suppose that he
granted it, for the story ends here.

Galinkalanganye was not so forgiving; he contrived to change places with
his mother after she was asleep, and it was she who was carried off by
the hyena. Similarly, Mutipi's mother was eaten by the lion to whom she
had promised her son, and Kalikalanje himself killed his mother, after
he and his companions had shot Namzimu (the demon who had come to claim
him). The tricks devised for handing over these lads to the enemy, and
the stratagems by which they are defeated, vary in the different
stories, but the bundle of grass appears in every one, and also in that
of Huveane.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: The Wakilindi Saga](mlb11)
