<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftc02)  [Next](ftc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0879800356/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Fortune Telling by Cards*, by P.R.S. Foli, \[1915\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# Fortune-Telling by Cards

### CHAPTER I

#### How we got our Pack of Cards

<span class="small">*Where do they come from?—The Romany Folk—Were they
made in Europe?—Suits and signs—The power of cards—Their charm and
interest—Necessity for sympathy—Value of Cartomancy*.</span>

#### Where do They Come From?

WHEN we take up an ordinary pack of cards to deal them out for a rubber,
or to lay them down in the careful deliberation of Patience, or when we
watch them being used as the inexplicable instruments of a something
that, with a feeling akin to superstitious dread, we prefer to call
coincidence, we do not often stop to think of the varied and eventful
history represented by those smooth, highly-glazed playthings.

The actual and authentic history of playing cards only goes back about
five hundred years, and various theories have been mooted as to the
source from which Europe obtained them. It is an established fact that
in past ages many eastern peoples, notably those of India, China, and
Chaldea, possessed cards which differed materially both in use and
design from those known in the West at a later date. It is impossible to
trace these prehistoric beginnings of card-lore, but there seems little
doubt that the Wise Men of eastern lands regarded their cards with none
of the contempt usually bestowed upon them in the West. They held them
in high esteem as mediums for the partial revelation of the Unknowable,
and included them as a part of their mystic lore.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

#### The Romany Folk.

It is thought by many that we owe our cards to the gipsies, who are
supposed to have been the offspring of a low caste of Hindus, and who,
driven from their own land, found their way, as fugitives, through
Western Asia into Egypt, and from Northern Africa into Europe. It is
certain that all kinds of fortune-telling, whether by Cartomancy or
whatever method, are inseparably connected with that curious,
fascinating, highly gifted and elusive people. They excelled in music
and ail mechanical pursuits; they could learn a language, or distinguish
themselves in metal work, with equal ease; but they had to live more or
less on the defensive, as very children of Ishmael, and years of
persecution only deepened their craftiness, sharpened their intuition,
and rendered them more keen to assert their mysterious power over those
who oppressed and yet inwardly feared them.

These Romany folk have preserved intact the ancient lore of the East,
while incredulous Europe has turned the sacred pages of divination from
the book of fate into mere instruments of amusement, and a vehicle for
winning or losing money. The gipsy remains a past master in the art of
Cartomancy, and though we may scoff, there are very few amongst us who
do not feel a sense of disquietude when brought face to face with an
instance of her uncanny power. We can afford to laugh when the sun of
our lives is shining brightly and all is well in mind and body, but
there come dark days in the lives of all, and then some are impelled to
seek the aid of these weird sons and daughters of an unknown land.

By many, perhaps by the majority, this inexplicable gift has been
vulgarised and debased to a mere means of extorting money from the
ignorant and the credulous; but by some it is still held as a sacred
faith—possibly no more superstitious than some forms of unenlightened or
perverted Christianity

#### Were They Made in Europe?

Another theory separates the cards of the West entirely from those of
the East, and holds that the western were originally made in Europe.
This is as it may be. A writer of the latter part of the fifteenth
century says that cards were first known

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

at Viterbo in 1379, and that they had been introduced by the Saracens,
who, with the Arabs and Moors, have the credit of planting the seeds of
Cartomancy in Spain. It is certain that at first cards were called by
the name *naibi;* and the Hebrew and Arabic words, *Nabi*, *naba*,
*nabaa*, signify "to foretell." It is also widely believed that the idea
of playing games with cards was an after-thought, and that their
original purpose was for the practice of divination.

The earliest cards were the Tarots, of which we speak in another
chapter, and it is supposed that some one had the bright idea of adding
the numeral to the symbolical cards, so as to play games with them. This
addition was made about the middle of the fourteenth century, and at the
beginning of the fifteenth century there was a pack in Venice composed
of seventy-eight cards, twenty-two symbols and fifty-six numerals; with
four *coat* (court) cards, king, queen, chevalier, and valet, and ten
*point* or pip cards to each suit. The fifty-six numerals were
subsequently reduced to the present number, fifty-two, by the rejection
of one of the picture cards.

The Spaniards discourteously abolished the queens, but the French, true
to their reputation, kept the dame and rejected the chevalier. The early
German packs were the same as the French, but the queens again were cast
out in favour of a superior knave called the *Obermann*. England
accepted the Spanish or French pack as she found it.

#### Suits and Signs.

There have always been four suits, but there have been many changes in
the signs used to mark them. The original quartette were:—Cups, supposed
to be emblematical of Faith; Money, representing Charity; Swords,
figuring Justice; and Clubs, typical of Fortitude. These signs are still
retained in the Tarots, and in Italian and Spanish cards. Old German
packs have bells, hearts, leaves, and acorns; and during the fifteenth
century the French adopted spades (*pique*), hearts, clubs (*trèfle*),
and diamonds.

There is some difficulty in tracing how we come by the word spade in
this connection. It has been thought to be a corruption of the Italian
word spade, meaning swords. It is not known why the French should have
called this

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

suit *pique*. Our suit of clubs is known by the French as *trèfle*, from
their drawing the sign like the trefoil; and the Germans call it
*Eichel* from its resemblance to an acorn. Our name is supposed to show
Italian influence, though where the connection between the word
*bastoni* and our sign is to be found, I am at a loss to say. The heart
sign needs no explanation, and is found in French, German, and English
packs. It corresponds to the Spanish and Italian sign of cups. By some
curious evolution the signs of money and bells were squared into the
French *carreaux*, our diamonds.

Many of the packs used in the fourteenth century were of the most
artistic and costly nature, and in some cases the court cards were drawn
so as to represent historic characters.

#### The Power of Cards.

Fierce controversies have ranged round these apparently simple pieces of
glazed pasteboard. They have exercised such an irresistible fascination
upon the minds of men and women of all grades and ages that others have
risen in wild revolt against this power, which had no attraction for
them, and which they longed to crush out of existence. There are still
those amongst us who will not have a card in the house, and who, even if
they do not use it, acquiesce in the term "the Devil's books," which has
been applied to the pack.

With their use for gambling purposes we have nothing to do here. As the
instruments of Cartomancy we give them our respectful consideration. We
would urge those of a morbid and unhealthy turn of mind to beware of
letting this practice take too strong a hold upon them. No reasonable
being need be ashamed of confessing a certain fear of the Unseen and the
Unknowable; but, on the other hand, no sane person would take a pack of
cards as the rule and guide of life, the final court of appeal in any
matters of moment.

#### Their Charm and Interest.

There is much amusement to be derived from the study of Cartomancy, and
it is not to be denied that there are certain persons who appear to have
the power of making the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

meaning of the cards vivid and convincing, while in the hands of others
there seems neither rhyme nor reason in their manipulation of the most
carefully shuffled pack. We may call things by what name we will, but
strange coincidences meet us at every turn, and now and then there seems
but the thinnest veil between us and the Future, which is so sedulously
hidden from us.

There has been a great revival of interest in all matters relating to
occultism in the immediate past, and if we are to believe what we read
and hear, educated men and women of to-day are going to have their
fortunes told as eagerly as did the great men and famous women of France
during the stormy period of the Revolution, and under the sway of the
great Napoleon himself. Many curious and convincing instances of
accurate foreshadowing of future events are told with regard to the
famous Mademoiselle Lenormand, and other cartomancers who held
undisputed sway over the minds of society at a time when credulity was
supposed to have been cast off with the trammels of a worn-out creed.

So when the fortune-tellers of the twentieth century take a pack of
cards and proceed to read the mysteries revealed therein, they are
following the example of the wise men of Chaldea, Egypt, and China, the
Flowery Land of the East, to say nothing of their European predecessors.

Divination by cards, therefore, is of great antiquity and of world-wide
popularity. Formerly it was combined with a knowledge of astrology; but
now it is considered sufficient to follow the general rules laid down by
one or two famous cartomancers, and to rely on intuition and experience
for details.

#### Necessity for Sympathy.

Any one with the slightest knowledge of occultism is aware that sympathy
with the inquirer or subject is essential.

It is true that cold reason tells us that the cards are pieces of
pasteboard and nothing more, and that it is the height of absurdity to
expect any revelation; yet, in dealing with them, human sympathy may
discern something of our perplexities, and all unconsciously set our
feet on the right path.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

#### Value of Cartomancy.

In the following pages there are several methods of divination by cards.
Any one observing the rules can learn the signification of the cards,
and while a study of the combinations they resolve into in the hands of
different people will always provide a fund of amusement, it may also—in
all seriousness I say it—inspire hope in the place of despair, assuage
sorrow, and send the inquirer away comforted; surely no insignificant
result.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](ftc04)

</div>
