<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftc16)  [Next](ftc18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0879800356/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Fortune Telling by Cards*, by P.R.S. Foli, \[1915\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### CHAPTER XV

#### Combination of Nines

#### How to Work it.

THE fifty-two cards must be shuffled and cut into three packs by the
person who wishes to have his or her fortune told, and the
fortune-teller must be careful to note what cards appear as the various
packs are turned face upwards, as this will be found to assist the
reading.

The card representing the inquirer must first be selected according to
the rules given in Chapter VII; it is not to be withdrawn, but shuffled
and cut with the pack.

Then lay the cards nine in a row, beginning from right to left with each
row; only seven will be in the last row. The cards being in order on the
table, you must begin by counting nine from your representative card and
nine again from the ninth, until you come to a card that has already
been counted.

The court cards represent the various people with whom the inquirer is
brought into contact, and their relation and attitude are easily
determined by the import of the cards between. Three deals are necessary
for a good reading.

#### An Example.

I give an example of fortune-telling by the combination of nines,
because an illustration is of practical help.

The pack having been dealt with in the manner described, we find the
cards have resolved themselves thus, reading from left to right in each
row:—

First line.—Seven of clubs, seven of spades, king of spades, ace of
diamonds, ace of hearts, knave of clubs, four of hearts, eight of
hearts, knave of spades.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Second line.—Two of diamonds, three of diamonds, two of hearts, six of
hearts, king of diamonds, five of clubs, two of clubs, five of spades,
three of hearts.

Third line.—Five of hearts, six of diamonds, four of clubs, queen of
clubs, five of diamonds, three of spades, king of hearts, four of
diamonds, ten of spades.

Fourth line.—Nine of spades, queen of spades, eight of diamonds, six of
clubs, ace of spades, queen of diamonds, king of clubs, knave of hearts,
six of spades, nine of hearts.

Fifth line.—Ten of diamonds, eight of clubs, seven of diamonds, ace of
clubs, nine of clubs, nine of diamonds, knave of diamonds, ten of
hearts, ten of clubs.

Sixth line.—Eight of spades, queen of hearts, seven of hearts, four of
spades, three of clubs, two of spades.

We will take the queen of hearts to represent the inquirer, and, as she
is in the lowest line of all, will count upwards. The ninth card is the
knave of clubs, and the next ninth the six of hearts, then the three of
spades, the ace of spades, and nine of clubs, which last brings us back
to our queen.

According to the signification given by this method the reading would be
as follows

<div align="center">

|                 |                                             |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Knave of clubs  | A generous friend.                          |
| Six of hearts   | Implies credulity.                          |
| Three of spades | An unfortunate marriage.                    |
| Ace of spades   | Difficulties. Be careful in making friends. |
| Nine of clubs   | Displeasure of friends.                     |

</div>

#### The First Reading.

My general reading of this would be that if the queen of hearts were an
unmarried woman she was in danger of making an unhappy marriage, which
would bring the displeasure of her friends upon her. If she will avoid
forming hasty friendships, and take the advice of a man who is older and
darker than herself, she will avoid much misfortune.

If married, the queen is the victim of an ill-assorted union, but she
must be careful not to give too much credence to the reports of friends,
and must guard her own conduct carefully. We will now proceed with the
next deal, to see if we can find a more favourable augury in the Book of
Fate.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

#### The Second Reading.

First line.—Eight of clubs, queen of hearts, six of spades, eight of
spades, eight of hearts, six of diamonds, ten of hearts, nine of clubs,
six of hearts.

Second line.—Three of spades, ace of spades, three of diamonds, king of
spades, ace of diamonds, ace of hearts, king of diamonds, king of clubs,
ace of clubs.

Third line.—Ten of spades, five of clubs, two of hearts, five of hearts,
ten of diamonds, four of hearts, two of clubs, knave of spades, three of
hearts.

Fourth line.—Five of spades, four of clubs, six of clubs, queen of
diamonds, four of diamonds, king of hearts, nine of spades, five of
diamonds, seven of clubs.

Fifth line.—Knave of clubs, ten of clubs, three of clubs, nine of
diamonds, queen of spades, seven of spades, knave of hearts, eight of
diamonds, seven of diamonds.

Sixth line.—Seven of hearts, four of spades, queen of clubs, two of
spades, knave of diamonds, two of diamonds, nine of hearts.

Here our inquirer does not prove to be a very wise person. In spite of
the warning and displeasure of friends, regardless of the affection of a
good man, and elated through unexpected riches, she listens with
credulous mind to one who will cause her much unhappiness. Let us hope
she will stop short of one fatal step, and take the good honourable love
that is awaiting her.

The ninth card is the king of clubs, and the five of the same suit
following in our arranged plan, then the five of diamonds, the ten of
clubs, the two of diamonds, the six of hearts, and the three of spades
complete this reading. A reference to the signification will show the
importance of these cards.

Perhaps in the third reading we may have more success.

#### The Third Reading.

First line.—Ace of clubs, eight of clubs, queen of hearts, ten of
spades, king of clubs, five of diamonds, ten of clubs, nine of spades,
knave of spades.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Second line.—Three of spades, two of spades, six of hearts, tight of
spades, five of spades, knave of clubs, seven of hearts, four of spades,
queen of clubs.

Third line.—Five of hearts, two of diamonds, three of diamonds, queen of
diamonds, eight of hearts, three of clubs, five of clubs, ace of
diamonds, six of diamonds.

Fourth line.—Four of diamonds, six of clubs, seven of dubs, seven of
diamonds, six of spades, nine of diamonds, knave of diamonds, nine of
hearts, eight of diamonds.

Fifth line.—Ten of hearts, king of spades, two of hearts, ten of
diamonds, ace of hearts, four of hearts, king of hearts, king of
diamonds, queen of spades.

Sixth line.—Two of clubs, seven of spades, knave of hearts, nine of
clubs, three of hearts, four of clubs, ace of spades.

The cards here are of better promise, though still full of warning. The
ninth card is the seven of hearts, which means unfaithfulness, followed
by another card indicating domestic dissension. The next is the knave of
diamonds, and treachery is to be apprehended. But there is considerable
success if care is exercised, and later on there appears to be a happy
marriage with comfort and even luxury.

Throughout her life the inquirer would have to be on her guard against
forming hasty friendships, and refrain from listening to scandal about
those near and dear to her. In this case I should think there would be
two marriages, the first not happy (which would probably be dissolved by
the law), then a happier time later on in life, with one who had been
content to wait.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Your Heart's Desire](ftc18.md)

</div>
