[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](moc06)  [Next](moc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5ITU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe*, by Donald A. Mackenzie,
\[1917\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

# CHAPTER II

### Palæolithic Magic and Religion

Intellectual Life of Palæolithic Man--Evidence from Present-day
Savages--Palæolithic Man progressive and big-brained--Bushmen and
Cro-Magnon Culture--Chronology of Aurignacian Period--The Inspiration of
Primitive Art--Steatopygous Figurines of Cave-dwellers, Babylonians,
Maltese, and Egyptians--The Primitive Mother-goddess--Wasp-waisted
Females in Fertility Dance--Hand Impressions in
Caves--Finger-mutilation--The Indian Evil-eye Charm--Foot-print
Lore--Animal Pictures as Totems--Evidence of Australia--Magdalenian
Art--Charmed Weapons--Palæolithic Ceremonial Burials--Ornaments as
Charms--Magic and Religion--Antiquity of Animal-headed Deities--Origin
of the Nude Goddess--The Aurignacian Claim.

IT will be recognized at the outset, in dealing with the intellectual
life of the Palæolithic Europeans, that little or no evidence can be
derived from chinless jaws or skulls with protruding brow ridges, and
that the artifacts of the Chellean and Acheulian phases of culture
assist us only in so far as they afford evidence regarding habits of
life and growing skill in craftsmanship. Not until we reach the
Mousterian stage, in the Third Glacial Epoch, and find that the
cave-dwelling hunters of reindeer and mammoths practised the ceremonial
burial of the dead, is there any sure indication that the Palæolithic
mind was sufficiently concerned regarding the great problems of life and
death as to formulate definite beliefs regarding the destiny of mankind.
But it would be rash to draw far-reaching conclusions from negative
evidence. The results that accrue from the comparative study of beliefs
and customs

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

renders highly improbable the hypothesis that Chellean and Acheulian men
of the Second Inter-glacial Period took no thought of the morrow because
they were on a plane of lower intellectual development than, for
instance) the backward Australian savages who practise elaborate
ceremonials and perpetuate myths which were anciently the products of
speculative thought. Indeed, there is no savage tribe on the globe at
present which can be said to be devoid of its intellectual life.

It is quite possible that the Chellean folks were even more advanced
than some of the existing types of primitive peoples. This view is
supported by the evidence obtained of their distinct progressive
tendencies. Stages of development can be detected in Chellean culture
which was raised to the Acheulian plane, and the increasing number and
excellence of the artifacts show clearly that a further distinct advance
was achieved when the Mousterian phase had fully developed. It is found,
by the examination of surviving Mousterian skulls, that despite his
rugged facial characteristics the Palæolithic European was a big-brained
man. Of course, skull capacity, especially in individual cases, cannot
be regarded as proof of intellectual power. Still, the fact remains that
the really progressive races in the world at present are those endowed
with the most liberal cranial capacity. The early inhabitants of Western
Europe may, therefore, have surpassed as thinkers, as they certainly did
as inventors, those surviving remnants of ancient races to whom they are
usually compared. The Grimaldi skulls of the Aurignacian period may have
Bushmen characteristics, but they give indication of greater
intellectual development than can be credited to those ill-fated and
interesting African nomads who, prior to coming into contact with the
white races, at whose hands they have suffered so

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

shamefully, had not advanced much beyond the Aurignacian and Magdalenian
stages of culture. The Bushmen appear, in fact, to have remained through
long ages in a state of arrested development after breaking away from
the ancient progressive races from whom the elements of their
civilization were derived. Possibly they even degenerated in the
interval.

It is probable that the Cro-Magnon peoples of the Aurignacian stage of
culture represented the race of unknown origin which exercised so marked
an influence on those of their contemporaries who were in touch with
them. They had the largest brains of any of the ancient peoples. Indeed,
according to the ethnologists, the skull capacity of their women was
greater than that of the average male European in the present age.

This Aurignacian stage of culture, which some date approximately at
20,000 B.C. and others at 30,000 B.C., affords ample indications not
only of intellectual activity, but also a marked degree of refinement of
thought and feeling. As has been shown in the "Tuan MacCarrell" story of
the Pleistocene Age, the Cro-Magnon cave-dwellers of the Late Third
Inter-glacial Epoch were accomplished draughtsmen and ivory-carvers.
They had an Art history which must be regarded as a reflection of their
social history. Apparently they had solved the problem of securing their
food-supply with a minimum of effort and had therefore leisure to
cultivate the Arts; this triumph they achieved by inventing new
implements and improving those inherited from the Mousterian Epoch.
Withal, as one cave-picture shows, they possessed domesticated cattle
which the women engaged in herding. Consequently they had advanced from
the hunting to the pastoral stage of civilization.

Their activities in the sphere of Art began with rude

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

childish efforts and culminated in the production of realistic drawings
and carvings in the round, and even of decorative designs which stand
comparison with those of later and more complex civilizations. It was
considered incredible, when discovery was first made of their
cave-pictures, that Palæolithic man could have been endowed with either
such intense artistic insight and feeling or technical skill as these
gave evidence of.

An interesting problem arises in connection with the artistic products
of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian stages of culture. Were they
connected with ceremonials, and therefore symbolic of religious and
magical beliefs; or should they be considered simply as the expression
of an Art movement which had been gradually developed for long ages by
accomplished flint-knappers who, in producing exquisitely flaked
artifacts of symmetrical proportions, displayed that infinite capacity
for taking pains which amounts to genius?

There can be no doubt that the finest Aurignacian figurines wrought in
stone and bone and ivory were conscious impressions of feminine beauty
of form, and that the artists of the Cro-Magnon race were as devoted
lovers of Art for Art's sake as those who at a later period shaped the
exquisite Solutrean flint lances of laurel-leaf and willow-leaf design.
The absence of male figurines, however, suggests that the art of this
remote period was fostered as a cult product, and that we should regard
these studies of nude women as religious symbols. This inference appears
to be corroborated by the finds of grotesque i steatopygous figurines,
some of which display no inconsiderable degree of skilful craftsmanship.
It is difficult to believe that when artists selected as models women
with enormously developed hips and thighs the *motif* was purely an
æsthetic one; their obvious desire

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

was to exaggerate sexual characteristics for some special reason.

The evidence derived in this connection from other cultural areas is of
undoubted value and interest. In Babylonia terra-cotta figurines, "with
accentuation of the female parts", represented Ishtar in her character
as the goddess of love and passion. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)
The steatopygous figurines which have been found in the prehistoric
"sanctuaries" of Malta were associated with perforated axe amulets and
other magical or religious ornaments. In some of the pre-Dynastic graves
of Egypt occur figurines of two types: those of slim-waisted women and
those of steatopygous females with short beards. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) It is not improbable that the Aurignacian,
like the early Egyptian figurines, were tribal forms of the ancient love
goddess and that the original "bearded Aphrodite" had a racial
significance.

In addition to these figurines there are other evidences of the practice
of religious ceremonials in the remote Aurignacian Age. In a cave at
Cogul, near Lerida, in Spain, a quaint painting depicts several females,
with "wasp waists" and bell-mouthed gowns reaching to their knees,
dancing round a nude male figure. A phallus image of this culture stage
has also been discovered.

Further light is thrown on Aurignacian beliefs by the imprints on cavern
walls of human hands with mutilated fingers. Some hands had been first
smeared with pigment and then impressed on the naked rock; others had
been held against damped rock and dusted round with either red or black
substances. Not a few of the fingers show that one or more joints had
been removed either by accident or design.

 

<span id="img_03000"></span> ![](img/03000.jpg)

GROUP OF FIGURINES, IN TERRA-COTTA, FROM PALAIKASTRO

The figurines represent priestesses dancing around the Snake Goddess,
the birds are doves, while the separate figure shows a worshipper with
right arm raised in prayer "salute".

 

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

The practice of finger-mutilation obtained among Bushmen, certain
Australian tribes, and communities of Canadian Indians. Independent
investigators have ascertained that it was usually associated with
burial customs and the ravages of disease. Bush women sacrificed a joint
of the little finger when a near relation died, and Canadian natives
acted similarly during times of pestilence "to cut off deaths". Finger
mutilation in Australia was, among other things, occasionally a mark of
caste. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60)

References are made to finger-mutilation in Gaelic stories. After or
before great heroes performed deeds of valour, fighting against monsters
or famous rivals, they fell into profound slumber. Heroines had to
awaken them by cutting off a finger-joint, a part of an ear, or a
portion of skin from the top of the head. In the story of Conall Gulban
a "great man" came to carry off the lady called "Breast of Light", while
Conall, her lover, lay asleep. "Fear would not let her cut off the
little finger," it is stated, "and she could not awaken Conall." <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61) This savage practice had evidently a
magical significance. It may have been intended to renew strength and
prolong life, and perhaps also to ward off threatened perils. In the
latter case it may have been associated with the ceremony of
purification. Among many primitive peoples those who dug graves or
touched the dead were under taboo for varying periods, and not allowed
to touch individuals or even handle their own food; in some instances
they had to be fed by friends until the purification ceremony was
completed.

Hand lore is as widespread as it is varied. Magical

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

signs were made by posturing certain fingers. "Children," says an old
English writer, "to avoid approaching danger, are taught to double the
thumb within the hand. This was much practised whilst the terrors of
witchcraft remained. . . . It was the custom to fold the thumbs of dead
persons within the hand, to prevent the power of evil spirits over the
deceased." <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) In India the upper
finger-joints are lucky, and the lower unlucky. Consequently the former
only are used at prayer-counting. Throughout Europe much attention was
paid to the fingers. The small finger was spat over for luck, and the
forefinger of the right hand was supposed to be poisonous, and in the
treatment of wounds was never utilized. It used to be considered unlucky
to pare finger-nails on certain days. At any time finger-nail parings
might be used by witches to work evil spells against individuals. Some
mothers still hesitate to cut baby's finger-nails in the first year of
life, and bite them off instead. The Scandinavian dead, who were buried
with unpared nails, and therefore without ceremony, suffered torture in
the Otherworld. The ship in which the demons sailed to wage war against
the gods at Ragnarok was made of the nail-parings of wicked persons, and
was called *Naglfar*, a name derived from *nagl*, a human nail. The fate
of an individual was, and is still, believed by patrons of "palmists" to
be indicated by the markings of the hand. Much attention used to be paid
to dots on finger-nails; yellow spots foretold death, white spots gifts,
and black spots bad luck. Hands were spat upon to seal bargains and
bring luck, and kissed upon in connection with Pagan religious
practices.

The Aurignacian custom of leaving imprints of hands on rocks is
prevalent in modern times in Australia and elsewhere. In India it is
part of a luck ceremony.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "During a marriage
among the Madigas (Telugur Pariahs)", writes Mr. Edgar Thurston, a
well-known investigator, "a sheep or goat is sacrificed to the
marriage-pots. The sacrificer dips his hand in the blood of the animal,
and impresses the blood on his palms on the wall near the door leading
to the room in which the pots are kept. This is said to avert the evil
eye. Among the Telugu Malas, a few days before a wedding, two marks are
made, one on each side of the door, with oil and charcoal, for the same
purpose. At Kadur, in the Mysore Province, I once saw impressions of the
hand on the walls of Brahman houses. Impressions in red paint of a hand
with outspread fingers may be seen on the walls of mosques and
Mohammedan buildings." <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) In many
Eur-Asian folk-tales the "Great Hand" is the only visible part of a
destructive demon.

Those Indians who still charm their houses with hand imprints also trace
wavy and interlacing lines in front of their doorsteps and on either
side of the part approaching it. Similar lines are found on Bushman
paintings of hunting-scenes and in Aurignacian cave-pictures in France
and Spain. They may have been intended to snare demons as well as to
cast a spell over wild animals. The hieroglyphics representing the name
of a Pharaoh were surrounded by cartouches which were "name charms". On
some of the sculptured stones of Brittany human footprints are depicted
surrounded by meandering and serpentine lines. Perhaps these "luck
lines", as they may be called, were inscribed with purpose to secure
magical protection for individuals setting out on a journey. Primitive
peoples rarely entered upon new undertakings without performing luck
ceremonies. It

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

is recorded in a minute of Dingwall Presbytery, dated 5th September,
1656, which refers to the prevalence of superstitious Practices in a
western parish of Ross-shire, "that future events in reference
especiallie to lyfe and death, in takeing of Journeyis, was exspect to
be manifested by a holl of a round stone quherein they tryed the
entering of thair heade, which if they could doe, to witt, be able to
put in thair heads, they expect thair returning to that place, and
failing they considered it ominous". The writer in his boyhood took part
with his contemporaries in performing various luck ceremonies which were
evidently of remote origin. Before dangerous cliffs were climbed an
ash-tree, named the "rock tree", was visited, and each individual
ascertained, by throwing a stone into a hollow in the trunk, whether he
could safely undertake the proposed enterprise or not. If a stone darted
sideways, the boys shouted, "The danger goes past!" but if it returned
to the feet of the thrower it was taken as a sign of ill luck for that
day, and he turned homewards. A large flat stone, called "the
spitting-stone", was spat upon by those that remained. The compact was
thus formed; where one went everybody had to go. When a rocky chasm had
to be leapt over, caps were first thrown to ensure that the owners would
similarly cross lightly and land safely; those whose caps fell short
refused to attempt to leap, and made a long and safe detour. When a
rainbow appeared against a rain-cloud passing at a distance, the boys
charmed away the threatened shower, which would render the rock slippery
and more dangerous, by "breaking" the gleaming arch of colours. This
they accomplished, as they believed, by laying on a boulder a withered
sprig of grass, which they snapped with a single blow delivered by a
small stone grasped tightly in the right hand, as Palæolithic man
grasped his

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

"hand-axe". It was noted that the upper part of the rainbow faded
simultaneously. Hands were spat upon when a specially difficult portion
of rock had to be negotiated, and it was believed that danger was
averted from trickling water by wetting the tip of a finger and
moistening the lips with it. A sacred well was invariably visited for an
inspiring and strengthening draught of charmed water, and much reverence
was shown for the wonderful skimming flies which were supposed to
cleanse it of mud after it was disturbed. Luck-drinking was not uncommon
in other days. Grose says: "There is a kind of beverage called 'foot
ale' required from one entering on a new occupation". <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) The "first-footing" ceremonies in Scotland
and elsewhere on New Year's Day are the occasion for much eating and
drinking. The familiar phrase, "putting one's foot in it", appears to
have an interesting history.

"It is a world-wide superstition", says Professor Frazer, "that by
injuring footprints you injure the feet that made them." <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) If, then, these line-surrounded footprints
on the Brittany stones were not intended to protect individuals who
visited them to perform magical ceremonies, they may have been inscribed
to restrict the wanderings of the ghosts of heroes buried underneath.
The primitive folks perhaps thought that when footprints were thus
"snared" by "luck lines", ghosts were prevented from troubling the
living.

A naked human footprint, which is not surrounded by these meandering and
interlacing lines, survives on fine undisturbed sand on the floor of an
Aurignacian cave (Altamira), near drawings of panting trout and a
wounded bison. <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66) In this case the
Palæolithic cave-dweller may

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

have ensured his luck by connecting himself ceremonially with the
animals he desired to obtain. "May luck follow in my footsteps," he may
have exclaimed, as Highland boys, who, as they set out on bird-nesting
expeditions were wont to say as they figured out eggs on a dusty
highway: "May I get this and this and more."

Other signs, which appear to be magical also, are rows of dots. These
figure in Australian and Bushman drawings and paintings. They figure
likewise on or beside the artistic products of the Aurignacian Age, and
sometimes are arranged in such a manner as to suggest constellations.
More elaborate enigmatical signs, resembling birds in flight, fish,
twigs, battle-axes, &c., appear to be primitive hieroglyphics.

Some anthropologists suggest that the animals depicted by the
Palæolithic artists, in caves and elsewhere, were tribal or family
totems. The following view is highly suggestive. "All the beasts thus
represented (in caves)," says Professor Frazer, "appear to be edible,
and none of them to be fierce carnivorous creatures. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) Hence it has been ingeniously suggested by
M. S. Reinach that the intention of these works of art may have been to
multiply by magic the animals so represented. . . . He infers that the
comparatively high development of prehistoric art in Europe . . . may
have been due in large measure to the practice of sympathetic magic."

Professor Frazer, quoting from Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68) shows that the native Australians perform
magical ceremonies "to multiply the kangaroos and emus". "The men of the
emu totem in the Arunta tribe proceed as follows. They clear a small
spot of level ground, and,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

opening veins in their arms, they let the blood stream out until the
surface of the ground, for a space of about three square yards, is
soaked with it. When the blood has dried and caked, it forms a hard and
fairly impermeable surface, on which they paint the sacred design of the
emu totem, especially the parts of the bird which they like best to eat,
namely, the fat and the eggs. Round this painting men sit and sing. The
men of the kangaroo totem perform a similar ceremony. They inscribe
figures of kangaroos on a rocky ledge, which they also decorate with
"alternate vertical stripes of red and white to indicate the red fur and
white bones of the kangaroo." The rock is reputed to be inhabited by
kangaroo spirits which are waiting for mothers, and they are supposed to
be driven out when human blood is poured over the ledge. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

M. S. Reinach's theory regarding the magical significance of Aurignacian
art seems to be confirmed by a piece of chance evidence which has been
recorded quite recently (1913). The Count Andreas Begouen,, the French
archæologist, has on his estate in the district of Montesquieu-Aventes a
cavern known as the Tus Ditboubert. It had long been known to bear
traces of occupation during Palæolithic times. Paintings could be
distinguished on the walls, but few finds of importance were made in it
until the count broke through a mass of stalactites that concealed an
inner cavern. In this secluded part the Count discovered that
Palæolithic man had begun to work clay at a remote period. At the base
of one of the walls were curious little clay figurines of animals in a
wonderful state of preservation. "One", says a French writer, "was a
male bison and another a female. The first was 26 inches long and the
second

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 30 inches. They
were almost intact, although cracked by the drying of the clay.
Excavations on the floor of the cavern revealed a great number of bones
of the bison, but no signs that the place had been used as a
dwelling-place or as a kitchen by the cave-dwellers." In this eerie cave
the Palæolithic folk had evidently conducted mysterious ceremonies. But
for what purpose? the Count wondered. "It was an old peasant who gave
him his clue. 'It is a charm,' said he, when his eyes fell on one of the
relics. Questioned regarding his statement, this man went on to tell
that the peasants of the neighbourhood have an ancient custom which they
believe enables them to catch the foxes which raid their chicken-yards.
They made, he said, a clay image of a fox which they rubbed with the
blood of a fox, and then concealed among the rocks at certain places.
Close to it they buried the carcass of a fox. Then they set traps near
by, and towards these foxes were drawn by the magical influence of the
modelled fox and were invariably caught." It is unnecessary to emphasize
the importance of this evidence. Similar practices were widespread long
centuries after the Palæolithic folk flourished in southern France. The
Babylonians and Egyptians shaped waxen and clay images of demons and
thrust them into a fire so as to injure or destroy the beings they thus
depicted. Magical images were also made in Greece and Rome, and they are
still being produced in various parts of the world. The Scottish
Highland *corp chreadh* ("clay body") was an image of an individual whom
the maker desired to afflict or slay magically. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) Pins or nails were stuck into it so that
the victim might suffer pain, and it was placed in running water so that
he might "waste away". Images of fish, turtle, and dugong

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

were made by the islanders of Torres Straits and taken with them when
they went fishing, with the idea that the image lured the real animal to
its destruction; and men of the dugong clan, who were symbolically
decorated, made mimetic movements with a dead dugong to constrain others
to come and be caught." <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) The
Palæolithic artists may have utilized the fragments of slate, stone,
&c., on which animals were depicted for a similar purpose.

The Bushman cave-pictures closely resemble the Aurignacian in many
details, and even retain certain mannerisms displayed by the ancient
European artists. But no direct evidence has been forthcoming that they
have, or had, a magical significance. It is possible, however, that
those natives who were questioned in this connection may have been as
reticent regarding their secrets as most superstitious peoples usually
are. In Scotland, where there are many archaic survivals, it is believed
that a charm may be broken if its purpose is revealed. Secrecy is
necessary for its success; it conserves energy and prevents the working
of counter-charms. Not unfrequently in the past Highlanders have misled
investigators who, because of their inquisitiveness, were regarded with
suspicion, and in consequence earned for themselves a reputation for
evasiveness and duplicity.

During the Magdalenian phase of civilization, in the Fourth Glacial
Epoch, there was a great art revival. Arctic and sub-arctic fauna were
depicted in a variety of forms with artistic feeling and a degree of
faithfulness which betokens close and even trained observation of
animals. Decorative designs display overflowing artistic fancy.
Everything the Magdalenian craftsmen touched he rendered beautiful.
Handles of weapons were carved out of bone, horn, or ivory to represent
wild animals, which

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

were skilfully posed so as to combine utility with artistic excellence.
Decoration was evidently, as M. Piette has insisted, generated primarily
by the imitative instinct. <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72)

Magdalenian art, like the Aurignacian, appears also to have derived
inspiration from custom and belief. "Every weapon has its demon," runs
an old Gaelic axiom. In the Indian epics, the *Máhabhárata* and the
*Rámáyana*, the spirits of celestial weapons appear before the heroes,
to whom they are gifted by deities, in attitudes signifying their
willingness to render obedient and helpful service. When we find
Magdalenian dagger-handles carved to represent charging mammoths or
scampering deer, it may be inferred that their owners believed that
these possessed the strength and prestige of the one animal and the
swiftness and sureness of the other. Discovery has also been made of
what appears to have been the Magdalenian "bull roarer". In Australia
this implement is used to invoke spirits at initiation and other
ceremonies, and elsewhere to raise the wind, that is to compel the
attention of the wind-god. The Egyptian sistrum similarly summoned the
god when it was tinkled in temples.

Ceremonial burials, which are sure indications of the existence of
religious beliefs, took place, as has been indicated, as early as the
Mousterian or Middle Palæolithic Period, and also in the later
Aurignacian Period. Sometimes the dead were covered over with stones in
their cave homes, which were then deserted. Sometimes artificial caves,
or grottoes, were utilized as family or tribal burial-vaults. Certain of
the skeletons appear to have been unfleshed and afterwards sprinkled
over with ochre and ashes. Stone chambers were also constructed to
protect the dead.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

The corpse was usually laid on the right side, with the legs crouched
up, the head resting on the right arm and the left arm extended.
Occasionally, however, the arms appear to have been crossed. These
postures suggest sleep, but it must have been believed that the dead
would awake, for weapons and implements were left in the tomb, as well
as cooked food. The deceased was also adorned with personal ornaments,
which were evidently charms. Apparently he had need of protection,
perhaps against demons. Strings of periwinkle shells were placed on the
head of deceased, and were evidently worn also by the living. This
custom in itself is sufficient to suggest that in these remote times
belief in magic was well developed and exceedingly prevalent. Primitive
peoples wear charms for a variety of reasons-to bring luck, to ward off
disease, to cure, to give strength and inspire courage, to acquire the
particular attributes they admire in the object, and so on. The
periwinkle, which so greatly attracted the Palæolithic Europeans, was
not necessarily regarded as "a thing of beauty and a joy for ever". It
is only in modern times, when the significance of an immemorial custom
has faded, that personal ornaments are selected on account of their
purely decorative qualities, their rarity or cost. Our remote ancestors
were intensely practical, and in adorning their bodies expected to
derive some benefit from what they wore. The virtue of the periwinkles
was supposed to pass to the warriors who charmed their heads with them,
just as the virtue of the crawfish toe with which Cherokee women have
been wont to scratch their babies' hands was supposed to pass to the
child thus treated, and give him in after life a powerful grip. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) It appears to have been believed that the

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

heads on which the periwinkle shell lay would be as difficult to injure
and as quick to avoid attack as the heads of these elusive sea-snails.
The Irish hero Cuchullin wore pearls in his hair. As frail pearls were
protected by oyster shells, they possessed protective virtue for those
who wore them. In this manner the ancient believers in magical charms
were accustomed to reason.

Palæolithic hunters also wore necklaces of deer's teeth, and these were
fixed round the necks of the dead at burials. They were probably charms
for swiftness of foot and endurance. African natives select for
necklaces the claws of leopards, which are supposed to impart to them
the fierceness and cunning of these dreaded animals, and they believe
that weariness is unknown to those who have anklets of tortoise legs.
When certain South American tribes go to battle they charm their bodies
with the tusks of the courageous and irresistible peccary.

Some anthropologists separate magic from religion, and define the former
as a process whereby the service of the god is enforced, and the latter
as a process to secure by appeal and obedience the goodwill and favours
of the god. Another theory is that magic was a means of leaguing oneself
with the evil powers as opposed to the religious adoration of, and
ceremonial connection with, the good powers. Among the most primitive
peoples it is recognized that there is a right and a wrong way of
obtaining supernatural aid. Individuals, like Faust, might form a
compact with the devil and obtain favours denied to pious folk, who.
however, secured full reward for their piety in the after-life.

The believer in magic in primitive times had no well-defined and
systematized philosophy of life. He appears to have had a vague
conception of world-pervading Power which issued from a hidden and
inexhaustible source, and

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

he endeavoured to "tap" the supply. This Power was manifested in many
directions and in many forms. Here it specialized as the quality of
strength or endurance, and there as cunning or keen-sightedness. It
might also specialize as a curative influence, or be developed as a
multiplying and exceedingly fertile agency. This hidden Power was also
more potent at one season than another.

As man's mind developed, and he recognized his various deficiencies and
needs in a world full of peril, he proceeded to increase his
capabilities of acquiring a meed of this universal Power. He feasted on
the body of a strong animal to increase his own strength, on a cunning
animal to acquire more cunning, and, believing that life was in blood,
sought to prolong his life by drinking blood. But he also believed that
the virtues of an animal, for instance, were not only in its flesh and
blood, but also in every part of its body. He picked up and stuck in his
hair the feather of an eagle, believing that the feather would impart to
him the keen-sightedness of that efficient bird of prey. His own
clothing, his footprints, his saliva, his hair, his nail-parings, and so
on, were so closely connected with himself that he could be injured or
benefited if any of these things were brought into contact with magical
energy. A man could be injured or hampered by injuring or hampering his
footprints, by m i uttering spells over his nail-parings, by mixing his
saliva with something infected with the energy of evil. There was
another way of "tapping" the universal Power. It could be directed into
certain channels by ceremonies, or by uttering potent words. Herein the
belief is involved that a god or animal can be mesmerized by force of
example and will-power. If it was desired to catch a deer, the hunter
performed the part he wished the deer to play; he ran and then fell as
he wished the deer to fall;

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

fishermen acted the part of fish by wriggling as if into a net, or
towards baited hooks. Sailors whistled to raise the wind, and ceased
whistling when it blew hard enough. Ceremonies were similarly performed
to bring on rain in season, and so on.

It appears to have been recognized at an early period that there were
two kinds of magic--the one kind brought good luck and the other bad
luck. By effecting a ceremonial connection with the source of good-luck
magic, mankind prospered. Wells were lucky, and those who visited them
wished for what they desired and left some article to ensure the
constant supply of desired energy; certain trees were sources of good
luck, and certain trees were sources of bad luck. An individual might
guard himself against the influence of bad luck by throwing a stone, as
when, for instance, he threw one on a burial-cairn, or the spot where a
disaster had occurred, or by spitting when an unlucky name was mentioned
or an unlucky animal passed by.

Religious beliefs, 'it is argued, developed when mankind rose to a
higher intellectual plane and recognized that the world is subject to
intelligent control--that there is a Divinity "which shapes our ends,
rough hew them how we will". It must be recognized, however, that when
this hypothesis is given practical application it has to be subjected to
qualifications. In civilized communities, like those of Babylonia and
Egypt, the highest religious conceptions were associated with the
crudest magical beliefs and practices. Deities were supposed to exercise
control over the supply of "Power", but they might also be influenced by
it themselves. In Babylonia the chief god of a pantheon attained his
position by becoming possessed of the "Tablets of Fate"; he directed
Power into certain channels, but another and older god usually generated

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

power. Merodach, for instance, was king of the deities, but he had to
co-operate with his father, Ea, the "Great Magician" of the gods. Ea
generated Power by utilizing fire and water. There are also traces of
the ancient belief that the moon was the supreme fountain-head of Power,
creative, curative, fertilizing, and sustaining, and it was
individualized as the bi-sexual deity Nannar (Sin), who was the Father
and Mother in one. In Scotland and Ireland the moon was never
individualized, and the moon remained simply as a magical crucible.

We may separate magic from religion, but this was not done by the early
peoples who believed in both. They were fused in the common stock of
inherited beliefs and ideas. The elements of religion can be detected in
communities where magic is prominent, and the elements of magic can be
traced in well-developed religious systems. It would appear that in the
Palæolithic Age this confusion existed also. Primitive man was neither
logical nor consistent. He embraced and perpetuated contradictory
beliefs. Intensely conservative, he continued to cling to old ideas even
after he embraced new ideas which were intended to supplant those which
had become obsolete.

Religious ideas appear to have had origin when mankind were faced by
crises. There came a time in every primitive community when it had to be
recognized that magic failed them. A calamity visited charm-protected
homes, charmed warriors fell in battle, starvation confronted a family
or a tribe which had performed all the ceremonies required for procuring
the food-supply. Mankind had to face disaster with faith and courage,
and in doing so he faced the unknown. "Religion", says Mr. R. R. Marett,
"is the facing of the unknown. It is the courage in it that brings
comfort. . . . The courage involved

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

in all live religion normally co-exists with a certain modesty or
humility." <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74)

This religious feeling necessitated the recognition of supernatural
will. It brought to the stricken heart a dim conception of a divine
individuality which acted voluntarily and in response to human appeals.
The god, or chief of the gods, was not controlled by Power in the same
way as mankind were. As this idea developed it was believed that good
luck came from the god, the friend of man, and bad luck from the demon,
the enemy of man. It was necessary to win the favour of the god and
secure protection against the demon.

Magic, on the other hand, gave no recognition to a supreme controlling
will. It was rooted in the belief that the world was governed by natural
laws. Those who practised it attained some success, but they generally
failed because of their ignorance of natural laws. Their ideas about
Power were based on the science of their times. They endeavoured to
"harness" it as their descendants have "harnessed" the Niagara Falls,
and to attract it from a recognized source as a wireless telegraphic
instrument attracts vibrating waves of electrical currents. In dealing
with the elements they acted vainly, but often cunningly, for
rain-making ceremonies, for instance, were never practised except when
rain was expected. The wily magicians rarely attempted the impossible.
They invariably achieved success, however, when they sought to influence
individuals. The primitive folks lived in a world of terror. Many minds
were unstable; there were few who had not deranged nervous systems.
Magicians achieved far-reaching results by sheer "make-believe". It was
no difficult task for them to secure the co-operation of those whom they
undertook

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

to injure or cure, by hypnotic suggestion. At the present day many of
the members of primitive communities are found to be exceedingly prone
to hysteria, and these, of course, are excellent subjects for the
magician. A savage who is prepared to face a lion or a Maxim gun, may
shiver at the glance of a magician who works up excitement by performing
a dance or some awesome and mysterious ceremony with purpose to
influence the distribution of Power.

When, therefore, we find a particular community with individualized gods
or demons, it may be recognized that they have conceived of supernatural
Wills which exist apart from magical energy. All acts performed to
influence these Wills in the interests of mankind are religious acts. A
magical ceremony may thus be performed in a religious spirit. Some of
the ancient peoples, however, performed religious acts in dealing with
the gods, and practised magic when undertaking to baffle demons. "Those
of the gods", said Isocrates, "who are the source to us of good things
have the title of Olympians; those whose department is that of
calamities and punishments have harsher titles; to the first class both
private persons and states erect altars and temples; the second is not
worshipped either with prayers or burnt sacrifices, but in their case we
perform ceremonies of riddance." <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) In
India the ritualistic Brahmans performed magical acts to prevent the
demons intercepting sacrifices intended for the gods. Egyptian priests
practised magic to influence the gods, although they also made offerings
to them, and those of Babylonia did likewise. The fusion of religion and
magic gave rise to many complex practices and systems of belief.

The Palæolithic folks had their gods or demons, or

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

both, as well as their magical beliefs. Animal-headed supernatural
beings were depicted in cave-drawings, with hands and arms uplifted in
the Egyptian attitude of adoration, or dancing the "dance of fertility"
like the "goat-men" (satyrs) of Babylonia and the animal-headed deities
of the wandering Bushmen. The fertility dance was "magical"; the dancer
was a supernatural being, a religious conception.

In Babylonia the oldest deities are indistinguishable from demons. Even
the benevolent Ea, who instructed his worshippers how to erect
buildings, till the soil, and frame humanitarian laws, had his demoniac
form. The Palæolithic gods were apparently half demons also,
"destroyers" as well as "preservers", "enemies of man" as well as
"friends of man", "bringers of calamity" as well as "bestowers of
blessings".

In shaping their gods the early people made them ideals of what they
sought most or feared most. The god of the athlete was a giant big as a
tree, who threw great boulders farther than a human being could fling a
pebble; the goddess of love was a lawless wanton who revelled in
exaggerated love-matches, and her lovers were numerous as those of
Ishtar and her kind. She was worthily depicted as a steatopygous female,
who was the ideal of reproducing motherhood, or as the slim beauty who
charmed impressionable males. The god was a superman and the goddess a
superwoman.

But the idea of gods was also affected by preconceived beliefs.
Worshippers of animals, who believed that their ancestor was a
particular animal, associated them with their anthropomorphic deities.
Ea, the culture-god of Babylonia, was clad in the skin of the ancestral
fish, whose virtues he had acquired by performing a sacrifice. The
priest of a totemic cult similarly enclosed himself in

 

<span id="img_04800"></span> ![](img/04800.jpg)

IVORY FIGURINE AND HEAD--"THE LEAPER"--FROM KNOSSOS

Reproduced from the "Annual of the British School at Athens'', by kind
permission of the Committee and of Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.

 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the skin of the ancestral animal of his tribe or family, which provided
the food-supply, or he wore a mask to represent the combination of the
totem and the tribe in himself. Another theory which accounts for
animal-headed deities is that they are a link between human gods and
animal gods; man progressed from the worship of the "Great Beast" to the
"Great Man" by degrees, the process being an evolutionary one. The
problem is a difficult one, no doubt. But however we may attempt to
solve it we have to deal with the fact that in the Aurignacian Age in
southern and western Europe there were animal-headed gods. These
therefore did not begin to be either in Egypt or Babylonia. The process,
if there was a process, was well advanced ere the Tigro-Euphratean
valley was rendered habitable for man, or the proto-Egyptians had begun
to sow grain and reap harvests. A prolonged Age of culture had prepared
for the builders of future civilization a tangled jungle of beliefs
which they were to inherit and perpetuate, along with the decorative
designs, &c., invented before and during the Fourth Glacial Epoch. Even
the fashions of attire were fixed in the early period. The bell-mouthed
skirts, hanging from wasp waists, which have been associated with Cretan
civilization, are displayed in Aurignacian cave-paintings. Even the
Assyrian goddess's postures are earlier than Assyrian civilization. An
ivory carving of Ishtar as an Egyptian goddess has been discovered at
Kuyunjik. "The Egyptian character of the figure", writes Mr. L. W.
King, <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) "leaps to the eye. . . . In
fact, everything about the figure is Egyptian with one exception-the
position of the hands. The fact that the goddess holds her breasts at
once betrays her Asiatic character. . . . The type, in fact, is
characteristic of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

western Asia and extends also into the Ægean." The type and the pose are
also characteristic of the Aurignacian Age; some steatopygous figures
carved in ivory similarly hold their breasts with their hands. "It is
still uncertain", adds Mr. King, "whether the nude goddess is to be
traced to a Babylonian, Anatolian, or Ægean source." She may have
survived from Aurignacian times among the descendants of scattered
Palæolithic peoples who mingled with later immigrants into Europe at the
dawn of the Neolithic Age. In the next chapter it will be shown that
traces of an ancient goddess cult survive in various areas, and that
certain of these were peopled by Palæolithic folks in post-glacial
times, who met and fused with the earliest settlers of the Mediterranean
Race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[30:1](moc07.htm#fr_58) *Religious Belief in
Babylonia and Assyria*, Morris Jastrow, pp. 136 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[30:2](moc07.htm#fr_59) The female beards
suggest that this race's area of characterization was a cold country. On
the other hind, it may be held that we have here the earliest evidence
of belief in "intermediate types" among the ancient Egyptians.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[31:1](moc07.htm#fr_60) See *Travels in the
Interior of Southern Africa*, W. J. Burchell, Vol. II., p. 61 (1824);
The Native Races of South Africa, G. W. Stow, p. 129 (1905); *Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada*, Representative of the British
Association (1889); p. 837; and *Ancient Hunters*, W. J. Sollas, pp. 238
*et seq*. (1911).

<span id="fn_61"></span>[31:2](moc07.htm#fr_61) Campbell's *West
Highland Tales*, Vol. III, p. 225.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[32:1](moc07.htm#fr_62) Hutchinson's *History of
Northumberland*, Vol. 14 p. 4.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[33:1](moc07.htm#fr_63) *Omens and Superstitions
of Southern India*, p. 119 (1912), and *Journal of Anthropological
Institute*, XIX, p. 56 (1890).

<span id="fn_64"></span>[35:1](moc07.htm#fr_64) Brand's Antiquities,
Vol. II, p. 333.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[35:2](moc07.htm#fr_65) *The Golden Bough* (The
Magic Art), Vol. I., pp. 207 *et seq*. Professor Frazer gives numerous
illustrations of this belief.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[35:3](moc07.htm#fr_66) *Ancient Hunters*, W. J.
Sollas, p. 235.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[36:1](moc07.htm#fr_67) Bears are depicted on
stones, &c., but evidence has been forthcoming that these were eaten. It
is possible that the primitive hunters feasted also on the flesh of the
mammoth and woolly rhinoceros.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[36:2](moc07.htm#fr_68) *Native Tribes of
Central Australia*, p. 176.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[37:1](moc07.htm#fr_69) *The Golden Bough* ("The
Magic Art"), Vol. I., pp. 85-8, third edition.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[38:1](moc07.htm#fr_70) J. G. Campbell's
*Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland*
(1902), pp. 46-8. The custom is not yet obsolete.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[39:1](moc07.htm#fr_71) *Magic and Fetishism*,
A. C. Haddon, p. 19 (London, 1906).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[40:1](moc07.htm#fr_72) L'Art pendant l'Age du
Renne.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[41:1](moc07.htm#fr_73) *Nineteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, p. 308, (Washington, 1900.)

<span id="fn_74"></span>[46:1](moc07.htm#fr_74) *The Birth of Humility
and Anthropology*, p. 212.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[47:1](moc07.htm#fr_75) Isocrates, *Orations*,
V, p. 117.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[49:1](moc07.htm#fr_76) The Journal of Egyptian
Archæology, Vol. I, Part II, pp. 107 *et seq*. (1914).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Ancient Peoples of the Goddess Cult](moc08)
