[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic109)  [Next](lfic111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# O'CARROLL'S WARNING.

Three Ulster students spent some time under him, and at last they formed
a design of performing a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. They asked his
permission, which he granted on one condition. "You will die," said he,
"before you return. And now give me your solemn promise that, when your
spirits are freed from their mortal bonds, you will not ascend to heaven
till you come and announce to me the time of my own death, and whether I
shall obtain eternal happiness or not."

"We make that promise," said the three together.

They died at Jerusalem: and when St. Michael was about to conduct their
spirits to heaven, they mentioned the necessity they were under of
returning to their preceptor, and making the revelation demanded. "Go,"
said he. They appeared before the great scholar, and thus revealed his
destiny:--"You have made changes in the canon--you have been
incontinent--you have neglected to sing the *Altus* \[a\]

for seven years. In three years you shall die, and hell is your
destination."

" Not so," said the frightened man. "I will never more make a letter of
alteration in the canon; I will lead a pure life; I will sing the
*Altus* seven times every night; I will turn with true contrition to my
Maker. Is it not written, 'the impiety of the impious, in whatever hour
he shall turn from it, shall not injure him'?"

So he changed his practices; he lived a mortified and pious life; and at
the end of the three years, on the day of his decease, he was again
visited by the three spirits who, in the appearance of doves, came to
give him an assurance of salvation, and bring comfort to the assistants
at his death-bed.

A smith, whose forge was on the Kerry side of the Shannon, was disturbed
one night by an impatient traveller, whom he afterwards discovered to be
one of the provincial fairy kings proceeding to make war on the fairy
tribes of Cork, and anxious to have h'is horse shod. The steed was so
fiery and impatient of restraint that the smith dreaded to touch his
hoof, whereupon *Fear Dhoirche* at once plucked the leg off and handed
it to the artist, who was thus enabled to do his office without risk of
being pranced on or kicked. The inventor of the following legend had
some such fiction as the above in his mind, when he told the world--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] The *Altus* is a hymn in praise of the Holy Trinity (still extant)
composed by St. Colum Cille in his monastery at Iona. O'Carroll had a
beloved and pious son, for whose recovery from illness he had got the
*Altus* seven times solemnly chanted. 'The youth, however, died the
death of the just, and the father never sang the hymn again till after
the warning.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How St Eloi was cured of Pride](lfic111)
