[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic002)  [Next](lfic004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Household Stories

IN this class is properly comprised those fictions which, with some
variations, are told at the domestic gatherings of Celts, Teutons, and
Slavonians, and are more distinguished by a succession of wild and
wonderful adventures than a carefully-constructed framework. A dramatic
piece exhibiting reflection, and judgment, and keen perception of
character, but few incidents or surprises, may interest an individual
who peruses it by his fireside, or as he saunters along a sunny river
bank; but let him be one of an audience witnessing its performance, and
he becomes sensible of an' uncomfortable change. Presence in a crowd
produces an uneasy state of expectation, which requires something
startling or sensational to satisfy it. Thus it was with the
hearth-audiences. It needed but few experiments to put the first
story-tellers on the most effective way of amusing and interesting the
groups gathered round the blaze, who for the moment felt their mission
to consist in being agreeably excited, not in applying canons of
criticism.

The preservation of these tales by unlettered people from a period
anterior to the going forth of Celt or Teuton or Slave from the
neighbourhood of the Caspian Sea is hard to be accounted for. The number
of good *Scealuidhes* dispersed through the country parts is but small
compared to the mass of the people, and hundreds may be found who
recollect the succession of events and the personages of a tale while
utterly incapable of relating it.

In remote neighbourhoods, where the people have scarcely any
communication with towns or cities, or access to books, stories will be
heard identical with those told in the Brothers Grimm's German
collection, or among the Norse tales gathered by MM. Asbjornsen and Moë.
We cannot for a moment imagine an Irishman of former days speaking
English or his native tongue communicating these household stories to
Swede or German who could not understand him, or suppose the old dweller
in Deutschland doing the good office for the Irishman. The ancestors
both of Celt and Teuton brought the simple and wonderful narratives from
the parent ancestral household in Central Asia, In consideration of the
preference generally given by young students to stirring action rather
than dry disquisition, we omit much we had to say on the earliest forms
of fiction, and introduce a story known in substance to every Gothic and
Celtic people in Europe. It is given in the jaunty style in which we
first heard it from Garrett (Gerald) Forrestal of Bantry, in Wexford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jac and His Comrades](lfic004)
