[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic021)  [Next](lfic023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Recovered Bride

There was a marriage in the towniand of Curragraigue. After the usual
festivities, and when the guests were left to themselves, and were
drinking to the prosperity of the bride and bridegroom, they were
startled by the appearance of the man himself rushing into the room with
anguish in his looks. "Oh," cried he, "Margaret is carried away by the
fairies, I'm sure. The girls were not left the room for half a minute
when I went in, and there is no more sign of her there than if she never
was born." Great consternation prevailed, great search was made, but no
Margaret was to be found. After a night and day spent in misery, the
poor brideroom laid down to take some rest. In a while he seemed to
himself to wake from a troubled dream, and look out into the room. The
moon was shining in through the window, and in the middle of the
slanting rays stood Margaret in her white bridal clothes. He thought to
speak and leap out of the bed, but his tongue was without utterance, and
his limbs unable to move. "Do not be disturbed, dear husband," said the
appearance; "I am now in the power of the fairies, but if you only have
courage and prudence we may be soon happy with each other again. Next
Friday will be May-eve, and the whole court will ride out of the old
fort after midnight. I must be there along with the rest. Sprinkle a
circle with holy water, and have a black-hafted knife with you. If you
have courage to pull me off the horse, and draw me into the ring, all
they can do will be useless. You must have some food for me every night
on the dresser, for if I taste one mouthful with them, I will be lost to
you for ever. The fairies got power over me because I was only thinking
of you, and did not prepare myself as I ought for the sacrament. I made
a bad confession, and now I am suffering for it. Don't forget what I
have said." "Oh, no, my darling," cried he, recovering his speech, but
by the time he had slipped out of bed, there was no living soul in the
room but himself.

Till Friday night the poor young husband spent a desolate time. The food
was left on the dresser over night, and it rejoiced all hearts to find
it vanished by morning. A little before midnight he was at the entrance
of the old rath. He formed the circle, took his station within it, and
kept the black-hafted knife ready for service. At times he was nervously
afraid of losing his dear wife, and at others burning with impatience
for the struggle. At last the old fort with its dark high bushy fences
cutting against the sky, was in a moment replaced by a palace and its
court. A thousand lights flashed from the windows and lofty hail
entrance, numerous torches were brandished by attendants stationed round
the courtyard, and a numerous cavalcade of richly attired ladies and
gentlemen was moving in the direction of the gate where he found himself
standing. As they rode by him laughing and jesting, he could not tell
whether they were aware of his presence or not. He looked intent at each
countenance as it approached, but it was some time before he caught
sight of the dear 'face and figure borne along on a milk-white steed.
She recognised him well enough, and her features now broke into a
smile--now expressed deep anxiety. She was unable for the throng to
guide the animal close to the ring of power; so he suddenly rushed out
of his bounds, seized her in his arms, and lifted her off. Cries of rage
and fury arose on every side; they were hemmed in, and weapons were
directed at his head and breast to terrify him. He seemed to be inspired
with superhuman courage and force, and wielding the powerful knife he
soon cleared a space round him, all seeming dismayed by the sight of the
weapon. He lost no time, but drew his wife within the ring, within which
none of the myriads round dared to enter. Shouts of derision and
defiance continued to fill the air for some time, but the expedition
could not be delayed. As the end of the procession filed past the gate
and the circle within which the mortal pair held each other determinedly
clasped, darkness and silence fell on the old rath and the fields round
it, and the rescued bride and her lover breathed freely. We will not
detain the sensitive reader on the happy walk home, on the joy that
hailed their arrival, and on all the eager gossip that occupied the
townland and the five that surround it for a month after the happy
rescue.

  
 

A wonderful treasure in the detection of fairy delusions is the
four-leaved shamrock! Once at the fair of Enniscorthy, a master of
sleight-of-hand, willing to astonish the simple Wexfordians, and extract
some money out of their pockets, threw his gamecock up on the roof of a
house, and there every one could see him stalk along with a great log of
Norway timber in his bill. Every one wondered, and those near the cock
as he paced along, got from under the beam as soon as they could.

"Musha," says a young girl who was taking home an armful of fresh grass
to her cow, "what are yous gapin' at?" "Gaping at! Do you see the balk
the cock is carrying?" "Balk*, inagh!* Purshuin' to the balk within a
street of him! All I can see is a good wheaten straw that he has in his
bake." The showman overheard the discourse, and called out to the
girl--" What will you take for that bunch of grass! I'd like, to give a
mouthful of fresh provender to my horse." The bargain was made, and as
soon as the article was handed over to the conjurer, the girl gave a
great start and cried, "Oh, the Lord save us! See what the cock is
carrying! Some one will be kilt." There was a four-leaved shamrock in
the bundle of grass.

We could name the receipt for rendering the "Good People" visible, when
a small whirlwind is at work with dust and dry leaves; but much as we
wish to diffuse a knowledge of the social economy of Fairy Land, we are
not anxious that any of our readers should make personal acquaintance
with individuals of that country, or practise any magic rites whatever.
You set dangerous machinery in motion, without knowing how to put it at
rest again, or whether it may not tear your own person to pieces.

A clannish spirit prevails among the Fairy folk, as well as in that
division of the human family amongst whom they delight to dwell. Hurling
matches, and even pitched battles, occur between the "Good People" of
different provinces. Passing one day along the road that runs near
Lough-na-Piastha, in company with an intelligent but visionary
neighbour, and talking on the present subject, he pointed out to us a
little glen on the side of Mount Leinster, and gave this personal
account of a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Faction-fight among the Fairies](lfic023)
