[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic046)  [Next](lfic048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE QUEEN'S COUNTY GHOST.

Squire Garret (let us say), whose seat lay near Kilcavan, was not a
pattern for faith or morals while,above mould, and afterwards caused
considerable annoyance to his surviving friends and dependents. No night
passed without the, noises usual in such cases being heard. Doors would
be flung open, keys heard turning in locks, plates and dishes hurled
down from the dresser on the kitchen floor, tables .overturned, and
chairs flung about, yet in the morning no-thing would be found out of
its place. The family at last removed to another manor-house at some
distance, but the steward, and old coachman, and a few hangers-on,
remained behind. None suffered more from the ghostly and ghastly freaks
of the late master than the coachman. When once the night came he could
not reckon on a moment's rest.: If he attempted to take a nap in the
great chair, his wig would be plucked off, or the chair pulled from
under him, and he would occasionally find himself pinched and bruised
black and blue. At last, he seemed utterly callous and indifferent to
these marks of interest in him evinced by the old Squire. Perhaps he was
more obnoxious to this persecution for having aided-the defunct in his
designs upon the innocence of sundry young women during his reign on
earth. There was one peculiarity in his visitations; lie never made
himself visible to more than one person in a company; and, though he
adopted the appearance of black dog, or boar, or bull on these
occasions, the individual singled out always knew the old Squire under
his disguises.

The wives, sons, and daughters of the neighbouring farmers once took it
in head to club and have a ball in the big house, for which they readily
got permission. All was as merry as music, and drink, and an assemblage
of young boys and girls could make it, when in the height of the
festivity, the old gentleman took it into his head to become visible in
a hideous shape to the aunt (then a young woman) of Mrs. FitzPatrick.
She shrieked out, and fainted, and the universal mirth and jollity came
to an abrupt conclusion. When she was brought to herself, and related
what had occurred, there was a general dispersion, and that was the last
attempt at a ball in the big house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ghost in Graigue](lfic048)
