[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic025)  [Next](lfic027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Sea Fairies

Moruadh, or *Moruach*, is the name given to the mer­maids that haunt the
shallow waters near our coasts. The word is composed of *Mur*, sea, and
*Oich*, maid. The mermen do not seem on the whole to be an attrac­tive
or interesting class. Their hair and, teeth are green, their noses
invariably red, and their eyes resemble those of a pig. Moreover, they
have a penchant for brandy, and keep a look-out for cases of that
article that go astray in shipwrecks. Some naturalists attribute the hue
of their noses to extra indulgence in that liquor. It is little to be
wondered at that their young women occa­sionally prefer marriage with a
coast farmer. The wear­ing of a nice little magic cap (the *Cohuleen
Druith*) is essential to their well-being in their country below the
waves, and the mortal husband must keep this cap well concealed from his
sea-wife, instances are rife of deso­lation made in families by the
inadvertent finding of it by one of the children, who, of course, shows
it to his mother to learn what it is. However strong her affection for
husband and children, she is instinctively obliged to seize on it, and
clap it on her head. She tenderly em­braces her children, but
immediately flies to the sea-brink, plunges in, and is seen no more. The
distracted husband, when he hears the news from the forsaken children,
accuses destiny, and calls for aid to the powers of sea and land, but
all in vain. Why did he perpetrate an unsuitable marriage?

One man, who lived near Bantry, was blessed with an excellent wife of
this class. (As a rule, a Moruach is most desirable as wife, mother, and
mistress of a family.) They would have lived comfortably, but many
sea-cows, aware of her original condition, would persist in coming up to
graze on her husband's meadows, and thus be near their relative. The
husband, an unsentimental fellow, would chase and worry the poor
sea-cattle, even to wounds and bruises, till the wife, after many
useless appeals to his good feelings, poked out her Cohuleen Druith and
quitted him. He was sorry when it was too late. His children, and theirs
again, were distinguished by a rough scaly skin and a delicate membrane
between fingers and toes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Black Cattle of Durzy Island](lfic027)
