[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic107)  [Next](lfic109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SINNER SAVED.

On a Christmas-eve the barque reached an island, and brought comfort and
joy to the heart of its only inhabitant; for he had seen seven
Christmas-days in this solitude without having been present at a mass or
heard the human voice. He feasted his guests on roots and dried fish, in
a comfortable cavern. The devotions of the festival were duly performed,
and the solitary then gave an outline of his history. He had been one of
the monks of Inis-na-Gloire, on the coast of Erris, and, like their lost
comrade, had been guilty of hidden sibs of gluttony and incontinence.
Stung at last with remorse, and urged on by despair, he flung himself
into the sea; but touched by a feeling of true penitence, he exerted
himself, and gained a boat moored near-the spot. Fearing to return, he
loosed the chain and let himself drift out to sea. The boat was driven
west, and for some days he endured hunger and loss of sleep. A violent
gale of wind upset the boat at last, and he hoped his last hour had
come. He fell into a sweet sleep, and found himself, when he awoke,
lying on the strand, of an unknown island, being unable to tell whether
his lethargy had lasted for hours or days. He returned heartfelt thanks,
and then explored his new territory. It appeared to him that death by
hunger and cold awaited him; but while he was humbly resigning himself
to God's will, an otter appeared before him with a fish in its mouth,
and laid it at his feet. By means of flints and dry leaves, seaweed and
sticks, he soon kindled a fire and broiled the fish. So soon as he was
enabled by natural means to Procure necessaries, he was deserted-by his
dumb servant. This penitent was carried away by the monks, and filled a
vacancy that had occurred in a terrible fashion.

In Keightley's *Fairy Mythology of Scandinavia,* saints are frequently
assisted by the trolls in the erection of their churches, subject to be
dealt with severely by the said trolls, unless they can discover their
names before the keystone is inserted. The Patron of Ferns, St. Aidan
(or Mogue), knew better than to employ such dangerous assistants. He
raised the walls of the cathedral to the wall-plate in one night,
without any unholy aid. The peasantry of Wexford delight to boast how a
late Protestant Bishop paid a hundred pounds to an Italian sculptor for
repairing the nose of his statue.

The dwellers under Mount Leinster, who have had no personal experience
of the matter, are, or were some time ago, firmly persuaded that the
bells in Ferns Cathedral could not be heard across the neighbouring
stream. We ourselves have seen the statue of St. Mogue lying as
described, and believe that the care' of the Bishop in having it
restored has been in the main correctly reported. There is a strong
desire through the neighbouring country for interment in the cemetery of
Ferns, owing to a supposed promise of the saint, on his deathbed, that
he would take five hundred times the full of the churchyard to Paradise
along with himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Legend of St Mogue of Ferns](lfic109)
