[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic017)  [Next](lfic019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Belated Priest

A very lonesome road connects the village of Ballin­daggin, in the
Duffrey, with the townland of Mangan, on the Bantry side of the brawling
Urrin, and outside these intermediate stations it leads to Kaim and
Castle­boro, on one side, and the high road from Bunclody to Ross on the
other. From the river to Ballindaggin, you hardly meet a house, and
fallow fields extend on each side.

 Father Stafford was asked, rather late in the day, to make a sick call
at a cabin that stood among these fields, at a considerable distance
from this road,--a cabin from which no lane led either to by-road or
public road. He was delayed longer than he expected, and when he was
leaving the cabin it was nearly dark. This did not disturb him much.
There was a path that led to the road, and he knew he had only to keep a
north-easterly direction to come out on it, not far from the village
already named. So he went on fearlessly for some time, but complete
obscurity soon surrounded him, and he would have been sorely perplexed,
had it not been that the path lay for the most part beside the fences.

 At last, instead of passing in a line near the fence, it struck across
the field; and, open his eyes wide as he might, he could hardly
distinguish it from the dry, russet-coloured grass at each side. Well,
he kept his eyes steadily fixed in the due direction, and advanced till
he was about the middle of the field, which happened to be a large one.
There some case of conscience, or other anxious subject, crossed his
mind, and he stopped and fidgeted about, walking restlessly this way and
that for a few steps, totally forgetting his present circumstances.
Coming at last to some solution of his difficulty, full recol­lection
returned, and he was sensible of being thoroughly ignorant of the
direction in which his proper route lay. If he could but get a glimpse
of Mount Leinster, it would be all well; but, beyond a few perches, all
was in the deepest darkness on every side. He then set off in a straight
line, which he knew would bring him to some fence, and perhaps he might
find stile or gap for his guidance. He went twice round the field, but,
in the confusion of his faculties, he could find no trace of path or
pass. He at last half resolved to cross the fence, and go straight on,
but the dykes were, for the most part, encumbered with briers, and
furze-bushes crowned the tops of the steep clay mounds.

 While he stood perplexed, he heard the rustle of wings or bodies
passing swiftly through the air, and a musical voice was heard:--" You
will suffer much if you do not find your way. Give us a favourable
answer to a question, and you shall be on the road in a few minutes."
The good priest was somewhat awed at the rustle and the voice, hut he
answered without delay, "Who are you, and what's your question?" The
same voice replied, "We are the Chlann Sighe, and wish you to declare
that at the last day our lot may not be with Satan. Say that the Saviour
died for us as well as for you." "I will give you a favourable answer,
if you can make me a hopeful one. Do you adore and love the SON OF GOD?"

 He received no answer but weak and shrill cries, and the rushing of
wings, and at once it seemed as if he had shaken off some oppression.
The dark clouds had separated, a weak light was shed round where he
stood, and he distinguished the path, and an opening in the bushes on
the fence. He crossed into the next field, and, follow-log the path, he
was soon on the road. In fifteen minutes he was seated at his
comfortable fire, and his little round table, covered with books, was at
his side.

 

The good people, as already mentioned, are not uniformly selfish. They
are grateful for food left in their way, and other kindnesses shown them
by the human race. The following tale will furnish an illustration. In a
modified form, it is well known in Brittany, and is a favourite in
Munster. It was the earliest fairy legend known to our boyhood, and is
the most popular of those that have been preserved by the people of the
south-east of Ireland. Every locality lays the scene in some rath in the
neighbourhood. The phraseology in which the legend was so often heard is
preserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Palace in the Rath](lfic019)
