[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic080)  [Next](lfic082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BORROWED LAKE.

A young chief once wooed the daughter of another chief, whose dun lay by
the edge of Loch Ennel in Westmeath, The damsel was rather haughty and
fastidious, and plainly told him that she would not require possession
of his grianan as its mistress till she could see as beautiful a lake
from its casement as that which lay before her father's house. This was
annoying. The valley was suitable, but the hill sides were covered with
cottages, and the nil which meandered in the bottom would, perhaps, take
a score of years to fill it, after the dam, which it would require a
dozen years to construct, should be finished. He would be an elderly man
by that time. His foster-mother, an enchantress (this was during the
times of the Danaans), seeing him take in his perplexity two or three
vicious pulls at his long hair, induced him to unbosom himself, and
ordered him to respect his flowing locks till to-morrow. She at once
repaired through the air by the ordinary witch conveyance then in use,
to the shealing of a Firbolg sister in the magic art, on the western
bank of the Shannon. This hut was snugly seated on the brow of a hill
above a pleasant lake, and the Danaan woman was hospitably entertained
by her of the Firbolg race.

After their simple repast, the visitor unfolded the cause of her
journey, and besought her sage friend for the loan of her lake till the
next moon's day, deceitfully adding under her breath, "after the week of
eternity." It was a difficult request to obtain, but at last obtain it
she did, and triumphantly bore it in her cloak to the Leinster valley.
The hill-side dwellers were awakened from their sleep that night by the
noise, as it were, of ten thousand waterfalls. All made their escape to
the upland, and were hospitably sheltered in the buildings of the dun;
and at the dawn of morn, thousands of astonished eyes were gazing on the
placid sheet of water that covered their dwellings of yesterday.

Thus the haughty bride was won. The misguided Conacht woman waited till
the second moon's day, sorely annoyed by the muddy bed of her lake under
the influence of a hot sun, and yet no appearance of the grateful waters
returning. The patience even of a wise woman may be exhausted. She rode
to the house of her deceitful fellow-witch in flying haste, and she was
received with feigned welcome. "No time for compliments, gossip," said
she; "the next moon's day and the moon's day after that have come, and,
instead of my pleasant lake, I still see nothing but rocks, and mud, and
decayed fish. Restore my lake, I say." "Alas, dear sister! your anger
has driven away your memory. I promised you the return of your fine
piece of water the moon's day after the week of eternity--not before
claim it when it becomes due."

The rage of the betrayed witch knew no bounds, but she was without
remedy, owing to the treacherous self-reservation of the cunning Danaan.
The result was tragic to most of the parties concerned, but the
acquisition of Loch Owel to the pleasant plains of Meath is all that we
are concerned with for the present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kilstoheen in the Shannon](lfic082)
