[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic031)  [Next](lfic033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Adventures of the "Son of Bad Counsel."

The tale, of which the following is an abridgment,. was composed in
mixed prose and verse by Brian Dhu O'Reilly, \[a\] who was living in
Cavan about the year 1725. The original title is *Eachtra mhic na
Miochomhairle*. Our plan allows admission but to a few of the
adventures. The hero tells the tale in his own person, and it must be
owned that his is a very rambling mode of fixing his hearer's interest.
You would suppose at first that his meeting with a lovely fairy and
their subsequent courtship would be the central group of his fortunes;
but after singing her glorious form and features, and the splendour of
the surrounding landscape, in the most florid Irish poesy, night comes
on, and he is obliged to seek for shelter in the castle of a Gruagach
(giant, enchanter; *Breton*, groac'h). Here is a taste of the original,
literally translated:--

"Or, the sun going to his bed I knew not what place, what land,  
What district I was in, on the earth or above.  
My eyes to the four quarters of the sky I cast round,  
And by the roadside I there saw the beautiful Sighe.

"I approached her, though arduous and bold was the deed:  
Seated on the bank, like an angel she seemed.  
Her silky sweet shape not bony nor angular,  
Like the blossoms of the berry her fair-coloured breasts."

The "Son of Bad Counsel" was evidently very whimsical and fickle-minded;
he turned from the lovely fairy beauty at once to sing the glory of the
landscape.

"The like of that land I've not seen nor heard of,  
For amenity, for goodness, for its clear flowing streams  
Dew-drops of honey on all the tree branches,  
And the bee's humming music was heard without pause."

Dark stormy night came on the landscape. No more is heard of the fairy
belle, and the Son of Bad Counsel somehow found himself before a castle,
the beauties of which he described in poetic language. Entering, he
found the Gruagach master, "strong, truly powerful, ruddy in
countenance, and clad in 'silken robes." And on the right hand of the
Gruagach, on a chair of burnished gold, was his lady daughter,
beauteous, gentle, honest, unexceptionable in her attire, musical in
voice and compassionate, young, glorious, sweet-spoken, lightsome, like
a shining diamond, a harvest moon, a morning sun, a heavenly angel. Her
eyes were gray and thoughtful, like the gleaming sparkling stars of a
hard frosty night. Her golden, curling hair was divided, and hung on
each side like bunches of clustering grapes. Her robe was of silk,
gracefully covering her beautiful figure, and an ornamented brooch
glittered on her bosom, and on her knee was a hand-harp (Cruith), from
which she was drawing sweet sounds. \[b\]

The hero of the story was an arrant coward, as well as a poet; but he
plucked up courage to address the host, who, after all, was not very
formidable in appearance:----

King of the globe, fair is this place which I have come to--  
A royal fort, white-boarded, erected as the abode of Maev;  
Like onto the Dun Aileach, it is similar to Paradise,  
And I am not certain that it is not in a court I am truly.

"More delightful is this sight than Tara and Naas together,  
And than the three branches in Emania, \[c\] once held by the hero  
Dairg,  
My journey I arrest till I know who dwells here."

The richly dressed Gruagach made a suitable reply "Long it is since we
saw a person or people before you, who could afford us joy or pleasure"
(they were apparently not aware of his cowardice and general
worthlessness), "and long were we expecting you, for we have neither
children nor heirs, but that daughter you see before you; and we have
nursed and nobly reared her from her infancy for you to be your wife and
companion." "By your hand," was the ready answer, "if I had known so
much--but how could I? It is I that would have searched the four
quarters of the globe for her sweet self, even to the loss of my life."

Then the Gruagach arose, and bade the guest take his golden chair; and
then he began his own particular grievances, and the service he required
at the hands of his future son-in-law before the silken-attired lady
could become his wife.

It seemed that Trom Ceo Draochta (Heavy Enchanted Fog), the fairy chief
residing at Din Aoilig, had stolen the two sons of the *King of the Isle
of the Living*, as he had no heirs to enjoy his power. Ruan Luimneach, a
powerful Sighe chief, a neighbour of him of the Isle of the Living, on
hearing of this wrong, summoned all his subjects of the Western World to
assemble, and attack the Fog-chief in his stronghold, and rescue the
sons of his friend. *Heavy Magic Fog*, on hearing of the projected
attack on Din Aoilig, summoned his confederates to his aid. Among these
were Donn Ceiv Fionn from Magh Hi in Conacht, Donn Feiriné O'Conail from
Knocfierna, and Donn Binné Eachla labhra (The Lord of the Hill of the
Speaking Horse \[d\]), Gilla Brighid O'Faolan, a *Sighe gaoithe* (Fairy
Blast) from the Decies, and Gilla Fiamach O'Doran, Chief of Ceibhfion.
\[e\]

"I was also summoned among these chiefs," continued the master, "and my
footmen and my horsemen departed yesterday to Din Aoilig, and I myself
will follow to-morrow. I did not go with my people, for I expected you;
and if your feats of valour deserve the hand of my daughter, my daughter
shall be your wife on our return. If you fall, a mighty mound shall
cover your remains, your caoine shall be said by eloquent and very
famous fileas, and your name, and your ancestors, and your deeds
engraved on the Oghuim stone."

Fair was the daughter of the Gruagach, but she was to be won with risk
of life; and a shivering seized on the limbs of the young man, and his
teeth chattered. The master seemed to know that trouble had come on his
spirit, and be asked his wife to bring in the golden, gem-incrusted
goblet of comfort and forgetfulness.

It was brought, and this was the quality of that goblet, that every one
drinking from it should forget their cares and troubles as if they had
never been; and if a thousand persons drank their fill from it, never
was the wine a hair's breadth lower.

Mac drank, and great courage came into his heart. "Deep is my gratitude
to you, O powerful chief," said he; "and I would be glad to know your
name, and the name of the Bhan Tiernach (Woman-chief), your wife, and
how your castle is called." "*Gruagath Tirégan Taithige* (Giant \[f\] of
the Unfrequented Land) is my name," said he, "and my wife is daughter of
the King of the Lonesome Land, and *Dun Tochluaiste* (Uncertain Castle)
is the name of this castle; and it is as easy for me to be at the end of
Erinn at any hour as to be here."

Then the master of the house and his guest sat down at *Taibleish Mhor*
(backgammon, large table), and the fashion of the tables was this. Fine
elephant (ivory) were the dice, and fine carved wood, and emerald, and
gold, and white silver, and carbuncle were the tables; and a blind man
could see to play with them, and people with their sight could play with
them on the darkest night. But if the body of the *Mac na, &c*. was at
the table with the Gruagach, his "intellect, his desire, his sight, and
his reason, were at the other side of the hall, where sat the Gruagach's
daughter, with her golden curling hair and her silken robe."

So the unfortunate youth lost the game, but the Gruagach made him a
present of the tables that he might learn to play. Very grateful was he,
but he feared he 'should pay for all to-morrow before Din Aoilig. Then
came supper time, and the youth sat opposite the magician, with the fair
beauty on his right hand, and better food or better liquor was not
consumed that night at Tara of the Kings.

But when the time of rest was come, and the Gruagach bade the Mac, &c.
sleep soundly, as the flight of night was to see them on their way to
Aoilig, "great fear, and discomfort, arid hate, and loathing, "fell on
the heart of the Son of Bad Counsel, and said he to himself, "I wish I
had -the dressed skin of a white sheep; that I might leave my last
thoughts to my friends."

"Long it is to tell how I first saw the maid.  
When she came in my sight I lit up full of her love.  
My heart is sad that I see no more her fair face,  
Her neck like the snow, and her bosom like two fair hills  
Aud by the king's hand I'm sorry she is not mine."

Then they prepared his state bed, and the Gruagach and his wife went to
their own apartment, after first giving him a token of life and health
(wishing him goodnight). He was thinking more of the morning than the
night; but the maid of the flowing hair, and the mild gray eyes, and the
sweet smile, told him not to fear for his life, for that it was not in
the power of all the fairy hosts within the four seas of Erinn to bring
the end of life on him that had received baptism. They might pierce him
with sighe-darts that would disable arm or leg, or cause him to pine,
but perhaps they would not. And she also "gave him a token of life and
health," and went to her couch in the next chamber.

Bad it was to lose life and the maid of the silk robe together, and but
little better was it to be stretched on rushes with sighe-darts in the
leg. So the Son of Bad Counsel, while lying on the wolf-skin, felt a
shivering all over him, and then all the blood in his body rushed up to
his head, arid his skin seemed on fire, and at last despair put it into
his mind to persuade the lady that had won his heart to fly with him
where neither Gruagach, nor Heavy Magic Fog, nor Ruan Luimneach, King of
all the Fairies of the West, could find them out. So he arose, with his
heart in his mouth, and his legs trembling under him he opened her door,
and he found himself in a wild lonesome place, and then he knew that it
was *Aimsighthe* and *Aimgeoireachd* (*qu*. ambushes and temptations)
were on him; and he heard the *bonanaich* and the *boconaigh* (*qu*.
wild boars or wild bulls, and he-goats), and the other forest dwellers,
hideous, terrible, loud-voiced, sharp, inflamed. And he became like a
madman, and he flew like a wild cat from its nest in the tree, or a stag
from his lair. And when he cleared the wood he found himself in a plain,
wide-spread and grassy, and in the middle a high green hill, where
neither boars nor goats could easily catch him.

When he was on the hill he found a great rim round its summit, and
within, a boiling, boisterous, noisy, foamy, very tempestuous sea, with
no path round it. By the harbour was an old boat, which the unfortunate,
ill-advised youth strove to repair; but hearing the wild piercing cries
of the beasts of devils of the woods at his back, he put to sea. This
was all that the fierce, incessant, spiteful, threatening, very
destructive winds waited for. They blew as if to scoop out the sea from
its hollow, and the earth belched out from its caverns the restless
waters. The boatman flying up to the clouds at this side of the wave,
and descending into the dark caverns of the earth op the other, bellowed
to heaven for help; arid the Gruagach, hearing the outcry, bade his
daughter light a candle!

In the cellar they found the son of ill-luck as well as of ill-counsel,
seated on a cullender that was covering a vat of strongly-working new
beer. These were the high-rimmed mound and the sea. The roaring of the
he-goats, the boars, and the bulls, and the wolves, was the cry of two
cats which the sleep-walker had disturbed, and the howling of the storm,
a breeze blowing through the cellar window.

The Gruagach and his daughter, seeing the youth crouched in the
cullender over the great beer vat, burst out a laughing, and, said the
master of the house, "Very fond of sailoring you must be to get into so
small a vessel; and if it was in search of my daughter you were, better
it would be to seek her on dry land." The misguided boy, descending from
his damaged boat, hastened to his state bed to hide his confusion and
great shame. Lying on his back, he composed a strain of lamentation over
his hard fate; and when he fell asleep, all the ugly dreams that float
between the moon and the earth passed through his mind. At last he
awoke, and the fear of death came upon him when he remembered the
gathering of Din Aoilig next day.

He arose, and opened the door of the maiden's chamber, intending to
persuade her to fly with him; and great was his terror when he found
himself in a wide field without track of man or beast. He recollected
the roaring of the wild devils, and his heart turned into water when he
saw a beast, black, devilish, hideous coloured, heavy-headed,
dull-buzzing, approaching him. A great plum or a small apple would fit
on every one of his coarse hairs. Two dead eyes were locked in his head,
an empty long-falling snout he had, and rough white teeth.

When the doomed boy saw this hellish beast rushing right on him to
devour him, he felt it full time to seek an escape. So with swift,
mighty springs he made to the edge of that large field, and at its
bounds he found himself stopped by a stormy, dangerous, coarse-waved,
light. leaping, strongly-diffused, streamy, troublesome river; and
thought within himself whether it would be better to try to swim across
it, not knowing anything of the art, or face the cursed-of-form,
diabolical, odious-coloured, hideous-countenanced, amazingly-hateful,
and malicious beast. He had heard of persons ignorant of swimming,. who
crossed wide streams under terror, and was sure that he would do the
deed if ever fear, surprise, terror, timidity, fright, or loss of reason
helped any one.

But, while he was considering what he should do, he looked back, and the
big animal, with his gluttonous -mouth open, was just behind. It was not
a courageous look of defiance he gave him, but he took a high, powerful,
very light spring into the slowly-flowing river, and struck out
vigorously with his arms for life. But deep and thick with mud was that
pool, and choked with reeds, and no boat with sail or oar could work its
way out. It was then he considered indeed that it was to the suffocating
sea he had come, and that he should not leave it till he had been
permanently drowned, and unworlded, and till the ravenous birds,
open-beaked, should have. taken away his skin, his flesh, and his blood.
In that state he gave out a wondrous, hard, slender, complaining,
frightened cry. The waters were oozing into his open mouth, and cold
death was creeping up his limbs, when he heard the voices of the
Gruagach and his daughter over him. He was lying in a large trough
filled with water and grains, his face downwards, his mouth full of the
contents of the trough, and his arms striking out. "If you wished for a
bath," said the master, "better would a vessel of clean water be than
where the pigs take their food."

He cleared his mouth and his eyes, and sorrow was upon him to be seen by
the maiden; and, when he turned away his eyes in shame, he discovered
the fierce, ravenous, life-seeking wild beast of the big, lonesome
field, grunting and rummaging in the litter, and it was as small and as
tame as the rest of the enchanter's pigs.

With bitter grief he again betook himself to his rest, his soul divided
between love for the maid of the sweet eyes and lips, and dread of the
battle. \[g\] The Gruagach told him to sleep soundly till he should be
called, as he himself was then going to gird the horses in their battle
harness for the morrow. The blood rushed again to his head, while a
shivering fit seized on his limbs. In the middle of his despair a raw
gray light fell on his eyes; and his bed was the dry grass of a moat;
and little wonder it was that he should be shivering, for his clothes
were the pillow that supported his head.

But the love of the sighe-maid was still strong in his soul, and he
vowed he would never lie two nights in the same bed till he had
discovered her. For a year and a day he searched through the length and
breadth of Erinn, and his resting-place at night was a sheltered grassy
nook near a Sighe-Brugheen or a Danish fort. At the end of a year and a
day, he was again at the spot where he had discovered the Castle of
Uncertainty; and in his sleep that- night he had a vision of his fairy
love, who told him to give over his pursuit of her, as she had been
obliged by her father to take a husband. Next morning he found the charm
gone, and his soul freed from the sighe-spell. He reformed his ways, and
became the "Son of Good Counsel," and these are the verses he made about
it:--

"Farewell, sweet and false dreams of my fancy!  
The happiness you give is like the gold of the Clurichaun.  
By the light of the moon the weight and the colour are there;  
Withered leaves only remain in our hands at the dawn.  
My course I'll change as the feathers fall from the birds;  
I'll keep my hands busy, and take the sogarth's \[h\] advice;  
And surely in Erinn of chaste and beautiful women,  
I'll find some fair angel to come and sit on my hearth,  
With smiles on her face when wearied I come from the fields;  
She'll make evening happy, and lie all night at my side."

Among the old fireside romances were more than one or two of this
deceptional character. Thor's visit to Jotunheim was the reverse in the
order of things. What to him and his companions seemed of a mean and
trifling character, were in reality of awful dimensions. The vessel from
which he drank, but could scarcely see any way diminished of its
contents, was the bed of ocean. The cat which he found it impossible to
raise from the ground, was in reality the wolf Fenris, and so on.

The knights in quest of the San Graal also suffered in body and mind
from being led aside by one of the three chief enemies of the human
soul.

The general belief of the peasantry is that the existing fairies are
those angels who, without openly joining Satan in his rebellion, gave it
no opposition. Their future destiny will be determined at the Day of
Judgment.

Some archaeologists fancy that the tales of mortals abiding with the
fays in their Sighe palaces are founded on the tender preferences shown
by the Druidic priestesses of old to favourite worshippers of the Celtic
Divinities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] Some give the credit of it to that loose fish, Carroll O'Daly.

\[b\] A profusion of epithets nearly synonymous often occurs in Irish
poetry and romance. It arises from the richness of the language in words
of the same or nearly the same meaning, and the temptation thrown in the
way of the poet by alliteration.

\[c\] Maev, the Semiramis of the Royal Court of Conacht. Aileach, the
Great Stone Fortress in the north-east of Donegal. Naas, once the
residence of the kings of Leinster. Ernania, the Court of Ulster, whose
ruins are yet to be seen near Armagh. Red Branch, an order of knighthood
there established.

\[d\] Scholars who insist on beast-worship among the pagan Irish, adduce
this tradition in support of their views. At every midsummer festival of
the sun, this Each Labhra would issue from his mound, and give full and
true answers to all who consulted him on the occurrences that would take
place up to the next summer festival.

\[e\] As in our country parts, Casar, Pincher, Juno, and other favourite
dogs enjoy the surnames of the families whom they serve, so we find here
the fairy chiefs called by the names of the old families whose districts
they frequented, and whose deceases they marked by their lamentations.
The O'Dorans were Brehons to the kings of South Leinster. Gilla Brighid
O'Faolan, St. Bridgid's servant (now Kilbride), would otherwise have
been a strange name for a fairy chief.

\[f\] Gruagach has for root, *Gruach*, hair,--giants and magicians being
usually furnished with a large provision of that appendage. A favourite
song (even in its English dress) with the dying out generation, was the
*Bouchal 'na Gruaga Dhouna*, "The Boy with the Brown Hair."

\[g\] There is a third adventure, of course, but it does not possess
much novelty or interest.

\[h\] The Irish construction of *sacerdos*, one of the many words
introduced with Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Witchcaft, Socery, Ghosts and Fetches](lfic033)
