[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic059)  [Next](lfic061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FION'S FIRST MARRIAGE.

The only other adventure of Fion's youth for which we can find space
could only be suitably told in the language of the old story-tellers.
See *Ossianic Transactions*, vol. ii. Fion thus relates the exploit:--

"I lost my way, and strayed to Lughar Diega in the south. I saw two
different assemblies met on two high cairns opposite each other. One was
an assembly of comely men; the other, beautiful, blooming women. There
was a high, terrific precipice on either side, and a windy formidable
valley between. I inquired the reason why they assumed that separate
position. They informed me that Shane M'Carroll, son of Crovan, King of
Kerry Luachra, was seized by a current of affection and a torrent of
deep love towards Donae, daughter of Dame, and that the condition she
required of him was that he should leap (over the valley) every year,
but that when he came to the brink of the precipice he balked the leap.
I inquired if she would marry any other man who would achieve it. She
replied that she never saw a man with worse clothing than myself (this
dress consisted of the skins of the animals lately slain by him for
food; hence his title at the time, 'Giolla *na Chroicean* '--the fellow
in the skins), but that she found no fault with my personal appearance,
and that she would accept me if I succeeded. I thereupon tucked myself
up in my skins, took my race to the margin of the precipice, and sprang
over in a truly swift, scientific manner to the opposite side. I then
with a high, light, airy bound, sprang back, and the princess gave me
fit clothing, and becathë my wife, binding me by solemn geasach to
perform the same feat every year."

Fion always succeeded--one unlucky day excepted, on the morning of which
he had met a hare or a red-haired woman as he approached the chasm.

As the Druid of Boyne had predicted, Fion, after making some
demonstrations in Conacht, and punishing some of the foes of his family,
and obtaining the favour of the King of Munster, began to engross the
attention of King Cormac. He appreciated the advantage it would be to
the general weal to secure the services of a chief distinguished by
heroism, and endowed with such supernatural qualities as Fion possessed.
So he summoned Goll to his presence, and so wrought on him by his
persuasive powers (Goll was more dogged than ambitious), that he
consented to hold second rank in the national militia, In the Ossianic
rhapsodies he aids his chief merely through a principle of loyalty. When
immniment danger approaches, he fearlessly meets it, but is never
forward to undertake any of the chivalrous enterprises so frequent in
the history of the body; he finds it impossible to forget that Fion's
father perished by his hand. He is more redoubtable in fight than Fion
himself, being only excelled by Diarmuid and the peerless Oscur.
Diarmujd bears a certain resemblance, in character and fortune, to Sir
Launcelot and Sir Tristrem; Fion himself to King Arthur and Agamemnon.
The bald Conan is Thersites, not altogether devoid of animal courage;
Goll himself is an amalgamation of Ajax and Diomed, and the rest are
amiable and noble-minded as Don Quixote himself, but destitute of any
striking characteristics, except in the article of fleetness possessed
by Caeilte Mac Ronan, poetic inspiration by Oisin, Fergus, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Fion selected a Wife](lfic061)
