[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic027)  [Next](lfic029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Silkie Wife

Those in Shetland and Orkney Islands who know no better, are persuaded
that the seals, or silkies, as they call them, can doff their coverings
at times, and disport themselves as men and women. A fisher once turning
a ridge of rock, discovered a beautiful bit of green turf adjoining the
shingle, sheltered by rocks on the landward side, and over this turf and
shingle two beautiful women chasing each other. Just at the man's feet
lay two seal-skins, one of which he took up to examine it. The women,
catching sight of him, screamed out, and ran to get possession of the
skins. One seized the article on the ground, donned it in a thrice, and
plunged into the sea; the other wrung her hands, cried, and begged the
fisher to restore her property; but he wanted a wife, and would not
throw away the chance. He wooed her so earnestly and lovingly, that she
put on some woman's clothing which he brought her from his cottage,
followed him home, and became his wife. Some years later, when their
home was enlivened by the presence of two children, the husband awaking
one night, heard voices in conversation from the kitchen. Stealing
softly to the room door, he heard his wife talking in a low tone with
some one outside the window. The interview was just at an end, and he
had only time to ensconce himself in bed, when his wife was stealing
across the room. He was greatly disturbed, but determined to do or say
nothing till he should acquire further knowledge. Next evening, as he
was returning home by the strand, he spied a male and female phoca
sprawling on a rock a few yards out at sea. The rougher animal, raising
himself on his tail and fins, thus addressed the astonished man in the
dialect spoken in these islands:--"You deprived me of her whom I was to
make my companion; and it was only yesternight that I discovered her
outer garment, the loss of which obliged her to be your wife. I bear no
malice, as you were kind to her in your own, fashion; besides, my heart
is too full of joy to hold any malice. Look on your wife for the last
time." The other seal glanced at him with all the shyness and sorrow she
could force into her now uncouth features; but when the bereaved'
husband rushed toward the rock to secure his lost treasure, she and her
companion were in the water on the other side of it in a moment, and the
poor fisherman was obliged to return sadly to his motherless children
and desolate home.

 

The reader will find the character and habits of the Pooka illustrated
in different collections of Irish Legends. The adventure that follows
was related by the sufferer to a gentleman, from whose mouth we have it.
Our authority felt certain that the man was fully persuaded of the
reality of the facts, which he was unable to detail without a feeling of
terror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pooka of Murroe](lfic029)
