[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic036)  [Next](lfic038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE GHOSTS AND THE GAME OF FOOTBALL.

There was once a poor widow woman's son that was going to look for
service, and one winter's evening he came to a strong farmer's house,
and this house was very near an old castle. "God save all here," says
he, when he got inside the door. "God save you kindly," says the farmer.
"Come to the fire." "Could you give me a night's lodging?" says the boy.
"That we will, and welcome, if you will only sleep in a comfortable room
in the old castle above there; and you must have a fire and candlelight,
and whatever you like to drink; and if you're alive in the morning I'll
give you ten guineas." "Sure. I'll be 'live enough if you send no one to
kill me." "I'll send no one to kill you, you may depend. The place is
haunted ever since my father died, and three or four people that slept
in the same room were found dead next morning. If you can banish the
spirits I'll give you a good farm and my daughter, so that you like one
another well enough to be married." "Never say't twice. I've a middling
safe conscience, and don't fear any evil spirit that ever smelled of
brimstone."

Well and good, the boy got his supper, and then they went up with him to
the old castle, and showed him into a large kitchen, with a roaring fire
in the grate, and a table, with a bottle and glass, and tumbler on it,
and the kettle ready on the hob. They bade him good-night and God speed,
and went off as if they didn't think their heels were half swift enough.

"Well," says he to himself, "if there's any danger, this prayer-book
will be usefuller than either the glass or tumbler." So he kneeled down
and read a good many prayers, and then sat by the fire, and waited to
see what would happen. In about a quarter of an hour, he heard something
bumping along the floor overhead till it came to a hole in the ceiling.
There it stopped, and cried out, "I'll fall, I'll fall." "Fall away,"
says Jack, and down came a pair of legs on the kitchen floor. They
walked to one end of the room, and there they stood, and Jack's hair had
like to stand upright on his head along with them. Then another
crackling and whacking came to the hole, . and the same words passed
between the thing above and Jack, and down came a man's body and went
and stood upon the legs. Then comes the head and shoulders, till the
whole man, with buckles in his shoes and knee-breeches, and a big
flapped waistcoat and a three-cocked hat, was standing in one corner of
the room. Not to take up your time for nothing, two more men, more
old-fashioned dressed than the first, were soon standing in two other
corners. Jack was a little cowed at first; but fbund his courage growing
stronger every moment, and what would you have of it, the three old
gentlemen began to kick a *puckeen* (football) as fast as they could,
the man in the three-cocked hat playing again' the other two.

"Fair play is bonny play," says Jack, as bold as he could; but the
terror was on him, and the words came out as if he was frightened in his
sleep; "so I'll help you, sir." Well and good, he joined the sport, and
kicked away till his shirt was wringing wet, savin' your presence, and
the ball flying from one end of the room to the other like thunder, and
still not a word was exchanged. At last the day began to break, and poor
Jack was dead beat, and he thought, by the way the three ghosts began to
look at himself and themselves, that they wished him to speak.

So, says he, "Gentlemen, as the sport is nearly over, and I done my best
to please you, would you tell a body what is the reason of yous coming
here night after night, and how could I give you rest, if it is rest you
want?" "Them is the wisest words," says the ghost with the three-cocked
hat, "you ever said in your life. Some of those that came before you
found . courage enough to take a part in our game, but no one had
*misnach* (energy) enough to speak to us. I am the father of the, good
man of next house, that man in the left corner is my father, and the man
on my right is my grandfather. From father to son we were too fond of
money. We lent it at ten times the honest interest it was worth; we
never paid a debt we could get over, and almost starved our tenants and
labourers.

"Here," says he, lugging a large drawer out of the wall; "here is the
gold and notes that we put together, and we were not honestly entitled
to the one-half of it; and here," says he, opening another drawer, "are
bills and memorandums that'll show who were wronged, and who are
entitled to get a great deal paid back to them. Tell my son to saddle
two of his best horses for himself and yourself, and keep riding day and
night, till every man and woman we ever wronged be rightified. When that
is done, come here again some night; and if you don't hear or see
anything, we'll be at rest, and you may marry my grand-daughter as soon
as you please."

Just as he said these words, Jack could see the wall through his body,
and when he winked to clear his sight, the kitchen was as empty as a
noggin turned upside down. At the very moment the farmer and his
daughter lifted the latch, and both fell on their knees when they saw
Jack alive. He soon told them everything that happened, and for three
days and nights did the farmer and himself ride about, till there wasn't
a single wronged person left without being paid to the last farthing.

'The next night Jack spent in the kitchen he fell asleep before he was
after sitting a quarter of an hour at the fire, and in his sleep he
thought he saw three white birds flying up to heaven from the steeple of
the next church.

Jack got the daughter for his wife, and they lived comfortably in the
old castle; and if ever he was tempted to hoard up gold, or keep for a
minute a guinea or a shilling from the man that earned it through the
nose, he bethought him of the ghosts and the game of football.

 

The peculiar style of conversation adopted by cats in their nightly
reunions, and other odd fashions of theirs, have invested them in the
eyes of our people with an eerie character.

In the Norse tales, a young hillman was banished from his tribe by the
influence of an old chief, whose lady was suspected to be rather partial
to him. He took refuge with a farmer, and did service in the form of a
house cat. After some time, the farmer's servant coming by the enchanted
mound, heard a shrill voice repeating--

"Go bid Tom Platt,  
To tell his cat  
That Knurre Murre's dead,"

When the servant entered the kitchen, he repeated the verse; and the
moment the exile heard it from his seat by the fire, he gave a wild mew
of delight, spouted out in feline language, "Knurre Murre's dead,"
cleared the yard-fence at a leap, and was off to his hill to bring
comfort to the widow. Now hear the impotent conclusion to which this
tale has come in Leinster

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cat of the Carman's Stage](lfic038)
