[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ST. LATEERIN OF CULLIN.

St. Lateerin lived at Cullin, near Millstreet, and her Sisters lived in
her neighbourhood. 'They visited one another once a week, and because
they had to pass through bogs and brakes, the angels made a fine road
for them connecting Kilmeen, Drumtariuf, and Cullin, where they
respectively lived. St. Lateerin took only one meal in the day, and when
it was dressed she let her fire go out. Every evening she went to the
smith's forge for the "seed of the fire," and carried it home
miraculously in the skirt of her long gown. One unfortunate evening, the
smith, who had been "looking at some one drinking," that day, said, as
she was walking away with the bright coal in -the fold of her robe, "Ah,
Saint Lateerin, what a darlin', purty, white foot you have!" Vanity took
possession of her pure mind for a moment, and she looked down, but what
did she see and feel? The red hot coal burn through her gown, and scorch
her ankles. She was naturally vexed with the smith, as well as with
herself, and exclaimed, "May there never more be a smith or his forge in
Cullin!" Curious readers will do well during the excursion season to
call at Cullin, and ascertain whether the wish has been fulfilled.

If any fair or gentle reader, touched by the poetic or romantic spirit
of some of these saintly legends, desires to make acquaintance with more
of the same stamp, he or she will save time, trouble, and expense by
*not* buying or borrowing the authorized Roman Catholic work on the
subject--*Lives* *of the Saints,* by the Rev. Alban Butler. They will
meet with much biographical, historical, and archaeological information,
and the principal events in the lives of his subjects, but a total
absence of romantic and a sparing use of supernatural events.

We are not to suppose that such legends as we have given were
deliberately fabricated by the early biographers of the different holy
personages and committed to writing. They -were the result of oral
tradition, altered and enlarged by many transmissions, till some scribe
or other secured the eightieth or hundredth version of some simple
narrative. A saint's memory falling into the hands of a professional

story-teller fared still worse. His imagination went to work. He cared
to a certain extent for the reputation of his subject; but he cared, to
an extent unlimited, for the impression to be made by his narrative upon
his audience. He consequently borrowed passages from the pagan poems and
stories, Christianized them slightly, and connected them without scruple
with the memory of the 'humble-minded and earnest worker in God's
vineyard.

If any of our readers feel disposed to apply the test, *Cui Bono?* to
our light labour, we beg to say, that it can scarce ever be
uninteresting to learn something Of the circumstances, the habits, or
the language of those who, in succession, held our native soil before us
for thousands of years. Well, we are often in doubt as to their
implements of labour, their dress, their merry-makings, their funerals,
or the terms on which they held their lands. But here in these wild,
purposeless, and artlessly constructed tales, we have the very words,
and assemblages of words, that have, for two or three thousand years,
filled their ears at their comfortable fireside gatherings, or travelled
with them in their tedious and difficult progresses from the far East.
We certainly did nothing for the Greeks and Romans, but our gratitude
would be not small to those writers who might have left us, but
unfortunately did not, a correct report of their fireside stories, if
they were accustomed to the indulgence of such. So rapid have been the
changes in our social customs, and so altered our tastes in many things;
so powerful is becoming the influence of the mighty dollar and splendid
shilling; and so terrible the battle of life, that if such task as we
have undertaken be not now achieved, it would become impracticable, even
within a score of years from this our present epoch. The *Gentleman's
Magazine* has existed a hundred and thirty odd years,. and will, as we
hope and wish, be still young a hundred years hence. Its chief object is
to preserve in memory former modes of existence, and everything
connected with them. We readily grant that many of the treasures of its
museum are of far more importance than such relics as we are striving to
save from the remorseless teeth of time, but certainly others there
preserved are much inferior. But the world of literature is wide enough
for us all: we only scramble each to get his own collection in a place
of honour. We are hopeless of literary fame for ourselves in this
struggle; but we are truly in earnest that the memory of those things
which were of interest to our forbears should be recorded and preserved
for the knowledge of those who succeed us to the fiftieth generation. We
are doing for them what we should be very glad that the Greeks and
Romans had done for us.

What is here presented is a mere fraction of the wealth of Gaelic
fiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
