[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic041)  [Next](lfic043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE CROCK FOUND IN THE RATH.

If any of our English readers are unfortunately ignorant of the social
position of tailors in the remote districts of this country, let them
hereby learn that Brian Neill, the unlucky hero of this narrative, when
he arose on Monday morning, betook himself to the farmer's house where
his services were required, took the measures of his clients; sat on the
large kitchen table, kept his goose in the turf fire, mended and made
clothes, chatted with the women,,and there remained till his business
was finished. He then repaired to some other farmstead where his
presence was desirable, and thus his life glided on.

Brian was employed as mentioned one afternoon on Mrs. Rooney's great
table. He had been remarked all the day for an unwonted silence, and now
began to acquaint Mrs. Rooney with the subject on which his -thoughts
were employed. "Be this and be that, ma'am, it's very strange that I
should have the same, dream for the last three nights. There it was, in
the rath of Knocmor, I saw, as plain as I see you now, a big grey stone,
and an old thorn tree, and the hole between them, and the crock at the
bottom of it. I declare to you I can't stand it any longer. I'll take a
spade and shovel, and try my fortune, and have it off my mind. You
needn't tell anybody where I'm gone."

About three hours afterwards he returned in a very dismantled condition,
his hair in moist flakes, his eyes glassy, and his whole appearance
betokening one who would drop in pieces if some strong power were not
keeping him together. "Oh, ma'am, honey 1" he faltered out, "let me lie
down somewhere; I think I'll die." Mrs. Rooney had put him into the bed
belonging to the servant boy, and good-naturedly brought him a warm
drink of whey in a quarter of an hour or so. She then sat down by the
bed; and when he had refreshed himself, and seemed somewhat restored,
she requested to know how he fared after he had left the house. This is
the account he rather reluctantly gave after some pressing:--

"When I got to the rath, ma'am, I wondered to find the stone and the old
thorn just as I dreamed they were. Bedad I took off my coat, and fell
to, and dug and shovelled, and shovelled and dug till my poor arms were
tired. I rested myself for a little while, and then fell to again. Well,
I think I was down between three and four feet, when I felt. something
hard against the spade. I cleared away the clay carefully from about it,
and what was it but a heavy crock, just like the very one I saw in the
dreams. I lifted it out on the heap of clay I threw up, and was going to
get the cover off when I felt myself getting as weak as water. I was
trembling indeed, and my heart fluttering from the first touch I gave it
with the spade. Well, what would you have of it! I fell down in a
*stugue*, and don't know how long I was in it; and when I came to myself
the very sight of the crock brought my heart to my mouth. I done nothing
after that but crawled back as well as I could. I suppose all happened
to me because I did not say e'er a prayer, or take any holy-water with
me to sprinkle a ring round the place. I think I'll go asleep now; I
can't keep my eyes open."

So he slept soundly, and never woke till next morning, and the first
thing he was conscious of was a strong inclination to go to the rath
again, and recover the crock, if it still remained there. He went in all
haste, found the spade and shovel, the heap of clay, and the pit, but no
sign of the crock or its cover. He came back overpowered with vexation
at the silly way in which he had behaved the day before, and begged Mrs.
Rooney to give him his crock, and promised to give her a good handful of
its contents. "Crock!" said she; " what are you talking about?" "Sure I
am talking about the crock I dug up in the rath of Knocmor yesterday,
and that I told you about after you gave me the drink of whey in the
bed." "Oh, my poor man, you are raving! I gave you a drink, sure enough,
but this is the first time you opened your mouth about a crock." "But
sure,,if you come you can see the hole and the clay, and here is the
spade and shovel that I used." "And if they are, is that a reason I
should have your crock, that I never heard of till this blessed hour?"

There was great commotion in the neighbourhood. Several people,
including Mr. and Mrs. Rooney, went to the rath, and saw the hole and
the clay, but that did not prove that Mrs. Rooney got the money. All
that the sharpest neighbour could make out was the absence of the farmer
and his wife from their house for about an hour on the evening in
question. It all resulted in poor Brian losing his reason, and coming to
vituperate Mrs. Rooney about once a week at her own door. We will say of
her that she always gave him something to eat on these occasions, and a
coat or breeches when his need was sore for good clothing. By degrees
the farm was improved, and more land taken. Her children were well
provided for, and so are such of her grandchildren as are now living.
Ill-got money does not in general produce such comfortable results.

 

In the *Leadbeater Papers* will be found another version of the next
legend. What we heard from Mrs. K. in 1816, or thereabouts, is here
given to the reader most conscientiously. It is a curious instance of
old circumstances being attached to the fortunes of a new man, such as
Earl Garrett must be considered -when thought of in comparison with
Holger the Dane or King Arthur.

Such legends belong to a race which has been obliged to give way to a
less imaginative people. James IV. of Scotland, survived Flodden, and
will appear when his country wants hint. Don Sebastian of Portugal did
not perish in Africa. Holger the Dane remained watching in his cavern
long after the period--

When Roland brave, and Olivier,  
And every paladin and peer,  
On Roncesvalles died."

King Arthur is still waiting in the Isle of Avalon; and some old Welsh
king can scarcely disengage his beard from the stone table into which it
has grown, as he has slept till his coming forth can be of no manner of
use.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Enchantment of Gearhoidh Iarla](lfic043)
