[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic068)  [Next](lfic070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE KING WITH THE HORSE'S EARS.

The story I'm going to tell yous is not to be met every day. I heard
little Tom Kennedy, the great schoolmaster of Rossard, say that he read,
it in the history of Ireland, and that it happened before the people wor
Christians. It is about a king that never let himself be docked only
once a year. He lived in some ould city on the borders of Carlow and
Kilkenny, and his name was a queer one--Lora Lonshach it was. So, as I
said, he got his hair cut once a year; and tale or tidings was never
after hard of the barber that done it; About seven unlucky fellows got
the honour, and after that, dickens a barber would come for love or
money within a hen's race of the castle. So the king made an Act of
Parlement, that all the shavers through the country was to cast lots;
and if any one that got the short straw daared say boo, down went his
house. \[a\]

So the first lot came to the son of a poor widow woman, and the bellman
proclaimed it through the town; and when the poor mother heard it she
had like to fall out of her stanin'; but as that wouldn't save the poor
fellow's life, she thought betther of it, and run up the street like
wildfire, till she came to the palace gates. She broke through the
guards (I don't think the old kings in Ireland took any trouble about
mindin' the gates; for if they did, how could such crowds be always at
the fastes withinside?)--She broke in, as I said, and came into the big
stone hail, where the king was takin' his tay--if it's tay they used in
them days.

"What brings this mad woman here?" says he, flying into a passion. "Go,"
says he to the butler, "and put the guards into the dungeon, for lettin'
me be disturbed at my break'ast, and bid the drummer give 'em thirty
lashes apiece wud the cat-o'-noine-taiis. What brings you here, \~
unfortunate ould sinner?" says he to the

Poor woman, that was sitten' an her heels, and puililuin' fit to blow
the roof off o' 'the house.

"Oh, plase your noble majesty," says she, "don't take Thigueen from me.
If you do, who'll I have to wake and bury me dacent?" "An' who is
Thigueen?" says he; "an' what have I to say to him?" "Oh, an' isn't he
the unfortunate disciple that's to clip your majesty to-morrow, an' sure
after that I'll never see him again." "Call the butler here," says the
king to the little page. "Plaze your majesty, he's gone to see the
floggin'." "It doesn't plaze my majesty, I tell you, for him to take'
the liberty. Call the footman." "Sir, he's gone to mind the butler." "
Well, then, tundher and turf! call the coachman." "Sir, he said he'd go'
have an eye on the other two, for fraid they'd go look at any one
dhrinkin'." "Well, then, call in the 'guards." "Oh, sure, they're all
gettin' the floggin'." "Cead millia mollaghart--Oh, tattheration to yez
all; isn't this the purty way I'm circumvented! Begone, you oul' thief,"
says he to the poor woman, "since I can't give you the chastisement you
desarve. You'll get your *paustha* (boy) back 'safe an' sound; but if
ever I lay eyes on you again, I'll have you hung as high as Balife or
Gildheroy." \[b\] "Oh, may heavens be your bed! May all the sowis that
ever left you--" "Out o' my sight, you torment! My break'ast is spiled,
an' I'll be all through other the whole day."

You may be sure the guards kep' an eye about 'em next day, till the king
was done his break'ast; and then the poor barber came in, like a dog
with a kittle under his tail. He stood, bowin', bowin', and 'all the
blood in his body down in his brogues. So the king looked at him, an'
says he, "My good fellow, you'll be at liberty to go where you please
after cutting my hair; but you must first take your Bible oath--" Ah,
that's true, they didn't know anything about the Bible; the oath he made
him swear was *Dar lamh an Righ* (by the king's hand), that he'd never
tell anything that had ears and tongue what he'd see that day.

So he sat down on his throne, took off his green birredh, with his eyes
fixed on the barber; and when the cap was off, up flew two brown horse's
ears (but they were as long as if they belonged to an ass), and bid
Thigue fall on with his scissors.

The poor lad never could rightly tell how he got through the job. He had
like once to cut the edge of one ear; but such a roar as the king let at
him, while he put down one ear and cocked up the other, almost terrified
him to death. He'd give the world to be away some place where he could
faint, and be done with the business, head and pluck.

When he was over the job, the page handed him five guineas--if it's
guineas they had; and says the king, "Now, my lad, if I ever hear the
wind o' the word of this after you, if I don't hang you, or thransport
you to Bottomy Bay, I'll do worse; I'll get you married to a
tay-dhrinking bawrshuch (scold) of a woman, that'll make you wish you
never was born before you're three months man and wife. I will do that,
by this scepthre, an' there's both wood and stick in it \[c\]--so mind
yourself."

The poor mother was there, looking over 'the half-door, seeing if her
son 'ud ever come back to her; an' at last, bedad, there he was, comin'
down the street, pullin' one leg after the other; and when he came in,
he tumbled head and heels into his bed, without so much as blessing
him'self. Ovoch, I'm always forgetting it's a hathen story I'm telling.
The poor mother begged and beseecht him to tell her what ailded him, but
dickens a word he let on about it. At last, after two days and nights,
the doctor came; and as sure as he did, he bid Thigue put out his
tongue, and let him feel his. pulse. "Docthor," says the poor fellow,
"there's no use in sthrivin' to blindfold the divel in the dark: I have
a saycret. If I can't tell it, I'll die; and if I do tell it, I'll not
be allowed to live." "*Sha gu dheine*," says the doctor, "is that 'the
way the wind blows?" When he heard that the people the secret was not to
be told to were to have tongues and ears on 'em, says he to Thigue, "Go
into the wood there below; make a split in the bark of one of the trees,
tell your secret into the cut, and try how you'll feel after it."

The doctor was hardly out of the house when Thigue was up, and creeping
off to the wood. He was afraid to stop, for fear he'd be seen, till he
got into the heart of it, where two paths crossed one another. There
was., a nice sally tree at the spot, and so Thigue went no farther; but
cut the bark in a down gash, and stooped down, and whispered into it,
"*Da Chluais Chapail ar Labhhradth Loingseach*." And the maning of them
words is, "The two ears of a horse has Lora Lonshach."

Well, the poor fellow was hardly done whispering, when he felt as if a
mountain was lifted off his back. He'd be out of the wood home again in
three jumps, only for the wakeness of hunger that was on him, and that
he never felt while the secret was troubling him. A neighbour, that was
strainin' her dinner on the flags outside of her door, just as he got
into the town, seem' him go by so miserable-lookin', made him come in,,
and never did he enjoy such a dinner of good potatoes and milk before or
since.

Well, with the joy, and the five guineas, and that, himself and his
mother lived like fightin' cocks for a long time; but the day
twelvemonth was drawing near, when he'd have to cut the king's long hair
again, and his mornings began to grow very dismal on him. But, before
the day come round, there was great coming and going; for the other four
kings of Ireland were invited, along with all the lords and ladies that
choose to travel so far, to listen to a great match of harp-playing
between Craftine, the king's harper, and any one that had the consate to
play again him.

Well and good, a week before the day appointed, the harper found some
cracks or worm-holes, or sonic *meea* or other in his instrument, and so
he went into the wood to look for the makings of a new one. Where should
bad luck send him but to the very sally that Thigue told his secret to!
He cut it down, and fashioned it into the finest harp that ever you see
(an' the dickens a harp ever I saw but on a halfpenny); and when he
tried it, he was enchanted himself, such beautiful music as it played!

So at last the great day came, and the streets wor filled with coaches
and horses, and the big hall in the palace was crammed. The king was on
his high throne, and the four other kings were before him, and behind
him, and at one side of him, and at the other; and the great lords and
ladies were round the open place in the centre where all the harpers
were sitting; and all such people as you and me surrounded the quality,
till you couldn't put the blade of a knife between the walls and
themselves.

So the king gave 'the word of command, and up got Craftine, and the
music he made was so mournful that those who couldn't cover their faces
put a cross look on themselves to hide their grief. This didn't please
the king; so he waved his hand, and Craftine struck up a jig, and so
bothered were they all, gentle and simple, that they had no room for
dancing,,that they shouted out for merriment, and any one that had a hat
or a cap flung it up to the rafters. By,and by he, got afeared that they
would all rush in on himself and the other harpers for dancing room, and
he changed the air to "Brian Boru's March." Well, they were not so
uproarious while it was playing; but the blood was galloping through
their veins like mad. Every one that had room drew his sword, and waved
it over his head (and such a clatter as these swords made striking one
another!), and every one cried out the war-cry of his own chief or king.
This wouldn't do at all for a continuance; so he changed his hand, and
made such music as angels do when they are welcoming good souls to
heaven. Every one shut their eyes and leaned back, and hoped that the
beautiful tune would never come to an end.

But it was forced to come to an end, and the, harper let his arms fall
on his knees, and every one sighed and groaned for being brought back to
the world again. You may depend that Craftine was praised, and gold and
silver was thrown in showers to him. Then the harpers of Leinster,
Munster, Connaught, and Ulster tried their hands, and, sure enough, fine
music flew out from under these hands; but all did not come within miles
of Craftine's. So when they stopped, says the king to his harper,

"Give us one tune more to finish decently, and put all that we invited
in good humour for their dinner. I'm afraid if you go on in this way the
King of Greece or the Emperor of Moroco will be sending for you one of
these clays." "By your hand, my king," says Craftine, "I'm afeard of the
same harp. It wasn't my fingers at all that struck out that music; it
was the music that stirred my fingers. There's some pishrogue on the
instrument, and I'm in dread it will play us some trick." "Oh, trick be
hanged!" says the king; "play away." "Well," says the other, " I must
obey your majesty--why shouldn't I? Here goes!"

Well, his fingers hardly touched the strings, when they felt like
sand-paper that was powdered with nettle-tops, and out they roared as if
thunder was breaking over the roof, and a thousand men were smashing
stones. Every one was going to stop his ears, but a loud voice began to
shout out from the strings that were keeping hold of Craftine's fingers,
"*Da Chluais Chapail ar Labhradh Loingseach*!"

Well, to be sure! how the people were frightened, and how they looked at
the unfortunate sinner of a king, that didn't know whether he was
standing on his feet or his head, and would give half Ireland to be ten
miles under ground that, moment. He put up his poor hands to his head,
not knowing what he was doing, and, bedad, in his fumbling he loosed the
band of his birredh, and up flew the two long hairy ears. Oh, what a
roar came from the crowd! Lora wasn't able to stand it; he fell in a
stugue down from his' throne, and in a few minutes he had the hall to
himself, barring his harper and some of his old servants.

They say that when he came to himself, he was very sorry for all the
poor barbers that he put out of the way, and that he pensioned their
wives and mothers; and when there was-no secret made of it, Thigueen
made no more work about docking him than he would about you or me. Only
for all the blood he got shed he'd never be made the holy show he was in
the sight of people from all parts within the four seas of Ireland.

But for fear of being detected, we should willingly claim this as an
original Celtic legend. But alas! the learned in classic mythology would
soon humble our national vanity by quoting that troublesome old Midas of
Asia Minor, renowned for the fatal pair of ass's ears bestowed on him by
Apollo, the secret told to the reeds, the minstrel fashioning a Pandean
pipe out of these reeds, and the treacherous miniature organ squeaking
out, "King Midas has the ears of an ass!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] Idiomatic for "being put to death."

\[b\] The biography of these unlucky heroes was to be found in the once
familiar school-book--" The Adventures of the Irish Rogues and
Rapparees" It has been a *desideratum* in our little collection these
thirty years. We cannot bear the sight of the modem edition.

\[c\] The editor has not ventured to print this bizarre pleonasm without
legitimate authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of the Sculloge's Son from Muskerry](lfic070)
