[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lfic022)  [Next](lfic024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Faction-Fight Among the Fairies

"I was sitting on the brow of that hill, the other day, and it was so
calm you could hear the buzzing of--a fly's wing. I was half asleep with
the heat and with having nothing to do, when I was aroused by a noise
coming down from the mountain along the stream. The road crosses it just
above the glen; and at the bridge the sound divided itself, and I heard
the beat of wings on one side of the stream and on the other, but I
could see nothing. I then seemed to hear the blowing of weak-voiced
bugles, and faint shouts, and the sound of blows, as if two winged
armies were fighting in the air; and even the firing of shots; but it
was as if I was hearing all through a skreen or in a dream. It seemed to
me even as if light bodies fell in the water. At last there was greater
shout­ing and work on one side, and hurraing, and then all the noise and
rout rose in the air, and everything fell into quiet again. Fairies
don't cross streams, you say! How then could the Leinster fairies cross
over the Suir and Barrow to have a hurling match with the Munster
fairies, or the fairies of Ireland have a battle with the Scotch
fairies? "

Mrs. K. was as certain that the following adventure had befallen her
father as that she ruled her husband without appeal, and was in turn
despotically ruled by his children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jemmy Doyle in the Fairy Palace](lfic024)
