[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou08)  [Next](hou10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

### CHAPTER VI. THE STORY OF MORMONISM. 1840-1844.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">The City of Nauvoo—Its
Temple and University—the Nauvoo Legion—the Mormons in Illinois—Evil
Reports—Revelation on Polygamy—Its Reception and Practice—the Prophet a
Candidate for the Presidency—the 'Nauvoo Expositor'—Joseph
Arrested—Governor Ford and His Measures—Joseph and Hyrum Proceed to
Carthage—Their Imprisonment—the Governor's Pledge—Assassination of the
Prophet and His Brother—Character of Joseph Smith—a Panic at
Carthage—Addresses of Richards and Taylor—Peaceful Attitude of the
Mormons.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">To</span> the saints it is indeed a place of
refuge, the city of Nauvoo, the Holy City, the City of Joseph. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169) It stands on rolling land, covering a
bed of limestone yielding excellent building material, and bordered on
three sides by the river which here makes a majestic curve, and is
nearly two miles in width. The aborigines were not indifferent to the
advantages of the spot, as the presence of their mounds testifies. In
area it is three miles by four. The city is regularly laid out in
streets at right angles, of convenient width, along which are scattered
neat, whitewashed log cabins, also frame, brick, and stone houses, with
grounds and gardens. It is incorporated by charter, <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170) and contains the best institutions of
the latest civilization; in the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

country are hundreds of tributary farms and plantations. The population
is from seven to fifteen thousand, varying with the ebb and flow of new
converts and new colonizations. <span id="fr_171"></span>[3](#fn_171)

    Conspicuous among the buildings, and chief architectural feature of
the holy city, is the temple, glistening in white limestone upon the
hill-top, a shrine in the western wilderness whereat all the nations of
the earth may worship, whereat all the people may inquire of God and
receive his holy oracles. <span id="fr_172"></span>[4](#fn_172) Next in

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

the City of Joseph in prominence and importance is the house of Joseph,
hotel and residence, called the Nauvoo House, <span
id="fr_173"></span>[5](#fn_173) which is to the material man as the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

temple to the spiritual man. Unfortunately both the one and the other
are destined to an occupancy and enjoyment all too brief in view of the
vast labor bestowed upon them. Besides these buildings are the Hall of
Seventies, in which is a library, the Masonic Hall, and Concert Hall;
also there a university and other institutions are established, though
having as yet no separate edifices.

    The president of the university and professor of mathematics and
English literature is James Kelly, a graduate of Trinity College,
Dublin, and a ripe scholar; Orson Pratt, a man of pure mind and high
order of ability, who without early education and amidst great
difficulties had to achieve learning as best he could, and in truth has
achieved it; professor of languages, Orson Spencer, graduate of Union
College and the Baptist Theological Seminary, New York; professor of
church history, Sidney Rigdon, versed in history, belles-lettres, and
oratory. In the board of regents we find the leading men of the
church; <span id="fr_174"></span>[6](#fn_174) connected with the
university were four common-school wards, with three wardens to each.

    In 1840 all the male members of the church between the ages of
sixteen and fifty were enrolled in a military organization known as the
Nauvoo Legion, which eventually numbered some four thousand men, and
constituted part of the state militia. It was divided into two cohorts,
and then into regiments, battalions, and companies, Lieutenant-general
Joseph Smith being commander-in-chief. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[7](#fn_175) The organization

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

was modelled after the Roman legion. The men were well disciplined,
brave, and efficient. These troops carried their name to Utah, where
they were reörganized in May 1857.

    Though all are soldiers, there are no dandy warriors in their midst.
Each one returns after drill to his occupation—to his farm, factory, or
merchandise. Among other workshops are a porcelain factory established
by a Staffordshire company, two steam sawmills, a steam flouring-mill, a
foundry, and a tool-factory. A joint-stock company is organized under
the style of the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. Just
outside the city is a community farm, worked by the poor for their own
benefit; to each family in the city is allotted one acre of ground; the
system of community of property does not obtain.

    Most of the people in and about Nauvoo are Mormons, but not all. The
population is made up chiefly from the farming districts of the United
States and the manufacturing districts of England; though uneducated,
unpolished, and superstitious, they are for the most part intelligent,
industrious, competent, honest, and sincere. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[8](#fn_176) With a shrewd head to direct,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

like that of the prophet, a wisdom like his to concentrate, a power like
his to say to ten thousand men, do this, and it is done, with plenty of
cheap, virgin land, with a collective knowledge of all arts, and with
habits of economy and industry, it were a wonder if they did not rapidly
accumulate property, and some of them acquire wealth. This they do,
though tithed by the church, and detested by the gentiles, and they
prosper in a remarkable degree. Of course, in political, as in spiritual
and pecuniary affairs, the prophet's word is law.

    "Nauvoo is the best place in the world!" exclaims an enthusiastic
saint. Nauvoo, the beautiful indeed! And "as to the facilities,
tranquillities, and virtues of the city, they are not equalled on the
globe." Here the saints find rest. "No vice is meant to be tolerated; no
grog-shops allowed; nor would we have any trouble, if it were not for
our lenity in suffering the world, <span id="fr_177"></span>[9](#fn_177)
as I shall call them, to come in and trade, and

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

enjoy our society, as they say." "They are a wonderfully enterprising
people, writes a gentile. "Peace and harmony reign in the city. The
drunkard is scarcely ever seen, as in other cities, neither does the
awful imprecation or profane oath strike upon your ear; but while all is
storm and tempest and confusion abroad respecting the Mormons, all is
peace and harmony at horne." <span id="fr_178"></span>[10](#fn_178)

    About this time there comes to Joseph Smith a somewhat, singular
individual making somewhat singular advances. He is a yankee huckster of
the first class, only for his merchandise, instead of patent clocks and
wooden nutmegs, he offers for sale theology, medicine, and a general
assortment of political and military wares. The thing is a fraud, and
before long he openly announces himself as such. As his manhood is far
inferior to his duplicity, so his name—the Reverend General John C.
Bennett, M. D., U.S.A., president, chancellor, and master in chancery—as
we may observe, is subordinate to his titles. He has ability, he has
brains and fingers; but

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

he has no soul. He comes to Joseph and says, "Hail, master!" and
worships him. He professes all that the Mormons profess, and more; he
does all that the Mormons do, and more. So the prophet makes him general
of his legion, mayor of the city, chancellor of the university, not to
mention his functions as attorney, doctor, and privy counsellor. All
this is done with quick despatch; and the result is that the great man
soon tires of his greatness, or thinks to become yet greater by turning
renegade, and writing a book against his late friends and
associates. <span id="fr_179"></span>[11](#fn_179)

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

    There is another individual of similar name, and yet more similar
character, James Arlington Bennett,

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

also called general, whom Mackay, Smucker, a reviewer in the
*Edinburgh*, and others have

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

mistaken for the original. The quality of impudence appears as fully in
the second Bennett as in the first. <span
id="fr_180"></span>[12](#fn_180)

 

    As I have before observed, the misfortunes of the saints by no means
dampened their ardor, or impoverished them as a society. Some lost their
all; in that case the others helped them. Old scores were

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

cancelled, old debts forgiven. <span id="fr_181"></span>[13](#fn_181)
There were no great riches among them; yet he who had nothing could not
be called poor amid such surroundings. Head over all, temporal and
spiritual, was Joseph Smith, not only prophet and president, but general
and mayor. <span id="fr_182"></span>[14](#fn_182) He had now approached
the summit of his career, and for a brief space was permitted to enjoy
his fame, wealth, and power in some degree of quiet.

    They were salutary lessons that the prophet and his people had
received in Missouri, and for a time their speech and manner were less
arrogant than of old. But soon prosperity was far greater here than ever
before, and as with Israel of old the chastisements of the Lord were
soon forgotten. From the moment they crossed the river from Missouri
into Illinois their position as men and members of the commonwealth was
changed. In the one state they were regarded as fanatics, dangerous to
the government and to the people, having associated assassins to do
their bidding, and holding to a doctrine of divine inheritance with
regard to all that country; in the

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

other they were esteemed as hard-working and thrifty American citizens,
whose votes, to the party in power, were worth as much as those of the
baptist or the methodist.

    Such was their past and present status in the community. They were
now treated, politically and socially, with consideration, especially by
politicians. Thomas Carlin, governor of Illinois, was their friend, and
granted them all the privileges they asked; Robert Lucas, governor of
Iowa, was their friend, and promised them the protection due to every
citizen of the United States, of whatsoever religion, creed,
superstition, fanaticism, craze, or whatever people might choose to call
it.

    But soon there came a governor, named Thomas Ford, who knew not
Joseph. He was a well meaning man enough, not blood-thirsty like Boggs,
nor strong and cool-headed like Carlin, nor yet a man of positive action
and opinion like Lucas; still, Ford was not a bad man, and if the saints
had conducted themselves according to the wisdom of the world, they
might in time, perhaps, have overcome the prejudices of the people. But
prosperity seemed as fatal to them as adversity was profitable. All the
best of heaven and earth was now theirs, and again Jeshurun waxed fat
and kicked, revelations becoming less frequent as the cares of this
world, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life crept in among the
people.

    The city charter of Nauvoo <span id="fr_183"></span>[15](#fn_183)
allowed the enactment of any laws not in conflict with those of the
State or of the United States, and particularly that a writ of *habeas
corpus* might be issued in all cases arising under city ordinance. In
the interpretation of this

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

provision the saints allowed themselves rattler a wide latitude, even
assuming authority opposed to superior powers, and sometimes questioning
the validity of state documents not countersigned by the mayor of
Nauvoo. The counties surrounding Hancock, in which was Nauvoo, were
fearful of the prosperity of the saints, and of their political
influence; there were angry words and bickerings between the opposing
societies, and then blows. The old Missouri feud was kept alive by suits
instituted against Smith and others. <span
id="fr_184"></span>[16](#fn_184) All attempt made to assassinate
Governor Boggs was, of course, charged to the Mormons, and probably with
truth. In fact, if we may believe their enemies, they did not deny it.
Boggs had unlawfully ordered all the Mormons in Missouri killed if they
did not leave the state: why had not they the same right, they argued,
to break the law and kill him? <span id="fr_185"></span>[17](#fn_185)

    Among the reports circulated, besides those of assassination and
attempted assassination, the following will serve as specimens: That the
plan of Smith

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

was to take the county, then the state, after that the United States,
and finally the whole world; that any section making a move against the
saints should be destroyed by the Danites; that Smith declared his
prophecies superior to law, and threatened that if not let alone he
would prove a second Mahomet, and send streams of blood from the Rocky
Mountains to the sea.

    In an address to the saints at Nauvoo, September 1, 1812, Joseph
stated that on account of the enemies in pursuit of him, both in
Missouri and in Illinois, he deemed it best to retire for a time, and
seek safety. He ordered his debts paid as they fell due, his property to
be sold if necessary to meet requirements, and exhorted all officers to
be faithful to their trust. "When the storm is past I will return," he
said; "and as for perils, they seem small things to me, for the envy and
wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life." And
again: "Verily thus saith the Lord, let the work of my temple, and all
the works which I have appointed unto you, be continued and not cease.
Let all the records be had in order, that they may be put in the
archives of my holy temple. I will write the word of the Lord from time
to time and send it to you by mail. I now close my letter for the
present, for the want of more time, for the enemy is on the alert; and
as the savior said, the prince of this world cometh, but he hath nothing
in me."

    Five days later the prophet sent an address to the saints, mainly
touching the baptism for the dead, of which more hereafter. "Now what do
we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A
voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth, glad
tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and dead; glad
tidings of great joy. And again what do we hear? Glad tidings from
Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the
prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record
of the book. The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna,
detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light. The voice of
Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna
county, and Colesville, Boone county, on the Susquehanna River,
declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the
dispensation of the fulness of times. And again, the voice of God in the
chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry
times and in divers places, through all the travels and tribulations of
this church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

 

    We come now to a most momentous epoch in the history of the church,
to the most important act of the prophet during the entire course of his
wonderful life, to the act of all others pregnant with mighty results,
if we except the primary proceedings relative to the sacred book and its
translation.

    Twenty years had passed since the plates of Mormon had been revealed
to Joseph, during which time he had suffered divers and continued
persecution. lie and his followers had been reviled and spit upon from
the beginning; some of them had been robbed, and beaten, hunted down,
imprisoned, and slain. Yet they had prospered; the church had rapidly
increased, and its members were blessed with plenty. Their neighbors
spoke much evil of them and committed many violent acts. The saints were
exceedingly annoying; they voted solid and claimed the whole world as
theirs, including Jackson county, Missouri; they were wild in their
thoughts, extravagant in their pretensions, and by no means temperate in
the use of their tongues; they were not always prudent; they were not
always without reproach.

    Just how far certain members or leaders erred, bringing evil on all,
it is impossible at this day to

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

determine. The evidence comes to us in the form of rumors, general
assertions, and bold statements from the mouths of men filled with
deadly hate, and cannot be altogether trusted. Some of these have said
that the leaders of the church, finding their power over the minds and
bodies of their female associates so greatly increased, so rapidly
becoming absolute, could not resist temptation, but fell into grievous
sins like Jeroboam and David, and were thereby obliged to adopt some
plan either to cover or make right their conduct.

    It was easy for the gentiles to make such a charge appear plausible,
in view of the fact that about this time the doctrine of plurality of
wives as practised and promulgated in the scriptures attracted much
attention. Most of the other acts, customs, and ordinances of the old
and new testaments had been adopted in common with those contained in
the book of Mormon by the latter-day church; why should not this? Wives
and concubines without restriction had been permitted to the worthy men
of old; the holy scriptures had nowhere condemned the custom; God had at
no time ordered otherwise. On the contrary, it seemed in the line of
example and duty; it seemed necessary to make the holy fabric
symmetrical and complete. True, it was not now in vogue with either Jews
or Christians; but neither were miracles nor special revelations.
Surely, if God disapproved, he would have so declared; his commands he
makes clear; particularly acts heinous in his sight he denounces loudly
and with many repetitions.

    Thus argued the elders. They did not consider, nor indeed care for,
the fact that, viewed from the standpoint of intellectual progress, the
revival of polygamy, or concubinage, in common with other practices of
the half-savage Hebrews, was a retrogression, a turning back toward
savagism. They found it sanctioned in the holy book in use by the most
civilized nations of the earth, and they felt themselves able to make

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

it appear plausible. If any had the right to adopt part of the bible as
their rule of conduct, accepting it all as true, they claimed the right
to adopt the whole of it for their rule of conduct if they chose. It was
civilization, and not the holy scriptures, that forbade polygamy, and
they cared very little comparatively for civilization.

    Finally, on the 12th of July, 1843, while the chief men of the
church were thinking the matter over, though saying little even among
themselves, it is stated that there came to Joseph a revelation, the
last of the prophet's revelations of which there is any record.

    "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, that
inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein
I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; as also
Moses, David, and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principles and
doctrine of their having many wives and concubines: Behold! and lo, I am
the Lord thy God. and will answer thee, as touching this matter.

    "Abraham received concubines, and they bare him children, and it was
accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him,
and he abode in my law; as Isaac also, and Jacob, did none other things
than that which they were commanded. David also received many wives and
concubines, as also Solomon, and Moses, my servant, as also many others
of my servants, from the beginning of creation until this time, and in
nothing did they sin, save in those things which they received not of
me.

    "David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me by the hand
of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys of
this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me, save in
the case of Uriah and his wife: and, therefore, he hath fallen from his
exaltation, and received his portion; and he shall not inherit them out
of the world, for I gave them unto another, saith the Lord.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

    "Verily, I say unto you, a commandment I give unto mine handmaid,
Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay
herself, and partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto
her; for I did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham,
and that I might require an offering at your hand by convenant and
sacrifice; and let mine handmaid, Emma Smith, receive all those that
have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure
before me.

    "And I command mine handmaid, Emma Smith, to abide and cleave unto
my servant Joseph, and to none else. And again, verily, I say, let mine
handmaid forgive my servant Joseph his trespasses, and then shall she be
forgiven her trespasses, wherein she hath trespassed against me; and I,
the Lord thy God, will bless her and multiply her, and make her heart to
rejoice.

    "And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood: if any man
espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give her
consent; and if he espouse the second, and they are virgins, and have
vowed to no other man, then he is justified; he cannot commit adultery,
for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit adultery with that
belonging unto him, and to none else; and if he have ten virgins given
unto him by this law he cannot commit adultery, for they belong to him,
and they are given unto him; therefore he is justified."

    It is said that as early as 1831 the will of the Lord in this
respect had been revealed to Joseph. In translating the bible he had
come upon the passages relating to plural wives and concubines, and had
inquired of the Lord what he should do. He was told to wait, and not
make the matter public then, the people not yet having faith to receive
it. It was one of the severest trials the church had yet been called
upon to undergo, and the wisest circumspection was necessary lest Joseph
should be repudiated by his followers

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

as a false prophet. So he approached persons singly, first the man of
the family and then the woman. In 1841 Joseph began to take to himself
plural wives, and his example was followed by some of the others.
Finally, in order that all might know that he was not acting on his own
responsibility alone, the revelation came, sanctioning and enforcing the
system. This, as I have given it, is the orthodox and authorized
explanation of the matter.

    Thus came to the saints the doctrine of polygamy, first to the
leaders and for a time kept secret, and finally to the whole church, as
one of its most prominent tenets. <span id="fr_186"></span>[18](#fn_186)
For years it was known only to a few, and it was not formally
promulgated until after the great exodus, when the church had become
well established in the valleys of the Yutas. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[19](#fn_187)

    There were several reasons for adopting this course. First, the hate
and obloquy which would be engendered by its publication, and the
wide-spread and bitter opposition it would meet. The work of
missionaries in the field would greatly suffer. Many in the church would
oppose it; women would rebel, while their sisters throughout christendom
would hold them in derision. It was all so new and strange. Even in
theory it was startling enough; but put it in practice, and who could
foretell the result? The very foundations of

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

the church might thereby be broken up. If it must needs be, then let
discretion be used. Let the matter be broken to the church as it is able
to receive it; let the system be introduced gradually, and practised
secretly; by the chief men at first, and later by all. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[20](#fn_188)

    It was indeed a heavy load that the saints thus took upon
themselves, willingly or unwillingly, in the service of God or in the
service of Satan. Up to this

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

time, though citizens of the commonwealth, they had not been in sympathy
with other citizens; though religionists, they were in deadly opposition
to all other religions; as a fraternity, bound by friendly compact, not
alone spiritually but in temporal matters, in buying and selling, in
town-building, farming, and stock-raising, in all trades and
manufactures, they stood on vantage-ground. They were stronger than
their immediate neighbors—stronger socially, politically, and
industrially; and the people about them felt this, and while hating,
feared them.

    It is true, that on their first arrival in Zion they were not
wealthy; neither were their neighbors. They were not highly educated or
refined or cultured; neither were their neighbors. They were sometimes
loud and vulgar of speech: so were their neighbors. Immorality cropped
out in certain quarters; so it did among the ancient Corinthians and the
men of modern Missouri; there was some thieving among them; but they
were no more immoral or dishonest than their persecutors who made war on
them, and as they thought without a shadow of right.

    There is no doubt that among the Mormons as among the gentiles,
perhaps among the Mormon leaders as among the gentile leaders,
fornication and adultery were practised. It has been so in other ages
and nations, in every age and nation; it is so now, and is likely to be
so till the end of the world. But when the testimony on both sides is
carefully weighed, it must be admitted that the Mormons in Missouri and
Illinois were, as a class, a more moral, honest, temperate,
hard-working, self-denying, and thrifty people than the gentiles by whom
they were surrounded. Says John D. Lee on entering the Missouri
fraternity and, at the time of this remarking, by no means friendly to
the saints, "The motives of the people who composed my neighborhood were
pure; they were all sincere in their devotions, and tried to square
their actions through life by the golden rule…

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The word of a
Mormon was then good for all it was pledged to or for. I was proud to be
an associate with such honorable people." And thus Colonel Kane, a
disinterested observer, and not a Mormon: As compared with the other
"border inhabitants of Missouri, the vile scum which our society, like
the great ocean, washes upon its frontier shores," the saints were
"persons of refined and cleanly habits and decent language."

    Nevertheless the sins of the entire section must be visited on them.
Were there any robberies for miles around, they were charged by their
enemies upon the Mormons; were there any house-burnings or
assassinations anywhere among the gentiles, it was the Danites who did
it. Of all that has been laid at their door I find little proved against
them. The charges are general, and preferred for the most part by
irresponsible men; in answer to them they refer us to the records. On
the other hand, the outrages of their enemies are easily followed; for
they are not denied, but are rather gloried in by the perpetrators. To
shoot a Mormon was indeed a distinction coveted by the average gentile
citizen of Illinois and Missouri, and was no more regarded as a crime
than the shooting of a Blackfoot or Pawnee. Of course the Mormons
retaliated.

    Polygamy was a heavy load in one sense; in another sense it was a
bond of strength. While in the eyes of the world its open avowal placed
the saints outside the pale of respectability, and made them amenable to
the law, among themselves as law-breakers, openly defying the law, and
placing themselves and their religion above all law, the very fact of
being thus legal offenders, subject to the penalties and punishments of
the law, brought the members of the society so acting into closer
relationship, cementing them as a sect, and making them more dependent
on each other and on their leaders. It is plain that while thus bringing
upon themselves ignominy and reproach,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

while laying themselves open to the charge of being law-breakers, and
assuming an attitude of defiance toward the laws and institutions of the
country in which they lived, this bond of sympathy, of criminality if
you will, particularly when made a matter of conscience, when recognized
as a mandate from the almighty, higher than any human law, and in whose
obedience God himself was best pleased, and would surely afford
protection, could but prove in the end a bond of strength, particularly
if permitted to attain age and respectability among themselves, and
assume the form of a concrete principle and of sacred obligation.

    If instead of falling back upon the teachings of the old testament,
and adopting the questionable practices of the half-civilized Jews; if
instead of taking for their models Abraham, David, and Solomon, the
saints at Nauvoo had followed the advice of Paul to the saints at
Ephesus, putting away fornication and all uncleanness, and walking
worthy of their vocation, in all lowliness and meekness, as children of
light, they would probably have remained in their beautiful city, and
come into the inheritance of their Missouri Zion as had been prophesied.
Had they consulted more closely the signs of the times, had they been
less orthodox in their creed, less patriarchal in their practices, less
biblical in their tenets, less devoted in their doctrines—in a word, had
they followed more closely the path of worldly wisdom, and, like
opposing christian sects, tempered religion with civilization, giving up
the worst parts of religion for the better parts of civilization, I
should not now be writing their history, as one with the history of
Utah.

    But now was brought upon them this overwhelming issue, which
howsoever it accorded with ancient scripture teachings, and as they
thought with the rights of man, was opposed to public sentiment, and to
the conscience of all civilized nations. Forever after they must have
this mighty obstacle to contend with; forever

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

after they must live under the ban of the christian world; though, with
unshaken faith in their prophet and his doctrine of spiritual wedlock,
they might scorn the world's opinion, and in all sincerity and
singleness of heart thank God that they were accounted worthy to have
all manner of evil spoken of them falsely.

    During this period of probation the church deemed it advisable to
deny the charge, notably by Elder Pratt in a public sermon, and also by
Joseph Smith. "Inasmuch as this Church of Christ has been reproached
with the crime of fornication and polygamy, we declare that we believe
that one man should have one wife, and one woman but one husband, except
in case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again." <span
id="fr_189"></span>[21](#fn_189) In the *Times and Seasons* of February
1, 1844, we have a notice signed by Joseph and Hyrum Smith: "As we have
lately been credibly informed that an elder of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, by the name of Hiram Brown, has been
preaching polygamy and other false and corrupt doctrines in the county
of Lapeer, state of Michigan, this is to notify him and the church in
general that he has been cut of from the church for his iniquity."

    Notwithstanding these solemn denials and denunciations in high
places, the revelation and the practices which it sanctioned were not
easily concealed. <span id="fr_190"></span>[22](#fn_190) As yet,
however, the calumny of the gentiles and the bickering of the saints
vexed not the soul of Joseph. He was now in the zenith of his fame and
power; his followers in Europe and America numbered

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

more than a hundred thousand; his fortune was estimated at a million
dollars; he was commander-in-chief of the Nauvoo Legion, a body of
troops "which," remarks an artillery officer, from his own observation,
"would do honor to any body of armed militia in any of the states, and
approximates very closely to our regular forces;" he was mayor of the
city; and now, as the crowning point of his earthly glory, he was
announced in February 1844 as a candidate for the presidency of the
United States, while Sidney Rigdon was named for vice-president. Whether
this was done for effect or in earnest is somewhat doubtful, for it
appears that the prophet's head was a little turned about this time; but
it is certain that the people of Illinois and Missouri believed him to
be in earnest. Addressing letters to Clay and Calhoun, near the close of
1843, he asked each of them what would be his rule of action toward the
Mormons as a people should he be elected to the presidency. The reply in
both cases was non-committal and unsatisfactory; <span
id="fr_191"></span>[23](#fn_191) whereupon Joseph issues an address
setting forth his views on the government and policy of the United
States, and foreshadows his own policy, in which we find many excellent
features and many absurdities. "No honest man can doubt. for a moment,"
he says, "but the glory of American liberty is on the wane; and that
calamity and confusion will sooner or later destroy the peace of the
people. Speculators will urge a national bank as a savior of credit and
comfort. A hireling pseudo-priesthood will plausibly push abolition
doctrines and doings and 'human rights' into congress, and into every
other place where conquest smells of fame or opposition swells to
popularity." <span id="fr_192"></span>[24](#fn_192)

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

    The aspirations of the prophet, pretended or otherwise, to the
highest office in the republic, together with renewed, and at this
juncture exceedingly dangerous, claims, pointing toward almost universal
empire, <span id="fr_193"></span>[25](#fn_193) brought upon him afresh
the rage of the surrounding gentile populace, and resulted in an awful
tragedy, the circumstances of which I am now about to relate. "The great
cause of popular fury," writes Governor Ford shortly after the
occurrence, "was that the Mormons at several preceding elections had
cast their vote as a unit; thereby making the fact; apparent that no one
could aspire to the honors or offices of the country, within the sphere
of their influence, without their approbation and votes."

    Indeed, a myriad of evils about this time befell the church, all
portending bloody destruction. There were

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

suits and counter-suits at law; arrests and rearrests; schisms,
apostasies, and expulsions; charges one against another of vice and
immorality, Joseph himself being implicated. Here was one elder
unlawfully trying his hand at revelations, and another preaching
polygamy. Many there were whom it was necessary not only to cut off from
the church, but to eradicate with their evil influences from society.
Among the prophet's most inveterate enemies were William Law, who sought
to betray Smith into the hands of the Missourians, and almost
succeeded—Doctor Foster and Francis M. Higbee, who dealt in scandal,
charging Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney, and others with seducing women, and
having more wives than one. Suits of this kind brought by the brethren
against each other, but more particularly by the leaders against high
officials, were pending in the Nauvoo municipal court for over two
years.

    Early in June 1844 was issued the first number of the *Nauvoo
Expositor*, the publishers being apostate Mormons and gentiles. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[26](#fn_194) The primary object of the publication
was to stir up strife in the church, and aid its enemies in their work
of attempted extermination. Its columns were at once filled with foul
abuse of the prophet and certain elders of the church, assailing their
character by means of affidavits, and charging them with all manner of
public and private crimes, and abusing and misrepresenting the people.
The city council met, and pronouncing the journal a nuisance, ordered
its abatement. Joseph Smith being mayor, it devolved on him to see the
order executed, and he issued instruction to the city marshal and the
policemen accordingly. The officers of the law forthwith entered the
premises, and destroyed

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

the establishment, tearing down the presses and throwing the type into
the street. <span id="fr_195"></span>[27](#fn_195) For this act the
proprietors obtained from the authorities of the town of Carthage, some
twenty miles distant, a warrant for the arrest of Joseph Smith, which
was placed in the hands of the Carthage constable to be served.

    It was a proceeding not at all to the taste of the Mormons that
their mayor should be summoned for misdemeanor before the magistrate of
another town, and Smith refused to go. He was willing to be tried before
a state tribunal. Meanwhile the offenders were brought before the
municipal court of Nauvoo, on a writ of habeas corpus, and after
examination were discharged. The cry was then raised throughout the
country that Joseph Smith and associates, public offenders, ensconced
among their troops in the stronghold of Nauvoo, defied the law, refusing
to respond to the call of justice; whereupon the men of Illinois, to the
number of two or three thousand, some coming even from Missouri, rallied
to the support of the Carthage constable, and stood ready, as they said,
not only to arrest Joe Smith, but to burn his town and kill every man,
woman, and child in it.

    As the forces of the enemy enlarged and grew yet more and more
demonstrative in their wrath, the town prepared for defence, the Nauvoo
Legion being called out and placed under arms, by instructions from
Governor Ford to Joseph Smith, as general in command. This gave rise to
a report that they were about to make a raid on the neighboring gentile
settlements. <span id="fr_196"></span>[28](#fn_196)

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In consequence of
these rumors and counter-rumors the governor went to Carthage. Previous
to this, frequent communications were sent to him at Springfield by
Joseph Smith, informing him of the position of affairs in and around
Nauvoo. The governor in his *History of Illinois*, referring to these
times, writes: "These also were the active men in blowing up the fury of
the people, in hopes that a popular movement might be set on foot, which
would result in the expulsion or extermination of the Mormon voters. For
this purpose public meetings had been called, inflammatory speeches had
been made, exaggerated reports had been extensively circulated,
committees had been appointed, who rode night and day to spread the
reports and solicit the aid of neighboring counties, and at a public
meeting at Warsaw resolutions were passed to expel or exterminate the
Mormon population. This was not, however, a movement which was
unanimously concurred in. The county contained a goodly number of
inhabitants in favor of peace, or who at least desired to be neutral in
such a contest. These were stigmatized by the name of Jack Mormons, and
there were not a few of the more furious exciters of the people who
openly expressed their intention to involve them in the common expulsion
or extermination."

    Thomas Ford, governor of Illinois, was as a man rather above the
average politician usually chosen among these American states to fill
that position. Not specially clear-headed, and having no brain power to
spare, he was quite respectable and had some conscience, as is
frequently the case with mediocre men. He had a good heart, too, was in
no wise vindictive, and though he was in no sense a strong man, his
sense of right and equity could be quite stubborn upon occasion.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Small in body, he
was likewise small in mind; indeed, there was a song current at the time
that there was no room in his diminutive organism for such a thing as a
soul. Nevertheless, though bitterly censured by some of the Mormons, I
do not think Ford intended to do them wrong. That he did not believe all
the rumors to their discredit is clearly shown in his statement of what
was told him during the days he was at Carthage. He says: "A system of
excitement and agitation was artfully planned and executed with tact. It
consisted in spending reports and rumors of the most fearful character.
As examples: On the morning before my arrival at Carthage, I was
awakened at an early hour by the frightful report, which was asserted
with confidence and apparent consternation, that the Mormons had already
commenced the work of burning, destruction, and murder, and that every
man capable of bearing arms was instantly wanted at Carthage for the
protection of the county. We lost no time in starting; but when we
arrived at Carthage we could hear no more concerning this story. Again,
during the few days that the militia were encamped at Carthage, frequent
applications were made to me to send a force here, and a force there,
and a force all about the country, to prevent murders, robberies, and
larcenies which, it was said, were threatened by the Mormons. No such
forces were sent, nor were any such offences committed at that time,
except the stealing of some provisions, and there was never the least
proof that this was done by a Mormon."

    On the morning to which he refers, the report was brought to him
with the usual alarming accompaniments of fears being expressed of
frightful carnage, and the like. Hastily dressing, he assured the crowd
collected outside of the house in which he had lodged that they need
have no uneasiness respecting the matter, for he was very sure he could
settle the difficulty peaceably. The Mormon prophet knew him well,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

and would trust him. What he purposed doing was to demand the surrender
of Joseph Smith and others. He wished them to promise him that they
would lend their assistance to protect the prisoners from violence,
which they agreed to do.

    After his arrival at Carthage the governor sent two men to Nauvoo as
a committee to wait on Joseph Smith, informing him of his arrival, with
a request that Smith would inform him in relation to the difficulties
that then existed in the county. Dr J. M. Bernhisel and Elder John
Taylor were appointed as a committee by Smith, and furnished with
affidavits and documents in relation both to the proceedings of the
Mormons and those of the mob; in addition to the general history of the
transaction they took with them a duplicate of those documents which had
previously been forwarded by Bishop Hunter, Elder James, and others.
This committee waited on the governor, who expressed an opinion that
Joseph Smith and all parties concerned in passing or executing the city
law in relation to the press had better come to Carthage; however
repugnant it might be to their feelings, he thought it would have a
tendency to allay public excitement, and prove to the people what they
professed, that they wished to be governed by law. The next day the
constable and a force of ten men were despatched to Nauvoo to make the
arrests. The accused were told that if they surrendered they would be
protected; otherwise the whole force of the state would be called out,
if necessary, to take them.

    Upon the arrival of the constable and his posse, the mayor and the
members of the city council declared that they were willing to
surrender. Eight o'clock was the hour appointed, but the accused failed
to make their appearance; whereupon the constable returned, and reported
that they had fled. The governor was of opinion that the constable's
action was part of a plot to get the troops into Nauvoo and exterminate
the Mormons. He called a council of officers and proposed to

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

march on the town with the small force under his command, but was
dissuaded. He hesitated to make a further call on the militia, as the
harvest was nigh and the men were needed to gather it. Meanwhile,
ascertaining that the Mormons had three pieces of cannon and two hundred
and fifty stand of arms belonging to the state, the possession of which
gave offence to the gentiles, he demanded a surrender of the state arms,
again promising protection.

    On the 24th of June <span id="fr_197"></span>[29](#fn_197) Joseph
and Hyrum Smith, the members of the council, and all others demanded,
proceeded to Carthage, gave themselves up, and were charged with riot.
All entered into recognizances before the justice of the peace to appear
for trial, and were released from custody. Joseph and Hyrum, however,
were rearrested, and, says Ford, were charged with overt treason, having
ordered out the legion to resist the posse comitatus, though, as he
states, the degree of their crime would depend on circumstances. The
governor's views on this matter are worthy of note. "The overt act of
treason charged against them," he remarks, "consisted in the alleged
levying of war against the state by declaring martial law in Nauvoo, and
in ordering out the legion to resist the posse comitatus. Their actual
guiltiness of the charge would depend upon circumstances. If their
opponents had been seeking to put the law in force in good faith, and
nothing more, then an array of a military force in open resistance to
the posse comitatus and the militia of the state most probably would
have amounted to treason. But if those opponents merely intended to use
the process of the law, the militia of the state, and the posse
comitatus as cat's-paws to compass the possession of their persons for
the purpose of murdering them afterward, as the

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

sequel demonstrated the fact to be, it might well be doubted whether
they were guilty of treason."

    With the Nauvoo Legion at their back, the two brothers voluntarily
placed themselves in the power of the governor who, demanding and
accepting their surrender, though doubting their guilt, nevertheless
declared that they were not his prisoners, but the prisoners of the
constable and jailer. Leaving two companies to guard the jail, he
disbanded the main body of his troops, and proceeding to Nauvoo,
addressed the people, beseeching them to abide by the law. "They
claimed," he says, "to be a law-abiding people; and insisted that as
they looked to the law alone for their protection, so were they careful
themselves to observe its provisions. Upon the conclusion of my address,
I proposed to take a vote on the question, whether they would strictly
observe the laws, even in opposition to their prophet and leaders. The
vote was unanimous in favor of this proposition." The governor then set
forth for Carthage, and such in substance is his report when viewed in
the most favorable light. <span id="fr_198"></span>[30](#fn_198)

    It is related that as Joseph set forth to deliver himself up to the
authorities he exclaimed: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but
I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offence
toward God and toward all men. I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be
said of me, He was murdered in cold blood." <span
id="fr_199"></span>[31](#fn_199) Nevertheless, for a moment he
hesitated. Should he offer himself a willing sacrifice, or should he
endeavor to escape out of their hands? Thus meditating, he crossed the
river thinking

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

to depart. On reaching the opposite bank he turned and gazed upon the
beautiful city, the holy city, his own hallowed creation, the city of
Joseph, with its shining temple, its busy hum of industry, and its
thousand happy homes. And they were his people who were there, his very
own, given to him of God; and he loved them! Were he to leave them now,
to abandon them in this time of danger, they would be indeed as sheep
without a shepherd, stricken, and scattered, and robbed, and butchered
by the destroyer. No, he could not do it. Better die than to abandon
them thus! So he recrossed the river, saying to his brother Hyrum,
"Come, let us go together, and let God determine what we shall do or
suffer."

    Bidding their families and friends adieu, the two brothers set out
for Carthage. Their hearts were very heavy. There was dire evil abroad;
the air was oppressive, and the sun shot forth malignant rays. Once more
they returned to their people; once more they embraced their wives and
kissed their children, as if they knew, alas! that they should never see
them again.

    The party reached Carthage about midnight, and on the following day
the troops were formed in line, and Joseph and Hyrum passed up and down
in company with the governor, who showed them every respect—either as
guests or victims—introducing them as military officers under the title
of general. Present were the Carthage Greys, who showed signs of mutiny,
hooting at and insulting the prisoners—for such in fact they were, being
committed to jail the same afternoon until discharged by due course of
law.

    A few hours later Joseph asked to see the governor, and next morning
Ford went to the prison. "All this is illegal," said the former. "It is
a purely civil matter, not a question to be settled by force of arms."
"I know it," said the governor, "but it is better so; I did not call out
this force, but found it assembled; I pledge you my honor, however, and
the faith and honor of

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

the state, that no harm shall come to you while undergoing this
imprisonment." The governor took his departure on the morning of the
27th of June. Scarcely was he well out of the way when measures were
taken for the consummation of a most damning deed. The prison was
guarded by eight men detailed from the Carthage Greys, their company
being in camp on the public square a quarter of a mile distant, while
another company under Williams, also the sworn enemies of the Mormons,
was encamped eight miles away, there awaiting the development of events.

    It was a little after five o'clock in the evening. Joseph and Hyrum
Smith were confined in an upper room. With the prisoners were John
Taylor and Willard Richards, other friends having withdrawn a few
moments before. At this juncture a band of a hundred and fifty armed men
with painted faces appeared before the jail, and presently surrounded
it. The guard shouted vociferously and fired their guns over the heads
of the assailants, who paid not the slightest attention to them. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[32](#fn_200) I give what followed from *Burton's
City of the Saints*, being the statement of President John Taylor, who
was present and wounded on the occasion.

    "I was sitting at one of the front windows of the jail, when I saw a
number of men, with painted faces, coming around the corner of the jail,
and aiming toward the stairs. The other brethren had seen the same, for,
as I went to the door, I found Brother Hyrum Smith and Dr Richards
already leaning against it. They both pressed against the door with
their shoulders to prevent its being opened, as the lock and latch were
comparatively useless. While in this position, the mob, who had come up
stairs, and tried to open the door, probably thought it was

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

locked, and fired a ball through the keyhole; at this Dr Richards and
Brother Hyrum leaped back from the door, with their faces toward it;
almost instantly another ball passed through the panel of the door, and
struck Brother Hyrum on the left side of the nose, entering his face and
head. At the same instant, another ball from the outside entered his
back, passing through his body and striking his watch. The ball came
from the back, through the jail window, opposite the door, and must,
from its range, have been fired from the Carthage Greys, who were placed
there ostensibly for our protection, as the balls from the fire-arms,
shot close by the jail, would have entered the ceiling, we being in the
second story, and there never was a time after that when Hyrum could
have received the latter wound. Immediately, when the balls struck him,
he fell flat on his back, crying as he fell, 'I am a dead man!' He never
moved afterward.

    "I shall never forget the deep feeling of sympathy and regard
manifested in the countenance of Brother Joseph as he drew nigh to
Hyrum, and, leaning over him, exclaimed, 'Oh! my poor, dear brother
Hyrum!' He, however, instantly arose, and with a firm, quick step, and a
determined expression of countenance, approached the door, and pulling
the six-shooter left by Brother Wheelock from his pocket, opened the
door slightly, and snapped the pistol six successive times; only three
of the barrels, however, were discharged. I afterward understood that
two or three were wounded by these discharges, two of whom, I am
informed, died. <span id="fr_201"></span>[33](#fn_201) I had in my hands
a large, strong hickory stick, brought there by Brother Markham, and
left by him, which I had seized as soon as I saw the mob approach; and
while Brother Joseph was firing the pistol, I stood close behind him. As
soon

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

as he had discharged it he stepped back, and I immediately took his
place next to the door, while he occupied the one I had done while he
was shooting. Brother Richards, at this time, had a knotty walking-stick
in his hands belonging to me, and stood next to Brother Joseph, a little
farther from the door, in an oblique direction, apparently to avoid the
rake of the fire from the door. The firing of Brother Joseph made our
assailants pause for a moment; very soon after, however, they pushed the
door some distance open, and protruded and discharged their guns into
the room, when I parried them off with my stick, giving another
direction to the balls.

    "It certainly was a terrible scene: streams of fire as thick as my
arm passed by me as these men fired, and, unarmed as we were, it looked
like certain death. I remember feeling as though my time had come, but I
do not know when, in any critical position, I was more calm, unruffled,
energetic, and acted with more promptness and decision. It certainly was
far from pleasant to be so near the muzzles of those fire-arms as they
belched forth their liquid flames and deadly balls. While I was engaged
in parrying the guns, Brother Joseph said, 'That's right, Brother
Taylor, parry them off as well as you can.' These were the last words I
ever heard him speak on earth.

    "Every moment the crowd at the door became more dense, as they were
unquestionably pressed on by those in the rear ascending the stairs,
until the whole entrance at the door was literally crowded with muskets
and rifles, which, with the swearing, shouting, and demoniacal
expressions of those outside the door and on the stairs, and the firing
of the guns, mingled with their horrid oaths and execrations, made it
look like pandemonium let loose, and was, indeed, a fit representation
of the horrid deed in which they were engaged.

    "After parrying the guns for some time, which now protruded thicker
and farther into the room, and

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

seeing no hope of escape or protection there, as we were now unarmed, it
occurred to me that we might have some friends outside, and that there
might be some *chance* to escape in that direction, but here there
seemed to be none. As I expected them every moment to rush into the
room—nothing but extreme cowardice having thus far kept them out—as the
tumult and pressure increased, without any other hope, I made a spring
for the window which was right in front of the jail door, where the mob
was standing, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Greys, who
were stationed some ten or twelve rods off. The weather was hot, we had
our coats off, and the window was raised to admit air. As I reached the
window, and was on the point of leaping out, I was struck by a ball from
the door about midway of my thigh, which struck the bone and flattened
out almost to the size of a quarter of a dollar, and then passed on
through the fleshy part to within about half an inch of the outside. I
think some prominent nerve must have been severed or injured, for, as
soon as the ball struck me, I fell like a bird when shot, or an ox when
struck by a butcher, and lost entirely and instantaneously all power of
action or locomotion. I fell upon the window-sill, and cried out, 'I am
shot!' Not possessing any power to move, I felt myself falling outside
of the window, but immediately I fell inside, from some, at that time,
unknown cause. When I struck the floor my animation seemed restored, as
I have seen it sometimes in squirrels and birds after being shot. As
soon as I felt the power of motion I crawled under the bed, which was in
a corner of the room, not far from the window where I received my wound.
While on my way and under the bed I was wounded in three other places;
one ball entered a little below the left knee, and never was extracted;
another entered the forepart of my left arm, a little above the wrist,
and passing down by the joint, lodged in the fleshy part of my hand,
about

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

midway, a little above the upper joint of my little finger; another
struck me on the fleshy part of my left hip, and tore away the flesh as
large as my hand, dashing the mangled fragments of flesh and blood
against the wall.

    "It would seem that immediately after my attempt to leap out of the
window, Joseph also did the same thing, of which circumstance I have no
knowledge only from information. The first thing that I noticed was a
cry that he had leaped out of the window. A cessation of firing
followed, the mob rushed down stairs, and Dr. Richards went to the
window. Immediately afterward I saw the doctor going toward the jail
door, and as there was an iron door at the head of the stairs adjoining
our door which led into the cells for criminals, it struck me that the
doctor was going in there, and I said to him, 'Stop, doctor, and take me
along.' He proceeded to the door and opened it, and then returned and
dragged me along to a small cell prepared for criminals.

    "Brother Richards was very much troubled, and exclaimed, 'Oh!
Brother Taylor, is it possible that they have killed both Brothers Hyrum
and Joseph? it cannot surely be, and yet I saw them shoot them;' and,
elevating his hands two or three times, he exclaimed, 'Oh Lord, my God,
spare thy servants!' He then said, 'Brother Taylor, this is a terrible
event;' and he dragged me farther into the cell, saying, 'I am sorry I
can not do better for you;' and, taking an old filthy mattress, he
covered me with it, and said, 'That may hide you, and you may yet live
to tell the tale, but I expect they will kill me in a few moments.'
While lying in this position I suffered the most excruciating pain. Soon
afterward Dr. Richards came to me, informed me that the mob had
precipitately fled, and at the same time confirmed my worst fears that
Joseph was assuredly dead." It appears that Joseph, thus murderously
beset and in dire extremity, rushed to the window and threw himself

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

out, receiving in the act several shots, and with the cry, "O Lord, my
God!" fell dead to the ground. <span id="fr_202"></span>[34](#fn_202)
The fiends were not yet satiated; but setting up the lifeless body of
the slain prophet against the well-curb, riddled it with bullets. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[35](#fn_203)

    Where now is the God of Joseph and of Hyrum, that he should permit
this most iniquitous butchery? Where are Moroni and Ether and Christ?
What mean these latter-day manifestations, their truth and efficacy, if
the great high priest and patriarch of the new dispensation can thus be
cruelly cut off by wicked men? Practical piety is the doctrine! Prayer

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

and faith must cease not though prayer be unanswered; and they ask where
was the father when the son called in Gethsemane? It was foreordained
that Joseph and Hyrum should die for the people; and the more of murder
and extermination on the part of their enemies, the more praying and
believing on the part of saints, and the more praise and exultation in
the heavenly inheritance.

    The further the credulity of a credulous people is taxed the
stronger will be their faith. Many of the saints believed in Joseph;
with their whole mind and soul they worshipped him. He was to them as
God; he was their deity present upon earth, their savior from evil, and
their guide to heaven. Whatever he did, that to his people was right; he
could do no wrong, no more than king or pope, no more than Christ or
Mahomet. Accordingly they obeyed him without question; and it was this
belief and obedience that caused the gentiles to fear and hate. There
are still open in the world easier fields than this for new religions,
which might recommend themselves as a career to young men laboring under
a fancied inexorable necessity.

 

    Whatever else may be said of Joseph Smith, it must be admitted that
he was a remarkable man. His course in life was by no means along a
flowery path; his death was like that which too often comes to the
founder of a religion. What a commentary on the human mind and the human
heart, the deeds of those who live for the love of God and man, who die
for the love of God and man, who severally and collectively profess the
highest holiness, the highest charity, justice, and humanity, higher far
than any held by other sect or nation, now or since the world began—how
lovely to behold, to write and meditate upon their disputings and
disruptions, their cruelties and injustice, their persecutions for
opinion's sake, their ravenous hate and bloody butcheries!

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

    The founder of Mormonism displayed a singular genius for the work he
gave himself to do. He made thousands. believe in him and in his
doctrines, howsoever good or evil his life, howsoever true or false his
teachings. The less that can be proved the more may be asserted. Any one
possessing the proper abilities may found a religion and make
proselytes. His success will depend not on the truth or falsity of his
statements, nor on their gross absurdity or philosophic refinement, but
on the power and skill with which his propositions are promulgated. If
he has not the natural and inherited genius for this work, though his be
otherwise the greatest mind that ever existed, he is sure to fail. If he
has the mental and physical adaptation for the work, he will succeed,
whatever may be his abilities in other directions.

    There was more in this instance than any consideration short of
careful study makes appear: things spiritual and things temporal; the
outside world and the inside workings. The prophet's days were full of
trouble. His people were often petulant, his elders quarrelsome, his
most able followers cautious and captious. While the world scoffed and
the neighbors used violence, his high priests were continually asking
him for prophecies, and if they were not fulfilled at once and to the
letter, they stood ready to apostatize. Many did apostatize; many
behaved disgracefully, and brought reproach and enmity upon the cause.
Moreover, Joseph was constantly in fear for his life, and though by no
means desirous of death, in moments of excitement he often faced danger
with apparent indifference as to the results. But without occupying
further space with my own remarks, I will give the views of others, who
loved or hated him and knew him personally and well.

    Of his physique and character, Parley P. Pratt remarks: "President
Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active; of a
light complexion, light hair, blue eyes, very little beard, and of an

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with
interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was ever
mild, affable, and beaming with intelligence and benevolence, mingled
with a look of interest and an unconscious smile of cheerfulness, and
entirely free from all restraint, or affectation of gravity; and there
was something connected with the serene and steady, penetrating glance
of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human
heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heavens, and comprehend all
worlds. He possessed a noble boldness and independence of character; his
manner was easy and familiar, his rebuke terrible as the lion, his
benevolence unbounded as the ocean, his intelligence universal, and his
language abounding in original eloquence peculiar to himself."

    And thus a female convert who arrived at Nauvoo a year or two before
the prophet's death: "The first time I ever saw Joseph Smith I
recognized him from a vision that once appeared to me in a dream. His
countenance was like that of an angel, and such as I had never beheld
before. He was then thirty-seven years of age, of ordinary appearance in
dress and manner, but with a child-like innocence of expression. His
hair was of a light brown, his eyes blue, and his complexion light. His
natural demeanor was quiet; his character and disposition were formed by
his life-work; he was kind and considerate, taking a personal interest
in all his people, and considering every one his equal." <span
id="fr_204"></span>[36](#fn_204)

    On the other hand, the author of *Mormonism Unveiled* says: "The
extreme ignorance and apparent stupidity of this modern prophet were by
his early followers looked upon as his greatest merit, and as furnishing
the most incontestable proof of his divine mission…His followers have
told us that he could not at the time he was chosen of the Lord even
write his own name. But it is obvious that all these deficiencies

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

are fully supplied by a natural genius, strong inventive powers of mind,
a deep study, and an unusually correct estimate of the human passions
and feelings. In short, he is now endowed with all the requisite traits
of character to pursue most successfully the humbug which he has
introduced. His address is easy, rather fascinating and winning, of a
mild and sober deportment when not irritated. But he frequently becomes
boisterous by the impertinence or curiosity of the skeptical, and
assumes the bravado, instead of adhering to the meekness which he
professes. His followers, of course, can discover in his very
countenance all the certain indications of a divine mission."

    One more quotation will serve to show the impression that Joseph
Smith's doctrines and discourse made not only on his own followers but
on the gentiles, and even on gentile divines. In 1843 a methodist
minister, named Prior, visited Nauvoo and was present during a sermon
preached by the prophet in the temple. "I took my seat," he remarks, "in
a conspicuous place in the congregation, who were waiting in breathless
silence for his appearance. While he tarried, I had plenty of time to
revolve in my mind the character and common report of that truly
singular personage. I fancied that I should behold a countenance sad and
sorrowful, yet containing the fiery marks of rage and exasperation. I
supposed that I should be enabled to discover in him some of those
thoughtful and reserved features, those mystic and sarcastic glances,
which I had fancied the ancient sages to possess. I expected to see that
fearful faltering look of conscious shame which from what I had heard of
him he might be expected to evince. He appeared at last; but how was I
disappointed when, instead of the head and horns of the beast and false
prophet, I beheld only the appearance of a common man, of tolerably
large proportions.

    "I was sadly disappointed, and thought that,

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

although his appearance could not be wrested to indicate anything
against him, yet he would manifest all I had heard of him when he began
to preach. I sat uneasily and watched him closely. He commenced
preaching, not from the book of Mormon, however, but from the bible; the
first chapter of the first of Peter was his text. He commenced calmly,
and continued dispassionately to pursue his subject, while I sat in
breathless silence, waiting to hear that foul aspersion of the other
sects, that diabolical disposition of revenge, and to hear that
rancorous denunciation of every individual but a Mormon. I waited in
vain; I listened with surprise; I sat uneasy in my seat, and could
hardly persuade myself but that he had been apprised of my presence, and
so ordered his discourse on my account, that I might not be able to find
fault with it; for instead of a jumbled jargon of half-connected
sentences, and a volley of imprecations, and diabolical and malignant
denunciations heaped upon the heads of all who differed from him, and
the dreadful twisting and wresting of the scriptures to suit his own
peculiar views, and attempt to weave a web of dark and mystic sophistry
around the gospel truths, which I had anticipated, he glided along
through a very interesting and elaborate discourse, with all the care
and happy facility of one who was well aware of his important station
and his duty to God and man." <span id="fr_205"></span>[37](#fn_205)

 

    No event, probably, that had occurred thus far in the history of the
saints gave to the cause of Mormonism so much of stability as the
assassination of Joseph Smith. Not all the militia mobs in Illinois, in
Missouri, or in the United States could destroy this cause, any more
than could the roundheads in the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

seventeenth century destroy the cause of monarchy. The deed but reacted
on those who committed it.

    When two miles on his way from Nauvoo, the governor was met by
messengers who informed him of the assassination, and, as he relates, he
was "struck with a kind of dumbness." At daybreak the next morning all
the bells in Carthage were ringing. It was noised abroad throughout
Hancock county, he says, that the Mormons had attempted the rescue of
Joseph and Hyrum; that they had been killed in order to prevent their
escape, and that the governor was closely besieged at Nauvoo by the
Nauvoo Legion, and could hold out only for two days. Ford was convinced
that "those whoever they were who assassinated the Smiths meditated in
turn his assassination by the Mormons," thinking that they would thus
rid themselves of the Smiths and the governor, and that the result would
be the expulsion of the saints, for Ford had shown a determination to
defend Nauvoo, so far as lay in his power, from the threatened violence.
Arriving at Carthage at ten o'clock at night, he found the citizens in
flight with their families and effects, one of his companies broken up,
and the Carthage Greys also disbanding, the citizens that remained being
in instant fear of attack. At length he met with John Taylor and Willard
Richards, who, notwithstanding the ill-usage they had received, came to
the relief of the panic-stricken magistrate, and addressed a letter to
their brethren at Nauvoo, exhorting them to preserve the peace, the
latter stating that he had pledged his word that no violence would be
used.

    The letter of Richards and Taylor, signed also by Samuel H. Smith, a
brother of the deceased, who a few weeks afterward died, as the Mormons
relate, of a broken heart, prevented a threatened uprising of the
saints. <span id="fr_206"></span>[38](#fn_206) On the 29th of June, the
day after the news was received, the legion was called out, the letter
read,

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

and the fury of the citizens allayed by addresses from Judge Phelps,
Colonel Buckmaster, the governor's aid, and others. In the afternoon the
bodies of Joseph and Hyrum arrived in wagons guarded by three men. They
were met by the city council, the prophet's staff, the officers of the
legion, and a vast procession of citizens, crying out "amid the most
solemn lamentations and wailings that ever ascended into the ears of the
Lord of hosts to be avenged of their enemies." Arriving at the Nauvoo
House, the assemblage, numbering ten thousand persons, was again
addressed, and "with one united voice resolved to trust to the law for a
remedy of such a high-handed assassination, and when that failed, to
call upon God to avenge them of their wrongs. Oh I widows and orphans!
Oh Americans! weep, for the glory of freedom has departed!"

    Meanwhile the governor, fearing that the Mormons would rise in a
body to execute vengeance, issued an address to the people of Illinois,
in which he attempted to explain his conduct, <span
id="fr_207"></span>[39](#fn_207) and again called out the militia. Two
officers were despatched to Nauvoo, with orders to ascertain the
disposition of the citizens, and to proceed thence to Warsaw, where were
the headquarters of the anti-Mormon militia, and forbid violent measures
in the name of the state. On arriving at the former place they laid
their instructions before the members of the municipality. A meeting of
the council was summoned, and it was resolved that the saints rigidly
sustain the laws and the governor, so long as they are themselves
sustained in their constitutional rights; that they discountenance
vengeance on the assassins of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; that instead of an
appeal to arms, they appeal to the majesty of the law, and, should the
law fail, they

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

leave the matter with God; that the council pledges itself that no
aggressions shall be made by the citizens of Nauvoo, approves the course
taken by the governor, and will uphold him by all honorable means. A
meeting of citizens was then held in the public square; the people were
addressed, the resolutions read, and all responded with a hearty amen.

    The two officers then returned to Carthage and reported to the
governor, who was so greatly pleased with the forbearance of the saints
that he officially declared them "human beings and citizens of the
state." He caused writs to be issued for the arrest of three of the
murderers—after they had taken refuge in Missouri. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[40](#fn_208) The assassins escaped punishment,
however; and now that order was restored, the chief magistrate disbanded
the militia, after what he termed "a campaign of about thirteen days."

    On the afternoon of July 1st a letter was addressed by Richards,
Taylor, and Phelps to the citizens of Nauvoo, and a fortnight later, an
epistle signed by the same persons and also by Parley P. Pratt was
despatched to all the saints throughout the world. "Be peaceable, quiet
citizens, doing the works of righteousness; and as soon as the twelve
and other authorities can assemble, or a majority of them, the onward
course to the great gathering of Israel, and the final consummation of
the dispensation of the fulness of times, will be pointed out, so that
the murder of Abel, the assassination of hundreds, the righteous blood
of all the holy prophets, from Abel to Joseph, sprinkled with the best
blood of the son of God, as the crimson sign of remission, only carries
conviction to the business and bosoms of all flesh, that the cause is
just and will continue; and blessed are they that hold out faithful to
the end, while apostates, consenting to the shedding of innocent blood,
have no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come…Let no vain

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

and foolish plans or imaginations scatter us abroad and divide us
asunder as a people, to seek to save our lives at the expense of truth
and principle, but rather let us live or die together and in the
enjoyment of society and union." <span id="fr_209"></span>[41](#fn_209)

    At this time the saints needed such words of advice and consolation.
Some were already making preparations to return to the gentiles; some
feared that their organization as a sect would soon corec to an end. To
reassure them, one more address was issued on August 15th, in the name
of the twelve apostles, <span id="fr_210"></span>[42](#fn_210) and
signed by Brigham Young, the president of the apostles. The saints were
told that though they were now without a prophet present in the flesh,
the twelve would administer and regulate the affairs of the church; and
that even if they should be taken away, there were still others who
would insure the triumph of their cause throughout the world.

    In 1830, as will be remembered, the church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints was organized in a chamber by a few humble men; in
1811 the prophet's followers mustered scores of thousands. Speedy
dissolution was now predicted by some, while others argued that as all
his faults would lie buried in the tomb, while on his virtues martyrdom
would stied its lustre, the progress of the sect would be yet more
remarkable. The latter prediction was verified, and after the Mormons
had suffered another period of persecution, Joseph Smith the martyr
became a greater power in the land than Joseph Smith the prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[143:1](hou09.htm#fr_169) 'Among the more
zealous Mormons, it became the fashion at this time (1845) to disuse the
word Nauvoo, and to call the place the holy city, or the city of
Joseph.' *Mackay's The Mormons*, 191.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[143:2](hou09.htm#fr_170) The charter granted
by the legislature was signed by Gov. Carlin Sept. 16, 1840, to take
effect Feb. 1, 1841. 'So artfully framed that it was found that the
state government was practically superseded within the Mormon
corporation. Under the judicial clause its courts were supreme.' McBride
in *International Review*, Feb. 1882. Charters were also granted to the
university and the Nauvoo legion. *Times and Seasons*, ii. 281.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[144:3](hou09.htm#fr_171) The blocks contain
'four lots of eleven by twelve rods each, making all corner lots…For
three or four miles upon the river, and about the same distance back in
the country, Nauvoo presents a city of gardens, ornamented with the
dwellings of those who have made a covenant by sacrifice…It will be no
more than probably correct, if we allow the city to contain between 700
and 800 houses, with a population of 14,000 or 15,000.' *Times and
Seasons*, iii. 936. A correspondent of the *New York Herald* is a little
wild when lie writes about this time: 'The Mormons number in Europe and
America about 150,000, and are constantly pouring into Nauvoo and the
neighboring country. There are probably in and about this city and
adjacent territories not far from 30,000.' Fifteen thousand in 1840 is
the number given in *Mackay's The Mormons*, 115, as I mentioned in the
last chapter. A correspondent's estimate in the *Times and Seasons*, in
1842, was for the city 7,000, and for the immediate surroundings 3,000.
Phelps, in *The Prophet*, estimates the population during the height of
the city's prosperity in 1844 at 14,000, of whom nine tenths were
Mormons. Some 2000 houses were built the first year. Joseph Smith in
*Times and Seasons*, March 1842, says: 'We number from six to eight
thousand here, besides vast numbers in the county around, and in almost
every county in the state.'

<span id="fn_172"></span>[144:4](hou09.htm#fr_172) The structure was 83
by 128 feet, and 60 feet high. The stone was quarried within city
limits. There was an upper story and basement; and in the latter a
baptismal font wrought after the manner of King Solomon's brazen sea. A
huge tank, upon whose panels were painted various scenes, and ascent to
which was made by stairs, was upborne by twelve oxen, beautifully
carved, and overlaid with gold. 'The two great stories,' says a Mormon
eye-witness, 'each have two pulpits, one at each end, to accommodate the
Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods, graded into four rising seats, the
first for the president of the ciders and his two counsellors, the
second for the president of the high priesthood and his two counsellors,
and the third for the Melchizedek president and his two counsellors, and
the fourth for the president of the whole church and his two
counsellors. There are thirty hewn stone pilasters which cost about
$3,000 apiece. The base is a crescent new moon; the capitals, near 50
feet high; the sun, with a human face in bold relief, about two and a
half feet broad, ornamented with rays of light and waves, surmounted by
two hands holding two trumpets.' All was crowned by a high steeple
surmounted with angel and trumpet. The cost was nearly $1,000,000, and
was met by tithes contributed by some in money or produce, and by others
in labor. The four corner-stones of the temple were laid with much
ceremony on the 6th of April, 1841, on the celebration of the
anniversary of the church. Sidney Rigdon delivered the address, and upon
the placing of the first stone, said: 'May the persons employed in the
erection of this house be preserved from all harm while engaged in its
construction, till the whole is completed—in the name of the father, and
of the son, and of the holy <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> ghost;
even so, amen.' *Times and Seasons*, ii. 376. A revelation was published
in Jan. 1841. 'Let all my saints come from afar, and send ye swift
messengers, yea, chosen messengers, and say unto them: "Come ye with all
your gold and your silver and your precious stones, and with all your
antiquities, and with all who have knowledge of antiquities, that will
come, may come; and bring the box-tree and the fir-tree and the
pine-tree, together with all the precious trees of the earth, and with
iron and with copper and with brass and with zinc and with all your
precious things of the earth, and build a house to my name for the most
high to dwell therein."' *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 132. For reference
notes on temple: minutes of conference, relating to building a church,
etc., see *Times and Seasons*, i. 185-7. Laying the foundation stone,
*Id*., ii. 375-7, 380-2; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 118-20; *Smucker's
Hist. Mor*., 133. Laying of the capstone, *Times and Seasons*, vi. 926.
Progress of its building, *Id*., iii. 775-6; iv. 10-11; *The Prophet*,
in *Mackay's The Mormons*, 189-91. Description of the temple with cut,
*Smucker's Mormons*, 129; *Ferris’ The Mormons*, 137-9; *Pratt's
Autobiography*, 378; without cut, *Smucker's Mormons*, 202-4; *Bertrand
Mem. Morm*., 61; *Cincinnati Times; Deseret News*, March 22, 1876;
church claims, *Times and Seasons*, iii. 735-8; 767-9; v. 618-20;
*Kimball*, in *Times and Seasons*, vi. 972-3; misappropriation of funds,
*Hall's Mormonism Exposed*, 7-8. 'One of the most powerful levers which
he had invented for moving his disciples in temple building was the
doctrine of baptism for the dead…which baptism must be performed in the
temple; no other place would give it the requisite efficacy.' *Ferris’
The Mormons*, 97-8. 'Another mode of making the dimes was that of giving
the blessing, as it was said, from heaven. This was the sole province of
the patriarch, which office, till his death, was exercised by Hiram
Smith. No blessing could be obtained for less than one dollar; but lie
frequently received for this service twenty, thirty, and even forty
dollars.' *Hall's Mormonism*, 22.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[145:5](hou09.htm#fr_173) It was ordered by
revelation given to Joseph Smith, Jan. 19, 1841, that a hotel should be
built and called the Nauvoo House; that it should be erected under the
supervision of George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Snider, and Peter Haws,
one of whom should be president of a joint-stock company to be formed
for the purpose, and that stock subscriptions should be for not less
than Jiffy dollars nor more than fifteen thousand dollars by any one
man, and that only by a believer in the book of Mormon. Vinson Knight,
Hyrum Smith, Isaac Galland, William Marks, Henry G. Sherwood, and
William Law were directed by name to take stock. 'And now I say unto
you, as pertaining to my boarding-house, which I have commanded you to
build for the boarding of strangers, let it be built unto my name, and
let my name be names upon it, and let my servant Joseph and his house
have place therein from generation to generation.' The Nauvoo House
Associaton was incorporated Feb. 23, 1841, by George Miller, Lyman
Wight, John Snider, and Peter Haws, and associates. Copy of act in
*Bennett's Hist. Saints*, 204-5. Plan of city, with cuts of temple
baptismal font, and Nauvoo Legion, with description, in *Bennett's Hist.
Saints*, 188-91, which is quite erroneous, the building being then not
completed. I have taken this account chiefly from Phelps' description in
*The Prophet*. The Nauvoo House, says Bennett, though intended chiefly
for the reception and entertainment of strangers and travellers,
contains, or rather when completed is to contain, a splendid suite of
apartments for the special accommodation of the prophet Joe Smith, and
heirs and descendants forever.' Cut of temple, and best description of
Nauvoo institutions, in *Mackay's The Mormons*, 115, 190-1. The Nauvoo
House, in form of an L, had a frontage on two streets of 120 feet each,
by a depth of 49 feet; the estimated cost was $100,000. *Times and
Seasons*, ii. 369. Another building opened in Nov. 1843 was the Nauvoo
mansion.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[146:6](hou09.htm#fr_174) Chancellor, John C.
Bennett; registrar, William Law; regents, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon,
Hyrum Smith, William Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, N. K.
Whitney, Charles C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, John P. Greene,
Vinson Knight, Isaac Galland, Elias Higbee, Robert D. Foster, James
Adams, Samuel Bennett, Ebenezer Robinson, John Snider, George Miller,
Lenos M. Knight, John Taylor, Heber C. Kimball. The tuition fees were
five dollars per quarter, payable twice each quarter in advance.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[146:7](hou09.htm#fr_175) Among his generals
were Robert D. Foster, George W. Robinson, Charles C. Rich, W. P. Lyon,
Davison Hibbard, Hirum Kimball, A. P. Rockwood; majors, Willard
Richards, Hosea Stout; colonels, John F. Weld, Orson Pratt, Francis M.
Higbee, Carlos Gove, C. L. Higbee, James Sloan, George Schindle, Amass
Lyman, D. B. Smith, George Coulson, Alexander McRea, J. R. Backenstos,
<span id="page_147">p. 147</span> L. Woodworth; captains, D. B.
Huntington, Samuel Hicks, Amos Davis, Marcellus Bates, Charles Allen, L.
N. Scovil, W. M. Allred, Justus Morse, John F. Olney, Darwin Chase, C.
M. Kreymyer, and others. 'Col. A. P. Rockwood was drill-master. Rockwood
was then a captain, but was afterward promoted to colonel of the
militia, or host of Israel. I was then fourth corporal of a company. The
people were regularly drilled and taught military tactics, so that they
would be ready to act when the time came for returning to Jackson
county, the promised land of our inheritance.' *Lee's Mormonism*, 112.
'Reviews were held from time to time, and flags presented, and Joseph
appeared on all those occasions with a splendid staff, in all the pomp
and circumstance of a full-blown military commander.' *Ferris’ Utah and
the Mormons*, 100-1. 'At the last dress parade of the legion, he was
accompanied in the field by display of ten of his spiritual wives or
concubines, dressed in a fine uniform, and mounted on elegant white
horses.' *Tucker's Mormonism*, 170. After the force reached Utah it was
'regularly drilled by competent officers, many of whom served in Mexico
with the Mormon battalion under Gen. W. Scott. They are well armed, and
perfectly fearless.' *Hyde's Mormonism*, 183. See further *Times and
Seasons*, ii. 321-2, 417-18, 435, 517; iii. 654, 700-1, 718, 733-4, 921;
*Stenhouse's Tell It All*, 306; *Deseret News*, April 15 and July 1,
1857, July 6, 1859; *Gunnison's Mormons*, 183; *Smucker's Hist. Mor*.,
149; *Kidder's Mormonism*, 182-9.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[147:8](hou09.htm#fr_176) Says the *St Louis
Atlas* of September 1841: The people of Nauvoo 'have <span
id="page_148">p. 148</span> been grossly misunderstood and shamefully
libelled…The present population is between eight and nine thousand, and
of course it is the largest town in Illinois. The people are very
enterprising, industrious, and thrifty. They are at least quite as
honest as the rest of us in this part of the world, and probably in any
other. Some peculiarities they have, no doubt. Their religion is a
peculiar one; that is, neither Buddhism, nor Mahometanism, nor Judaism,
nor Christianity, but it is a faith which they say encourages no vice
nor immorality, nor departure from established laws and usages; neither
polygamy, nor promiscuous intercourse, nor community of property…Ardent
spirits as a drink are not in use among them…Tobacco, also, is a weed
which they seem almost universally to despise. We don't know but that
the Mormons ought to be expatriated for refusing to drink whiskey and
chew tobacco; but we hope the question will not be decided hastily, nor
until their judges have slept off the fumes of their own liquor and
cigars.' 'They have enclosed large farms on the prairie ground, on which
they have raised corn, wheat, hemp, etc., and all this they have
accomplished within the short space of four years. I do not believe
there is another people in existence who could have made such
improvements in the same length of time under the same circumstances.
And here allow me to remark, that there are some here who have lately
emigrated to this place, who have built themselves large and convenient
homes in the town; others on their farms on the prairie, who, if they
had remained at home, might have continued to live in rented houses all
their days, and never once have entertained the idea of building one for
themselves at their own expense.' *Smucker's Mormonism*, 159.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[148:9](hou09.htm#fr_177) Gentiles were not
excluded from the holy city. In *Bennett's Hist. Saints*, 158, is given
an ordinance, dated March 1, 1841, running as follows: 'Be it ordained
by the city council the city of Nauvoo, that the catholics,
presbyterians, methodists, baptists, latter-day saints, quakers,
episcopalians, universalists, unitarians, mohammedans, and all other
religious sects and denominations whatever, shall have toleration and
equal privileges in this city; <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> and
should any person be guilty of ridiculing, abusing, or otherwise
depreciating another in consequence of his religion, etc., he shall be
fined and imprisoned.' On the 17th of March, 1842, the Female Relief
Society of Nauvoo was organized.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[149:10](hou09.htm#fr_178) In the *Salem
Advertiser* was published an account of the visit to Nauvoo in 1843 of
one Newhall, a lecturer, who says: 'I sought in vain for anything that
bore the marks of immorality, but was both astonished and highly pleased
at my ill success. I could see no loungers about the streets nor any
drunkards about the taverns. I did not meet with those distorted
features of ruffians, or with the ill-bred and impudent. I heard not an
oath in the place, I saw not a gloomy countenance; all were cheerful,
polite, and industrious.' *Smucker's Mormons*, 154-5. 'The mayor of
Nauvoo deserves praise for the stand he has taken in favor of
temperance. The retailing of ardent spirits is not permitted within the
bounds of the corporation.' *Kidder's Mormons*, 189. For city ordinance
prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors in less quantity then a
quart except as a physician's prescription, see *Bennett's Hist.
Saints*, 27. On the 12th of Nov. 1841, B. Winchester writes from Nauvoo:
'You would be astonished, if you were here, at the vast improvement made
in so short space of time…You will see nothing like idleness, but will
hear the hum of industry, nay, may I not say more, the voice of
merriment…Now as to the morality of the people here:…you know if you
should throw cold water into melted iron the scene would be terrific,
because the contrast would be so great; so it is with the saints: if a
small portion of wickedness happens among them, the contrast between the
spirit of Christ and that of darkness is so great that it makes a great
upstir and tremendous excitement; this is the case here; but in other
communities the same amount of crime would hardly be noticed.'

<span id="fn_179"></span>[150:11](hou09.htm#fr_179) Representative of a
class of anti-Mormon literature, not altogether creditable to either its
authors or supporters, are the following:

*    The History of the Saints; or, An Exposé of Joe Smith and
Mormonism. By John C. Bennett.* (Boston, 1842.)

*    The Abominations of Mormonism Exposed; containing many Facts and
Doctrines concerning that singular people during seven years’ membership
with them, from 1840 to 1847. By William Hall.* (Cincinnati, 1852.)

*    Mormonism: Its Leaders and Designs. By John Hyde, Jun., formerly a
Mormon elder and resident of Salt Lake City.* (New York, 1857.)

*    Mormonism Unveiled; or, The Life and Confessions of the late Mormon
bishop, John D. Lee; Written by Himself; Embracing a history of
Mormonism from its inception down to the present time, with an
exposition of the secret history, signs, symbols, and crimes of the
Mormon Church; also the true history of the horrible butchery known as
the Mountain Meadow Massacre.* (St Louis, 1877.)

*    *The role of traitor is not one which in any wise brings credit to
the performer, either from one side or the other. However great the
service he may render us, we cannot but feel that he is false-hearted
and vile. Many of the apostates, though they may not have written books,
declare that they joined the sect only to learn their secrets and then
expose them. These are the most contemptible of all. There may be cases
where a young or inexperienced person, through ignorance or
susceptibility, has been carried away for a time contrary to the
dictates of cooler judgment; but the statements of such persons are
justly regarded with more or less suspicion. Far better is it, far more
honest and praiseworthy, for him who, having unwittingly made a mistake,
seeks to rectify it, to go his way and say nothing about it; for if he
talks of writing a book for the good of others, as a warning, and that
they may avoid his errors, few will believe him. 'If he has proved
traitor once,' they say, 'he will deceive again; and if he is sincere,
we cannot more than half believe him, for such an individual is never
sure of himself.' John C. Bennett, general, doctor, methodist preacher,
and quack, is from his own showing a bad man. He devotes some fifty
pages to the vindication of his character, which would not be necessary
were he honest; other fifty are given to defaming his late worshipful
patron Joseph Smith, which would never have been written were he true.
When a man thrusts in your face three-score certificates of his good
character, each signed by from one to a dozen persons, you may know that
he is a very great rascal. Nor are we disappointed here. This author is
a charlatan, pure and simple; such was he when he joined the Mormons,
and before and after. We may credit him fully when he says, 'I never
believed in them or their doctrines;' although in a letter to Dr Dyer,
dated Nauvoo, Jan. 20, 1842, he declares: 'My heart is <span
id="page_151">p. 151</span> filled with indignation, and my blood boils
within me, when I contemplate the vast injustice and cruelty which
Missouri has meted out to the great philanthropist and devout Christian,
General Joseph Smith, and his honest and faithful adherents.' When,
however, he affects patriotism and lofty devotion to the welfare of his
fellow-men, pretending to have joined the society in order to frustrate
'a daring and colossal scheme of rebellion and usurpation throughout the
north-western states,…a despotic military and religious empire, the head
of which, as emperor and pope, was to be Joseph Smith,' we know that the
writer is well aware that it is all nonsense. Nor do we believe that he
was induced to print his book 'by a desire to expose the enormous
iniquities which have been perpetrated by one of the grossest and most
infamous impostors that ever appeared upon the face of the earth.' We
have heard and are still hearing so much of that kind of talk from some
of the worst men in the community that it is becoming somewhat stale,
and if the general really does not know better than this why he wrote
his book, perhaps he will excuse me for telling him that it was, first,
for notoriety; second, for money; and third, in order to make people
think him a better and greater man than he is. When a man's ambition is
pitched so low, it is a pity that he should not have the gratification
of success. Bravely, then, the general proceeded to offer himself on the
altar of his country, 'to overthrow the impostor and expose his
iniquity' by 'professing himself a convert to his doctrines;' for 'the
fruition of his hopeful project would, of course, have been preceded by
plunder, devastation, and bloodshed, and by all the countless horrors
which invariably accompany civil war.' We are still more impressed when
we read: 'I was quite aware of the danger I ran'—that of being kicked
out of some back door—'but none of these things deterred me.' Without
wasting more time and space upon the man, we are well enough prepared to
place a proper estimate upon his statements, particularly when we take
into account that, in May of the very year in which his book was
published, he went before Alderman Wells and made affidavit that Joseph
Smith was an honest, virtuous, sincere, high-minded, and patriotic man.
He says himself that he solemnly swore to be true to the Mormons and not
reveal their secrets, and now in breaking that oath he has the audacity
to ask us to regard him as an honest and truthful man! In some measure,
at least, the statements of such men as this, taken up by the press and
people, and reiterated throughout the land, have given the latter-day
saints a worse name than they deserve. Some of his charges are too
coarse and filthy for repetition. I will cite a few specimens, however,
to show how far mendacity is sometimes carried in this direction.

*    *Joseph Smith is a 'monster who is using the power he possesses to
gratify a brutal lust;' 'a Giovanni of some dozens of mistresses;' 'must
be branded as a consummate knave;' one 'of the most heaven-daring liars
the world ever saw;' 'notoriously profane;' 'gets most gloriously
drunk,' etc. In the most vulgar and licentious language, he goes on to
describe what he calls the 'Mormon seraglio,' 'the female inquisition,'
'Joe's cloistered, chambered, and cyprian maids.' He revels in all the
wickedness of this kind during past ages which he can make up, rolling
it as a sweet morsel under his tongue, finally affirming that 'the holy
Joe outdoes them all!' He says that any woman belonging to the society
who lapses from virtue is condemned to a life of secret prostitution,
the most trustworthy members of the church having knowledge of it;
another class indulge in illicit intercourse by special permission of
the prophet; another class are the spiritual wives. All this is said, be
it remembered, within two or three months of the time he made oath that
Smith was one of the best and purest of men. Next comes an exposé of
several secret societies, the Danites, Destroying Angel, etc., and
finally a list of murders and robberies perpetrated in that section
during a certain time, all of <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> which
are charged to these agencies. Sidney Rigdon is praised by Bennett; so
much the worse for Sidney. Doubtless this book played its part in
bringing about the assassination of Joseph Smith. Says John Taylor of
John C. Bennett: 'At one time he was a good man, but fell into adultery,
and was cut off from the church for his iniquity;…he was also expelled
from the municipal court, of which he was a member.' *Public
Discussion,* 5-6.

*    *William Hall was an old gentleman of simple mind and manners when
he wrote his book; he appears to be earnest and truthful. As he says of
the saints, so I should say of him: he meant well, but he should beware
of bad leaders. Hall was not a great man in the church, like Bennett;
nevertheless, like Bennett he wrote a book, but unlike Bennett's, his
book reads like that of an honest man, although it is full of bitter
accusations against the Mormons. All such works should be taken with
some degrees of allowance; for when a person begins to rail against any
people or individual, he is apt to be carried away and misrepresent,
intentionally or unintentionally. The period that Hall's experiences
cover is quite an important one, including as it does the Illinois
expulsion and the exodus to Great Salt Lake.

*    *Quite different from any of his brother apostates is John Hyde,
Jr. who cannot by right be placed in the category of vulgar ranter or
hypocritical reformer. I regard him as an able and honest man, sober and
sincere. He does not denounce the sect as hypocrites. 'I know your
sincerity; I know also your delusion,' he writes. He does not even
denounce all the leaders; even to Brigham Young, whom he mercilessly
scourges, he gives credit for ability and sincerity. 'That you are
sincere in your confidence in Joseph Smith, and in your own
pretensions,' he writes to him, 'I believe and acknowledge; but at the
same time, that you are leading confiding thousands to misery and ruin
is evident…I admire your genius, but I deplore its exercise…I admire the
industry of your people, their notable labors, and their general
sincerity; but I deplore their delusion, and I denounce their
deceivers.' His book is dedicated 'To the honest believers in
Mormonism,' and he says to them: 'In writing the following work I was
not actuated by the base design of helping to malign an unpopular
people, nor by the unworthy one of administering to a mere idle
curiosity.' John Hyde was born in England, in 1833, and joined the
Mormons there when fifteen years of age. He was almost immediately
ordained a priest and began to preach. In 1851 he was ordained one of
the seventies, an office of equal power but inferior jurisdiction to
that of one of the twelve, and joined John Taylor in France. With about
400 Mormon converts he sailed from Liverpool in Feb. 1853, visited
Nauvoo, and thence crossed the plains in company with 2,500 brethren to
Salt Lake City, where he married and began teaching school. In Feb. 1854
he was 'initiated into the mysteries of the Mormon endowment,' became
shaken in the faith, and the following year, having accepted a mission
to the Hawaiian Islands, he threw off Mormonism and preached and wrote
against it instead of for it. In his book he gives a description of Salt
Lake City in 1853-4, a chapter entitles 'Practical Polygamy,' and others
on Mormon Mysteries, Education, Brigham Young, Book of Mormon,
Theoretical Polygamy, and Suppression of Mormonism. Hyde's book would be
quite useful were he not so more about his dates; it would appear from
the way he throws statements together that in the absence of a date he
guessed at it.

*    *Still another style of book is that of John D. Lee, purporting to
have been written by him, but as a matter of fact written for the most
part by W. W. Bishop while Lee was in prison condemned to death. The
work, therefore, though the story of a Mormon, and of one who under the
circumstances could not be expected to be very friendly, is not by a
Mormon. The book is not essentially different from the matter published
in the newspapers about the time of Lee's execution, under the title of
'Confessions.' Lee gives the <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> story of
his life, simply and honestly enough; to this is added an account of the
Mountain Meadow massacre, and of the arrest, trial, and execution of
Lee. He was a native of Illinois, born in 1812, worked hard and with
success while a young man, became an enthusiastic Mormon in 1837, and
went to Missouri. With everything there he was highly delighted; he
attended devoutly all the services of the church, and was duly promoted.
He was with his people at Nauvoo, migrated with them to Utah, and was
adopted by Brigham Young. In 1877 he was executed for participation in
the Mountain Meadow massacre, excusing himself while cursing others.

*    Mormonism and the Mormons; A Historical View of the rise and
progress of the sect self-styled Latter-day Saints; by Daniel P.
Kidder,* is the title of a 16mo vol. of 342 pages, published in New
York, and bearing no date, though entered for copyright in the year
1842. Mr Kidder certainly wrote a book on short acquaintance with the
subject; as he says up to Nov. 1840, he knew little about it. On the
13th of that month he found himself on board a Mormon steamboat called
the *Fulton City,* on the Mississippi River, bound for Nauvoo. Nearly
all the passengers and crew were Mormons. Desirous of knowing more of
them, and holding to the maxim that by teaching most is to be learned,
he procured copies of the *Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants,
Howe's Mormonism Unveiled,* and *Corrill's Brief History,* and seating
himself before them made his book, which consists chiefly of extracts
from the above sources tied together with occasional remarks neither
startling nor original. In Nauvoo, without date, but probably about
1841, were published two chapters of nonsense about women and their
relations and duties to men, entitled, *An Extract from a Manuscript
entitled The Peace-maker, or the Doctrines of the Millennium, being a
Treatise on Religion and Jurisprudence, or a New System of Religion and
Politics. For God, my Country, and my Rights. By Adney Hay Jacob, an
Israelite, and a Shepherd of Israel. Nauvoo, Ill. J. Smith, Printer.* In
a preface the reader is told: 'The author of this work is not a Mormon
although it is printed by their press.'

<span id="fn_180"></span>[153:12](hou09.htm#fr_180) In a letter to the
prophet dated October 24, 1843 which has become quite famous, James A.
Bennett pretends to have been baptized by Brigham Young, a ceremony that
he alludes to as 'a glorious frolic in the clear blue ocean' with 'your
most excellent and worthy friend, President B. Young.' 'Nothing of this
kind,' he goes on to say, 'would in the least attach me to your person
or cause. I am capable of being a most undeviating friend, without being
governed by the smallest religious influence…I say, therefore, go ahead,
you have my good wishes. You know Mahomet had his right-hand man,' etc.
Smith replied at length in a religio-philosophic strain. More has been
made of this correspondence than it deserves. It was printed in *Times
and Seasons*, iv. 371-3, in *Cor. between Joseph Smith*… *Wentworth*…
*and*… *Calhoun*, as well as in *Mackay's The Mormons*, and *Smucker's
Hist. Mor*. See also *Edinburgh Review*, April 1854, 334. Mackay
observes: 'Joseph's reply to this singular and too candid epistle was
quite as singular and infinitely more amusing. Joseph was too cunning a
man to accept, in plain terms, the rude but serviceable offer; and he
rebuked the vanity and presumption of Mr Bennett, while dexterously
retaining him for future use.' All this would have some signigicance if
Smith had been in the least deceived, or had the writer of this letter
and the original rascal been one.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[154:13](hou09.htm#fr_181) 'At the conference
in April 1840, the prophet delivered a lengthy address upon the history
and condition of the saints. He reminded the brethren that all had
suffered alike for the sake of the gospel. The rich and the poor had
been brought to a common level by persecution; that many of the brethren
were owing debts that they hail been forced to contract in order to get
out of Missouri alive. He considered it was unchristian-like for the
brethren to demand the payment of such debts; that he did not wish to
screen any one from the just payment of his debts, but he did think that
it would be for the glory of the kingdom if the people would, of their
own will, freely forgive each other for all their existing indebtedness,
one to the other, then renew their covenants with almighty God and with
each other; refrain from evil, and live their religion; by this means,
God's holy spirit would support and bless the people. The people were
then asked if they were in favor of thus bringing about the year of
jubilee. All that felt so inclined were asked to make it known by
raising their hands; every hand in the audience was raised.' The prophet
then declared all debts of the saints, to and from each other, forgiven
and cancelled. He then gave the following words of advice to the people:
'I wish you all to know that because you were justified in taking
property from your enemies while engaged in war in Missouri, which was
needed to support you, there is now a different condition of things
existing. We are no longer at war, and you must stop stealing. When the
right time comes we will go in force and take the whole state of
Missouri. It belongs to us as an inheritance; but I want no more petty
stealing.' *Lee's Mormonism*, 110-11.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[154:14](hou09.htm#fr_182) Smith was first
mayor. Feb. 1, 1841, Bennett was elected mayor and so continued till May
19, 1842, when Smith again assumed the office.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[155:15](hou09.htm#fr_183) Describing Nauvoo at
this period, Linforth remarks: 'Before the close of 1842 a vast
improvement had taken place. The city, which then extended 3 or 4 miles
on the river, and about the same distance back, had been regularly laid
off into blocks, containing 4 lots of 11 by 12 rods each, between 700
and 800 houses had been erected, and the population numbered about
15,000. Two steam-mills and 2 printing-presses existed, and buildings
for various manufactures were rapidly going up. In the mean time the
temple and Nauvoo House were progressing.' *Route from Liverpool to G.
S. L. Vally*, 62.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[156:16](hou09.htm#fr_184) When on his return
from Quincy, to which place he had accompanied Hyrum Smith and William
Law, who were on a mission to the east, Joseph was arrested the 5th of
June, 1841, on a warrant from Gov. Carlin to deliver him to the Missouri
state authorities. In return, Joseph Smith brought suit against J. H.
Reynolds and H. G. Wilson for false imprisonment. This as well as other
affairs of the kind kept up a bitter excitement.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[156:17](hou09.htm#fr_185) On the 6th of May,
1842 Gov. Boggs was fired at through a window, and narrowly escaped
being killed. The crime was charged to O. P. Rockwell, 'with the
connivance and under the instructions of Joseph Smith.' *Hyde's
Mormonism*, 105, 206. Boggs swore he believed Smith a party to the
attempted assassination, and instituted legal proceedings. *Mackay's The
Mormons*, 139. *Bennett, Hist. Saints*, 281-2, labors hard to prove that
Smith wanted Boggs killed, and said as much, which it seems to me few
would deny. Bennett states that in 1841 Smith prophesied that Boggs
would die by violent hands within a year. 'In the spring of the year
1842 Smith offered a reward of $500 to any man who would secretly
assassinate Gov. Boggs.' Joseph O. Boggs, brother of the governor,
writes Bennett, Sept. 12, 1842, 'We have now no doubt of the guilt of
Smith and Rockwell.' *Id*., 286. Rockwell was arrested, discharged, and
went to Utah. 'Brigham has had him into the pulpit,' says Hyde, 'to
address the meetings.' We read: 'Orin Porter Rockwell, the Mormon
confined in our county jail some time since for the attempted
assassination of ex-governor Boggs, was indicted by our last grand jury
for escaping from the county jail some weeks since, and sent to Clay
county for trial. Owing, however, to some informality in the
proceedings, he was remanded to this county again for trial. There was
not sufficient proof adduced against him to justify an indictment for
shooting at ex-governor Boggs; and the grand jury, therefore, did not
indict him for that offence.' *Independent Expositor; Niles' Register*,
Sept. 30, 1843.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[162:18](hou09.htm#fr_186) John Hyde mentions a
previous revelation. He says that about the year 1838 'Smith pretended
to obtain a revelation from God authorizing him to practise polygamy,
and began to practise it accordingly.' Mormonism, 203. See also Slater's
Mormonism, 84, and Deseret News, Oct. 22, 1879. There is no truth
whatever in this assertion. And yet John Hyde is regarded as pretty good
authority; but in this loose way thousands of false statements have been
made regarding the secrets of the saints.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[162:19](hou09.htm#fr_187) This revelation was
first published in the *Deseret News* in 1852, and next in the
*Millennial Star* at Liverpool, England, in 1853. It is given entire
elsewhere in this volume. The *Edinburgh Review* of April 1854, 335,
says, 'Not many months have yet passed since the Mormon leaders have
decided on a bolder policy and have publicly avowed this portion of the
system,' which shows that the fact of publication was not generally
known to the gentile European world until two years after the official
notice in Salt Lake City appeared. epics of it will also be found in
*Doc. and Cov*., 423-32; *Young's Wife No. 19*, 77-86; *Ferris’ Utah and
the Mormons*, app.; *Burton's City of the Saints*, 451-7; *Tucker's
Mormonism*, 172-82; *Smith's Rise, Prog. and Travels*, 42-8; *Pearl of
Great Price*, 64-70; *Stenhouse's Tell It All*, 135-8; and *Stenhouse's
Exposé of Polygamy*, 207-15.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[163:20](hou09.htm#fr_188) It is denied by some
that polygamy was practised by the Mormons at this date. In the *Deseret
News* of Oct. 22, 1879, are several statements under oath to the effect
that between 1840 and 1843 Joseph taught the doctrine of celestial or
plural marriage, that several women were sealed to him according to this
doctrine, and this with the consent of Joseph's wife, Emma Smith. On the
other hand, it is stated in the *Salt Lake City Tribune*, Oct. 3, 1879,
that Emma denied that her husband was ever married to another, or that,
so far as she knew, he ever had improper relations with any woman. Elder
Pratt reported at Plano, Ill., in the summer of 1878, several instances
of Joseph's having had wives sealed to him, one at least as early as
April 5, 1841. 'Smith introduced (at Nauvoo) the system of spiritual
wifeism, and had largely increased his household by celestial
ensealment. This was the preliminary step of polygamy, or its practical
adoption, though it had not yet been revealed as a tenet in the Mormon
creed.' *Tucker's Mormonism*, 170. The revelation was written after he
had taken other wives. *Stenhouse's Exposé of Polygamy*, 70. Jos. Smith
adopts it and is sealed to Eliza Snow. *Tullidge's Life of Young*,
Suppl. 22. In a letter to the *Deseret News*, Oct. 22, 1879, Eliza R.
Snow signs her name as 'a wife of Joseph Smith the prophet.' 'Brigham
Young delivered over to Jo Smith all his wives except one, and soon
after Smith had a revelation that Young should be his successor as head
of the church.' *Slater's Mormonism*, 84. John D. Lee says: 'I
understood that Brig. Young's wife was sealed to Joseph. After his death
Brig. Young told me that Joseph's time on earth was short, and that the
Lord allowed him privileges that we could not have.' *Mormonism*, 147.
Jos. Smith had taken some more wives, but the revelation required that
he should do it without publicity (for fear of the mob). *Richards’
Reminiscences*, MS., 18. 'Joseph Smith lost his life entirely through
attempting to persuade a Mrs Dr Foster, at Nauvoo, that it was the will
of God she should become his spiritual wife; not to the exclusion of her
husband, Dr Foster, but only to become his in time for eternity. This
nefarious offer she confessed to her husband. Some others of a similar
nature were discovered, and Dr Foster, William Law, and others began to
expose Smith. Their paper was burned, type and press demolished, for
which Smith was arrested, and afterward shot by Missourians, at
Carthage, Ill.' *Hyde's Mormonism*, 85.

    'Smith and Noble repaired by night to the banks of the Mississippi,
where Noble's sister was sealed to Smith by Noble, said the latter to
another woman by Smith. These were the first plural marriages, and a son
born to Noble the first child born in polygamy.' *Young's Wife No. 19*,
72-3. 'That polygamy existed at Nauvoo, and is now a mater scarcely
attempted to be concealed among the Mormons, is certain.' *Gunnison's
Mormons*, 120. On the other side, in *Times and Seasons*, iv. 143 (March
15, 1843), we read, 'The charge of advocating a plurality of wives is as
false as the many other ridiculous charges brought against us.' In
*Id*., v. 474 (March 15, 1844), Hyrum Smith declares that no such
doctrine is taught or practised; and on p. 715 it is declared that 'the
law of the land and the rules of the church do not allow one man to have
more than one wife alive at once.' For additional denials by Parley
Pratt, John Taylor, and others, see *S. L. Tribune*, Nov. 11, 1879.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[167:21](hou09.htm#fr_189) *Doctrine and
Covenants*, app. 331.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[167:22](hou09.htm#fr_190) 'It is believed,'
writes Governor Ford not long afterward to the Illinois legislature,
'that Joseph Smith had announced a revelation from heaven sanctioning
polygamy, by some kind of spiritual-wife system, which I never could
well understand; but at any rate, whereby a man was allowed one wife in
pursuance of the laws of the country, and an indefinite number of
others, to be enjoyed in some mystical and spiritual mode; and that he
himself, and many of his followers, had practised upon the precepts of
this revelation, by seducing a large number of women.' *Message to Ill.
Sen*.; 14th Ass. 1st Sess., 6. A copy of Ford's message will be found in
*Utah Tracts*, no. 11.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[168:23](hou09.htm#fr_191) Copies of the
correspondence may be found in *Times and Sections*, v. 393-6, 544-8;
*Mackay's The Mormons*, 151-62; *Olshausen, Geschichte der Mormonen*,
202-19.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[168:24](hou09.htm#fr_192) 'Now, oh people !'
he continues, 'turn unto the Lord and live; and reform this nation.
Frustrate the designs of wicked men. Reduce congress at least one half.
Two senators from a state and two members to a million of population
will do more business than the army that now occupy the halls <span
id="page_169">p. 169</span> of the national legislature. Pay them two
dollars and their board per diem, except Sundays; that is more than the
farmer gets, and he lives honestly. Curtail the offices of government in
pay, number, and power, for the philistine lords have shorn our nation
of its goodly locks in the lap of Delilah. Petition your state
legislature to pardon every convict in their several penitentiaries,
blessing them as they go, and saying to them in the name of the Lord, Go
thy way and sin no more…Petition also, ye goodly inhabitants of the
slave states, your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or
now, and save the abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame.
Pray congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of
the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands, and from the
deduction of pay from the members of congress…Give every man his
constitional freedom, and the president full power to send an army to
suppress mobs; and the states authority to repeal and impugn that relic
of folly which makes it necessary for the governor of a state to make
the demand of the president for troops in cases of invasion or
rebellion. The governor himself may be a mobber, and instead of being
punished as he should be for murder and treason, he may destroy the very
lives, rights, and property he should protect. Like the good Samaritan,
send every lawyer as soon as he repents and obeys the ordinances of
heaven, to preach the gospel to the destitute, without purse or scrip,
pouring in the oil and the wine…Were I the president of the United
States, by the voice of a virtuous people, I would honor the old paths
of the venerated fathers of freedom; I would walk in the tracks of the
illustrious patriots, who carried the ark of the government upon their
shoulders with an eye single to the glory of the people…When a
neighboring realm petitioned to join the union of the sons of liberty,
my voice would be, Come; yea, come Texas; come Mexico; come Canada; and
come all the world—let us be brethren; let us be one great family; and
let there be universal peace.' A full copy of the address is given in
*Times and Seasons*, 528-533; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 141-51; *Remy's
Jour. to G. S. L. City*, 353-71.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[169:25](hou09.htm#fr_193) Two months after
announcing himself a candidate for the presidency, Joseph again publicly
declared that all America, from north to south, constituted the Zion of
the saints, theirs by right of heavenly inheritance.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[170:26](hou09.htm#fr_194) In *Remy's Jour. to
G. S. Lake City*, i. 388, it is stated that, among others, a renegade
catholic priest, J. H. Jackson by name, 'conceived the idea of starting
at Nauvoo a newspaper called the *Expositor*, with the avowed object of
opposing the Mormons.' I find no confirmation of this statement. The
first number of the *Nauvoo Neighbor* had been issued May 3, 1843, in
place of the *Wasp*, suspended.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[171:27](hou09.htm#fr_195) Letter of John S.
Fullmer to the *New York Herald*, dated Nauvoo, Oct. 30, 1844 (but not
published until several years later). A copy of it will be found in
*Utah Tracts*, ix. p. 7. Smith had been elected mayor on the resignation
of John C. Bennett April 19, 1842. Mackay, *The Mormons*, 168, says 'A
body of the prophet's adherents, to the number of two hundred and
upward, sallied forth in obedience to this order and proceeding to the
office of the *Expositor*, speedily razed it to the ground.' Remy states
that 'an order to destroy the journal signed by Joseph was immediately
put into execution by a police officer, who proceeded the same day to
break up the presses.' *Journey*, i. 389. Ford declares that the marshal
aided by a portion of the legion executed his warrant by destroying the
press and scattering the type and other materials of the office. Message
to *Ill. Sen*., 14th Ass. 1st Sess., 4.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[171:28](hou09.htm#fr_196) 'At a meeting of the
citizens of Hancock co. held at Carthage, on the <span id="page_172">p.
172</span> 6th inst, it was resolved to call in the people of the
surrounding counties and states, to assist them in delivering up Joe
Smith, if the governor of Illinois refused to comply with the
requisition of the governor of Missouri. The meeting determined to
avenge with blood any assaults made upon citizens by the Mormons. It was
also resolved to refuse to obey officers elected by the Mormons, who
have complete control of the country, being a numerical majority.'
*Missouri Reporter*, in *Niles Register*, lxv. 70, Sept. 30, 1843.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[175:29](hou09.htm#fr_197) Report, ut supra,
10-11. In *Times and Seasons*, v. 560, it is stated that 'on Monday,
June 24th, after Ford had sent word that eighteen persons demanded on a
warrant, among whom were Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith, should be
protected by the militia of the state, they in company with ten or
twelve others start for Carthage.'

<span id="fn_198"></span>[176:30](hou09.htm#fr_198) *Message*, ut supra.
The above appear to be the facts of the case, so far as they can be
sifted from a lengthy report, which consists mainly of apology or
explanation of what the governor did or left undone.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[176:31](hou09.htm#fr_199) Smith's *Doc. and
Cov*., app. 335. The same morning he read in the fifth chapter of Ether,
'And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto
the gentiles grace, that they might have charity. And it came to pass
that the Lord said unto me, If they have not charity it mattereth not
unto you, thou hast been faithful; wherefore thy garments are clean. And
because thou hast seen thy weakness, thou shalt be made strong, even
unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions
of my father.'

<span id="fn_200"></span>[178:32](hou09.htm#fr_200) Littlefield says the
Carthage Greys were marched in a body, 'within about eight rods of the
jail, where they halted, in plain view of the whole transaction, until
the deed was executed.' *Narrative*, 9.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[179:33](hou09.htm#fr_201) 'He wounded three of
them, two mortally, one of whom, as he rushed down out of the door, was
asked if he was badly hurt. He replied, "Yes; my arm is shot all to
pieces by old Joe; but I don't care, I've got revenge; and I shot
Hyrum!"' *Id*., 11.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[183:34](hou09.htm#fr_202) Joseph dropped his
pistol, and sprang into the window; but just as he was preparing to
descend, he saw such an array of bayonets below, that he caught by the
window casing, where he hung by his hands and feet, with his head to the
north, feet to the south, and his body swinging downward. He hung in
that position three or four minutes, during which time he exclaimed two
or three times, 'O Lord, my God!' and fell to the ground. While he was
hanging in that situation, Col. Williams halloed, 'Shoot him! God damn
him! shoot the damned rascal!' However, none fired at him. He seemed to
fall easy. He struck partly on his right shoulder and back, his neck and
head reaching the ground a little before his feet. He rolled instantly
on his face. From this position he was taken by a young man who sprung
to him from the other side of the fence, who held a pewter fife in his
hand, was barefooted and bareheaded, having on no coat, with his pants
rolled above his knees, and shirt-sleeves above his elbows. He set
President Smith against the south side of the well-curb that was
situated a few feet from the jail. While doing this the savage muttered
aloud, 'This is old Jo; I know him. I know you, old Jo. Damn you; you
are the man that had my daddy shot'—intimating that he was a son of
Boggs, and that it was the Missourians who were doing this murder.
*Littlefield's Narrative*, 13.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[183:35](hou09.htm#fr_203) After President
Taylor's account in *Burton's City of the Saints*, the best authorities
on this catastrophe are: *Assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the
Prophet and the Patriarch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints; also a Condensed History of the Expulsion of the Saints from
Nauvoo, by Elder John S. Fullmer (of Utah, U.S.A.), Pastor of the
Manchester, Liverpool, and Preston Conferences.* Liverpool and London,
1855; *Message of the Governor of the State of Illinois, in relation to
the disturbances in Hancock County, December 23, 1844.* Springfield,
1844; *Awful assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; the pledged faith
of the State of Illinois stained with innocent blood by a mob,* in
*Times and Seasons*, v. 560-75; A *Narrative of the Massacre of Joseph
and Hyrum Smith by an Outsider and an Eye-witness,* in *Utah Tracts*,
i.; and *The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, by Apostle John Taylor,* a copy
of which is contained in *Burton's City of the Saints*, 625-67. Brief
accounts will be found in *Utah Pamphlets*, 23; *Lee's Mormonism*,
152-5; *Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City*, 388-96; *Hall's Mormonism
Exposed*, 15-16; Green's Mormonism, 36-7; Tullidge's Women, 297-300;
Olshausen, Gesch. der Mor., 100-3; *Tucker's Mormonism*, 189-92;
*Mackay's The Mormons*, 169-72; *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 177-9; *Ferris’
Utah and Mormons*, 120-5, and in other works on Mormonism. In the
*Atlantic Monthly* for Dec. 1869 ia an article entitled 'The Mormon
Prophet's Tragedy,' which, however justly it may lay claim to Boston
'smart' writing, so far as the facts are concerned is simply a tissue of
falsehoods.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[186:36](hou09.htm#fr_204) Another account says
that at 36 he weighed 212 lbs, stood 6 feet in his pumps, was robust,
corpulent, and jovial, but when roused to anger his expression was very
severe.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[188:37](hou09.htm#fr_205) *Mackay's The
Mormons*, 131-3. Of course views as to Joseph Smith's character are
expressed in nearly all the works published on Mormonism. With the
exception, perhaps, of Mahomet, no one has been so much bespattered with
praise by his followers and with abuse by his adversaries as the founder
of this faith.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[189:38](hou09.htm#fr_206) To the letter was
appended a postscript from the governor, bidding the Mormons defend
themselves until protection could be furnished, and one from <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> General Deming, telling them to remain
quiet, that the assassination would be condemned by three fourths of the
people of Illinois, but that they were in danger of attack from
Missouri, and 'prudence might obviate material destruction.' *Times and
Seasons*, v. 561.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[190:39](hou09.htm#fr_207) Copies of it will be
found in *Id*., v. 564-5; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 178-9; and *Smucker's
Hist. Mor*., 1867.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[191:40](hou09.htm#fr_208) In *Message to Ill.
Legis*., 20, it is stated that some of the murderers afterward
surrendered on the understanding that they should be admitted to bail.
There was not sufficient proof to convict them.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[192:41](hou09.htm#fr_209) The full text of
both letters is given in *Times and Seasons*, v. 568, 586-7; *Mackay's
The Mormons*, 180-2; *Smucker's Hist. Mormons*, 189-92.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[192:42](hou09.htm#fr_210) Who are thus
described in a letter addressed by Phelps to the editor of the *New York
Prophet*, a small journal established to promulgate the views of the
sect: 'Brigham Young, the lion of the Lord; Heber C. Kimball, the herald
of grace; Parley P. Pratt, the archer of paradise; Orson Hyde, the olive
branch of Israel; Willard Richards, the keeper of the rolls; John
Taylor, the champion of right; William Smith, the patriarchal staff of
Jacob; Wilford Woodruff, the banner of the gospel; George A. Smith, the
entablature of truth; Orson Pratt, the gauge of philosophy; John E.
Page, the sun-dial; and Lyman Wight, the wild ram of the mountains. They
are good men; the best the Lord can find.' See *Mackay's The Mormons*.
186.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Brigham Young Succeeds Joseph. 1844-1845.](hou10)
