[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou12)  [Next](hou14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

### CHAPTER X. MIGRATION TO UTAH. 1847.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Camp Near the
Missouri—Preparations at Winter Quartrs—Departure of the Pioneer
Band—Elkhorn Rendezvous—Route and Routine—Incidents of Journey—Approach
to Zion—in the Cañon—Hosanna! Hallelujah!—Entry Into the Valley of the
Great Salt Lake—Ploughing and Planting—Praying and Praising—Site for a
City Chosen—Temple Block Selected—Return of Companies to Winter
Quarters—Their Meeting With the Westward-Bound—General Epistle of the
Twelve.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">In</span> the spring of 1847 we find the
saints still in camp in the vicinity of the Missouri. Considering what
they had been called upon to undergo, they were in good health and
spirits. There is nothing like the spiritual in man to stimulate and
sustain the physical; and this result is equally accomplished by the
most exalted piety of the true believer, or by the most stupid
fanaticism or barbaric ignorance; for all of us are true believers, in
our own eyes. There is nothing like religion to sustain, bear up, and
carry men along under trying circumstances. They make of it a fight; and
they are determined that the world, the flesh, and the devil shall not
conquer.

    In the present instance it was of course a miracle in their eyes
that so many of their number were preserved; it was to this belief, and
to the superhuman skill and wisdom of their leader, and partly to their
own concert of action, that their preservation was due.

   Frequent meetings had been held by the council to consider plans for
further explorations by a pioneer

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

band. <span id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_328) A call was made for
volunteers of young and able-bodied men, and in April a company was
organized, with Brigham Young as lieutenant-general, Stephan Markham
colonel, John Pack major, and fourteen captains. The company consisted
of 143 persons, including three women, wives of Brigham Young, Lorenzo
Young, and Heber C. Kimball. They had 73 wagons drawn by horses and
mules, and loaded chiefly with grain and farming implements, <span
id="fr_329"></span>[2](#fn_329) and with provisions which were expected
to last them for the return journey.

    Early in April a detachment moved out of Winter Quarters for the
rendezvous on the Elkhorn, and on the 14th the pioneer band, accompanied
by eight members of the council, <span id="fr_330"></span>[3](#fn_330)
began the long journey westward in search of a site for their new Zion.
If none were found, they were to plant crops and establish a settlement
at some suitable spot which might serve as a base for future
explorations. <span id="fr_331"></span>[4](#fn_331)

    The route was along the north branch of the Platte, and for more
than 500 miles the country was bare of

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

vegetation. Roused by the call of the bugle at five o'clock in the
morning, they assembled for prayers; then they breakfasted, and upon a
second call of the bugle at seven o'clock they started, and travelled
about twenty miles for the day. At night the note of the bugle sent each
to his own wagon to prayers and at nine o'clock to bed. They rested on
Sunday, giving up the day to fasting and prayer. They were careful in
marching to preserve order, with loaded guns and powder-horn ready. And
the better to present a compact front, the wagons were kept well
together, usually two abreast where the ground would permit, and the men
were required to walk by the wagons.

    They felled cotton-wood trees for their horses and

<span id="img_25400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ROUTE OF THE
MORMONS.](tn/25400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25400.jpg)  
ROUTE OF THE MORMONS.  
</span>

cattle to browse upon, and at last were obliged to feed them from the
grain, flour, and biscuit they carried, subsisting meanwhile themselves
on game and fish. In the valley of the Platte roamed such vast herds of
buffaloes that it was often necessary to send parties in advance and
clear the road before the teams could pass. At night the wagons would be
drawn up in a semicircle on the bank, the river forming a defence upon
one side. The tongues of the wagons were on the outside, and a fore
wheel of each was placed against the hind wheel of the wagon before it;
all the horses and cattle were brought inside of the enclosure. The
corral thus formed was oblong, with an

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

opening at either end, where was stationed a guard. The tents were
pitched outside of the corral. <span id="fr_332"></span>[5](#fn_332)

    In crossing the Loup River on the 24th, they used a leathern boat
made for this expedition, and called *The Revenue Cutter*. On the 4th of
May letters were sent back to Winter Quarters by a trader named Charles
Beaumont. On the 22d they encamped at Ancient Bluff Ruins. Here the
spirits of the people reached such high hilarity that their commanding

<span id="img_25500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CORRAL OF
WAGONS.](tn/25500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25500.jpg)  
CORRAL OF WAGONS.  
</span>

officer was obliged to rebuke them, whereupon all covenanted to humble
themselves. <span id="fr_333"></span>[6](#fn_333)

    Early in June they reached the Black Hills by way of Fort
Laramie. <span id="fr_334"></span>[7](#fn_334) Here they rested for two
or three

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

weeks to build ferry-boats and recruit their animals. Grass was now
plentiful; most of the brethren depended upon their rifles for food, and
after having prepared sufficient dried meat for the rest of the journey,
they continued on their way.

    No sooner had they crossed the river than a horseman, who had
followed their trail from Laramie, rode up and begged them to halt, as
near by was a large company bound for Oregon, for which he asked
conveyance over the stream. The pioneers consented, stipulating that
they should receive payment in provisions. Other parties following, the
larder of the saints was replenished. <span
id="fr_335"></span>[8](#fn_335)

    Travelling rapidly, and a little to the south of what was known as
the Oregon track, <span id="fr_336"></span>[9](#fn_336) the Mormons
arrived at South Pass in the latter part of June, about the time when
the tide of emigration usually passed the Missouri. Thence skirting the
Colorado desert and reaching the Green River country, the monotony was
broken. Here the brethren were met by Elder Brannan, who had sailed from
New York for California in the ship *Brooklyn*, the previous February,
with 238 saints, as before mentioned. He reported that they were all
busy making farms and raising grain on the San Joaquin River. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[10](#fn_337) As several of the present

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

company were ill with mountain fever, they encamped for a few days.
Thirteen battalion brethren who were out searching for stolen cattle now
surprised them, and Brigham led in three hearty cheers. <span
id="fr_338"></span>[11](#fn_338) Again en route, passing through the
Green River country, they reached Fort Bridger. Soon after leaving this
point the real difficulties of the journey commenced. Led, as the saints
relate, only by the inspiration of the Almighty. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[12](#fn_339) Brigham and his band crossed the rugged
spurs of the Uintah range, now following the rocky bed of a mountain
torrent, and now cleaving their way through dense and gnarled timber
until they arrived at Echo Cañon, near the eastern slope of the Wasatch
Mountains, where for a brief space the main body rested, the president
and many others being attacked with mountain fever. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[13](#fn_340)

    Impatient of the delay, Brigham, after a formal

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

meeting, directed Orson Pratt <span id="fr_341"></span>[14](#fn_341) to
take the strongest of their number and cut through the mountains into
the valley, making roads and bridges as they went. After crossing what
were designated as Big and Little mountains, the party, consisting of
some forty-two men having twenty-three wagons, encamped in Emigration
Cañon. <span id="fr_342"></span>[15](#fn_342)

 

    Thus the saints are reaching their resting-place. Their new Zion is
near at hand; how near, they are as yet all unaware. But their prophet
has spoken; their way is plain; and the spot for them prepared from the
foundation of the earth will presently be pointed out to them. The great
continental chain is penetrated. In the heart of America they are now
upon the border of a new holy land, with its Desert

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

and Dead Sea, its River Jordan, Mount of Olives, and Gallilee Lake, and
a hundred other features of its prototype of Asia.

    Through the western base of the mountains extends the cañon, the two
sides of which are serrated by a narrow stream, which along the last
five miles flings itself from one side to the other a score or two of
times, in places tumbling over bowlders, again quietly threading its way
over a pebbly bottom, but everywhere cutting up the narrow and rugged
gorge so as to make it most difficult and dangerous of passage.

    The primeval silence is now broken; the primeval songs are now
disturbed by sounds strange to the surrounding hills, accustomed only to
the music of running water and the notes of birds and wild beasts. There
is the rumbling of the caravan as it comes slowly picking its way down
the dark ravine, the tramping of the horses upon the hard ground, and
the grinding of the wheels among the rocks as they plunge down one bank
and climb another, or thread their way along the narrow ledge
overhanging an abyss, the songs of Israel meanwhile being heard, and
midst the cracking of whips the shouts now and then breaking forth of a
leader in Israel awe-struck by the grandeur of the scene, "Hosanna to
the Lord! hosanna to the creator of all I hallelujah! hallelujah!"

    Emerging from the ravine upon a bench or terrace, they behold the
lighted valley, the land of promise, the place of long seeking which
shall prove a place of rest, a spot whereon to plant the new Jerusalem,
a spot of rare and sacred beauty. Behind them and on either hand
majestic mountains rear their proud fronts heavenward, while far before
them the vista opens. Over the broad plain, through the clear thin air,
bathed in purple sunlight, are seen the bright waters of the lake,
dotted with islands and bordered by glistening sands, the winding river,
and along the creek the broad patches of green cane which look like
waving corn. Raising their hats in reverence

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

from their heads, again hosannas burst from their lips, while praise to
the most high ascends from grateful hearts.

    It was near this terrace, being in fact a mile and a half up the
cañon, that Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow, with their detachment of
pioneers, encamped on the 20th of July, 1847. Next day, the
ever-memorable 21st, to reach this bench, whence was viewed with such
marvellous effect the warm, pulsating panorama before them, Pratt and
Snow crept on their hands and knees, warned by the occasional rattle of
a snake, through the thick underbrush which lined the south side of the
mountain and filled the cañon's mouth, leaving their companions on the
other side of the brush. After drinking in the scene to the satisfaction
of their soils, they descended to the open plain, Snow on horseback,
with his coat thrown loosely upon his saddle, and Pratt on foot. They
journeyed westward three miles, when Snow missing his coat turned back,
and Pratt continued alone. After traversing the site of the present
city, and standing where later was temple block, he rejoined his comrade
at the mouth of the cañon. Together they then returned to camp late in
the evening and told of their discoveries.

    The following morning the advance company, composed of Orson Pratt,
George A. Smith, <span id="fr_343"></span>[16](#fn_343) and seven
others, entered the valley and encamped on the bank of Cañon Creek. They
explored the valley toward the lake, and about three miles from the camp
found two fine streams with stony bottoms, whose banks promised
sufficient pasturage. Proceeding northward, they found hot springs at
the base of the mountain spur. Upon their return they were greeted by
the working camp five miles from the mouth of the cañon, at what was
subsequently known as Parley Cañon

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

creek. <span id="fr_344"></span>[17](#fn_344) On the 23d the camp moved
some two or three miles northward, the site chosen being near the two or
three dwarf cotton-woods, <span id="fr_345"></span>[18](#fn_345) which
were the only trees within sight, and on the bank of a stream of pure
water now termed City Creek, overgrown with high grass and willows.
Pratt called the men together, dedicated the land to the Lord, and
prayed for his blessing on the seeds about to be planted and on the
labors of the saints. Before noon a committee returned a report that
they had staked off land suitable for crops; that the soil was friable,
and composed of loam and gravel. The first furrow was thereupon turned
by William Carter, and through the afternoon three ploughs and one
harrow were at work. A dam was commenced and trenches cut to convey
water to the fields. Toward evening their energetic labors were
interrupted by a thunder-storm. <span id="fr_346"></span>[19](#fn_346)
The ground was so dry that they found it necessary to irrigate it before
ploughing, some ploughs having been broken; and it was not until after
the arrival of Brigham that planting was begun.

    The coming of the leader had been impatiently awaited, although in
their ambition to have as much as possible accomplished, the time
quickly passed. Brigham was slowly following with the remainder of the
company, and was still so weak as to be obliged to be carried on a bed
in Wilford Wordruff's carriage. As they reached a point on Big Mountain
where the view was unbroken, the carriage was turned into proper
position, and Brigham arose from his bed and surveyed the country. He
says: "The spirit of light rested upon me and hovered over the valley,
and I felt that there the saints would find protection and

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

safety." <span id="fr_347"></span>[20](#fn_347) Woodruff in describing
the scene says of Brigham: "He was enwrapped in vision for several
minutes. He had seen the valley before in vision, and upon this occasion
he saw the future glory of Zion…planted in the valley." <span
id="fr_348"></span>[21](#fn_348) Then Brigham said: "It is enough. This
is the right place. Drive on." Toward noon on the 24th they reached the
encampment. Potatoes were planted in a five-acre patch of ploughed
ground, and a little early corn. <span id="fr_349"></span>[22](#fn_349)

    Their first impressions of the valley, Lorenzo Young says, were most
disheartening. <span id="fr_350"></span>[23](#fn_350) But for the two or
three cotton-wood trees, not a green thing was in sight. And yet Brigham
speaks almost pathetically of the destruction of the willows and wild
roses growing thickly on the two branches of City Creek, destroyed
because the channels must be changed, and leaving nothing to vary the
scenery but rugged mountains, the sage bush, and the sunflower. The
ground was covered with millions of black crickets which the Indians
were harvesting for their winter food. <span
id="fr_351"></span>[24](#fn_351) An unusual number of natives had
assembled for this purpose, and after dinner gathered about the
new-comers, evincing great curiosity as to their plans.

    Lumber was made in the cañons, or from logs drawn thence, with
whip-saws, through the entire winter;

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

afterward, on account of alarm at the apparent scarcity of timber,
restrictions were put upon the manner of cutting and quantity used.
Certain fines were imposed as a penalty for disobedience; for fuel only
dead timber was allowed, and while there was sufficient, the restraint
excited some opposition. <span id="fr_352"></span>[25](#fn_352)

The next day was the sabbath; and as had been the custom at Nauvoo, two
services were held, George A. Smith, followed by Heber C. Kimball and
Ezra T. Benson, preaching the first sermon, and in the afternoon the
meeting was addressed by Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, and Willard
Richards. One cause for thankfulness was that not a man or an animal had
died on the journey. The sacrament was administered, and before
dismissing the saints, the president bade them refrain from labor,
hunting, or fishing. "You must keep the commandments of God," he said,
"or not dwell with us; and no man shall buy or sell land, but all shall
have what they can cultivate free, and no man shall possess that which
is not his own."

    On the 27th, <span id="fr_353"></span>[26](#fn_353) the president,
the apostles, and six others crossed a river which was afterward found
to be the outlet of Utah Lake, and thence walked dry-shod over ground
subsequently covered by ten feet of water to Black Rock, where all
bathed in the lake, Brigham being the first to enter it. <span
id="fr_354"></span>[27](#fn_354) The party returned to camp on the
following day, when a council was held, after which the members walked
to a spot midway between the north and south forks of a neighboring
creek, where Brigham stopped, and striking the ground with his cane,
exclaimed, "Here will

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

be the temple of our God." <span id="fr_355"></span>[28](#fn_355) This
was about five o'clock in the afternoon. An hour later it was agreed
that a site should be laid out for a city in blocks or squares of ten
acres, and in lots of an acre and a quarter, the streets to be eight
rods wide, with sidewalks of twenty feet.

    At eight o'clock on the same evening a meeting was held on the
temple square, and it was decided by vote that on that spot the temple
should be built, <span id="fr_356"></span>[29](#fn_356) and from that
spot the city laid out.

    On the 29th of July a detachment of the battalion, which had
wintered at Pueblo, <span id="fr_357"></span>[30](#fn_357) to the number
of 150, under Captain James Brown, arrived in the valley; they were
accompanied by fifty of the brethren who had started the year previous
from the Mississippi. On the following evening a praise service for
their safe arrival was held in the brush bowery, <span
id="fr_358"></span>[31](#fn_358) hastily

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

constructed for the purpose by the battalion brethren.

    During the next three weeks all were busily at work, tilling the
soil, cutting and hauling timber, making adobes, and building, ambitious
to accomplish as much as possible before the main body of the pioneer
band should start on its return journey to report to the brethren and to
promote further emigration. The battalion brethren moved their wagons
and formed a corral between the forks of City Creek. Brigham exhorted
the brethren to be rebaptized, himself setting the example, and
reconfirming the elders. On the 8th of August three hundred were
immersed, the services commencing at six o'clock in the morning. During
the month twenty-nine log houses had been built, either with roofs or
ready for the usual substitute, a covering of poles and dirt. These huts
were so arranged as to carry out their plan of forming a rectangular
stockade, <span id="fr_359"></span>[32](#fn_359) the president and Heber
C. Kimball being the first to take possession of their dwellings.

    On the 17th of August twenty-four pioneers and forty-six of the
battalion set out on their return to Winter Quarters. <span
id="fr_360"></span>[33](#fn_360)

    On the afternoon of the 22d a conference was held, at which it was
resolved that the place should be called the City of the Great Salt
Lake. The term 'Great' was retained for several years, until changed by
legislative enactment. It was so named in contradistinction to Little
Salt Lake, a term applied

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

to a body of water some two hundred miles to the south, situated in what
was later known as Iron county, near Parowan, and which has since almost
disappeared. The stream connecting the two great lakes was named the
Western Jordan, now called the Jordan, and the whole region whose waters
flow into the lake was distinguished as the great basin. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[34](#fn_361) On the 26th a second company,
consisting of 107 persons, <span id="fr_362"></span>[35](#fn_362)
started for Winter Quarters. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball set
forth on horseback a little in advance of the others, but turning back,
they waved their hats with a cheery "Good-by to all who tarry," and then
rode on.

    "We have accomplished more this year," writes Wilford Woodruff,
"than can be found on record concerning an equal number of men in the
same time since the days of Adam. We have travelled with heavily laden
wagons more than a thousand miles, over rough roads, mountains, and
curious, searching out a land, a resting-place for the saints. We have
laid out a city two miles square, and built a fort of hewn timber drawn
seven miles from the mountains, and of sun-dried bricks or adobes,
surrounding ten acres of ground, forty rods of which were covered with
block-houses, besides planting about ten acres of corn and vegetables.
All this we have done in a single month." <span
id="fr_363"></span>[36](#fn_363)

 

    At Winter Quarters active preparations had been making for following
the pioneers at the earliest opportunity. Throughout the spring all was
activity. Every one who had teams and provisions to last a year and a
half was preparing to move, and assisting those who were to remain to
plough and sow. Parley P. Pratt, having returned <span
id="fr_364"></span>[37](#fn_364) from England shortly

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

before Brigham's departure, was left in charge of the first companies
ordered westward. On the 4th of July, 1847, they set forth for the Rocky
Mountains, numbering in all 1,553 persons. <span
id="fr_365"></span>[38](#fn_365)

    A complete organization of the people was effected, according to a
revelation of the Lord made through Brigham on the 14th of January,
1847. <span id="fr_366"></span>[39](#fn_366) They were divided into
companies, each with one hundred wagons, and these into companies of
fifty wagons, and ten wagons, every company under a captain or
commander. Two fifties travelled in double columns if practicable. When
a halt was called the wagons were arranged as in the march of the
pioneers, forming a temporary fort, with its back opening upon the
corral formed by the two semicircles. The cattle were then driven into
the corral under charge of the herdsmen. When ready to march, the
captain of each ten attended to his company, under the supervision of
the captain of fifty. Advance parties each day selected the next
camping-ground. In the absence of wood, fires were made from buffalo
chips and sage brush. The wagons had projections extending over the
sides, making the interior six feet wide. Hen-coops were carried at the
end of each wagon, and a few young pigs were brought for use in the
valley. Great care was used to prevent a stampede of the animals, as
they appeared to recognize the peculiarities and dangers of the new
country and

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

were easily alarmed. The organization and order in the camp was so
perfect that not unfrequently half an hour after a halt the people sat
down to a comfortable meal of fresh bread and broiled meat. <span
id="fr_367"></span>[40](#fn_367)

    At the beginning of their journey, jealousy, bickering, and
insubordination arose among them, and a halt was called for the purpose
of holding a council and adjusting matters. For several hundred miles
they followed the trail of the pioneers, and now were approaching the
president and his men, who, encamped between Green River and the
Sweetwater, had sent forward two messengers <span
id="fr_368"></span>[41](#fn_368) to ascertain the progress and condition
of the company. Upon hearing of the difficulties that had arisen,
Brigham sent for Pratt and censured him severely for defects in the
management of the party at the start, and for misunderstandings on the
road. Pratt humbly acknowledged his faults and was forgiven. While the
president and council were at prayer, the Sioux improved the occasion by
stealing a number of horses, which proved a serious loss.

    Pratt now returned to his command, and without special incident
reached the Salt Lake settlement on the 19th of September; the companies
arriving in detachments at intervals of several weeks.

    Brigham's band was scantily provisioned for the journey to Winter
Quarters. <span id="fr_369"></span>[42](#fn_369) The number that had
already gathered at Salt Lake had drawn heavily on the pioneers'
resources, and they set out depending for subsistence on game and fish.
They travelled more rapidly in returning, <span
id="fr_370"></span>[43](#fn_370) although most of them were *compelled*
to walk. A few days after the Indian depredation

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

mentioned during the council, the Mormons were attacked by a large war
party of Sioux, who again carried off many horses. The meeting of the
battalion and pioneer brethren with Parley Pratt's company was an
occasion of rejoicing to all. <span id="fr_371"></span>[44](#fn_371) On
the 7th of September the former arrived at the Sweetwater. Here, with
the assembled companies, a jubilee was held and a feast of good things
prepared. While the men cut down brush and constructed a bowery, the
women, with great trouble, unpacked their dishes and table furniture,
delighted at the opportunity of assisting at such an event. A fat heifer
was killed, and whatever luxuries were in camp were now produced. A
slight snow fell, but in no degree marred their merriment; the feast was
followed by music and dancing, and by accounts of the pioneers'
experiences in entering upon and settling their new Zion; after prayer
the company dispersed. <span id="fr_372"></span>[45](#fn_372) The
remnants of the banquet were left with the eastern-bound train, and as
they separated each bade the other God speed. A fortnight before
reaching Winter Quarters a small delegation met Brigham's company with
most welcome supplies. On the 31st of October, when within one mile of
the settlement, Brigham called his men together, praised them for their
good conduct, blessed and dismissed them. They drove into town in order
an hour before sunset. The streets were crowded, and friends pressed
forward, shaking hands as they passed through the lines. <span
id="fr_373"></span>[46](#fn_373)

 

    During this season an abundant harvest had been gathered by the
brethren at their encampments near

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

the Missouri, though sickness was an ever-present guest; and many of
their number who could least be spared were scattered throughout the
world as missionaries in Europe, and as far westward as the Sandwich
Islands, as soldiers in California, or as laborers wherever they could
find a livelihood in the western states. The winter was passed quietly
and in content, most of the saints preparing for their migration in the
spring. Meanwhile, on the 23d of December, 1847, a general epistle of
the twelve was issued to the brethren and to the gentiles. In this it
was stated that they were at peace with all the world, that their
mission was to extend salvation to the ends of the earth, and an
invitation was extended to "all presidents, and emperors, and kings, and
princes, and nobles, and governors, and rulers, and judges, and all
nations, kindreds, tongues, and people under the whole heaven, to come
and help us to build a house to the name of the God of Jacob, a place of
peace, a city of rest, a habitation for the oppressed of every clime."
Then followed an exhortation for the saints to gather unto Zion,
promising that their reward should be a hundred-fold and their rest
glorious. They must bring "their gold, their silver, their copper, their
zinc, their tin, and brass, and iron, and choice steel, and ivory, and
precious stones; their curiosities of science,…or anything that ever
was, or is, or is to be for the exaltation, glory, honor, and salvation
of the living and the dead, for time and for all eternity." <span
id="fr_374"></span>[47](#fn_374)

    Such a gathering of saints and gentiles would of itself have
constituted an earthly Zion, especially for the president and the
twelve, who held virtual control over their brethren's property. Among
the gentiles one would think that such rhodomontade could not fail to
bring discredit on the Mormon faith and the Mormon cause, but no such
result followed. As will be mentioned later, their missions were never
more prosperous than during the years when at their new

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

stake of Zion the saints were employed, not in adorning their temple
with gold, silver, and precious stones, but in building rough shanties,
hewing timber, hoeing corn, and planting potatoes.

    The trite maxim commencing *Æquam memento* was one which the saints
had taken well to heart, and on few was the *mens æqua in arduis* more
firmly stamped than on the brow of him who, on christmas eve, the day
after his invitation to the princes and potentates of all the earth, was
appointed president of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints.
And while in adversity there were none more steadfast, it must be
admitted there were few in whom success developed so little of pride and
of vainglory. From this time forth Brigham Young was to the saints as a
prophet—yea, and more than a prophet: one on whom the mantle had fallen
not unworthily. By his foresight he had saved his people from
dispersion, and perchance his faith from annihilation. Hounded by a mob,
he had led his followers with consummate tact throughout their
pilgrimage, and in a wilderness as vet almost untrodden by man had at
length established for them an abiding-place.

 

    After the departure of Brigham from Salt Lake, John Smith, the
prophet's uncle, was nominally president of the camp; <span
id="fr_375"></span>[48](#fn_375) but upon the arrival of John Taylor and
Parley P. Pratt their precedence was acknowledged and they were placed
in charge. <span id="fr_376"></span>[49](#fn_376) There were no laws
until the latter part of this year, though certain penalties were
assigned for certain crimes and executed by the people. As there was no
jail, the whipping-post was substituted, but used only two or three
times. In such cases the high council tried the

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

prisoner, and sentenced him. "President Young was decidedly opposed to
whipping," <span id="fr_377"></span>[50](#fn_377) says George Q. Cannon,
"but matters arose that we considered required punishment at the
time." <span id="fr_378"></span>[51](#fn_378)

    During this period men and women voted by ballot in matters relating
to government. Women had already voted in religious meetings by the
uplifted hand, but this is probably the first instance in the United
States where woman suffrage was permitted. Utah at that time, however,
was not a part of the United States, and before its admission as a
territory the privilege was withdrawn. <span
id="fr_379"></span>[52](#fn_379)

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

    On the 16th of November, O. P. Rockwell, E. K. Fuller, A. A.
Lathrop, and fifteen others set forth for California to buy cows, mules,
mares, wheat, and seeds. They bought two hundred head of cows at six
dollars each, with which they started from California, but lost forty
head on the Mojave; being ninety days on the return trip. During the
autumn, several parties of the battalion men arrived from California,
bringing a quantity of wheat. Captain Grant came to Salt Lake City from
Fort Hall in December to arrange for opening trade between the two
points. After due discussion, the matter was referred to the
headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company.

    In regard to affairs at Pueblo and on the Missouri, I am indebted
for further and later information to my esteemed friends Wilbur F. Stone
and William N. Byers of Colorado. A detachment of the Mormons that
wintered at Pueblo underwent many hardships, and there have been found
relics in that vicinity, in the shape of furnace and cinders,
significant of their industrial occupation at the time.

    On the Missouri, the Indians, who at first had so heartily welcomed
the saints during the year 1847, complained to the government that they
were intruding on their domain. The government therefore ordered away
the Mormons, but gave them permission to occupy lands on the east bank
of the river for five years. There they built a town, named Kanesville,
opposite Omaha, and occupied the best part of the country up and down
the left bank of the river for a distance of twenty miles in each
direction. Many of them lived in dugouts, that is, artificial caves made
by digging out a space for occupancy in the bank of the river or on the
side of a bluff. Most

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

of them were farmers, and they had three or four grist-mills and two or
three saw-mills.

    The first emigrants did not stop on the east side of the river, but
passed over at once on arrival, making their first settlement, as before
mentioned, at Winter Quarters, situated six miles from the present city
of Omaha, at the north end of the plateau, nearly all of which they
ploughed up in the spring of 1847, and planted seed corn brought by
those who the previous winter had returned to the Mississippi to work
for wages. Hereabout they built many log houses, Brigham having a little
cluster of them for his wives in a cosey nook apart from the others.

    On their final departure for the west, the Mormons left a few of
their number under A. J. Mitchell, who was assisted by A. J. Smith. They
lived on the east side of the Missouri at first, and had a ferry across
the river as early as 1851, with other ferries west, one at Loup Fork,
and one on the Elkhorn. A large emigration up the river from New Orleans
set in about this time. In the spring of 1852 the steamboat *Saluda*,
having six hundred souls on board, was blown up at the mouth of the
Platte.

    In 1854 the lands of the Omahas, on the west side of the river, came
into market, through a treaty made during the summer of that year with
the natives, who ceded that section to the United States. Mitchell and
Smith then moved to the western side, and changed the name of Winter
Quarters to that of Florence, at the same time selling their interests
on the eastern side to the gentiles, who changed the name of Kanesville
to that of Council Bluffs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_328"></span>[253:1](hou13.htm#fr_328) The octagon house of
Dr Richards in which the council met is described as a queer-looking
thing, much resembling a New England potato-heap in time of frost.
'Council voted a load of wood for each day they met in his house.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 2.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[253:2](hou13.htm#fr_329) *Woodruff's Journal*,
MS., Apr. 17, 1847.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[253:3](hou13.htm#fr_330) John Taylor, Parley
Pratt, and Orson Hyde were engaged in missionary work abroad. *Pratt's
Autobiog*., 383.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[253:4](hou13.htm#fr_331) The impression was
that they would reach as soon as possible 'the foot of the mountains
somewhere in the region of the Yellowstone River, perhaps at the fork of
Tongue River, say 2 days' ride north of the Oregon road, and a week's
travel west of Ft Laramie…I informed Bishop Miller that when we moved
hence it would be to the great basin.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 79. No one
knew whither they were going, not even the leaders. 'We have learned by
letter to Elder G. D. Watt that a company left Council Bluffs for the
mountains on the 12th of April to seek a location for a stake in Zion.'
*Millennial Star*, ix. 235. 'The pioneers started for the mountains to
seek out a resting-place for the saints.' *Brown's Testimonies for the
Truth*, 26. In *Niles' Register*, lxxii. 206 (May 29, 1847), we read:
'Their intention is to proceed as far as possible up to the period of
necessary planting-time, when they will stop and commence a crop. The
leaders will make but a short delay at this point, and will proceed over
into California and communicate with or joia the disbanded forces of the
Mormon battalion, whose period of service will expire about the 1st of
July next.' 'When President Young was questioned by any of the pioneers
as to the definite point of our destination, all he could say to them
was, that he would know it when he should see it.' Erastus Snow, in
*Utah Pioneers, 33d ann*., 44.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[255:5](hou13.htm#fr_332) *Woodruff's Journal*,
MS., April 19, 1847. On May 4th they 'established a post-office and
guide system for the benefit of the next camp following. Every ten
miles…we put up a guide-board.'

<span id="fn_333"></span>[255:6](hou13.htm#fr_333) 'I have told the few
who did not belong to the church that they were not at liberty to
introduce cards, dancing, or iniquity of any description.' *Hist. B.
Young*, MS., 1847, 90.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[255:7](hou13.htm#fr_334) Fort John, or
Laramie, was occupied by 'James Bordeaux and about eighteen French
half-breeds and a few Sioux…There had been no rain for the last two
years…Two or three of us visited Mr Bordeaux at the fort. <span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> We paid him $15 for the use of his
ferry-boat. Mr Bordeaux said that this was the most civil and
best-behaved company that had ever passed the fort.' *Id*., MS., 1847,
91.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[256:8](hou13.htm#fr_335) Snow, in *Utah
Pioneers*, 44. 'Capt. Grover and eight others of the pioneers were left
at North Platte ferry and ford to ferry the companies that should
arrive, and especially to ferry the emigration from Winter Quarters.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[256:9](hou13.htm#fr_336) 'Making a new road
for a majority of more than one thousand miles westward, they arrived at
the great basin in the latter part of July.' *General Epistle of the
Twelve, in Millennial Star*, x. 82. 'He \[Brigham\] and the company
arrived on the 24th of July, having sought out and made a new road 650
miles, and followed a trapper's trail nearly 400 miles *Smith's Rise
Progress, and Travels*, 16; see also *Tullidge s Life of Young*, 161.
Remy says that an odometer was attached to a wheel of one of the wagons,
and careful notes taken of the distances. *Jour. to G. S. L. City*, i.
433-4. 'As I remember, there was no trail after leaving Laramie, going
over the Black Hills, except very rarely. For a short distance before
reaching the Sweetwater, we saw a wagon truck; it was a great surprise
and a great curiosity.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1848, 7.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[256:10](hou13.htm#fr_337) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1847, 95; *Tullidge's Life of Young*, 166.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[257:11](hou13.htm#fr_338) 'I exclaimed,
"Hosanna! hosanna! give glory to God and the lamb, amen!" in which they
all joined.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 96. 'Left Phineas Young and
four others, who had volunteered to return to guide the immigrants.'

<span id="fn_339"></span>[257:12](hou13.htm#fr_339) *Smith's Rise,
Progress, and Travels*, 16. 'For,' says the author, 'no one knew
anything of the country.' Snow, in *Utah Pioneers, 33d ann*., 44,
remarks: 'The president said we were to travel "the way the spirit of
the Lord should direct us."' Snow states that James Bridger, who had a
trading *post* which still bears the name of Fort Bridger, when he met
the president on the Big Sandy River about the last of June, and learned
that his destination was the valley of Great Salt Lake, offered $1,000
for the first car of corn raised there. 'Wait a little,' said the
president, 'and we will show you.' Again, on p. 45 he says that, being
encamped on what is now known as Tar Springs, the pioneers were met by a
mountaineer named Goodyear, who had wintered on the site of the present
city of Ogden, after planting brain and vegetables in the valley, but
with meagre results. The mountaineer's report was very discouraging, but
to him also Brigham replied, 'Give us time and we will show you.' There
is no evidence that as yet the president knew anything about the Salt
Lake Valley except what he heard from Bridger and Goodyear, or had
gleaned from the reports of Frémont's expedition. 'On the 15th of June
met James H. Grieve, Wm Tucker, James Woodrie, James Bouvoir, and six
other Frenchmen, from whom we learned that Mr Bridger was located about
300 miles west, that the mountaineers could ride to Salt Lake from Fort
Bridger in two days, and that the Utah country was beautiful.' *Hist. B.
Young*, MS., 1847, 92. 'Half-mile west of Fort Bridger some traded for
buckskins, their clothing being worn out.' *Id*., 97. Note also the
following: 'Met Capt. Bridger, who said he was ashamed of Frémont's map
of this country. Bridger considered it imprudent to bring a large
population into the great basin until it was ascertained that grain
could be raised.'

<span id="fn_340"></span>[257:13](hou13.htm#fr_340) 'We had to stop at
Yellow Creek and again at the head of Echo Cañon, stopping and
travelling as the sick were able to endure the journey, until we reached
the Weber at the mouth of Echo Cañon, and shuck our camp a fear miles
below, the present railroad station.' *Utah Pioneers, 33d ann*., 45.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[258:14](hou13.htm#fr_341) 'Voted, that Orson
Pratt take charge of an expedition to go on and make a road down the
Weber River.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 97. O. Pratt was appointed to
take 23 wagons and 42 men, and precede the main company. *Church
Chron*., 65. Erastus Snow says, in a discourse on the Utah pioneers,
delivered in the tabernacle July 25, 1880: 'I well remember, as we
called at the wagon to bid the president good-by, Brother Willard
Richards…asking if he had any counsel to give to guide our
movements…Resting his elbow on the pillow with his head in his hand, he
spoke feebly,…"My impressions are," said he, "that when you emerge from
the mountains into the open country you bear to the northward, and stop
at the first convenient place for putting in your seed."'

<span id="fn_342"></span>[258:15](hou13.htm#fr_342) 'The emigration
route previous to 1847 was via Laramie through South Pass to Big Sandy
River. Then to avoid a desert stretch, down the Big Sandy to its
junction with Green River, and across, then up Black's Fork to junction
with Ham's Fork, and thence up Black's Fork to Fort Bridger. The Mormons
here took the road made by Hastings and the Donner company in 1846,
bearing almost due west, crossing Bear River, down Echo Cañon to
junction with the Weber. The Mormons here chose the Donner trail, which
passed up the Weber southerly from Echo about twelve miles, then
westerly into Parley's Park, then across the hills northerly to the head
of Emigration Cañon, then into the valley. As the Donner company had
passed over this route more recently than any other, it seems to have
been followed as probably the best, and was usually travelled for many
years. In 1847, when the Mormons entered the valley, there were three
wagon routes into it. The first, down Bear River from Soda Springs,
through Cache Valley—Capt. Bartlett's route in 1841, followed by Frémont
in 1843: the second, Hastings’ California emigration through Echo and
Weber cañons in 1846; and the third, the Donner route of 1846,
described. The Mormons found a plain road into a fertile, unoccupied
country;…its isolation alone was the cause of its non-occupation.'
*McBride's Route of the Mormons*, MS. This manuscript, to which among
other favors I am indebted to Judge McBride, throws fresh light on the
question of passes and routes in early times. The author, one of the
first to enter Utah, was second to none in ability and position at a
later period.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[260:16](hou13.htm#fr_343) Geo. A. Smith says
in his autobiography that on this journey he walked 1,700 miles and rode
some 800 miles on horseback. He had 25 lbs of flour, which he used by
the cupful for those who were ill; for six weeks he was without bread,
and like the rest of the company, lived on buffalo meat and other game.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[261:17](hou13.htm#fr_344) Parley was always
quite popular among the brethren, though his judgment was not always the
best.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[261:18](hou13.htm#fr_345) 'My poor mother was
heart-broken because there were no trees to be seen; I don't remember a
tree that could be called a tree.' *Clara Young s Experiences*, MS., 5.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[261:19](hou13.htm#fr_346) 'July 23d, 96° Fah.
A company commenced mowing the grass and preparing a turnip-patch.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 99.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[262:20](hou13.htm#fr_347) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1847, 99.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[262:21](hou13.htm#fr_348) Woodruff, in *Utah
Pioneers*, 1880, 23. See also *Wroodruff's Journal*, MS.; *Clara Young's
Experiences*, MS.; *Utah Early Record*, MS.; *Pioneer Women*, MS.;
*Taylor's Rem*., MS.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[262:22](hou13.htm#fr_349) 'I had brought a
bushel of potatoes with me, and I resolved that I would neither eat nor
drink until I had planted them.' Woodruff, in *Utah Pioneers*, 1880, 23.
'I planted the first potato…in Salt Lake Valley,' says Geo. A. Smith in
his autobiography.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[262:23](hou13.htm#fr_350) Mrs Clara Decker
Young speaks of the distress she suffered at leaving Winter Quarters,
where there were so many people and life so social; but that when she
finally reached her destination she was satisfied. 'It didn't look so
dreary to me as to the other two ladies. They were terribly disappointed
because there were no trees, and to them there was such a sense of
desolation and loneliness.' *Experience of a Pioneer Woman*, MS., 5.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[262:24](hou13.htm#fr_351) 'The Indians made a
corral twelve or fifteen feet square, fenced about with sage brush and
grease-wood, and with branches of the same drove them into the
enclosure. Then they set fire to the brush fence, and going amongst
them, drove them into the fire. Afterward they took them up by the
thousand, rubbed off their wings and legs, and after two or three days
separated the meat, which was, I should think, an ounce or half an ounce
of fat to each cricket.' *Early Experiences of Lorenzo Young*, MS., 4.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[263:25](hou13.htm#fr_352) 'Taylor and Pratt
took the lead; through them this understanding about the timber
occurred.' *Nebeker's Early Justice*, MS., 4.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[263:26](hou13.htm#fr_353) On Monday, the 26th,
the president and his apostles ascended Ensign Peak, so called on
account of a remark made by Brigham: 'Here is a proper place to raise an
ensign to the nations.' *Ibid*. See also *Utah Early Records*, MS., 4;
*Woodruff's Journal*, MS.; *Nebeker's Early Justice*, MS. Woodruff was
the first who stood on the top of the peak.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[263:27](hou13.htm#fr_354) On this day was
commenced the first blacksmith's shop, the property of Burr Frost.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[264:28](hou13.htm#fr_355) 'This was about the
centre of the site of the Temple we are now building.' *Utah Pioneers,
33d ann*., 23.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[264:29](hou13.htm#fr_356) 'Some wished for
forty acres to be set apart for temple purposes, but it was finally
decided to have ten acres;…the base line was on the south-east corner,
and government officials afterward adopted it as the base meridian
line.' *Taylor's Reminiscences*, MS., 21. When the elders arrived from
England they brought with them to Winter Quarters, just before the
starting of the pioneers, 'two sextants, two barometers, two artificial
horizons, one circular reflector, several thermometers, and a
telescope.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 82. Thus Orson Pratt was
enabled to take scientific observations. He reported the latitude of the
north line of temple square, which was ten acres in size, to be 40° 45´
44″ N., and its longitude 111° 26´ 34″ W. From George W. Dean's
Observations in 1869, taken at the temple block, the results were lat.
40° 46´ 2″, long. 111° 53´ 30″. *Rept Coast Survey*, 1869-70. In taking
lunar distances for longitude, it is usual to have four observers, but
Orson Pratt had no assistant; hence probably the discrepancy. On August
16th it was determined that the streets around the temple block should
be called respectively North, South, East, arid West Temple streets, the
others to be named, as required, First North street, Second North
street, First South street, Second South street, etc.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[264:30](hou13.htm#fr_357) Says Mrs Clara
Young: 'Before reaching Laramie three of tire pioneers were sent to
Pueblo to tell the families there to strike their trail and follow them
to their settlement.' *Ex. of a Pioneer Woman*, MS., 7. 'The men of this
detachment were on their way to San Francisco, but their wagons breaking
down and their cattle being in very poor condition, they were compelled
to turn aside and await further orders.' *Utah Early Records*, MS., 8.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[264:31](hou13.htm#fr_358) For many years these
boweries of trees and brush had been constructed when any large number
of the people needed a temporary place of shelter. This one was 40 × 28
feet. Col Markham reported at this meeting 'that 13 ploughs and 3
harrows had been stocked during the past week, 3 lots of ground broken
up, one lot of 35 acres planted in corn, oats, buckwheat, potatoes,
beans, and garden seed.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 103-4. 'On the
20th H. G. Sherwood, in returning from an excursion to Cache Valley,
brought an <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> Englishman with him, named
Wells, who had been living in New Mexico for some years.' *Hist. B.
Young*, MS., 1847, 109. On the 21st A. Carrington, J. Brown, W. W. Rust,
G. Wilson, and A. Calkins made the ascent of the Twin Peaks, 15 miles
south-east of the stockade, and the highest mountain in the Wasatch
Range, its elevation being, as they reported, 11,219 feet. These were
probably the first white men who ascended this mountain.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[265:32](hou13.htm#fr_359) They were 8 or 9
feet high, and 16 or 17 feet long, by 14 wide. *Hist. B. Young*, MS.,
1847, 110. 'We were the first to move into the fort; our house had a
door and a wooden window, which through the day was taken out for light,
and nailed in at night…There was also a port-hole at the east end of the
fort, which could be opened and closed at pleasure…We had adobe chimneys
and a fire-place in the corner, with a clay hearth.' *Young's Pioneer
Women*, MS., 6.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[265:33](hou13.htm#fr_360) 'With 34 wagons, 92
yoke of oxen, 18 horses, and 14 mules, in charge of Shadrach Roundy and
Tunis Rappelye. Lt Wesley Willis was in charge of the battalion men.'
*Richards’ Narr*., MS., 13-14.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[266:34](hou13.htm#fr_361) 'It was also called
The Great North American Desert.' *Taylor's Rem*., MS., 22.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[266:35](hou13.htm#fr_362) With 36 wagons, 71
horses, and 49 mules.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[266:36](hou13.htm#fr_363) *Woodruff's
Journal*, MS., 78.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[266:37](hou13.htm#fr_364) 'I found my family
all alive and dwelling in a log cabin; they had, howerver, suffered much
from cold, hunger, and sickness…The winter had been <span
id="page_267">p. 267</span> very severe, the snow deep, and consequently
horses and cattle had been lost. …My wagons were overhauled and put in
order, tires reset, chains repaired, yokes and bows arranged in order,
wagon bows made and mended.' *Pratt's Autobiog*., 397-8. 'The companies
were organized by Elder P. P. Pratt and myself, as near as we could in
accordance with instructions left by Pres. Young.' *Taylor's Rem*., MS.,
7.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[267:38](hou13.htm#fr_365) This company is
distinguished as the first immigration. It was supplied with 580 wagons,
2,213 oxen, 124 horses, 887 cows, 358 sheep, 716 chickens, and 35 hogs.
*Utah Early Records*, MS., 17. Smith says about 700 wagons. *Rise,
Progress, and Travels*, 16. Kearny's and Frémont's parties met Pratt's
companies at Loup River; and according to *Martin's Narr., '42 in Cal*.,
MS., 122, John Young was appointed president and John Van Cott marshal.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[267:39](hou13.htm#fr_366) This was called 'the
word and will of the Lord concerning the camp of Israel.' Like all
revelations, it was in scriptural phraseology, and very explicit in its
directions. It was also read by Brigham to his people in Salt Lake City
on the 1st of August.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[268:40](hou13.htm#fr_367) From account of
their journeyings furnished me in *Taylor's Rem*., 7-12.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[268:41](hou13.htm#fr_368) O. P. Rockwell and
E. T. Benson.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[268:42](hou13.htm#fr_369) Among them was a
party of battalion men who were entirely destitute except for a very
small quantity of beef, which was soon exhausted. General Epistle of the
Twelve, in *Millennial Star*, x. 83.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[268:43](hou13.htm#fr_370) 'Camped on the south
side of the Platte. We were 42 days in going to the valley from this
point, and only 23 days in returning.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 115.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[269:44](hou13.htm#fr_371) 'Met Spencer's
advance company Sept. 3d, with 76 wagons; we had a joyful meeting; on
the 4th met encampment of 75 wagons; on the 5th 162; and on the 8th met
the last company of saints.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[269:45](hou13.htm#fr_372) 'All felt greatly
encouraged. We now knew for the first time our destination; we had
talked of California, and knew not until now where we should settle.'
*Horne's Migrations*, MS., 22.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[269:46](hou13.htm#fr_373) 'We were truly
rejoiced once more to behold our wives, children, and old friends, after
an absence of six months, having travelled over 2,000 miles… and
accomplished the most important mission in this last dispensation.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 122.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[270:47](hou13.htm#fr_374) The full text of
this epistle is given in the *Millennial Star*, x. 81-8.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[271:48](hou13.htm#fr_375) Affairs were
controlled by the high council, consisting of twelve high-priests. Salt
Lake City was a stake of Zion, with president and other officers. 'At
the conference on Oct. 3d Father John Smith was elected president of the
stake of Zion and patriarch of the church. Brigham Young was sustained
as president of the whole church.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 117.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[271:49](hou13.htm#fr_376) *Nebeker's Early
Justice*, MS., 4.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[272:50](hou13.htm#fr_377) 'I had to chastise
one in that way for stealing.' *Id*., MS., 4.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[272:51](hou13.htm#fr_378) 'For instance, one
of our best men now, who was then young, was accused of riding on
horseback with a girl in front of him. This was looked upon as
indecorous. He and others guilty of the same thing were severely
reprimanded.' G. Q. Cannon, in *Taylor's Rem*., MS., 12-13.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[272:52](hou13.htm#fr_379) *Taylor's Rem*.,
MS., 14. Herewith I give a list of the Utah pioneers of 1847: Adams,
Barnabas L.; Angel, Truman O.; Allen, Rufus; Attwood, Millen; Badger,
Rodney; Barney, Lewis; Barnham, Charles D.; Benson, Ezra T.; Billings,
Geo. P.; Boggs, Francis; Brown, Geo.; Brown, John; Brown, Nathaniel
Thomas; Bullock, Thos; Burke, Charles; Burnham, Jacob D.; Byard, Robert;
Carrington, Albert; Carter, William; Case, James; Chamberlin, Solomon;
Chessley, Alexander P.; Clayton, William; Cloward, Thos P.; Coltrin,
Zebedee; Craig, James; Crosby, Oscar; Curtis, Lyman; Cushing, Hosea;
Davenport, James; Dewey, Benjamin F.; Dixon, John; Driggs, Starling;
Dykes, William; Earl, Sylvester H.; Eastman, Ozro; Egan, Howard; Egbert,
Joseph; Eldredge, John S.; Ellsworth, Edmund; Empey, William A.; Ensign,
Datus; Everett, Addison; Fairbanks, Nathaniel; Farr, Aaron; Fitzgerald,
Perry; Flake, Green (colored); Fowler, John S.; Fox, Samuel; Freeman,
John M.; Frink, Horace M.; Frost, Burr; Gibbons, Andrew S.; Gleason,
John S.; Glines, Eric; Goddard, Stephen H.; Grant, David; Grant, Geo.
R.; Greene, John Y.; Grover, Thomas; Hancock, Joseph; Hanks, Sidney A.;
Hanson, Hans C.; Harmon, Appleton M.; Harper, Charles A.; Henrie,
William; Hewd, Simeon; Higbee, John S.; Holman, John G.; Ivory, Matthew;
Jackman, Levi; Jacobs, Norton; Johnson, Artemas; Johnson, Luke; Johnson
Philo; Kelsey, Stephen; Kendall, Levi N.; Kimball, Ellen S. (wife of H.
C. K.); Kimball, Heber C.; King, William A.; Klineman, Conrad; Lark,
Hark (colored); Lewis, Tarlton; Little, Jessie C.; Losee, John G.;
Loveland, Chancey; Lyman, Amasa; Marble, Samuel H.; Markham, Stephen;
Matthews, Joseph; Mills, George; Murray, Carlos; Newman, Elijah; Norton,
John W.; Owen, Seely; Pack, John; Pierce, Eli H.; Pomeroy, Francis M.;
Powell, David; Pratt, Orson; Reddin, Jackson; Rappelye, Tunis; Richards,
Willard; Rockwell, Orrin P.; Rockwood, Albert P.; Rolfe, Benjamin W.;
Rooker, Joseph; Roundy, Shadrach; Schofield, Joseph S.; Scholes, George;
Sherwood, Henry G.; Shumway, Andrew P.; Shumway, Charles; Smith, George
A.; Smoot, Wm C. A.: Snow, Erastus; Stevens, Roswell; Stewart, Benjamin
F.; Stewart, James W.; Stringham, Briant; Summe, Gilburd; Taft, Seth;
Tanner, Thomas; Taylor, Norman; Thomas, Robert T.; Thornton, Horace M.;
Thorpe, Marcus B.; Tippitts, John H.; Vance, William P.; Walker, Henson;
Wardel, George; Weiler, Jacob; Wheeler, John; Whipple, Edson; Whitney,
Horace K.; Whitney, Orson K.; Williams, Almon L.; Woodard, George;
Woodruff, Wilford; Woolsey, Thomas; Wordsworth,<span id="page_273">p.
273</span> William; Young, Brigham; Clarissa D. (wife of B. Y.); Young,
Harriet P. (wife of Lorenzo D.); Young, Isaac P. D.; Young, Lorenzo D.;
Young, Lorenzo Z.; Young, Phineas H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. In The Valley of The Great Salt Lake. 1848.](hou14)
