[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou16)  [Next](hou18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

### CHAPTER XIV. EDUCATION, MANUFACTURES, COMMERCE, AGRICULTURE, SOCIETY. 1850-1852.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Boundaries and Extent of
Utah—Configuration and Physical Features of the Country—Its Lands and
Waters—Flora and Fauna—State University—Curriculum—Educational
Ideas—Library—Periodicals—Tabernacle and Temple—New Fort—Progress of the
Useful Arts—Mills, Factories, and Manufactures—Farm
Products—Traffic—Population—Revenue—Mortality—Healthful Airs and
Medicinal Springs.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">In</span> the year 1850 Utah, bounded on the
south and east by New Mexico, Kansas, and Nebraska, on the west by
California, on the north by Oregon, which then included Idaho, was one
of the largest territories in the United States. Its length from east to
west was 650 miles, its breadth 350 miles, and its area 145,000,000
acres. The portion known as the great basin, beyond which were no
settlements in 1852, has an elevation of 4,000 to 5,000 feet, and is
surrounded and intersected by mountain ranges, the highest peaks of the
Humboldt Range near its centre being more than 5,000 feet, and of the
Wasatch on the east about 7,000 feet, above the level of the basin.

    For 300 miles along the western base of the Wasatch Range is a
narrow strip of alluvial land. <span id="fr_512"></span>[1](#fn_512)
Elsewhere in the valley the soil is not for the most part fertile until
water is conducted to it, and some of the alkali washed out. Rain seldom
falls in spring

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

or summer, and during winter the snow-fall is not enough to furnish
irrigating streams in sufficient number and volume. Throughout the
valley, vegetation is scant except in favored spots. With the exception
of the Santa Clara River in the south-west, the Green River in the east,
the Grand and other branches of the Colorado in the south and east, the
streams all discharge into lakes or are lost in the alkali soil of the
bottom-lands. On the hillsides bunch-grass is plentiful the year round,
and in winter there is pasture in the cañons. Around Salt Lake the soil
is poor; in the north and east are narrow tracts of fertile land; toward
the valleys of the Jordan and Tooele, separated by the Oquirrh Range,
and on the banks of the Timpanogos and San Pete, is soil of good
quality, that yielded in places from sixty to a hundred bushels of grain
to the acre.

    The Jordan and Timpanogos furnished good waterpower, and on the
banks of the latter stream was built a woollen-mill that ranked as the
largest factory of the kind west of the Missouri River. In the Green
River basin, immense deposits of coal were known to exist, and the Iron
Mountains near Little Salt Lake were so called from the abundance of ore
found in their midst. Other valuable minerals were afterward discovered,
among them being gold, silver, copper, zinc, lead, sulphur, alum, and
borax; the waters of Great Salt Lake were so densely impregnated that
one measure of salt was obtained from five of brine. <span
id="fr_513"></span>[2](#fn_513)

    In the streams were fish of several varieties; <span
id="fr_514"></span>[3](#fn_514) in

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

the mountains roamed the deer, elk, antelope, and bear, and on the
marshy flats amid the plains were smaller game. <span
id="fr_515"></span>[4](#fn_515) Timber was scarce and of poor quality,
except in places difficult of access; <span
id="fr_516"></span>[5](#fn_516) but with this exception there was no
great lack of resources in the territory which the saints had made their
abode.

 

    During the first years that followed their migration, while yet
engaged in building houses, fencing lands, planting crops, and tending
herds, the Mormons provided liberally for the cause of education. In the
third general epistle of the twelve, dated the 12th of April, 1850, it
is stated that an appropriation of $5,000 per annum, for a period of
twenty years, had been made for a state university <span
id="fr_517"></span>[6](#fn_517) in Salt Lake City, branches to be
established elsewhere throughout the territory as they were needed. In
the curriculum the Keltic and Teutonic languages were to rank side by
side with the Romanic, and all living languages spoken by men were to be
included. Astronomy, geology, chemistry, agriculture, engineering, and
other branches of science were to be studied; for having sought first
the kingdom of heaven, the saints were now assured that knowledge and
all other things should be added unto them. <span
id="fr_518"></span>[7](#fn_518) The world of science was to be
revolutionized;

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

the theories of gravitation, repulsion, and attraction overthrown, the
motion of atoms, whether single or in mass, being ascribed to the
all-pervading presence of the holy spirit. The planetary systems were to
be rearranged, their number and relations modified, for in the book of
Abraham it was revealed that in the centre of the universe was the great
orb Kolob, the greatest of all the stars seen by that patriarch,
revolving on its axis once in a thousand years, and around which all
other suns and planets revolved in endless cycles. <span
id="fr_519"></span>[8](#fn_519)

    At first, however, education among the settlers was mainly of an
elementary nature. There were many, even among the adults, who could not
write or spell, and not a few who could not read. A parents’ school was
therefore established at Salt Lake City, for the heads of families and
for the training of teachers, among the pupils being Brigham
Young. <span id="fr_520"></span>[9](#fn_520) Primary and other schools
were opened in all the principal settlements, <span
id="fr_521"></span>[10](#fn_521) and for those who were sufficiently
advanced, classes were organized as early as the winter of 1848-9, for
the study of ancient and modern languages. <span
id="fr_522"></span>[11](#fn_522)

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

    In 1850, by vote of congress, twenty thousand dollars were
appropriated for the building of a state-house, and the sum of five
thousand dollars was appropriated for the foundation of a library in
Salt Lake City. The delegate from Utah was authorized to make a
selection of books, and several thousand volumes were forwarded from the
east during this and the following year. <span
id="fr_523"></span>[12](#fn_523) Rooms were prepared in the
council-house for their reception, and many periodicals, both Mormon and
gentile, were added to the stock of reading matter. Among the former was
the *Millennial Star*, already mentioned, and the *Frontier Guardian*,
published bi-monthly at Kanesville, Iowa, between February 1849 and
March 1852, and afterward as a weekly paper under the style of the
*Frontier Guardian and Iowa Sentinel*. <span
id="fr_524"></span>[13](#fn_524)

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

    On the 15th of June, 1850, was published at Salt Lake City, under
the editorship of Willard Richards, the first number of the *Deseret
News*, a weekly paper, and the church organ of the saints. <span
id="fr_525"></span>[14](#fn_525) In this number, a copy of which I have
before me, is a report of the conflagration which occurred in San
Francisco on christmas eve of 1849, and of Zachary Taylor's message to
the house of representatives relating to the admission of California as
a state.

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

    At Salt Lake City and elsewhere throughout the country manufactures
began to thrive. Isolated, poor, having brought little or nothing with
them, these settlers were peculiarly dependent for necessaries and
comforts upon themselves, and what they could do with their hands. And
it would be difficult to find anywhere in the history of colonization
settlers who could do more. Among them were many of the best of Europe's
artisans, workers in wood, iron, wool, and cotton, besides farmers,
miners, and all kinds of laborers.

    At Tooele and several other settlements gristmills and saw-mills
were established before the close of 1852. <span
id="fr_526"></span>[15](#fn_526) Near Salt Lake City, a small
woollen-mill was in operation. <span id="fr_527"></span>[16](#fn_527) At
Parowan and Cedar City, iron-works were in course of construction; at
Paragoonah, a tannery had been built; and at Salt Lake City, in addition
to other branches of manufacture, flannels, linseys, jeans, pottery, and
cutlery were produced, <span id="fr_528"></span>[17](#fn_528) and sold
at lower prices than were asked for eastern cods of inferior quality
"Produce what you consume, writes Governor Brigham Young in his message
of January 5, 1852; "draw from the native elements the necessaries of
life; permit no vitiated taste to lead you into indulgence of expensive
luxuries which can only be obtained by involving yourselves in debt; let
home industry produce every article of home consumption." <span
id="fr_529"></span>[18](#fn_529) This excellent advice

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

was not unheeded; but the supply of home-manufactured goods did not, of
course, keep pace with the demand. Such commodities as were not the
products of home industry were, for the most part, obtained by barter
with passing emigrants, or were brought in wagon trains by way of
Kanesville; <span id="fr_530"></span>[19](#fn_530) though already
traffic had been opened with regions far to the westward on either side
of the Sierra Nevada. <span id="fr_531"></span>[20](#fn_531)

    According to the United States census returns for the year 1850, the
population of the valley of Great Salt Lake mustered 11,354 persons, of
whom about 53 per cent were males, and 6,000 residents of Salt Lake
City. <span id="fr_532"></span>[21](#fn_532) There were 16,333 acres
under cultivation, on which were raised 128,711 bushels of grain. The
value of live-stock was estimated at $546,698, and of farming implements
at $84,288. At the close of 1852, the total population was variously
estimated at from 25,000 to 30,000, <span
id="fr_533"></span>[22](#fn_533) of whom perhaps 10,000 resided in the
metropolis. The assessed value of

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

taxable property at the latter date was $1,160,883.80, or an average of
more than $400 per capita. The entire revenue amounted to
$26,690.58, <span id="fr_534"></span>[23](#fn_534) of which sum
$9,725.87 was expended for public improvements, the encouragement of
industries, or educational purposes.

 

    Little more than five years had elapsed since the pioneer band
entered the valley of Great Salt Lake, and now the settlers found
themselves amidst plenty and comfort in the land of promise, where until
their arrival scarce a human being was to be seen, save the Indians
whose clothing was the skins of rabbits and whose food was roasted
crickets. <span id="fr_535"></span>[24](#fn_535) There was no
destitution in their midst; <span id="fr_536"></span>[25](#fn_536) there
was little sickness. <span id="fr_537"></span>[26](#fn_537) In these and
some other respects, the wildest misstatements have been made by certain
gentile writers, among them Mr Ferris, who, as we shall see, was
appointed secretary for Utah. <span id="fr_538"></span>[27](#fn_538) In
this pure

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

mountain air, with its invigorating embrace, the aged and infirm
regained the elasticity of a second youth. Here was no rank vegetation,
here were no stagnant pools to generate miasma, no vapors redolent of
death, like those amid which the saints encamped on the banks of the
Missouri. In the valley were mineral springs, the temperature of which
ranged from 36° to 150° of Fahrenheit, some of them being prized for
their medicinal properties. From the warm spring <span
id="fr_539"></span>[28](#fn_539) in the vicinity of Salt Lake City,
waters which varied between 98° in summer and 104° in winter <span
id="fr_540"></span>[29](#fn_540) were conducted by pipes to a large
bath-house in the northern part of the city. <span
id="fr_541"></span>[30](#fn_541)

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_512"></span>[321:1](hou17.htm#fr_512) *Gunnison's The
Mormons*, 15.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[322:2](hou17.htm#fr_513) An analysis of the
mineral matter forty years ago showed 97.8 per cent of chloride of
sodium, 1.12 of sulphate of lime, .24 of magnesium, and .23 of sulphate
of soda. *Linforth's Route from Liverpool*, 101. The specific gravity of
the water is given by L. D. Gale, in *Stansbury's Expedition to G. S.
Lake*, at 1.117. Out of 22.422 parts of solid matter Gale found 20.196
of common salt, 1.834 of soda, .252 of magnesium, and of chloride of
calcium a trace. See also *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 177-8; *Hist.
Nev*., 11, this series. In chap. i. of that vol. is a further
description of the great basin, its topography, climate, soil, springs
and rivers, fauna and flora.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[322:3](hou17.htm#fr_514) 'The angler can
choose his fish either in the swift torrents of the cañons, where the
trout delights to live, or in the calmer currents on the plains, <span
id="page_323">p. 323</span> where he will find abundance of the pike,
the perch, the bass, and the chub. *Gunnison's The Mormons*, 20.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[323:4](hou17.htm#fr_515) Wild ducks and geese
were abundant in 1852. *Ibid*. There were also quail and herons. In
summer, boys filled their baskets with eggs found among the reeds on the
banks of streams or on the islands in the Great Salt Lake.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[323:5](hou17.htm#fr_516) 'Hidden away in the
profound chasms and along the streams, whose beds are deeply worn in the
mountain-sides, are the cedar, pine, dwarf-maple, and occasionally oak,
where the inhabitants of the vale seek their fuel and building timber,
making journeys to obtain these necessaries twenty to forty miles from
their abodes.' *Id*., 21.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[323:6](hou17.htm#fr_517) Under the supervision
and control of a chancellor, twelve regents, a secretary, and a
treasurer. *Frontier Guardian*, June 12, 1850.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[323:7](hou17.htm#fr_518) 'But what,' says
Phelps in an oration delivered July 24, 1851, 'will all the precious
things of time, the inventions of men, the records, from Japheth in the
ark to Jonathan in congress, embracing the wit and the gist, the
fashions and the folly, which so methodically, grammatically and
transcendentally grace the libraries of the élite of nations, really be
worth to a saint, when our father sends down his regents, the angels,
from the grand library of Zion above, with a copy of the history of
eternal lives, the records of worlds, the genealogy of the gods, the
philosophy of truth, the names of our spirits from <span
id="page_324">p. 324</span> the Lamb's book of life, and the songs of
the sanctified?' *Deseret News*, July 26, 1851.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[324:8](hou17.htm#fr_519) 'I saw the stars that
they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne
of God; and there were many great ones that were near it; and the Lord
said unto me, These are the governing ones: and the name of the great
one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God; I
have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order of
that upon which thou standest. And the Lord said unto me, By the urim
and thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to
its times and seasons in the revolution thereof, that one revolution was
a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one
thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou
standest.' *Reynolds’ Book of Abraham*, 29. See also Orson Pratt's
lecture on astronomy in *Deseret News*, Dec. 27, 1851.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[324:9](hou17.htm#fr_520) The parent school is
in successful operation in the council-house, and schools have been
built in most of the wards. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1851, 32; *Gunnison's
The Mormons*, 80; *Utah Early Records*, MS., 115. Lyons Collins was
appointed teacher by the chancellor and board of regents.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[324:10](hou17.htm#fr_521) Jesse W. Fox taught
the first school at Manti in 1850. *Utah Sketches*, MS., 172. The first
school at Nephi was opened in 1851. *Id*., 111. The best school-house in
Utah county was at Palmyra; at Provo, Evan M. Greene opened a select
school in the second ward. *Deseret News*, Dec. 11, 1852.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[324:11](hou17.htm#fr_522) 'There have been a
large number of schools the past winter, in which the Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, French, German, Tahitian, and English languages <span
id="page_325">p. 325</span> have been taught successfully. First General
Epistle of the Twelve, in *Utah Early Records*, MS., 74, and *Frontier
Guardian*, May 30, 1849. 'German books were bought in order that the
elders might learn that language. '*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1849, 3.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[325:12](hou17.htm#fr_523) Dr Bernhisel was
appointed by the president of the U.S. as special agent to expend the
U.S. appropriation of $5,000. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 80. Many valuable
donations of maps, papers, etc., were received. *Contributor*, 270;
*Gunnison's The Mormons*, 83; *Utah Early Records*, MS., 130;
*Millennial Star*, xii. 330-1. William C. Staines was appointed
librarian. *Deseret News*, Feb. 21, 1852.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[325:13](hou17.htm#fr_524) Of the *Frontier
Guardian*, brief mention has already been made. The first number,
published Feb. 7, 1849, with Orson Hyde as editor and proprietor, will
bear comparison with many of the leading newspapers in eastern or
European cities. In the prospectus Mr Hyde states that 'it will be
devoted to the news of the day, to the signs of the times, to religion
and prophecy, both ancient and modern; to literature and poetry; to the
arts and sciences, together with all and singular whatever the spirit of
the times may dictate.' Published, as was the *Guardian*, on the extreme
frontier of the states, Mr Hyde was enabled to furnish the latest news
from Salt Lake City, and many valuable items have been gleaned from its
pages. Glancing at them for the first time, one asks, How did he
contrive to bring out his newspaper in such creditable shape, at a place
which one year before was only an encampment of emigrants en route for
the valley? During this year, however, Kanesville—later Florence—had
made very rapid progress, due, in part, to the migration to California.
Glancing over the first numbers of the *Guardian*, we find advertised
for sale dry goods, groceries, provisions, hardware, clothing, and most
of the commodities needed by emigrants. There was a hotel, a fashionable
tailor, a lawyer, a doctor, and of course a tabernacle, which served for
social parties and religious worship. Provisions rose to very high
rates, though not to the prices demanded in Salt Lake City. On Feb. 7,
1849, flour, beef, and pork were selling at Kanesville for about $2 per
100 lbs. On May 1, 1850, flour was worth $6 to $6.50, beef $3.50 to
$4.50, and pork $5 to $6. Potatoes had risen meanwhile from 25 cents to
$1, corn from 20 cents to $2.25, and wheat from 50 cents to $1.75, per
bushel. On March 4, 1852, appeared the first number <span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> of the *Frontier Guardian and Iowa
Sentinel*, the paper having then passed into the hands of Jacob Dawson &
Co.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[326:14](hou17.htm#fr_525) Until Aug. 19, 1851,
it was issued as an eight-page quarto, the pages being about 8½ by 6½
in., and without column rules. After that date it was suspended for want
of paper until Nov. 19th. 'We got short of type, and I happened to have
some stereotyped plates,…which we melted down and used for type. We were
short, too, of paper, and all went to work to make it. We collected all
the rags we could and made the pulp, sifted it through a sieve, and
pressed it as well as we could.' *Taylor's Rem*., MS., 17. The terms
were $5 per year, payable half-yearly in advance, single copies being
sold for fifteen cents. There seems to have been some difficulty in
collecting subscriptions, for in the issue of November 15, 1851, the
editor states that payment will be due at the office on receipt of the
first number, 'and no one need expect the second number until these
terms are complied with, as credit will not create the paper, ink,
press, or hands to labor.' In his prospectus, Richards said that the
*Deseret News* is designed 'to record the passing events of our state,
and in connection refer to the arts and sciences, embracing general
education, medicine, law, divinity, domestic and political economy, and
everything that may fall under our observation which may tend to promote
the best interest, welfare, pleasure, and amusement of our
fellow-citizens…We shall ever take pleasure in communicating foreign
news as we have opportunity; in receiving communications from our
friends at home and abroad; and solicit ornaments for the News from our
poets and poetesses.' In the first issue is the following, perhaps by
Beta, who afterward wrote a number of papers styled the *Chronicles of
Utah* in the *Salt Lake City Contributor*:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

To my Friends in the Valley.

Let all who would have a good paper,  
  Their talents and time ne’er abuse;  
Since ’tis said by the wise and the humored,  
  That the best in the world is the *News*.

Then ye who so long have been thinking  
  What paper this year you will choose,  
Come trip gayly up to the office  
  And subscribe for the *Deseret News*.

And now, dearest friends, I will leave you;  
  This counsel, I pray you, don't lose;  
The best of advice I can give you  
  Is, pay in advance for the *News*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fortunately for
the prospects and reputation of the paper, such effusions were rare even
in its early pages. The *Deseret News* was at first less ably edited,
and inferior, as to type and paper, to the *Frontier Guardian*. It
appears, indeed, to have lacked support, for in the first number are
only two advertisements, one from a blacksmith and the other from a
surgeon-dentist, who also professes to cure the scurvy. In Nov. 1851 it
appeared in folio and in greatly improved form; for years it was the
only paper, and is still the leading Mormon journal, in the territory.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[327:15](hou17.htm#fr_526) The first grist-mill
built at Tooele was erected by Ezaias Edwards; in 1849 a saw-mill was
built at Provo by James Porter and Alex. Williams, and in 1850 a
grist-mill, by James A. Smith and Isaac Higbee. At American Fork Ezra
Adams built a grist-mill in 1851; at Mantia grist-mill was built by
Brigham Young and Isaac Morley, and a saw-mill by Charles Shumway; in
1848 Samuel Parish built a grist-mill at Centreville. *Utah Sketches*,
MS., passim. In Salt Lake county there were, in the autumn of 1851, four
gristmills and five saw-mills. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 158. Near
Ogden, Lorin Farr built a grist-mill and saw-mill in 1850. *Stanford's
Ogden City*, MS., 3.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[327:16](hou17.htm#fr_527) In March 1851 the
general assembly appropriated $2,000 for this purpose. *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 123.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[327:17](hou17.htm#fr_528) 'Our pottery is
nearly completed;…cutlery establishments are completed.' *Hist. B.
Young*, MS., 26.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[327:18](hou17.htm#fr_529) In *Id*., Nov. 6,
1852, similar advice is given to the saints: 'Buy no article from the
stores that you can possibly do without. Stretch our means, skill, and
wisdom to the utmost to manufacture what we need, beginning with <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> a shoestring (if we cannot begin higher).'
'When we have manufactured an article, sell it for cash or its
equivalent, as low, or lower, than it can be bought for at the stores.'
In the fifth general epistle is the following: 'Beach and Blair have
opened a general manufacturing establishment;…are now making molasses
and vinegar. Several grain and lumber mills have been erected in the
various settlements,…chairs and various articles of furniture are
multiplying,…two or three threshing-machines have been in successful
operation.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1851, 24. 'We are going in
extensively for home manufactures. My own family alone have this season
manufactured over 500 yds of cloth, and the home-made frequently makes
its appearance in our streets'—a great blessing, 'if it will prove an
inducement to the people to depend and rely upon their own resources for
their own supplies.' *Id*., 1852, 16.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[328:19](hou17.htm#fr_530) On May l, 1851, the
first train of merchandise for the season arrived in the city, laden
partly with sugar, coffee, and calicoes. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 127.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[328:20](hou17.htm#fr_531) On Nov. 19, 1848,
Capt. Grant of the Hudson's Bay Company arrived from Fort Hall with
pack-horses laden with skins, groceries, and other goods. On April 17,
1851, a small party arrived from Fort Hall in search of provisions and
Indian trading goods. On the 10th of the same month, Col Reese sent ten
or twelve wagon-loads of flour to Carson Valley for trading purposes.
*Id*., 39, 125, 127.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[328:21](hou17.htm#fr_532) The returns were
made under the direction of Brigham Young, who was appointed census
agent. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 112; *Deseret News*, Oct. 5, 1850.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[328:22](hou17.htm#fr_533) Early in 1853 the
*Deseret Almanac* places the number at 30,000, while in Orson Pratt's
*Seer* it is given at 30,000 to 35,000. *Olshausen's Mormonen*, 192. At
this date it was estimated at 25,000 by the gentiles. *Burton's City of
the Saints*, 357. Probably the Mormons exaggerated, as they desired to
<span id="page_329">p. 329</span> show as soon as possible a population
of 100,000, which would entitle them to claim admission as a state.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[329:23](hou17.htm#fr_534) Not more than one
tenth was collected in cash, payment being usually made in grain.
*Contributor*, 332. 'Securing a territorial revenue of $23,000,
including merchants’ licenses and tax on liquors.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS,
1852, 2.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[329:24](hou17.htm#fr_535) 'The most exposed
parts of the country are annually run over by the fires set by the
Indians to kill and roast the crickets, which they gather in summer for
winter food.' *Gunnison's The Mormons*, 21.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[329:25](hou17.htm#fr_536) The country was
canvassed to ascertain how many inmates there would be for a poor-house,
then projected. Only two were found, and the Mormons concluded that it
was not yet time for such an institution. *Id*., 34.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[329:26](hou17.htm#fr_537) The number of deaths
in the territory during the year ending June 1, 1850, was 239. *U.S.
Census, 1850*, 997; and in Salt Lake county, which virtually meant Salt
Lake City, 121; in both, the mortality was therefore less than 20 per
thousand, or about the average death-rate in San Francisco during recent
years. Moreover, the population of Utah included a very large proportion
of infants. Of 64 deaths reported in the *Deseret News* of March 8,
1851, 34 occurred between the ages of one and ten.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[329:27](hou17.htm#fr_538) *Utah and the
Morrmons: the History, Government, Doctrines, Customs, and Prospects of
the Latter-day Saints; from personal observation during a six months’
residence at Great Salt Lake City. By Benjamin G. Ferris, late secretary
of Utah Territory, New York, 1854*. Mr Ferris is not the first one whom
in his own opinion a six months’ residence in the west justifies in
writing a book. It was the winter of 1852-3 which he spent there, and
while professing that he writes wholly from an anti-Mormon standpoint,
as a rule he is comparatively moderate in his expressions. The
illustrations in this volume are many of them the same which are found
in several other works. Beginning with the physical features of Utah, he
goes through the whole range of Mormon history, and concludes with
chapters on government, doctrines, polygamy, book of Mormon
proselytizing, and society. While sometimes interesting, there is little
original information; and aside from what the author saw during his
residence in Utah, the book has no special value.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[330:28](hou17.htm#fr_539) The water was
analyzed in 1851 by L. D. Gale. Its specific gravity was found to be
1.0112; it was strongly impregnated with sulphur, and 100 parts of water
yielded 1.082 of solid matter. The specific gravity of the hot spring in
the same neighborhood was 1.013, and 100 parts yielded 1.1454 of solid
matter. Detailed analyses are given in *Stunsbury's Expedition to G. S.
Lake*, i. 419-20. An analysis of the warm spring given by Joseph T.
Kingsbury in *Contributor*, iv. 59-60, differs somewhat from that of
Gale. Further information on these and other springs and mineral waters
will be found in *Id*., iv. 86-9; *Hist. Nev*., 17, this series; *Salt
Lake Weekly Herald*, July 29, 1880; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Jan. 5, 1878;
*Wheeler's Surveys*, iii. 105-17; *Hollister's Resources of Utah*, 83-5;
*Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie*, 121; *Burton's City of the
Saints*, 222; *Sac. Union*, Aug. 7, 1860.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[330:29](hou17.htm#fr_540) *Contributor*, iv.
59. One of the brethren, writing to Orson Hyde from Salt Lake City,
Sept. 10, 1850, says that the temperature stands, winter and summer, at
about 92°. *Frontier Guardian*, Jan. 8, 1851.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[330:30](hou17.htm#fr_541) On Nov. 27, 1850,
the warm-spring bath-house was dedicated and opened with prayer,
festival, and dance. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 116.

    The material for the preceding chapters has been gathered mainly
from a number of manuscripts furnished at intervals between 1880 and
1885. As I have already stated, to F. D. Richards I am especially
indebted for his unremitting effort in supplying data for this volume.
The period between Feb. 1846 and the close of 1851—say between the
commencement of the exodus from Nauvoo and the opening of the
legislature of Utah territory—is one of which there are few authentic
printed records. From *Kane's The Mormons*, from *Fullmer's Expulsion*,
and other sources, I have gleaned a little; but as far as I am aware, no
work has yet been published that gives, or pretends to give, in
circumstantial detail the fall story of this epoch in the annals of
Mormonism. In the *Utah Early Records*, MS., I have been supplied with a
brief but full statement of all the noteworthy incidents from the
entrance of Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow into the valley of the Great
Salt Lake to the close of the year 1851. In the *Narrative of Franklin
D. Richards*, MS.; the *Reminiscences of Mrs F. D. Richards*, MS.;
*Inner Facts of Social Life in Utah*, MS., by the same writer; *History
of Brigham Young*, MS., which is indeed a continuation of the *History
of Joseph Smith*, or the history of the church; *Martin's Narrative*,
MS.—I have been kindly furnished with many details that it would have
been impossible to obtain elsewhere. Some of them I have already
noticed, and others I shall mention in their place.

    In *Reminiscences of President John Taylor*, MS., we have an account
of the migration from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters, the organization of the
various <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> companies, and much
information of a miscellaneous nature, relating to house-building in
Salt Lake City, the first manufactures, the location of the temple, and
other matters. The manuscript also makes mention of his visit to England
as a missionary in 1846, in company with Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde.

    The *Narrative of General Daniel H. Wells,* MS., gives an account of
the disturbances in Hancock county, the troubles at Nauvoo before the
exodus, the journey to Winter Quarters, the organization of the Nauvoo
legion, and of the state of Deseret; but perhaps the most valuable
portion is a condensed narrative of all the Indian outbreaks between
1849 and 1864, a task for which General Wells, who during this period
had charge of the Nauvoo legion and aided in suppressing some of the
disturbances, is specially qualified.

    *Wilford Woodruff's Journal,* MS., commencing with the claims of
Sidney Rigdon to the guardianship of the church, in 1846, and closing
with a summary of the operations of the pioneers in the following year.
Mr Woodruff gives some valuable details concerning this most interesting
period in the annals of Mormonism. Being himself a pioneer, he furnishes
minute particulars as to their journey and their early labors in the
valley.

    In *A Woman's Experiences with the Pioneer Band, by Mrs Clara Decker
Young,* MS., we have also some information as to the work accomplished
during the single month that the pioneers remained in the valley, among
other matters being the building of the old fort. Items of interest are
also given concerning those who were left alone in the valley after the
pioneers' departure, until the arrival of Parley Pratt's companies.
Clara Decker Young, a native of Freedom, N.Y., moved with her parents to
Daviess co., Mo., in 1837, the family being driven, during the
persecutions of that year, to Far West, whence they removed to Quincy,
and later to Nauvoo. When 16 years of age she became the fifth wife of
Brigham Young.

    From the *Material Progress of Utah, by William Jennings,* MS., I
have gathered many details as to the industrial condition of the Mormons
from the earliest settlement of S. L. City up to a recent date, among
them being items relating to manufactures, agriculture, stock-raising,
the grasshopper plague, and the influence of the railroad on the
population of Utah.

    *Early Justice, by John Nebeker,* MS., besides describing the
punishment of offenders in the days of 1847, when, as I have already
stated, the whipping-post was substituted for imprisonment, furnishes
other material of value relating to early times. In his capacity of
public complainer, Mr Nebeker prosecuted one culprit before the high
council for stealing, and himself administered the flogging. Mr Nebeker,
a native of Delaware, came to Nauvoo in the winter of 1846; crossed the
plains with the first companies, and left Winter Quarters with Parley
Pratt's detachment.

    In *The Migration and Settlements of the Latter-day Saints, by Mrs
Joseph H. Horne,* MS., is an account of her conversion, her experiences
at Far West, Quincy, and Nauvoo, and the hardships suffered during the
migration. Then follows a description of the first years in S. L. City,
the food, dress, and dwellings of the saints, their make-shifts and
privations, with some mention of the Mormon battalion, and the ill
feeling caused by the withdrawal of 500 able-bodied men at this crisis
in their affairs. Mrs Horne, a native of Rainham, England, moved with
her parents to New York (now Toronto, Canada) when ten years of age. In
1836, the year of her marriage, she was converted by the preaching of
Parley and Orson Pratt, her house being afterward open to the elders,
who frequently held meetings there.

    From the *Utah Sketches,* MS., I have gathered much information as
to the founding of various settlements and their progress up to the year
1880, of which mention will be made later. Most of them were written by
persons who were themselves among the earliest settlers, and of whom
some are still prominent members of the several communities among which
their lot was cast. In this connection may be mentioned the *Brief
Historical Sketch of the Settlements in Weber County, by Joseph
Stanford,* MS., and the *Historical Sketch of Ogden City,* by the same
author.

    In addition to the manuscripts and journals constituting the vast
original <span id="page_332">p. 332</span> sources upon which I have
drawn, I would mention also the following printed and secondary
authorities: *Millen. Star,* iv. 187-90, v. 174-7, vi. 41-2, vii. 71-2,
87-9, 103-4, 149-53, viii. 68-71, 97-8, 102-3, 113-21, 149-58, ix.
11-22, xi. 46-7; *Times and Seasons,* i. 30-1, 44, 185-7, 517, ii.
273-4, 281-6, 309, 319, 321-2, 336, 355-6, 370-1, 375-7, 380-2, 417-18,
435, 517, 567-70, iii. 630-1, 666, 638, 654, 683-6, 700, 718, 733-4,
743, 767-9, 775-6, 806-7, 831-2, 902-3, 919-21, 936-7, iv. 10-11, 33-6,
65-71, 154-7, 198-9, 241-78, v. 392-6, 418-23, 455, 471-2, 536-48,
560-75, 584-99, 618-22, vi. 762, 773-8O, 926, 972-3; *Beadle, Life in
Utah,* 58-9, 63-121, 125-54, 161-2, 280; *Bennett, Morm. Exposed,* 5-10,
140-62, 188-214, 278-302, 307-40; *Bertrand, Mem. Morm.,* 61, 65-70;
*Bonwick, Morm. and Silv. Mines,* 3; *Burton, City of Saints,* 183-4,
433, 625-67; *Busch, Gesch. Morm.,* 43-5, 97-113, 125-30, 205-17,
254-98; *Death of the Prophets, with Offic. Doc.,* no. 23, in *Utah
Pamph. Relig.; Deseret News,* 1851, Apr. 8, Nov. 29, Dee. 13, 27; 1867,
July 24; 1868, July 1, Dec. 16, 30; 1869, Apr. 7, Sept. 1; 1876, Mar.
22; 1877, Nov. 14; *Hall, Morm. Exposed, 7-*8, 15-16, 24-7, 28-34,
55-70, 91-9, 106-7; *Tucker, Morm.,* 37, 167-207; *Tullidge, Life of
Young,* 6-191, 204; *Women of Morm.,* 297-300, 425-32, 443-4, 488-95;
*Edinburg Rev.,* Apr. 1854, 319-83; *Ford (Thos, Gov. Ill.), in Utah
Tracts,* no. 11; *Ferris, Utah and Morm.,* 51, 92-107, 114-15, 137-46,
151-4, 120-30; *Gunnison, Morm.,* 133, 115-39; *Stansbury, Exped.,*
135-7; *Green,* Morm., 28-9, 36-7, 54-64; *Hickman, Destroying Angel,*
41-5; *Hyde, Morm.,* 140, 144-6, 152-3, 155-7, 172-5, 183-5, 189-92;
*Kidder, Morm.,* 157-9, 182-92; *Kanesville (Ia), Front. Guard.,* 1849,
Feb. 7, 21, Mar. 7, June 27, Aug. 8, Nov. 14; *Id.,* 1850, May 1, 29,
Oct. 2, 30; *Id.,* 1852, Mar. 18, 25; *Linforth, Route from Liverpool,*
61-9, 72-5; *Lee, Morm.,* 109-12, 144-8, 152-5, 167-8, 173-4, 179-80;
*Mackay, The Morm.,* 115-206; *Niles' Reg.,* lxix. 70, 134, lxx. 208,
211, 327, lxxii. 206, 370, lxxiii. 6; *Olshausen, Gesch. Mormonen,*
59-65, 88-90, 100-3, 144-51, 202-34; *Hon. Polynesian,* ii. 1846, 91;
*Pratt (P.), Autobiog.,* 378, 398-401,405-6; *Remy, Journey to G. S. L.
City,* i. 336-406, 434-8, ii. 258-63; *Smucker, Hist. Morm.,* 119-34,
148-276, passim; *Snow (Eliza), in Utah Pioineers, 33d Ann.,* 41-50, in
*Times and Seasons,* iv. 287; *Snow (Lorenzo),* with *Taylor, Govt of
God,* no. 12, 9-11; *Stenhouse, Tell It All,* 306; *Crimes of L. D.
Saints,* 11-15; *Dunbar, Romance of Age,* 45; *Ebberts, Trapper's Life,*
MS., 18; *Fullmer,* in *Utah Tracts,* no. 9. 1-40; *Mather,* in
*Lippincott's Mag.,* Aug. 1880; *McGlashen, Hist. Donner Party,* 34-56;
*Spence, Settler's Guide,* 268-9; *Sala, Amer. Revisited,* ii. 289;
*Salt Lake City, Contributor,* ii. 86, 134-7, 195-8, 239, 301, 354-6,
366, iii. passim, iv. 370-6; *Salt Lake City, Deseret News,* 1850, July
27; 1851, July 26, Aug. 19; 1852, Feb. 7, Aug. 7, 21; 1854, July 27,
Aug. 3; 1855, Sept. 26; 1857, July 29, Aug. 5; 1858, June 30; *Salt Lake
City, Herald,* 1880, July 3, 29; *Salt Lake City, Telegraph,* 1868, May
30, Oct. 10, 12-14; *Smith, Rise, Progress, etc.,* 6-18, 314-22, 334-6;
*Smoot (Margaret S.), Experience,* etc., MS., 4-5; *Cal., Its Past
Hist.,* 218-19; *Tracy (Mrs N. N.), Narr.,* MS., 10-19; *Thornton, Or.
and Cal.,* i. 158-9; *Utah Pioneer, 33d Ann.,* 50-2; *Narrative of the
Murders of the Smiths,* in *Utah Tracts,* no. 1, passim; *The Murder of
Jos Smith, in Utah Tracts,* no. 1, 54-5; *Tyler, Hist. Morm. Battalion,*
passim; *U. S. Ex. Doc.,* 24, 31 Cong. 1st Sess.; *Van Tramp,
Adventures,* 313-38; *Woodruff (W.),* in *Utah Pion., 33d Ann.,* 19-24;
*Ward, Mormon Wife,* 81-4, 109-40, 165; *White (Mrs C. V.), The Mormon
Prophet,* etc., 4-8; *Young (Ann Eliza), Wife No. 19,* 54-7; *Marshall,
Through Amer.,* 184; *Murphy, Mineral Resour.,* 84-5; *Miller (J.),
First Families,* etc., 65-73; *Martin (Thos S.), Narrative,* etc., MS.,
42; *San Francisco, Alta Cal.,* 1851, Aug. 8; *Id., Cal. Star,* 1848,
Feb. 26; *Id., Call,* 1869, Sept. 5, 1877, Aug. 31; *Id., Chronicle,*
1881, Jan. 9; *Id., Herald,* 1851, Oct. 12, 1859, Nov. 15; *Sacramento,
Placer Times,* 1849, May 26; *Id., Union,* 1855, Sept. 10, 27, 1859,
Aug. 24; *Portland (Or.), Telegram,* 1879, Mar. 15; *Salem (Or.),
Argus,* 1858, Feb. 13, Aug. 28; *Id., Statesman,* 1851, Dec. 23; *Or.
City (Or.), Spectator,* 1846, July 4; *Ogden (Utah), Freeman,* 1879, May
2; *Gold Hill (Nev.),* News, 1872, May 1, Oct. 24; *Eureka (Nev.),
Leader,* 1880, July 24; *Carson (Nev.), State Register,* 1872, Nov. 24;
*Rae, Westward by Rail,* 125-7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Mormonism and Polygamy.](hou18)
