[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou20)  [Next](hou22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII. THE GOVERNMENT IN ARMS. 1853-1857.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Brigham As Dictator—Utah
Seeks Admission As a State—Dissatisfaction Among the Saints—Conflicting
Judiciaries—the New Federal Officials—Disputes With Judge
Drummond—Colonel Steptoe—An Expedition Ordered to Utah—Official
Blunders—the Troops Assemble at Fort Leavenworth—Hockaday and Magraw's
Mail Contract—the Brigham Young Express—Celebration of the Pioneer
Anniversary—News of the Coming Invasion—Its Effect on the
Mormons—Arrival of Major Van Vliet—the Nauvoo Legion—Mormon
Tactics.</span></span>

    "<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> and will be governor, and no
power can hinder it," declared Brigham in a sabbath discourse at the
tabernacle in June 1853; "until," he added with characteristic
shrewdness, "the Lord almighty says, 'Brigham, you need not be governor
any longer.'" <span id="fr_712"></span>[1](#fn_712) After the departure
of the runaway officials in September 1851, there were none to dispute
the authority of the governor, and for several years his will was law.
At the opening of the joint sessions of the assembly, a committee was
appointed to escort him to the hall of the representatives, where he
took his seat in front of the speaker's chair, the members and
spectators rising in a body as he entered. The message was then read by
his private secretary; it was ordered that a thousand copies of it be
printed for the use of both houses, and that it be published in the
*Deseret News* for the benefit of the people. The assembly then
adjourned, and at the meetings which followed

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

adopted only such measures as were suggested in the message, or as they
knew would find favor with the governor. <span
id="fr_713"></span>[2](#fn_713) "Laws should be simple and plain,"
remarked Brigham, in his message of December 1853, "easy to be
comprehended by the most unlearned, void of ambiguity, and few in
number." <span id="fr_714"></span>[3](#fn_714) Most sensible advice.

    During the years 1852-3 little of importance occurred in the
political history of Utah. By act approved January 3, 1853, it was
ordered that general elections should be held annually in each precinct
on the first Monday in August, <span id="fr_715"></span>[4](#fn_715) and
in section five of this act each elector was required to provide himself
with a vote containing the names of the persons he wished to be elected,
and the offices he would have them fill, and present it folded to the
judge of the election, who must number and deposit it in the ballot-box;
the clerk then wrote the name of the elector, and opposite to it the
number of the vote. This measure,

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

which virtually abolished vote by ballot, gave much ground of complaint
to the anti-Mormons. "In a territory so governed," writes Benjamin G.
Ferris, who superseded Willard Richards as secretary in the winter of
1852-3, "it will not excite surprise that cases of extortion, robbery,
murder, and other crimes should occur and defy all legal redress, or
that the law should be made the instrument of crime." The remark is
unjust. If crime was not punished, it was from no fault of the
legislature, but, as we shall see later, from want of harmony between
the federal and territorial judiciaries.

    In January 1854 <span id="fr_716"></span>[5](#fn_716) Utah again
sought admission as a state, a memorial to congress being adopted by the
legislative assembly praying that the inhabitants be authorized to call
a convention for the purpose of

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

framing a constitution and state government. <span
id="fr_717"></span>[6](#fn_717) As no notice was taken of this request,
the convention met in March 1856, and the people again adopted a
constitution of their own, under the style of the state of Deseret,
resembling, though with some additions, the one framed in 1849. <span
id="fr_718"></span>[7](#fn_718) It was signed by every member of the
convention, and together with a second memorial, was presented by John
M. Bernhisel, who between 1851 and 1859 filled the position of
territorial delegate. Both were again ignored, <span
id="fr_719"></span>[8](#fn_719) probably on the score of polygamy, for
otherwise there were many arguments in favor of the Mormons. If their
population was not yet large enough to entitle them to admission, it was
larger than that of several of the younger states when first
admitted. <span id="fr_720"></span>[9](#fn_720) They were a prosperous
and fairly intelligent community; their wars with the Indian tribes had
been conducted successfully, and at their own expense; at their own
expense also they had constructed public buildings, roads, and bridges;
they had conquered the desert, and amid its wastes had founded cities;
there could be no doubt of their ability to maintain a state government;
and thus far, at least, there was no valid reason to question their
loyalty. That under these circumstances their memorial should be treated
with contempt gave sore offence to the saints. <span
id="fr_721"></span>[10](#fn_721)

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

    Another cause of complaint with the Mormons was the impossibility of
acquiring a secure title to land. In December 1853 the president of the
United States had recommended in his message that the land system be
extended over Utah, <span id="fr_722"></span>[11](#fn_722) with such
modifications as the peculiarities of that territory might require.
About a year later, an act was passed authorizing the appointment of a
surveyor-general for Utah, <span id="fr_723"></span>[12](#fn_723) and
soon afterward large tracts were surveyed. But the Indian title had not
yet been extinguished; the sections were not open to preëmption, and the
saints therefore found themselves merely in the condition of squatters
in their land of Zion. They were ready to purchase, but the organic act
forbade the primary disposal of the soil, and, as it seems, the
government, knowing their ability and their eagerness to purchase, still
hesitated to make them its permanent owners. Nevertheless, a few years
before, this portion of the public domain had virtually been ceded to
them as worthless.

    Still another reason for dissatisfaction was the failure of congress
to make such appropriations as were granted for other territories. With
the exception of about $96,000 granted, it will be remembered, as part
compensation for an expense of $300,000 in quelling Indian outbreaks,
$20,000 for a state-house, and $5,000 for a library, no money was voted
specially for the benefit of Utah between 1850 and 1857; for the sums
expended on the survey and construction of roads connecting that
territory with other parts of the Union cannot, of course, be so
regarded. In 1855 the

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

seat of the legislative assembly and of the supreme court was removed to
Fillmore, and in 1856 again transferred to Salt Lake City. <span
id="fr_724"></span>[13](#fn_724) In the latter year a further
appropriation was asked for the completion of the state-house, but the
request was refused, and even the expenses of the assembly and other
necessary items were not promptly paid. <span
id="fr_725"></span>[14](#fn_725)

    Meanwhile most of the gentile officials appointed by the authorities
were, according to Mormon accounts, political adventurers of the lowest
grade—men who, being glad to accept the crumbs of government patronage,
were sent to this the cesspool of the United States. The officials, of
course, answered with counter-charges, among them that the Mormons
combined to obstruct the administration of justice. To attempt to carry
out the laws was, they declared, a hopeless task, in a community
controlled by an ecclesiastical star-chamber, working out in darkness a
sectarian law, and with a grand lama presiding over their suffrages.
Complications hence arise, and the conflict known as the Mormon war.

    Among the principal causes of the rupture were the frequent disputes
between the conflicting judiciaries. By act of 1852 it had been ordered
that the district courts should exercise original jurisdiction, both in
civil and criminal cases, when not otherwise provided for by law, and
should have a general supervision over all inferior courts, to prevent
and correct abuses where no other remedy existed. By consent of court,

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

any person could be selected to act as judge for the trial of a
particular cause or question, and while in this capacity possessed all
the powers of a district judge. The district court judges were, of
course, federal magistrates. By the same act it was provided that there
should be judges of probate for each county within the territory; that
they should be elected for a term of four years by joint vote of the
legislative assembly; should hold four regular sessions each year; and
that their courts should be considered in law as always open. Besides
the powers pertaining to such courts, they had the administration of
estates, the guardianship of minors, idiots, and insane persons, and
"power to exercise original jurisdiction, both civil and criminal, and
as well in chancery as at common law, when not prohibited by legislative
enactment." <span id="fr_726"></span>[15](#fn_726) The probate court
judges were, of course, Mormons; but appeal lay from their decisions to
the district courts. Subject to the revision of the probate courts were
the municipal courts, the justices of the peace, and the three
'selectmen' appointed for each county, whose duties were to oversee and
provide for the maintenance of the poor, to take charge of the persons
and estates of the insane, and to bind apprentice, orphan, and vagrant
children. <span id="fr_727"></span>[16](#fn_727)

    Thus the probate courts, whose proper jurisdiction concerned only
the estates of the dead, were made judges of the living, with powers
almost equal to those of the supreme and district courts. These powers
were conferred on them, as the gentiles alleged, in order to nullify, so
far as possible, the authority of

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

the higher courts; and as the Mormons alleged, because justice could not
be had at the hands of the federal officials, who were little with them
and at such uncertain times that, save for the probate courts, they
would have been practically without civil and criminal jurisdiction. To
the malevolent representations of the latter the saints mainly ascribed
the Mormon war, and, as will presently appear, the violation of some of
their most cherished rights and privileges.

 

    After Seretary Harris and judges Brocchus and Brandebury had set out
for Washington, taking with them the territorial seal and the
territorial funds, Zerubbabel Snow held court, <span
id="fr_728"></span>[17](#fn_728) with little heed to gentile law, until
succeeded in 1854 by George P. Stiles, W. W. Drummond being appointed
associate judge, as will be remembered, and John F. Kinney chief
justice, about the same time.

    Stiles, a renegade Mormon, who had been counsel for Joseph Smith and
the municipality of Nauvoo at the time when the Nauvoo Expositor was
ordered to be suppressed as a nuisance, was assigned to the Carson
district, but soon afterward returned to Salt Lake City, where he held
several sessions of the court. And now trouble commenced. The
legislature had appointed a territorial marshal, who was to take the
place of the United States marshal, impanel jurors, and enforce writs
when the courts were sitting as territorial courts; while the United
States marshal claimed the right to officiate in all the United States
courts, whether they were sitting as territorial or federal courts. To
the latter, the judge issued certain writs, which it was found
impossible to serve, and when the question of jurisdiction was brought
before the court, several Mormon lawyers entered and

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

insulted the judge, threatening him with violence unless he decided in
their favor. <span id="fr_729"></span>[18](#fn_729) Stiles appealed to
the governor, but was told that if he could not sustain and enforce the
laws, the sooner he adjourned his court the better. A short time
afterward the records of the United States district courts were taken
from the judge's office during his absence, and a few moments before his
return a bonfire was made of the books and papers in his office. He, of
course, supposed that the records were also consumed, and so made
affidavit on his return to Washington in the spring of 1857. Meanwhile
the business of the courts was suspended. The records had, in fact, been
removed, and were in safe-keeping; but this silly freak was noised
abroad throughout the land with many exaggerations, and excited much
adverse comment.

    The chief justice was a more popular magistrate than either of his
colleagues. In Iowa, where he resided before receiving his appointment,
he was better known as a tradesman than as a jurist, and on account of
his traffic with the saints at Kanesville was called a jack Mormon. On
his arrival at Salt Lake City he added to his judicial functions the
occupations of store-keeper and boarding-house proprietor. He never lost
the good-will of his patrons, and never refused to drink with them.
Rotund, of vinous aspect, and of medium height, dull-witted, brusque in
manner, and pompous in mien, he was a man whom Brigham knew well how to
use; before taking leave of the Mormons he became an open apologist for
polygamy. He remained in the territory until 1856,

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

and four years afterward was reappointed. We shall hear of him later.

    The official who did more than any other, and perhaps more than all
others, to bring about the Mormon war was Associate Judge W. W.
Drummond. Leaving his wife and family in Illinois without the means of
support, he brought with him a harlot whom he had picked up in the
streets of Washington, and introducing her as Mrs Drummond, seated her
by his side on the judicial bench. Gambler and bully, he openly avowed
that he had come to Utah to make money, and in the presence of the chief
justice declared: "Money is my God" <span
id="fr_730"></span>[19](#fn_730) When first he appeared in court he
insulted the community by mocking at their laws and institutions, and
especially at the institution of polygamy. He also declared that he
would set aside the finding of the probate courts in all cases other
than those which lay strictly within their jurisdiction. Here was a
direct issue, and one that was immediately taken up, for as yet none of
the federal judges had declared the powers granted to these courts by
the act of 1852 to be of no effect. <span
id="fr_731"></span>[20](#fn_731) Nor had any such view of the matter
been expressed by the authorities at Washington.

    When asking for admission as a state or territory, the Mormons did
not suppose that the majesty of the

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

law would be represented by a gamester <span
id="fr_732"></span>[21](#fn_732) with a strumpet by his side. Drummond
soon became even more unpopular than had been Judge Brocchus, and after
administering justice for a brief term at Fillmore and Carson, went home
by way of California. On handing in his resignation, he addressed a
letter to the attorney-general, in which are many groundless accusations
and some truths. He complains "that the federal officers are daily
compelled to hear the form of the American government traduced, the
chief executives of the nation, both living and dead, slandered and
abused from the masses, as well as from the leading members of the
church, in the most vulgar, loathsome, and wicked manner that the evil
passions of men can possibly conceive." He is pained to say that he has
accomplished little good while there, and that the judiciary is only a
puppet. He states that the records and papers of the supreme court had
been destroyed by order of the church, that Brigham had pardoned Mormon
criminals, and imprisoned at will innocent inch who were not
Mormons. <span id="fr_733"></span>[22](#fn_733) He attributes to the
saints the Gunnison massacre, the death of Judge Shaver and of Secretary
Almon W. Babbitt, <span id="fr_734"></span>[23](#fn_734) who was in fact
murdered by Indians during the year 1856, and says that officials are
"insulted, harassed, and murdered for doing their duty, and not
recognizing

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

Brigham Young as the only law-giver and lawmaker on earth."

    These allegations were denied by the Mormon authorities in an
official letter from the deputy clerk of the supreme court of Utah to
the attorney-general, <span id="fr_735"></span>[24](#fn_735) except
those relating to the treatment of the federal officials, the Gunnison
massacre, the death of Shaver, and the murder of Babbitt, which needed
no denial. If it was true that the magistrates appointed by the United
States were held in contempt, there was sufficient provocation. Two of
them, as we have seen, deserted their post, a third was probably an
opium-eater, a fourth a drunkard, a fifth a gambler and a lecher.

    After the departure of Drummond, the only gentile official remaining
in the territory was Garland Hurt, the Indian agent, and none were found
willing to accept office in a territory where it was believed they could
only perform their duty at peril of their lives. The saints had now few
apologists at Washington. Even Senator Douglas, who in former years was
their stoutest champion, had deserted them, and in a speech delivered at
Springfield, Illinois, early in 1856, had denounced Mormonism as "the
loathsome ulcer of the body politic." At least two years before this
date it was apparent that matters in Utah were tending toward a crisis,
though no measures had yet been taken except a feeble effort to
supersede Brigham as governor of the territory. On the 31st of August,
1854, Lieutenant-colonel E. J. Steptoe arrived in Salt Lake City, en
route for California with a body of troops. As Brigham's term of office
was now about to expire, the governorship of Utah was tendered to the
colonel by President Pierce. Knowing, however, that the former

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

was the people's choice, he refused to accept the position, and a
memorial signed by himself, by the federal officials, the army officers,
and all the prominent citizens, was addressed to the president, asking
for the reappointment of Brigham as governor and superintendent of
Indian affairs. <span id="fr_736"></span>[25](#fn_736) The request was
granted, and the colonel and his command remained in the valley until
the following spring, being on good terms with the Mormons, except for a
fracas that occurred between the soldiers and the saints on new-year's
day. <span id="fr_737"></span>[26](#fn_737)

    Orders had been given to Colonel Steptoe to arrest and bring to
trial the perpetrators of the Gunnison massacre, and after much expense
and the exercise of great tact and judgment, most of them were secured
and indicted for murder. Eight of the offenders, including a chief named
Kanosh, were put on trial at Nephi City; and though the judge distinctly
charged the jury that they must find the prisoners guilty or not guilty
of murder, a verdict of manslaughter was returned against three of the
accused, the rest being acquitted. The sentence was three years
imprisonment in the Utah penitentiary, this being the severest

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

punishment prescribed by statute; but after a brief imprisonment, the
culprits made their escape, or, as some declare, were allowed to
escape. <span id="fr_738"></span>[27](#fn_738)

    On the sabbath after the colonel's departure, Brigham repeated in
the tabernacle the remark which he had made two years before,
commencing, "I am and will be governor;" adding on this occasion: "I do
not know what I shall say next winter if such men make their appearance
here as some last winter. I know what I think I shall say: if they play
the same game again, so help me God, we will slay them." <span
id="fr_739"></span>[28](#fn_739)

    Such phrase, deliberately uttered at the place and on the day of
public worship, at a time when Utah sought admission as a state, was
certainly, from an outside standpoint, injudicious, and boded ill for
the saints. At this period the slavery question was the all-absorbing
topic throughout the country. The sedition in Utah, grave though it was,
passed for a time almost unheeded, except by a section of the republican
party, which, while criticising the theories of Senator Douglas, added
to the venom of its sting by coupling slavery and polygamy as the twin
relics of barbarism. After the presidential election of 1856, however,
matters assumed a different phase. There was now a temporary lull in the
storm which a few years later swept with all the fury of a tornado over
the fairest portions of the Union, and the nation had leisure to turn
its attention to the Mormon question. <span
id="fr_740"></span>[29](#fn_740)

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

    It was now established, as was supposed, on sufficient evidence,
that the Mormons refused obedience to gentile law, that federal
officials had been virtually driven from Utah, that one, at least, of
the federal judges had been threatened with violence while his court was
in session, and that the records of the court had been destroyed or
concealed. With the advice of his cabinet, therefore, and yielding
perhaps not unwillingly to the outcry of the republican party, President
Buchanan determined that Brigham should be superseded as governor, and
that a force should be sent to the territory, ostensibly as a posse
comitatus, to sustain the authority of his successor. <span
id="fr_741"></span>[30](#fn_741)

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

    In a report of the secretary of war, dated December 5, 1857, it is
stated that Utah was inhabited exclusively by Mormons; that the people
implicitly obeyed their prophet, from whose decrees there was no appeal;
that from the day when they had settled in the territory their aim had
been to secede from the Union; that for years they had not preserved
even the semblance of obedience to authority, unless by doing so they
could benefit themselves; that they encouraged and perhaps excited nomad
bands of savages to pillage and massacre emigrants; and that they stood
as a lion in the path of the gentile communities established on the
Pacific seaboard. Except that the internal government of the saints was
nominally theocratic and practically autocratic, these statements are
grossly unjust, but not more so than might be expected from a biased and
ill-informed official, who was not even aware that the population of
Utah contained a considerable percentage of gentiles. When first the
Mormons peopled their desert land they had raised with due respect the
Union flag, and as citizens of the nation had, in the name of the
nation, claimed the territory as the nation's right; but now, on the
24th of July, 1857, while celebrating the tenth anniversary of the
arrival of the pioneers, they were to hear for the first time of the
approach of a United States army, and, as they supposed, were to be
driven out of their homes at the point of the bayonet.

    It has not been alleged, however, except by Mormons, that in
ordering the Utah expedition the president had any desire to limit the
freedom of the saints in its broadest constitutional sense. However
baneful to gentile eyes their rights appeared, however profane their
dogmas, however bigoted their rulers, it was not proposed to interfere
with them until it was made to appear by the reports of Drummond

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

and others that they came in conflict with the secular authorities, and
even then every precaution was taken to avoid, if possible, the shedding
of blood. "The instructions of the commanding officer," writes the
secretary of war, "were deliberately considered and carefully drawn, and
he was charged not to allow any conflict to take place between the
troops and the people of the territory, except only he should be called
upon by the governor for soldiers to act as a posse comitatus in
enforcing obedience to the laws."

    Before the departure of the troops an opinion was requested of
General Winfield Scott as to the prospects of an expedition during the
year 1857. The general's decision was strongly against the despatch of
an army until the following season, on account of the distance and the
time required for the concentration of regiments. It would have been
well if his advice had been taken, but other counsels prevailed, and
about the end of May orders were given that a force, consisting of the
5th and 10th infantry, the 2d dragoons, and a battery of the 4th
artillery, should assemble as soon as possible at Fort
Leavenworth. <span id="fr_742"></span>[31](#fn_742) Several
reënforcements were sent forward during the year, and in June 1858 there
were more than six thousand troops in Utah, or en route for that
territory. <span id="fr_743"></span>[32](#fn_743) The command was given
to Brigadier-general Harney, a man of much rude force of character,
ambitious, and a capable officer, but otherwise ill fitted for the
conduct of an expedition that needed the qualities of a diplomatist more
than those of a soldier.

    It is probable that no expedition was ever despatched by the United
States better equipped and provisioned than was the army of Utah, <span
id="fr_744"></span>[33](#fn_744) of which the portion

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

now under orders mustered about twenty-five hundred men. Two thousand
head of beef cattle, together with a huge and unwieldy convoy, were sent
in advance, the trains being larger than in ordinary warfare would have
been required for a force of ten thousand troops. The price to be paid
for the transport of stores, provisions, and munitions of war was at the
rate of twenty-two cents a pound; and thus it will be seen that if the
Utah war served no other purpose, it made the fortunes of those who
secured the government contracts. Through a little dexterous
manipulation at Washington, permission was given to the man who secured
the flour contract to furnish Utah flour, and this he did at a cost of
seven cents per pound, receiving, of course, meanwhile, the money
allowed for freight, and netting in a single year the sum of
$170,000. <span id="fr_745"></span>[34](#fn_745) The troops remained in
the territory for about four years, and no wonder that they often asked
one of another, "Why were we sent here? Why are we kept here? What good
call we do by remaining here?" No wonder also that the people asked,
"Were they retained in Utah in order to fill the purses of the
contractors?" <span id="fr_746"></span>[35](#fn_746)

    Fortunately for the welfare of the expedition, it happened that the
harvest of 1857 was a plentiful one, and though the crop of 1856 had
been a partial failure, and that of 1855 almost a total failure, <span
id="fr_747"></span>[36](#fn_747) there

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

was now an abundant supply of grain. Neither the famine nor the
bountiful harvest which followed appear, however, to have been known to
the authorities at Washington. The winter of 1856-7 had been unusually
severe. For six months the territory had been shut out from the
remainder of the world, no mails having reached the eastern states. To
add to their distress, the Mormons were compelled to feed large
multitudes of emigrants, who arrived at this period in a starving
condition in the hand-cart companies. At the time when the expedition
was ordered, there were thousands in the territory who, for more than a
year, had not had a full meal; there were thousands of children who had
endured the gnawings of hunger until hunger had become to them a second
nature. Yet in the orders to Harney, issued while yet the famine was at
its sorest, we read: "It is not doubted that a surplus of provisions and
forage, beyond the wants of the resident population, will be found in
the valley of Utah, and that the inhabitants, if assured by energy and
justice, will be ready to sell them to the troops. Hence, no
instructions are given you for the extreme event of the troops being in
absolute need of such supplies, and their being withheld by the
inhabitants. The necessities of such an occasion would furnish a law for
your guidance." <span id="fr_748"></span>[37](#fn_748)

    But the sequel will show that instead of the troops living on the
Mormons, the Mormons lived on the troops, stampeding their cattle,
plundering or destroying their provision trains, and only after all fear
of active hostilities had been removed, selling them surplus grain at
exorbitant rates.

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

    Before the end of June 1857 the first division of the army of Utah
was assembled at Fort Leavenworth, and before the end of July was on its
march to Salt Lake City, Harney remaining meanwhile with some squadrons
of the second dragoons in Kansas, where trouble was anticipated at the
forthcoming elections in October. In the instructions issued to the
general, it was stated that though the lateness of the season and the
smallness of the force presented difficulties, if not danger, it was
believed that these obstacles might be overcome by care in its outfit
and prudence in its conduct. No expense was to be spared that would
insure the efficiency, health, and comfort of the troops; a large
discretion was allowed in the purchase of supplies, and no reasonable
limit was placed as to the number of guides, interpreters, spies, and
laborers to be employed. The men were to be so completely equipped as to
act, for a time, as a self-sustaining machine, and to be kept well
massed and in hand. Detachments were not to be lightly hazarded, but a
small, though sufficient, force was to move separately in charge of the
more cumbersome part of the convoy, and in advance of the rest, until
overtaken by the main body, when it was to form the rear-guard. Thus no
precautions were omitted that might serve to insure the success of the
expedition, and it was hoped that its purpose might be attained without
the loss of a single life.

    Meanwhile, events of some importance had transpired at Washington.
The governorship of Utah, after being refused by several persons, was
accepted in July by Alfred Cumming, who had recently been superintendent
of Indian affairs on the upper Missouri, in which capacity he had
displayed tact and executive ability. About the same time D. R. Eckles
was appointed chief justice, and John Cradlebaugh and Charles E.
Sinclair, associate judges.

    During the month of June, also, a contract granted to Hiram Kimball,
for the carriage of the United

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

States mails between Salt Lake City and Independence, Missouri, was
annulled, ostensibly on account of their non-arrival within the
stipulated time. <span id="fr_749"></span>[38](#fn_749) Between 1851 and
1856 the service had been regularly performed, the contract being held
in the autumn of 1856 by the gentile firm of Hockaday & Megraw, <span
id="fr_750"></span>[39](#fn_750) the latter

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

of whom, when it was awarded to a Mormon, addressed a malignant epistle
to the president. I have no doubt," he declares, "that the time is near
at hand and the elements rapidly combining to bring about a state of
affairs which will result in indiscriminate bloodshed, robbery, and
rapine, and which, in a brief space of time, will reduce that country to
the condition of a howling wilderness." The remainder of Magraw's
communication, <span id="fr_751"></span>[40](#fn_751) though containing
no specific charges, is in a similar vein.

    This despatch was probably the actual reason that led to the
withdrawal of the mail contract, and certainly among the reasons that
led to the Utah war; for in answer to a resolution asking for details as
to the cause of the expedition, the secretary of state reported that the
only document on record or on file in his department was the letter of
Mr Magraw to the president. <span id="fr_752"></span>[41](#fn_752)

    The annual payment on account of Hiram Kimball's contract amounted
only to $23,600 a year, a sum barely sufficient to defray expenses; but
such a favor, small as it was, had never before been conferred on a
Mormon citizen. Brigham resolved, therefore, that all diligence should
be used in keeping faith with the government, and for his own benefit
established in connection with the mail service the B. Y. Express
Carrying Company. In the early spring of 1857 the snow was still deep on
plain and mountain, and to build stations and provide draught animals,
and forage for the entire distance of more than twelve hundred miles was
no easy task. But Brigham had at his call the entire community.
Summoning the more enterprising of the brethren, he laid before them his
plan, convinced them that the B. Y. Express would develop

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

into a good money-making enterprise, and would place Utah in frequent
intercourse with the world long before an overland railroad could be
completed. Moreover, it was proposed that Mormon settlements should be
formed along the line of route, and parties were at once organized and
equipped for this purpose. <span id="fr_753"></span>[42](#fn_753)

    On the 2d of June, 1857, Abraham O. Smoot, then mayor of Salt Lake
City, <span id="fr_754"></span>[43](#fn_754) set out in charge of the
eastward-bound mail and of the B. Y. Express. Between Fort Laramie and
Fort Kearny he encountered the advanced guard of the army of Utah, and,
as he relates, was informed by the commanding officer that the troops
"were reconnoitring the country in search of hostile Indians." When
about a hundred miles west of Independence freight teams were met,
destined, as the drivers said, for some western post, but for what
particular post they did not know. On reaching Kansas City, Smoot
repaired with one Nicholas Groesbeck, who took charge of the mails at
that point, to the office of William H. Russell, and there

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

ascertained that the freight trains were intended for Salt Lake City,
that Cumming had been appointed governor, and that orders had been given
that no more mails should for the present be delivered to the Mormons.
Harnessing his fleetest animals to a light spring wagon, Smoot
immediately started homeward, and making the distance from Fort Laramie
in about five days, found the brethren celebrating their pioneer
anniversary at Little Cottonwood Cañon. <span
id="fr_755"></span>[44](#fn_755)

    Thus, in part through the stubbornness of the Mormons, but in part
also through the malice of a dissolute and iniquitous judge, the spite
of a disappointed mail contractor, the wire-pulling of birds of prey at
Washington, and possibly in accordance with the policy of the president,
who, until the confederate flag had been unfurled at Fort Sumter,
retained in the valley of Great Salt Lake nearly all the available
forces in the Union army and a store of munitions of war sufficient to
furnish an arsenal, was brought about the Utah war.

    "Give us ten years of peace, and we will ask no odds of the United
States," declared Brigham when the pioneers first entered the valley.
And now the ten years had passed, and on the margin of a mountain lake,
seven thousand feet above sea-level, under bowers of fragrant pine and
fir, twenty-five hundred of the saints were assembled on the 24th of
July, 1857. It was a day of feasting and recreation. Hand in hand with
little children, who had seen nothing of the great world beyond their
native valley, walked silver-haired elders and apostles, who had passed
through all the tribulations of Kirtland and Nauvoo. Of the rest, some
were strolling among the trees, some were fishing in the lake, some were
dancing, some busied with games. Laughter and the noise of merry-making
mingled with the songs of Zion. It was now near even-fall, and the
western sun had already crimsoned the frosted peaks, when two
dust-stained messengers

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

rode in hot haste up the cañon, and announced to the brethren the
approach of the army of Utah.

    All eyes turned at once to Brigham. It was at times like the
present, when the hearts of the others sank within them, that his genius
rose superior to all obstacles, proving him the born leader that all
acknowledged him to be. Gathering the people around him, he repeated the
words uttered ten years before, prophesying even now that at no distant
day he would himself become president of the United States, or dictate
who should be president. Then festivities were renewed, and when the day
was far spent the people returned to their homes with trust in Brigham
and the God of Joseph.

    Then war became the universal theme. Fire-arms were manufactured or
repaired; scythes were turned into bayonets; long-unused sabres were
burnished and sharpened, and from all parts of the earth the saints were
summoned to the defence of Zion. Apostles Lyman and Rich, who were in
charge of the saints at San Bernardino, and Orson Hyde, who, as we shall
see, had founded a thriving colony in Carson Valley, were ordered to
break up their settlements and gather to the defence of Zion. Messengers
were sent to the Atlantic states and to Europe to summon home the elders
and apostles, <span id="fr_756"></span>[45](#fn_756) and, had it been
possible, thousands of converts from all parts of the world would have
rallied this year round the standard of the prophet.

    On the 8th of September Captain Van Vliet arrived in Salt Lake
City, <span id="fr_757"></span>[46](#fn_757) with orders to purchase
forage and lumber, and to assure the Mormons that

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

the troops would not molest or interfere with them. Though informed by
parties whom he met en route that he would not be allowed to enter the
territory, or would do so at the risk of his life, the captain met with
a cordial reception. Brigham, Wells, Bernhisel, and other leading
citizens called at his quarters on the evening of his arrival, and a
formal interview was appointed for the following day <span
id="fr_758"></span>[47](#fn_758) at the social hall, when Van Vliet was
introduced to a large number of prominent Mormons, presented to Brigham
an official letter from Harney, and declared the purpose of his mission.
The governor and the captain then retired with a few others to a private
office, where a conversation took place, from which I give a few
extracts that may be of interest to the reader.

    "We do not want to fight the United States," remarked Brigham, "but
if they drive us to it, we shall do the best we can; and I will tell
you, as the Lord lives, we shall come off conquerors. The United States
are sending their armies here to simply hold us until a mob can come and
butcher us, as has been done before. We are the supporters of the
constitution of the United States, and we love that constitution and
respect the laws of the United States; but it is by the corrupt
administration of those laws that we are made to suffer. Most of the
government officers who have been sent here have taken no interest in
us, but on the contrary, have tried many times to destroy us."

    "This is the case with most men sent to the territories," Van Vliet
replied. "They receive their offices as a political reward, or as a
stepping-stone to the senatorship; but they have no interest in common
with the people. The greatest hold that the government now has upon you
is in the accusation that you have burned the United States records."

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

    "I deny that any books of the United States have been burned," said
Brigham. "I have broken no law; and under the present state of affairs,
I will not suffer myself to be taken by any United States officer to be
killed as they killed Joseph Smith."

    "I do not think it is the intention of the government to arrest
you," said Van Vliet, "but to install a new governor in the territory."

    "I believe you tell the truth," returned Brigham, "that you believe
this—but you do not know their intentions as well as I do. If they dare
to force the issue, I shall not hold the Indians by the wrist any longer
for white men to shoot at them; they shall go ahead and do as they
please. If the issue comes, you may tell the government to stop all
emigration across the continent, for the Indians will kill all who
attempt it. And if an army succeeds in penetrating this valley, tell the
government to see that it has forage and provisions in store, for they
will find here only a charred and barren waste. We have plenty here of
what you want, but we will sell you nothing. Further than this, your
army shall not enter this valley." <span
id="fr_759"></span>[48](#fn_759)

    In vain Van Vliet remonstrated, stating that though the mountain
passes might be defended against the small army then approaching Utah, a
force would surely be sent, during the following year, that would
overcome all opposition. To this warning, several times repeated, but
one answer was returned: "We are aware that such will be the case; but
when these troops arrive they will find Utah a desert; every house will
be burned to the ground, every tree cut down, and every field laid
waste. We have three years’ provisions on hand, which we will cache, and
then take

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

to the mountains and bid defiance to all the powers of the government."

    During the captain's visit, Brigham, with the apostles, General
Wells of the Nauvoo legion, and others, asked him to walk through their
grounds, and introducing him to some of the Mormon women, showed him the
garden-spots which their hands had fashioned out of the wilderness.
"What, madam," he exclaimed to one of the sisters, "would you consent to
see this beautiful home in ashes and this fruitful orchard destroyed?"
"I would not only consent to it," was the answer, "but I would set fire
to my home with my own hands, and cut down every tree, and root up every
plant." On the following sabbath the captain attended divine service at
the tabernacle, when John Taylor, after referring in his discourse to
the approach of the troops, and repeating that they should not be
allowed to enter the territory, desired all who would apply the torch to
their dwellings, cut down their trees, and lay waste their farms to
raise their hands. Every hand was raised in a congregation numbering
more than four thousand. "When the time comes to burn and lay waste our
improvements," said Brigham in a sermon delivered on the same day, "if
any man undertakes to shield his he will be treated as a traitor. …Now
the faint-hearted can go in peace; but should that time come, they must
not interfere. Before I will again suffer, as I have in times gone by,
there shall not one building, nor one foot of lumber, nor a fence, nor a
tree, nor a particle of grass or hay, that will burn, be left in reach
of our enemies. I am sworn, if driven to extremity, to utterly lay waste
this land in the name of Israel's God, and our enemies shall find it as
barren as when we came here."

    Captain Van Vliet was astounded. He had expected to find a seditious
and priest-ridden community, mouth-valiant and few in number, whom the
mere approach of the troops would tame into submission. He found instead
this handful of enthusiasts,

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

rising against the might of a great nation. He declared, as the Mormons
relate, that if the United States made war on them, he would withdraw
from the army. Quitting Salt Lake City a few days afterward, he arrived
at Washington in November, and delivered his report to the secretary of
war. <span id="fr_760"></span>[49](#fn_760)

    On the day after the captain's departure, Brigham issued a
proclamation declaring martial law in Utah, forbidding all armed forces
to enter the territory under any pretence whatever, and ordering the
Mormon militia to be in readiness to march at a moment's notice. <span
id="fr_761"></span>[50](#fn_761) It is probable that the Nauvoo legion,
which now included the entire militia force of the territory, mustered
at this date from four to five thousand men. <span
id="fr_762"></span>[51](#fn_762) Though imperfectly armed and equipped,
and of course no match for regular troops, they were not to be held in
contempt. In July 1857 the legion had been reorganized, the two cohorts,
now termed divisions, having each a nominal strength of two thousand.
The divisions consisted of two brigades, the brigades of two regiments,
the regiments of five battalions, each of a hundred men, <span
id="fr_763"></span>[52](#fn_763) the battalion being divided into
companies of fifty, and the companies into platoons of ten. Each platoon
was in charge of a lieutenant, whose duty it was carefully to inspect
the

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

arms, ammunition, and accoutrements. Those who failed to provide their
equipments were fined, and those who disposed of them were tried by
court-martial and doubly fined. Penalties were also imposed for
non-attendance at muster and drill. <span
id="fr_764"></span>[53](#fn_764) The cavalry arm was for a time
abolished <span id="fr_765"></span>[54](#fn_765) as unsuited to mountain
warfare, and a corps of topographical engineers organized, together with
an ordnance corps.

    All able-bodied males in the territory, except those exempt by law,
were liable, as we have seen, to military service, and it is probable
that the Mormons could put in the field not less than seven thousand raw
troops, half disciplined, indeed, but inured to hardship, and most of
them excellent marksmen. If Brigham had now carried out his threat of
letting loose the Indian tribes of Utah, the United States forces would
have been hopelessly outnumbered. Arms and ammunition were supplied in
part from San Bernardino, <span id="fr_766"></span>[55](#fn_766) though
no considerable reinforcements from southern California arrived until
after the crisis was over, and those from Carson Valley did not exceed
one hundred men capable of bearing arms. <span
id="fr_767"></span>[56](#fn_767)

    It was not, of course, the intention of the saints to encounter the
army of Utah in the open field, or even behind breastworks, if it could
be avoided. In order

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

to explain their tactics, I cannot do better than quote a few lines from
a despatch addressed soon afterward by the lieutenant-general of the
Nauvoo legion to Major Joseph Taylor, and signed, "your brother in
Christ, Daniel H. Wells." "On ascertaining the locality or route of the
troops, proceed at once to annoy them in every possible way. Use every
exertion to stampede their animals and set fire to their trains. Burn
the whole country before them and on their flanks. Keep them from
sleeping, by night surprises; blockade the road by felling trees or
destroying the river fords where you can. Watch for opportunities to set
fire to the grass on their windward, so as, if possible, to envelop
their trains. Leave no grass before them that can be burned. Keep your
men concealed as much as possible, and guard against surprise." <span
id="fr_768"></span>[57](#fn_768)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_712"></span>[481:1](hou21.htm#fr_712) *Journal of
Discourses*, i. 135.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[482:2](hou21.htm#fr_713) Officials nominated
by the governor were also elected by the assembly, by a unanimous vote.
At a joint session held Jan. 17, 1854, Councillor Taylor presented a
list of nominations, including an auditor, treasurer, territorial
commissioner, surveyor-general, librarian, member of the code
commission, a district attorney, a probate judge, and several notaries
public. A vote was taken on each nomination, and all were carried
unanimously. *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 134.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[482:3](hou21.htm#fr_714) Copies of the message
will be found in *Id*., 1853-4, 111-23; *Deseret News*, Dec. 15, 1853.
It contains a statement of the revenue and expenses of the territory for
the then current year. The assessment for 1853 was at the rate of one
per cent, and should have yielded, including the delinquencies in the
previous year's collections, $24,121.09. The expenses were only
$14,181.23, of which $12,301.37 was for public improvements; but during
the year warrants had been issued on the treasury amounting to
$14,834.92, and there were previous warrants, not yet redeemed,
amounting to $2,896.66, together with outstanding debts estimated at
$6,000, making in all $23,733.58. Of this sum $10,003.66 had been
redeemed, and there was a balance in the treasurer's hands of $1,298.41,
leaving a debt of $12,431.57, for which there were no available funds.
The delinquencies still remaining for 1852, when the assessment was two
per cent, were $6,463, and for 1853, $10,523. If these were collected,
there would be a balance of $4,554.49 in the treasury. The saints are
exhorted to pay their assessments more promptly, and the officers to be
more energetic in their collection. Copies of the governor's messages
for 1851-2 will be found in *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 1851-2, 100-13;
*Deseret News*, Jan. 10, 1852.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[482:4](hou21.htm#fr_715) Copies of the act are
in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 232-4; *Utah Pamphlets, Polit*.,
xiv. 6-7. The result of the election for 1853 is given in an extra of
the *Deseret News*, Aug. 25, 1853, and will be found in the same paper
for each succeeding year.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[483:5](hou21.htm#fr_716) The remaining acts of
the legislature for 1852-3 will be found in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed.
1855), 231-52, (ed. 1866), 64-6. On March 3, 1852, an act was approved
whereby it was made unlawful 'to use with disrespect the name of the
deity,' or to 'become publicly intoxicated so as to endanger the peace
and quiet of the community.' For the former offence the penalty was a
fine of $2 to $10, or one to five days’ labor on the public highway, at
the discretion of the court; for the latter, a fine of $1 to $10. On
Jan. 17, 1853, an act was approved incorporating the Deseret Iron Co.,
Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, and Geo. A. Smith being among the
members of the body corporate. Acts were also passed incorporating the
Provo Canal and Irrigation Co., of which Orson Hyde, Geo. A. Smith, and
Geo. W. Armstrong were the promoters, power being granted to divert a
portion of the waters of Provo River. Another act bearing this date
gives to Dan. H. Wells the right to erect and control ferries on Green
River, the rates of toll being $3 for each vehicle not over 2,000 lbs
weight, $4 for any vehicle between 2,000 and 3,000, $5 for those between
3,000 and 4,000, and $6 for those over 4,000 lbs; for each horse, mule,
ox, or cow 50 cents, and for each sheep, goat, or swine 25 cents. Wells
was required to pay ten per cent of the proceeds to the emigration fund.
On Jan. 21, 1853, an act was passed incorporating the Provo
Manufacturing Co., of which Orson Hyde, Geo. A. Smith, and others were
members. By other acts of this date the Great S. L. City Water Works
Association was incorporated, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Ezra T.
Benson, Jedediah M. Grant, Jesse C. Little, and Phineas W. Cook being
the body corporate; to Chas Hopkins and others was granted the right to
build a toll-bridge across the Jordan, to Jos. Busby the privilege of
establishing ferries on Ham Fork of the Green River, and to Jos. Young,
David Fullmer, and two others that of establishing ferries at Bear River
and building a toll-bridge across the Malad. On the same date an act was
passed regulating the mode of procedure in criminal cases. By act of
June 4, 1853, Abiah Wardsworth and two others were granted the right to
erect a toll-bridge across the Weber. The acts, resolutions, and
memorials of the legislature were published in the *Deseret News*. In
the issues of June 18, 1853, and Jan. 11, 1855, is a description of
festivities held by the members, which the federal officials were
invited. They were afterward held once twice each year.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[484:6](hou21.htm#fr_717) A copy of it may be
found in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 414-15.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[484:7](hou21.htm#fr_718) The full text is
given in *Sen. Misc. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., iii. no. 240, *Utah
Acts*, 1855-6; *Deseret News*, Apr. 2, 1856.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[484:8](hou21.htm#fr_719) They were tabled in
the senate on the 20th of April, 1858.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[484:9](hou21.htm#fr_720) In 1854 W. Richards
estimated the population of Utah at 40,000 to 50,000. In Feb. 1856
Leonard W. Hardy, census agent, gave 76,335 as the number, of whom
37,277 were males and 39,058 females. The peace commissioners sent to
the territory in 1858, after the Utah war, reported its population at
the figures given by Richards. The census of 1860 was taken under some
disadvantages. Gen. Burr was appointed to that duty by Marshal Dotson, a
strong anti-Mormon, but as the saints murmured at this selection, a
clerk in his store was chosen in his stead. The returns gave 40,295
souls, including 29 apprentices, or so-called slaves, and are probably
much within the actual figures. At this date the Mormons claimed a
population of 90,000 to 100,000, which is doubtless an exaggeration. In
order to show the number that would entitle them to admission as a
state, they were accused of counting cattle and unborn children as
souls. *Burton's City of the Saints*. 356-8. It is probable that the
actual population in 1860 was about 65,000.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[484:10](hou21.htm#fr_721) For comments on the
admission of Utah as a state at this period, see <span id="page_XXX">p.
XXX</span> *Deseret News*, Apr. 2, May 21, 1856; *Putnam's Mag*., v.
225-36; *S. F. Bulletins*, Aug. 23, 1856.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[485:11](hou21.htm#fr_722) And also over New
Mexico. *House Ex. Doc*., 33d Cong. 1st Sess., i. pt 1, p. 12.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[485:12](hou21.htm#fr_723) *U. S. Public Laws*,
33d Cong. 2d Sess., 611; *House Ex. Doc*., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., xxvi. p.
971. The appointment was given to David H. Burr, who, according to a
writer in the *Internat. Rev*., Feb. 1882, p. 192, met, with such
opposition that he was compelled to flee for his life. I find no
confirmation of this statement, nor does Mr Burr mention any
disagreement with the Mormon authorities in his report, in *House Ex.
Doc*., 34th Cent. 3d Sess., i. pt i. pp. 542-9.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[486:13](hou21.htm#fr_724) *Taylor's Narr*.,
MS.; *Wells’ Narr.*, MS.; Hist. B. Young, MS.; *Utah Notes*, MS.;
*Olshausen, Mormonen*, 163; *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1866), 106. In
*Richards’ Narr*., MS., 69, it is stated that the extra expense caused
to most of the members was the cause of the second removal. Fillmore is
about 105 miles south of S. L. City. In the *Deseret News* of Jan. 11,
1855, is a description of the state-house at Fillmore, so far as it was
then completed.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[486:14](hou21.htm#fr_725) Demands were made on
congress for the expenses of the assembly in 1856, and for making a
survey of the boundaries of Oregon in the same year. *Utah Acts*,
1855-6, p. 47; 1858-9, p. 38. Neither was granted. In 1852 a bill passed
the house of representatives in congress, giving to the legislatures of
territories the control of appropriations for their expenses. To this
was added an amendment 'that the provisions of this act shall not apply
to Utah.' *U.S. House Jour*., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., 780. The bill was
thrown out by the senate.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[487:15](hou21.htm#fr_726) *Utah, Acts Legisl*.
(ed. 1855), 120-1, 123-4. Section 8 of this act, relating to pleadings,
is worthy of note, as it shows the tendency of the Mormons to simplify
their system of legal procedure. 'Any pleading which possesses the
following requisites shall be deemed sufficient: First, when to the
common understanding it conveys a reasonable certainty of meaning.
Second, when by a fair and natural construction it shows a substantial
cause of action or defence. If defective in the former, the court shall
direct a more specific statement. If in the latter, it is ground for
demurrer; demurrers for formal defects are abolished.'

<span id="fn_727"></span>[487:16](hou21.htm#fr_727) An act creating the
office of selectmen, and defining their duties, approved Feb. 5, 1852,
will be found in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 136-7.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[488:17](hou21.htm#fr_728) According to the
provisions of 'an act concerning the judiciary and for judicial
purposes,' approved Oct. 4, 1851. A copy of it will be found in
*Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 93-4. Among other proceedings, Snow tried
and convicted several Mexicans for buying Indian slaves. The slaves were
forfeited and delivered into the keeping of the Mormons. *Waites' Mormon
Prophet*, 23.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[489:18](hou21.htm#fr_729) The names of the
lawyers were James Ferguson, Hosea Stout, and J. C. Little. *Id*., 37.
In Dec. 1858 a Mormon grand jury found that 'James Ferguson of Salt Lake
City did use language and threats calculated to intimidate Judge George
P. Stiles.' S.E. Sinclair, who succeeded Stiles after the arrival of the
troops under Johnston, did his utmost to bring to justice those who had
intimidated his predecessor. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 283,
note. Beadle states that Thomas Williams, also a Mormon lawyer,
protested against the insult offered to the judge, that his life was
threatened in consequence, and that he was murdered while attempting to
escape to California. *Life in Utah*, 175.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[490:19](hou21.htm#fr_730) Adding, 'And you may
put this down in your journal if you like.' *Remy's Journey to G. S. L.
City*, i. 469. Remy states that he was present when the remark was made.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[490:20](hou21.htm#fr_731) Judge Shaver tacitly
admitted the jurisdiction of the probate courts, but Chief Justice
Kinney was the first to render decisions from the bench confirming their
jurisdiction. His interpretation of the organic act is noteworthy: 'The
court holds that by virtue of that clause of the organic act which
provides that "the jurisdiction of the several courts provided for,"
including the probate courts, "shall be as limited by law," that the
legislature had the right to provide by law for the exercise by the
probate courts of jurisdiction in civil and criminal cases.' *Burton's
City of the Saints*, 379. The clause in section 9 of this act to which
Kinney refers provides that 'the jurisdiction of the several courts
herein provided for, both appellate and original, and that of the
probate courts, and of justices of the peace, shall be as limited by
law.' If the phrase 'limited by law' be so interpreted as to extend the
right of proving wills to jurisdiction in all other matters, one fails
to see the need of federal judges. As well indict a man for murder
before a justice of the peace.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[491:21](hou21.htm#fr_732) Remy states that
after a gambling quarrel Drummond ordered his negro Cato to assault and
ill use a Jew named Levi Abrahams, who had turned Mormon. *Journey to G.
S. L. City*, i. 469-70. Mrs Waite's version of the matter is, that when
the court was about to be opened at Fillmore, a Jew was hired to quarrel
with the judge and strike him. Instead of striking him, the Jew sent an
insulting message by a negro belonging to Drummond. For answer, the
judge ordered the negro to take a rawhide and lay it on lustily to the
back of the Jew. The negro and judge were arrested. *The Mormon
Prophet*, 39. See also *Hickman's Destroying Angel*, 111-12.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[491:22](hou21.htm#fr_733) He meutions the
cases of Moroni Green, convicted before Judge Kinney of assault with
intent to murder, and of a man named Baker, who murdered a dumb boy.
Beth were sentenced to the penitentiary, but pardoned on arriving there.
Drummond states that on the sabbath after his pardon Brigham accompanied
one of them to church. *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no.
71, p. 212. He also alleges that five or six men from Missouri and Iowa,
who had not violated any criminal law in America, were in the
penitentiary.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[491:23](hou21.htm#fr_734) Who, he says, was
murdered by Mormons by order of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and J.
M. Grant. *Id*., p. 213.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[492:24](hou21.htm#fr_735) *Id*., 214-15.
Curtis E. Bolton, deputy clerk (in the absenee of the chief clerk),
solemnly declares that the records, papers, etc., are in safe-keeping.
He states that Green, a lad 18 years of age, drew a pistol in
self-defence, but did not point it, and was pardoned at the petition of
the U.S. officials and influential citizens of S. L. City, and that the
statement as to the incarceration of five or six men from Missouri and
Iowa without due cause is utterly false.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[493:25](hou21.htm#fr_736) On Jan. 4, 1855,
Bernhisel wrote from Washington to F. D. Richards: 'I regret to inform
you that Prest Pierce finally declined to reappoint Gov. Young.
Lieut-col Steptoe is the appointee.' *Richards’ Incidents in Utah
Hist*., MS. The memorial states that Brigham Young possesses the
confidence of the people of the territory without distinction of party
or sect, that he is a firm supporter of the constitution of the U.S.,
and that his reappointment would serve the interests of the territory
better than that of any other man, while his removal would cause the
deepest feeling of regret. A copy of it will be found in *Tullidge's
Life of Young*, 239-40, and in *Skelton and Meik's Defence of
Mormonism*, 22. Beadle states that Col Steptoe was entrapped by two of
Brigham's 'decoy women,' and to avoid exposure resigned his commission
as governor. *Life in Utah*, 171; see also *Waite' s The Mormon
Prophet*, 27-8. There are no gounds for such a statement. By Orson Hyde,
in *Deseret News*, March 21, 1555, and by others of the Mormons, the
colonel is spoken of in the highest terms. Memorials for Brigham's
reappointment were also adopted by the legislature, for which see *Utah,
Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 419-21.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[493:26](hou21.htm#fr_737) A quarrel broke out
between the troops and the Mormons in some of the saloons; fire-arms
were used, and several men wounded, two of the soldiers severely. The
entire legion turned out and threatened to annihilate Steptoe's
companies, compelling them to intrench and remain under arms for three
days. The matter was settled by mediation. *Olshausen's Mormonen*, 189.
See also *S. F. Herald*, March 14, 1855, and *Hickman's Destroying
Angel*, 107, where it is stated that the brawl occurred on christmas
day. No mention of this matter is made in the official reports of the
officers.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[494:27](hou21.htm#fr_738) Judge Drummond, in
his letter to Mrs Gunnison, in *Gunnison's The Mormons*, ix.-x., says
that those who were convicted were old, crippled, and partially blind,
while the able-bodied warriors were acquitted, and that Judge Kinney,
before whom the trial took place, was so much mortified at the finding
of the jury that he at once adjourned the court. He also states that Col
Steptoe, Gen. Holman, the government attorney, Garland Hurt, Indian
agent, and others were of opinion that those who were found not guilty
were acquitted by order of the church. The statement as to the escape of
the three who were convicted rests mainly on the authority of Capt.
Rufus Ingalls, the quartermaster of Col Steptoe's regiment. In his
report to the quartermaster-general, in *House Ex. Doc*., 34th Cong. 1st
Sess., i. pt ii. p. 167, he says that they were at large when he left
the valley.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[494:28](hou21.htm#fr_739) Again, in a
discourse delivered at the tabernacle June 17, 1855, he says: "Though I
may not be governor, here my power will not be diminished. No man they
can send here will have much influence with this community.' *Journal of
Discourses*, ii. 322.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[494:29](hou21.htm#fr_740) In *Doctrine and
Covenants* (ed. 1876), 278-9, is given a remarkable revelation <span
id="page_495">p. 495</span> to Joseph Smith, Dec. 25, 1832, and first
published by F. D. Richards in the *Pearl of Great Price* at Liverpool
in 1851. 'Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars which will
shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina,
which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls.
The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations,
beginning at that place; for behold! the southern states shall be
divided against the northern states, and the southern states will call
on other nations, even on the nation of Great Britain, as it is called,
and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend
themselves against other nations; and thus war shall be poured out upon
all nations. And it shall come to pass after many days slaves shall rise
up against their masters, who shall be marshalled and disciplined for
war.' It is somewhat suspicious that this revelation should appear in
the edition of 1876, but not in the one of 1845, or in any other edition
published before the war, so far as I am aware. A copy of it will be
found in *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 420-1. According to *Hist.
B. Young*, MS.; *Carrington's Rem*., MS., Joseph Smith early in his
career warned the saints that 'some day they would see the United States
come against them in war, and that the Lord should deliver them.'

<span id="fn_741"></span>[495:30](hou21.htm#fr_741) The above appear to
be the main reasons that led to what was termed the Utah war. Among the
best statements as to its causes, apart from the official documents
already quoted, are those contained in *Remy's Journey to G. S. L.
City*, i. 468-73, and *Tullidye's Hist. S. L. City*, 144 et seq., though
the latter is somewhat far-fetched and lays too much stress on the part
that Frémont bore in the matter. 'In the framing of its first platform,'
he says the republican party raised her (Utah) to a kindred association
with the south; and in every campaign where John C. Frémont was the
standard-bearer of the party, there could be read: 'The abolishment of
slavery and polygamy, the twin relics of barbarism.' Mr Tullidge borrows
somewhat closely from Stenhouse, who, in his *Rocky Mountain Saints*,
307-8, makes the same remark. The causes of the war have, of course,
been touched upon by most writers on Utah, those in favor of the saints
claiming that there was no just reason for it, and others bringing
numberless charges against them. During the years 1855-7 newspapers and
periodicals throughout the U.S. were teeming with articles and
paragraphs on the Mormon question, most of them being more or less acrid
and unjust in their comments. A writer in the *Atlantic Monthly*, March
1859, p. 364, states that Buchanan's idea in ordering the Utah
expedition was 'to gag the north, and induce her to forget that she had
been robbed of her birthright, by forcing on the attention of the
country other questions of absorbing interest.' For views and statements
of <span id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> the press on the Pacific slope,
see, among others, *S. F. Alta*, Apr. 24, May 21, July 15, Nov. 13, 16,
1857; *S. F. Bulletin*, Apr. 15, 1857; *Sac. Daily Union*, Oct. 27,
1857; *S. L. C. Contributor*, iii.-iv. passim.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[497:31](hou21.htm#fr_742) Circular letter of
Winfield Scott, addressed to the adjutant-general and other officers, on
the 28th of May, 1857. A copy of it will be found in *Tullidge's Hist.
S. L. City*, 121-2.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[497:32](hou21.htm#fr_743) A statement of the
disposition of the troops and the reinforcements en route at this date
will be found in the report of the secretary of war, in *House Ex.
Doc*., 2, 35th Cong. 2d Sess., pp. 31-2.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[497:33](hou21.htm#fr_744) For estimates of
supplies and subsistence, see *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess.,
ix. no. 33, xii. no. 99.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[498:34](hou21.htm#fr_745) *Greeley's Overland
Journey*, 253. Greeley says that this instance had become quite
notorious at Washington.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[498:35](hou21.htm#fr_746) Stenhouse relates
that the man who obtained the flour contract received an order for his
money payable at Camp Floyd, but had the choice of receiving in lieu
army mules at a certain valuation. He chose the latter, and sending them
to California realized a profit of nearly 600 per cent on his money.
*Rocky Mountain Saints*, 416. For further specimens of sharp practice,
see *S. F. Bulletin*, June 8, Aug. 20, 22, 30, 1859.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[498:36](hou21.htm#fr_747) *Utah Notes*, MS.;
*Hist. B. Young*, MS.; *Richards’ Incidents in Utah Hist*., MS., 79-80;
*Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 291. The failure was caused by
crickets. In a letter to his son in England, Heber writes from S. L.
City Feb. 29, 1856: 'I have been under the necessity of rationing my
family sad also yours to two thirds of a pound of breadstuff per day
each; as the last week is up to-day, we shall commence on half a pound
each. This I am under the necessity of doing. Brother Brigham told me
to-day that he had put his family on half a pound each, for there is
scarcely any grain in the country, and there are thousands that have
none at all, scarcely.' This second famine <span id="page_499">p.
499</span> was compared to the famine of Egypt. For months some families
knew not the taste of bread, and settlements in which good crops had
been gathered in former years were compelled to send their teams several
hundred miles for bran and shorts. After 1855 the Mormons stored their
surplus wheat at each harvest, until the completion of the overland
railroad removed all fear of famine.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[499:37](hou21.htm#fr_748) Letter of
Aide-de-camp George W. Lay to Harney, dated from the headquarters of the
army, New York, June 29, 1857. A copy of it will be found in *Tullidge's
Hist. S. L. City*, 122-4.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[501:38](hou21.htm#fr_749) In a distorted
sketch of the Utah expedition, in the *Atlantic Monthly*, March 1859, p.
367, the writer gives, as the actual reason, that the postmaster
believed the malls to have been tampered with, by order of Brigham
Young, at S. L. City or en route. It is improbable that Brigham would
take such risks, for, as we shall see, he now proposed to establish an
express company in connection with the mails.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[501:39](hou21.htm#fr_750) During the winter of
1856-7 no regular mail service was performed, on account of the severity
of the season. The postmaster at S. L. City contracted, however, with
Messrs Little and Hanks to carry a mail to Independence for $1,500. They
made the trip in 78 days, having suffered severely from cold and hunger.
*Little's Mail Service*, MS., 35-8. Mr Little had been for several years
connected with the mail service. In 1850 Sam. H. Woodson of
Independence, Mo., made a contract with the U.S. P.O. department to
carry a monthly mail for four years between that point and S. L. City.
This was the first government mail service performed between S. L. City
and any point east of the Rocky Mountains. Mr Little afterward
contracted with Woodson to carry the mail between S. L. City and Fort
Laramie, where the mails exchanged, commencing the service Aug. 1, 1851,
and associating with himself Ephraim K. Hanks and Charles F. Decker. At
that time there was no settlement between S. L. City and Fort Laramie,
except the trading post at Fort Bridger. On their first trip Little and
Hanks met Secretary Harris and judges Brocchus and Brandebury between
Green River and South Pass. They reached Laramie in nine days without
changing their animals, and there procured five unbroken Mexican mules,
with which they completed their journey. In Sept. 185l C. F. Decker and
Alfred Higgins set out in charge of a mail, Delegate Bernhisel being a
passenger. At Box Elder Creek their party was stopped by 20 Indians, who
plundered the wagon. On Oct. l, 1851, Mr Little started on a second trip
eastward, among his passengers being Judge Brandebury, and among his
fellow-travellers Judge Brocchus. Mr Little's third trip was made in
Nov. and Dec. 1852, Howard Livingstone, of the firm of Livingstone &
Kinkead, being one of his passengers. In Feb. 1852 and May 1853 Mr
Decker carried the mails to Laramie, having a narrow escape from death
at the hands of hostile Indians on his second trip, on which occasion he
met with Kit Carson, to whose intercession he ascribes his deliverance.
Another trip was made by Mr Little in April 1853. *Id*., 1-34; *Utah
Early Records*, MS., passim. For further particulars on mail routes and
services up to 1856, see *U. S. Acts and Resol*., 31st Cong. 1st Sess.,
111; *H. Ex. Doc*., 1, pt 3, 33d Cong. 1st Sess., pt iii. p. 821;
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 5; *Frontier Guardian*, March 7, 1849,
Apr. 17, 1850; *Deseret News*, Apr. 8, 1851, Dec. 25, 1852, May 14,
1853; *Fisher's Amer. Star. Annual*, 1854, pp. 127-8; *Sac. Union*, Apr.
18, 1855. In the *Mail Service across the Plains, by F. Little*, MS. (S.
L. City, 1884), are many incidents of travel during the years of which
his manuscript treats. The service was performed under great
difficulties, the author suffering many hardships and having several
narrow escapes from Indians. Ferez-more Little, a native of Cayuga co.,
N. Y., came to S. L. City in 1850, and joined the Mormon church in 1853.
In 1854-5 he superintended the construction of the Big Cottonwood cañon
wagon road and the building of the penitentiary. In 1868-9 he was
engaged in railroad work on the Union Pacific, and afterward became
interested, as we shall see later, in the Utah Central and Utah Southern
railroads.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[502:40](hou21.htm#fr_751) See *Utah Notes*,
MS.; *Hist. B. Young*, MS.; *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x.
no. 71, pp. 2-3.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[502:41](hou21.htm#fr_752) *Id*., pp. 1-2. In
doc. no. 71 are the reports of the secretary of state, of war, and of
the interior, and also that of the attorney-general, relating to the
expedition. Reference is frequently made to them in this and the
following chapter.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[503:42](hou21.htm#fr_753) *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 345-6; *Hist. B. Young*, MS.; *Little's Mail Service*,
MS.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[503:43](hou21.htm#fr_754) As successor to
Grant, who died Dec. 1, 1856. *Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 27;
*Deseret News*, Dec. 3, 1856. Jedediah Morgan Grant was native of
Windsor, Broome co., N.Y., his parents, Joshua and Athalia Grant, née
Howard, removing to Naples, Ontario co., in 1817, about a year after his
birth. Here the lad remained until he was 14 years of ago, and receiving
little education, was trained to his father's calling, that of a farmer.
The family then removed to Erie co., Penn., and two years later Jedediah
heard for the first time the doctrines of Mormonism. Being convinced of
their truth, he was baptized in 1832, by Elder John F. Boyington, who
afterward became an apostle, and, when 18 years of age, accompanied
Zion's camp in its migration to Missouri. In the winter of 1835 he was
ordained, at Kirtland, a member of the first quorum of seventy, and the
following spring started forth on his first mission, his labors as a
missionary extending over eleven years, principally in the southern and
middle states. At the expulsion from Nauvoo, he was was one of those who
crossed the Mississippi in Feb. 1846, and though not a pioneer, was
among the earliest settlers in the valley of Great Salt Lake, being one
of the captains of hundreds appointed during the migration of 1847.
After holding office under the provisional government of the state of
Deseret, he was elected speaker of the house of representatives; he was
also appointed brigadier-general and afterward major-general in the
Nauvoo legion, and in April 1854, after the decease of Willard Richards,
was made second councillor to Brigham. In the funeral sermon of this
much esteemed citizen, delivered at the tabernacle Dec. 4, 1856, Brigham
remarked: 'He has been in the church upwards of twenty-four years, and
was a man that would live, comparatively speaking, a hundred years in
that time.' *Id*., Dec. 10, 1856; *Linforth's Route from Liverpool*,
115-16; *S. L. City Contributor*, iv. 241-5, 281-3.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[504:44](hou21.htm#fr_755) Letter of A. O.
Smoot.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[505:45](hou21.htm#fr_756) The elders returning
from Europe landed as secretly as possible in New York, fearing that
they would be molested by the authorities, and most of them journeyed to
Utah overland by various routes. The apostles crossed the Atlantic
incognito, and remaining there in disguise until the steamer sailed for
Panama, travelled by way of San Francisco and southern California,
accompanied by a small body-guard of elders. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 354-5.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[505:46](hou21.htm#fr_757) According to special
instructions, dated army headquarters, Fort Leavenworth, July 28, 1857.
See Van Vliet's rept to the acting assistant adj.-general army of Utah,
in *H. Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. pt 2, p. 25.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[506:47](hou21.htm#fr_758) In his *Life of
Brigham Young*, 262, Tullidge gives Aug. 12th, and in his *Hist. Salt
Lake City*, 161, Sept. 12th, as the date of Van Vliet's first formal
interview with Brigham. The correct date is Sept. 9th. See *Deseret
News*, Sept. 16, 1857, where is a description of the captain's visit.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[507:48](hou21.htm#fr_759) *Woodruff's
Journal*, MS., in which were originally noted the words spoken a few
hours after the interview took place. There is little doubt that, so far
as I have quoted them, they are substantially true. In his report, ut
supra, Van Vliet says that at this and other interviews Brigham declared
that 'the Mormons had been persecuted, murdered, and robbed in Missouri
and Illinois, both by the mob and state authorities, and that now the
U.S. were about to pursue the same course; and that, therefore, he and
the people of Utah had determined to resist all persecution at the
commencement.'

<span id="fn_760"></span>[509:49](hou21.htm#fr_760) A copy of it will be
found in *House Ex. Doc*., 351h Cong. 1st Sess., ii. pt 2, pp. 24-7,
37-8. It contains no specific statements not already made, except that
Brigham's only objection to the troops entering Utah was that in doing
so they would open the door for the rabble of the western frontier,
which, as in former days, would persecute and annoy the saints. Copies
of the correspondence between Van Vliet and Brigham as to the purchase
of forage and lumber for army use will be found in *Id*., 35-7.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[509:50](hou21.htm#fr_761) For copies of the
proclamation, dated Sept. 15, 1851, and comments thereon, see *Id*.,
32-3; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 358-9; *Hist. B. Young*, MS.;
*Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 43-5; *Tucker's Mormonism*, 232-7; *S. F.
Alta*, Nov. 25, 30, 1857; *S. F. Herald*, Nov. 25, 1857; *Sac. Daily
Union*, Nov. 25, 1857.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[509:51](hou21.htm#fr_762) In a report of the
secretary of war, in *Sen. Doc*., 33d Cong. 2d Sess., vt. no. 33, the
strength of the Utah militia in 1854 is given at 1,744 infantry and
1,004 cavalry, or a total of 2,748 men. In this return it is stated that
they had no ordnance except one howitzer, and no ordnance stores; but,
as we have seen, some of their forts were mounted with cannon. Brigham,
in his message of Dec. 11, 1854, in *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 1854-5,
anticipates a considerable increase in the new enrolments. In the
*Oregon Argus* of Feb. 13, 1858, the Mormon forces are estimated at
5,000.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[509:52](hou21.htm#fr_763) The brigades
contained 1,000 and the regiments 500 men.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[510:53](hou21.htm#fr_764) *Utah, Acts Legisl*.
(ed. 1866), 190-3, where is a copy of an act, approved Jan. 15, 1857,
for the organization of the militia, and of the regulations adopted six
months later. The regulations were first published in the *Deseret
News*, Apr. 1st of this year. Previous acts relating to the militia,
approved in 1852, will be found in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855),
207-22, 231-2. Daniel H. Wells remained lieutenant-general, James
Ferguson was adjutant-general, and A. P. Rockwood commissary-general.
The names of other officers will be found in *Id*. (ed. 1866), 193;
*Deseret News*, Apr. 29, 1857. All the officers were elected except
those in the engineers' and ordnance corps. Further items concerning the
legion will be found in *Id*., July 6, 1859; *S. F. Alta*, Aug. 11,
1857; *Or. Statesman*, Oct. 20, 1857.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[510:54](hou21.htm#fr_765) By general order
issued at the headquarters of the legion. A copy of it will be found in
the *Deseret News*, July 1, 1857.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[510:55](hou21.htm#fr_766) In *Hayes’ Scraps,
San Bernardino*, i. 53, we read: 'Arms and ammunition continue to be
forwarded from San Bernardino. The last mail-rider took along—in Nov.
1857—500 revolvers, which passed through this city.'

<span id="fn_767"></span>[510:56](hou21.htm#fr_767) With the exception
of a few persons, the Carson Mormons started for S. L. City Sept. 26,
1857, and arrived Nov. ed. They mustered about 450 persons, several
being from Or. and Cal., had with them 123 wagons, and were in charge of
Chester Loveland. *Early Hist. Carson Valley*, MS., 5.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[511:57](hou21.htm#fr_768) A copy of the letter
is given in *Tullldge's Hist. Salt Lake City*, 172. The major was
captured, and the letter delivered to Assistant Adjuant-general Porter
when 16 miles from Fort Bridger. In a postscript the major is ordered to
'take no life.' In *Lee's Mormonism Unvailed*, 18-19, is a copy of a
circular letter, dated S. L. City, Sept. 14, 1857, and signed by Brigham
Young and Daniel H. Wells, in which a similar plan of operations is
marked out. 'But save life always,' is the injunction, 'when it is
possible; we do not wish to shed a drop of blood if it can be avoided.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The Utah War. 1857-1858.](hou22)
