[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou24)  [Next](hou26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_604">p. 604</span>

### CHAPTER XXII. PROGRESS OF EVENTS. 1861-1869.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Governor Dawson's
Gallantry—Utah Refused Admission As a State—Passage of a Bill Against
Polygamy—Measures of the Legislature—Arrival of Governor
Harding—Disputes Between Brigham and the Federal Officials—Arrival of
the California Volunteers—a False Alarm—the Morrisite Troubles—Governors
Doty and Durkee—the Limits of Utah Curtailed—Celebration of Lincoln's
Second Inauguration—the Brassfield and Robinson Murders—Indian
Outbreaks—the Battle of Bear River—Disturbances in Southern
Utah—Treaties With Indian Tribes—the Uintah Valley
Reservation—Bibliographical.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">The</span> first appointments made by
President Lincoln for the territory of Utah were John W. Dawson as
governor, <span id="fr_957"></span>[1](#fn_957) John F. Kinney as chief
justice, R. P. Flenniken and J. R. Crosby associate judges, Frank Fuller
secretary, and James Duane Doty superintendent of Indian affairs. A few
weeks after his arrival, the governor was accused of making improper
advances to one of the Mormon women, and on new-year's eve of 1861 was
glad to make his escape from Zion, being waylaid at Mountain Dell on his
return journey and soundly beaten by a party of saints. <span
id="fr_958"></span>[2](#fn_958)

<span id="page_605">p. 605</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A month later the
associate judges also left the territory, Thomas J. Drake and Charles B.
Waite, appointed in their stead, with Stephen S. Harding as governor,
arriving in July. Meanwhile the secretary, by virtue of his office,
became the chief magistrate. <span id="fr_959"></span>[3](#fn_959)

    Now came an opportunity for Brigham to put forth once more the claim
which he had several times asserted: "I am and will be governor." At
this period another effort was being made to obtain admission as a
state, and on the 17th of March, 1862, the legislature being then in
session, a proclamation was issued, in which, styling himself
governor-elect, Brigham convened the general assembly and ordered the
election of senators to congress. <span id="fr_960"></span>[4](#fn_960)
Soon afterward he telegraphed to Washington that no assistance was
needed in subduing the Indians, who, as will presently appear, were
somewhat troublesome at this date; for "the militia were ready and able,
as they had ever been, to take care of them, and were able and willing
to protect the mail line if called upon to do so." Fuller meekly
indorsed this statement, and was authorized by the war department to
call out ninety men for three months' service between forts Bridger and
Laramie. General Wells was ordered to take command of the party, and in
three days it was ready to march.

    The choice for senators fell on William H. Hooper and George Q.
Cannon. The former had been elected delegate in 1859, when he obtained a
partial settlement of the outstanding claims of the territory, including
a portion of the expenses for the Indian war of 1850, and for the
sessions of the assembly under

<span id="page_606">p. 606</span>

the provisional government. He was at once despatched to Washington,
with a memorial and constitution of the inchoate state of Deseret, and
Cannon, who was then in England, was instructed to join him without
delay. The two elders labored diligently in their cause, but failed of
success. <span id="fr_961"></span>[5](#fn_961) It was claimed, however,
on the part of the Mormons, that they won the respect of congress by
accepting their defeat and adhering to the union at a time when it was
believed throughout Europe that the war would result in favor of the
south, and when the sympathies of England and France were strongly in
favor of the southern states. Moreover, the attitude of the saints
throughout this struggle, and especially the tone of their church organ,
the *Deseret News*, were not adverse to the union cause. On the Sunday
preceding the surrender at Appomattox their prophet foretold in the
tabernacle that there would be yet four years of civil war.

    Though the saints may have had some few friends in congress at this
time, it is certain that they had numerous and bitter enemies, who were
constantly working against their interests. In April 1862 a bill was
introduced by Justin S. Morrill of Vermont "to punish and prevent the
practice of polygamy in the territories of the United States, and for
other purposes, and to disapprove and annul certain acts of the
territorial legislature of Utah." The objectionable acts referred to
included all those which tended to establish or support polygamy, and
especially an

<span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

ordinance incorporating the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
passed in 1851, and reinacted in 1855, whereby all members of the church
were included in the body corporate, trustees being appointed to control
the church property, and the church empowered to make laws with regard
to marriage. <span id="fr_962"></span>[6](#fn_962) It was further
provided by the same act of congress that no corporation or association
for religious purposes should hold real estate in any of the territories
of a greater value than $50,000. <span id="fr_963"></span>[7](#fn_963)

    In other respects the proceedings of the Utah legislature at this
period and for many years afterward contained few objectionable
features, most of them relating to municipal affairs, as did those of
previous sessions. In 1854 and 1855 acts were passed providing for the
construction of canals between Utah Lake, Big Cottonwood Creek, and
Great Salt Lake. <span id="fr_964"></span>[8](#fn_964)

<span id="page_608">p. 608</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In 1862 an
ordinance was approved, regulating the fisheries of the Jordan River. In
1865 laws were enacted amending the charter of Salt Lake City, <span
id="fr_965"></span>[9](#fn_965) and prescribing the mode of assessing
and collecting territorial and county taxes, which must not exceed one
per cent of the assessed value of property. <span
id="fr_966"></span>[10](#fn_966) In 1866 statutes were framed defining
the boundaries of counties, locating the county seats, <span
id="fr_967"></span>[11](#fn_967) and providing for the establishment and
maintenance of common schools. <span id="fr_968"></span>[12](#fn_968)
Between 1854 and 1866 numerous acts were also passed incorporating
agricultural, manufacturing, irrigation, and road companies, <span
id="fr_969"></span>[13](#fn_969) and

<span id="page_609">p. 609</span>

granting to individuals certain water and grazing rights, and the
privilege of building toll-roads and bridges. <span
id="fr_970"></span>[14](#fn_970)

 

    In July 1862, Governor Harding, with judges Waite and Drake, arrived
in Salt Lake City, and for the first time in his career Brigham declared
himself satisfied with the United States officials. Matters worked
smoothly until the meeting of the legislature in December, when the
saints took offence at the governor's message, wherein he reproved them
sharply for disloyalty and the practice of polygamy, and called their
attention to the recent act of congress. "I am aware," he said, "that
there is a prevailing opinion here that said act is unconstitutional,
and therefore it is recommended by those in high authority that no
regard whatever should be paid to the same…I take this occasion to warn
the people of this territory against such dangerous and disloyal
council." <span id="fr_971"></span>[15](#fn_971)

<span id="page_610">p. 610</span>

    Thus was aroused afresh the antagonism of the Mormons, and the
trouble was further increased by the action of Judge Waite, who was
appointed to the second, or southern district, <span
id="fr_972"></span>[16](#fn_972) Drake being assigned to the first, or
central district, and the chief justice to the third, or northern
circuit. Early in 1863 Waite drew up a bill amending the organic act,
providing that juries be selected by the United States marshal,
authorizing the governor to appoint militia officers, and restricting
the powers of the probate courts to their proper functions, though with
a limited criminal jurisdiction. The bill was approved by the governor
and by Judge Drake, and, being forwarded to congress, was referred to
committee. On hearing of this measure, Brigham called a meeting at the
tabernacle for the 3d of March, when many inflammatory speeches were
made, and resolutions passed, condemning the governor's message and the
action of the judges. A committee was appointed to wait on the officials
and request their resignation, and a petition drawn up requesting the
president to remove them. <span id="fr_973"></span>[17](#fn_973)

    To the committee, among whom was John Taylor, Drake replied: "Go
back to Brigham Young, your

<span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

master—that embodiment of sin and shame and disgust—and tell him that I
neither fear him, nor love him, nor hate him—that I utterly despise him.
Tell him, whose tools and tricksters you are, that I did not come here
by his permission, and that I will not go away at his desire or by his
directions. I have given no cause of offence to any one. I have not
entered a Mormon's house since I came here; your wives and daughters
have not been disturbed by me, and I have not even looked upon your
concubines and lewd women." "We have our opinions," remarked one of the
committee as they rose to depart. "Yes," replied Drake, "thieves and
murderers can have opinions." The governor made answer to the committee
in language hardly less injudicious, though somewhat uneasy as to his
own personal safety, but Waite responded in more seemly and temperate
phrase. <span id="fr_974"></span>[18](#fn_974) The Mormons resented the
conduct of the judges as an outrage. Men gathered in groups at the
street corners and discussed the matter with angry gestures; one of the
judges was threatened with personal violence, and it is probable that an
émeute was only prevented by the fact that a party of California
volunteers was now encamped near Salt Lake City.

    Ostensibly for protection against Indians, though in fact because
the mail route and telegraph line were not considered secure in the
hands of the saints, and perhaps also for the purpose of holding the
territory under military surveillance, Colonel Connor was ordered to
Utah in May 1862, his command consisting of the third California
infantry and a part of the second California cavalry, afterward joined
by a few companies from Nevada, and mustering in all about seven hundred
strong. The men had volunteered in the expectation of being ordered to
the seat of war, and great was their disgust when it became known that
Zion was their destination. <span id="fr_975"></span>[19](#fn_975) In
October the troops reached Camp

<span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Floyd, or, as it
was now termed, Fort Crittenden. <span id="fr_976"></span>[20](#fn_976)
Here it was supposed that the volunteers would encamp, and their
commanding officer was informed that no nearer approach to the capital
would be permitted. The colonel paid no heed to this warning. "He would
cross the Jordan," he declared, "though all hell should yawn beneath
it." On the next day his men, after passing through Salt Lake City with
fixed bayonets, loaded rifles, and shotted cannon, encamped on the brow
of a hill <span id="fr_977"></span>[21](#fn_977) east of the city, their
artillery being pointed at Brigham's residence. To this spot was given
the name of Camp Douglas, the site being afterward declared a military
reservation. <span id="fr_978"></span>[22](#fn_978)

    The presence of the volunteers, though they were not sufficient in
number to overawe the populace, and could have been readily annihilated
by the Nauvoo legion, was a source of constant irritation. The Mormons
were not backward in their denunciations, while mischief-makers were
constantly spreading reports that served to increase the mutual
distrust. An elder who was passing Waite's residence, while the judge
was in

<span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

conversation with Colonel Connor, overheard the latter remark: "These
three men must be surprised." "Colonel, you know your duty," answered
the judge. It was now believed that the first presidency was in
danger; <span id="fr_979"></span>[23](#fn_979) a flag was hoisted over
Brigham's residence as a signal, and within an hour two thousand men
were under arms, the prophet's dwelling being strongly guarded,
scaffolding built against the surrounding walls, to enable the militia
to fire down on the volunteers, and cannon planted on the avenues of
approach.

    Night and day for several weeks armed men kept watch over the
prophet, for it was now rumored that Connor intended to seize him at
night and carry him off to Camp Douglas before the saints could rally to
his aid. <span id="fr_980"></span>[24](#fn_980) The citizens were
instructed that, if the attempt were made, alarm guns would be fired
from the hillside east of Brigham's residence. On the night of the 29th
of March they were roused from sleep by the booming of cannon, and, as
quickly as they could don their garments and seize their weapons, all
ran forth from their homes, intent on exterminating the foe. As they
rushed through the streets, the strains of martial music were heard, to
which, as was supposed, the troops were marching on Zion. The alarm was
unfounded, the music and salute being in honor of the colonel's
promotion to the rank of brigadier-general, of which news had just
arrived at Camp Douglas.

    Although it is probable that Connor never intended

<span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

to risk his slender force in an encounter with the territorial militia,
there was a possibility of a collision, and it is probable that
hostilities were prevented by the prevailing of better counsels on both
sides. Brigham was always strongly opposed to the shedding of blood,
though he wished these men out of the city limits, on which the
reservation slightly intrenched. <span id="fr_981"></span>[25](#fn_981)
The grand jury had already voted the camp a nuisance, <span
id="fr_982"></span>[26](#fn_982) and on the mayor devolved the duty of
seeing it abated. But before taking action that official began to count
the cost. To rid the city of the volunteers might be no difficult task,
but if their blood was shed, others would come in tenfold numbers to
take their place. <span id="fr_983"></span>[27](#fn_983) By a little
judicious delay the mayor gave time for the prophet's cooler judgment to
assert itself, and thus averted an issue which might have resulted in
the final dispersion of his people.

    The condition of affairs was now similar to that which had obtained
during the presence of the army of Utah, Judge Kinney shielding the
church dignitaries from molestation by his colleagues, as Governor
Cumming had done from the measures of judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh.
When it was believed that the arrest of Brigham was contemplated, on the
ground that he had recently married another wife, the chief justice, as
a safeguard, and at his own request, ordered him into custody for
violating the act for the suppression of polygamy. The writ was served
by the marshal, without the aid of a posse, and the prisoner, attended
by a few intimate friends, promptly appeared at the state-house, where
an investigation was held,

<span id="page_615">p. 615</span>

and the accused admitted to bail, awaiting the action of the grand jury.
Although the prophet's recent marriage was well known throughout the
city, and had long furnished food for gossip, the judges afterward
refused to find a bill against him, on the ground that there was no
sufficient evidence. <span id="fr_984"></span>[28](#fn_984)

    During its session the grand jury indicted, for armed resistance to
the laws, certain apostates known as Morrisites. In November 1860 an
ignorant and simple-minded Welshman, Joseph Morris by name, made his way
to the capital on foot, from an obscure settlement in Weber county. He
had two letters, the contents of which were, as he claimed, inspired,
their purport being to warn Brigham of his sin. <span
id="fr_985"></span>[29](#fn_985) His despatches were unheeded, or
answered in befitting phrase, <span id="fr_986"></span>[30](#fn_986)
whereupon this new seer and revelator turned his face homeward. Reaching
Kington Fort, on the Weber River, some thirty miles north of the
city, <span id="fr_987"></span>[31](#fn_987) he found favor with the
bishop and certain of his neighbors, who embraced the new doctrine,
believing that Morris was appointed by the Lord to deliver Israel from
bondage, and that the Lord's coming was nigh at hand. Other proselytes
gathered from far and near, and all held their effects in common, for
Christ was about to descend and would provide for his elect. <span
id="fr_988"></span>[32](#fn_988)

<span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

    But the Lord tarried; and meanwhile provisions ran short and the
enthusiasm of the converts began to wane, some desiring to withdraw,
demanding a restitution of their property, and refusing to contribute
anything to the common stock, even for their own support. It was decided
to let the dissenters go in peace; but some of them selected from the
common herd the choicest cattle, and laying in wait for their brethren's
teams, pounced on them while on their way to the mill laden with wheat.
Three of the offenders were seized and imprisoned at Kington Fort, their
friends in vain asking the interference of the sheriff and of Brigham.
An appeal was then made to Judge Kinney, who at once issued warrants for
the arrest of the Morrisite leaders, and writs of habeas corpus for the
men held in custody. No heed was paid to these documents, for Morris had
already appointed the day for the second advent, assuring his followers
that there would no longer be seedtime or harvest, and that meanwhile
they had grain and cattle sufficient for their needs. Colonel Burton,
sheriff of Salt Lake county, was then ordered to enforce the writs, and
on the 13th of June, 1862, appeared on the heights above their camp at
the Weber settlement with a posse of three hundred or four hundred men
and five pieces of artillery.

    A summons was now sent to the leaders, <span
id="fr_989"></span>[33](#fn_989) demanding their surrender within thirty
minutes, and warning them of the consequences if they should refuse.
Morris withdrew to his dwelling, to consult the Lord, and a few minutes
later returned with a written revelation, promising that not one of his
people should be harmed,

<span id="page_617">p. 617</span>

but that their enemies should be smitten before them. The faithful were
then assembled, and after prayer and reading of the revelation were told
to choose which part they would take. A moment later the report of
artillery was heard, and two women were struck dead by a cannon-ball,
the lower jaw of a young girl being shattered by the same shot. The
firing was continued almost without intermission, the assailants opening
with musketry as they approached the camp.

    At first the Morrisites, both men and women, took refuge in their
cellars, or wherever else they could find cover, all being unarmed and
the attack unexpected; but presently, recovering from their panic, the
men seized their weapons and organized for defence. The camp consisted
mainly of tents and covered wagons, with a few huts built of willows,
woven together and plastered. Behind this frail protection the besieged
maintained for three days an unequal fight, the cannon and long-range
rifles of their assailants raking the enclosure, <span
id="fr_990"></span>[34](#fn_990) while their own weapons consisted only
of shot-guns and a few Mexican fire-locks. At intervals Morris was
besought to intercede with the Lord, but his only answer was: "If it be
his will, we shall be delivered, and our enemies destroyed; but let us
do our duty." On the evening of the third day a white flag was raised,
whereupon he exclaimed: "Your faith has gone and the Lord has forsaken
us. I can now do nothing more."

    After the surrender, the Morrisites were ordered to stack their
arms, the men being separated from the women, and most of the former
placed under arrest. The prophet, his lieutenant, and two of the women
were shot, as the survivors relate, by the sheriff, <span
id="fr_991"></span>[35](#fn_991) ten

<span id="page_618">p. 618</span>

of their party and two of the posse having been killed during the
fight. <span id="fr_992"></span>[36](#fn_992) The camp was then
plundered, and the dead conveyed to Salt Lake City, where the bodies of
Morris and his lieutenant were exposed at the city hall, the robe,
crown, and rod of the former being laid in mockery by his side, and his
fate regarded by the saints as the just punishment of one who "had set
himself up to teach heresy in Zion, and oppose the Lord's anointed." The
prisoners were brought before Judge Kinney, placed under bonds, and at
the next session of court, in March 1863, seven were convicted of murder
in the second degree and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment,
while sixty-six others were fined $100, being committed to jail until
the titles were paid, and two were acquitted. <span
id="fr_993"></span>[37](#fn_993) Against

<span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

the sheriff and other members of the posse no proceedings were taken at
this date, though it was alleged by the Morrisites that his course was
severe, and that the arrests might have been made without the loss of a
single life. In 1879, however, Burton, who in consideration of his
services had meanwhile been promoted to offices of trust, holding among
others the post of collector of internal revenue for Utah, <span
id="fr_994"></span>[38](#fn_994) was indicted for the murder of one of
the women. <span id="fr_995"></span>[39](#fn_995) He was acquitted after
a trial lasting several weeks, for he was a good and responsible man in
every respect, and there was no evidence that he was guilty of the crime
alleged.

    To Governor Harding and judges Waite and Drake the law appeared to
have been strained against the Morrisites, even though they may have
been guilty of resisting a legal process, and petitions for their pardon
being signed by the federal officials, the officers

<span id="page_620">p. 620</span>

at Camp Douglas, and other gentiles, <span
id="fr_996"></span>[40](#fn_996) the chief magistrate released the
prisoners and remitted the fines. <span id="fr_997"></span>[41](#fn_997)
For thus turning loose on the community a number of persons whom the
Mormon rulers classed as dangerous criminals, only three days after
conviction, and before any investigation had been made, Harding was
severely censured by the grand jury. "Therefore we present his
'Excellency' Stephen S. Harding, governor of Utah, as we would an unsafe
bridge over a dangerous stream—jeopardizing the lives of all who pass
over it—or as we would a pestiferous cesspool in our district breeding
disease and death." Meanwhile the bonds of such offenders as had failed
to appear for trial were declared forfeited by the chief justice, and
execution issued against their property. The homestead of one of them
named Abraham Taylor was sold for a trifling sum, <span
id="fr_998"></span>[42](#fn_998) and his family turned into the street.
By the advice of Judge Waite, who investigated the matter, and found
that no judgment had been recorded, Taylor applied to the chief justice
for an injunction. The application was refused, on the ground that "if
there was no judgment, he could render one, as the court had not
permanently adjourned, but only to meet on his own motion."

    Of the further career of the Morrisites it remains only to be said
that a few who were possessed of means at once left the territory, while
most of the remainder found refuge and employment at Camp Douglas. A few
weeks later Connor established a military post at Soda Springs, on Bear
River, immediately

<span id="page_621">p. 621</span>

beyond the northern limit of Utah, <span
id="fr_999"></span>[43](#fn_999) offering to furnish conveyance for all
who wished to form a settlement at that point. More than two hundred of
the Morrisites availed themselves of this offer, removing with their
effects under the escort of a company of volunteers.

    This feud between the saints and the federal officials was brought
to an end in June 1863, Harding being superseded as governor <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[44](#fn_1000) by James Duane Doty, with Amos Reed
as secretary, and John Titus of Pennsylvania being appointed chief
justice in place of Kinney, who at the next general election was chosen
delegate to congress. <span id="fr_1001"></span>[45](#fn_1001) Thus the
president endeavored to restore peace by making concessions on both
sides. In the spring of 1864 Judge Waite resigned in disgust, after
holding a term of court, at which there was not a single case on the
docket. <span id="fr_1002"></span>[46](#fn_1002) His successor was a
Missourian, named Solomon McCurdy. Judge Drake still remained at his
post, <span id="fr_1003"></span>[47](#fn_1003) though merely going
through the form of holding court, all attempts to administer justice
proving futile among a community that had never willingly submitted, and
had not yet been compelled to submit, to gentile domination.

    The administration of Governor Doty lasted only for two years, and
during this period little worthy of note is recorded in the annals of
Utah, this being perhaps the best evidence that some degree of harmony

<span id="page_622">p. 622</span>

at length prevailed between the federal and territorial authorities. The
new magistrate was a conservative ruler, liberal and tolerant in his
policy, an able and experienced statesman, and on terms of friendship
with many of the most eminent men of his day. His youth had been passed
among the frontier settlements of Wisconsin and Michigan, and in early
manhood he had held prominent positions in state and national
councils. <span id="fr_1004"></span>[48](#fn_1004) During his residence
in the territory he had made many friends and scarcely a single enemy,
his intercourse with the citizens being always marked by the cordiality
and freedom from constraint characteristic of western life and manners.
At his decease, which occurred, after a painful illness, on the 13th of
June, 1865, a city draped in mourning gave token of the respect in which
he was held by the Mormon community. <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[49](#fn_1005)

    Governor Dory was succeeded by Charles Durkee, a native of
Wisconsin, who held office until late in 1869. <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[50](#fn_1006) At the time of his appointment he was
aged and infirm, and was selected perhaps for that reason, his orders
being to pursue a negative and conciliatory policy. "I was sent out to
do nothing," he once remarked to an intimate friend, <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[51](#fn_1007) and his instructions were faithfully
executed. <span id="fr_1008"></span>[52](#fn_1008)

    During Durkee's administration the territory of

<span id="page_623">p. 623</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wyoming was
organized, <span id="fr_1009"></span>[53](#fn_1009) and included the
portion of Utah north of the 41st parallel and east of the 111th
meridian, a surface of 8,000 square miles. Idaho, admitted in 1863, also
contained, on its southern border, a narrow belt claimed by the Mormons,
though merely by right of possession. <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[54](#fn_1010) In 1861, on the organization of
Colorado, the eastern boundary of Utah was placed at the 109th
meridian. <span id="fr_1011"></span>[55](#fn_1011) By these partitions
the area of the latter was reduced to about 85,000 square miles, its
limits being identical with those which now exist. <span
id="fr_1012"></span>[56](#fn_1012)

    The antagonism between General Connor and the Mormon
authorities <span id="fr_1013"></span>[57](#fn_1013) was for the moment
relieved,

<span id="page_624">p. 624</span>

when, in 1865, all joined in celebrating the second inauguration of
Abraham Lincoln and the success of the union arms. Though his party was
strongly opposed to Mormonism, Lincoln had little to say on the
so-called Mormon question, and that little was expressed in three words:
Let them alone. To be left alone was all that the people asked and all
that they had struggled for, since Utah was first admitted as a
territory. The occasion was therefore one of rejoicing, honest and
heart-felt, and the pageant more imposing than anything that had yet
been witnessed in the city of the saints. <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[58](#fn_1014) In the centre of Main Street a
platform was erected, and here, on the morning of the 4th of March, the
federal officers, civil and military, exchanged greetings with the
church dignitaries. Past them filed a procession of tradesmen and
working men, a mile in length, the sidewalks, the windows, and
house-tops being crowded with an eager and boisterous throng. The
buildings were draped with flags, the carriages and sleighs decorated
with streamers, the men and women with rosettes, while the bands of the
3d infantry and the Nauvoo legion furnished music, and Mormon banners,
with their manifold devices, appeared side by side with the stars and
stripes.

    Later the concourse assembled in front of the stand, the provost
guard <span id="fr_1015"></span>[59](#fn_1015) facing the platform, the
militia companies forming in the rear, and the volunteers drawn up on
their right, four deep and with arms at rest. Addresses were delivered,
the bands playing and the multitude cheering lustily during the
intervals. The troops were then escorted to their camp by the cavalry of
the legion, and General Connor and his staff

<span id="page_625">p. 625</span>

invited to a banquet at the city hall, the invitation being accepted,
although the general, who had now received orders to take charge of the
department of the Platte, was unable to attend in person. <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[60](#fn_1016) In the evening the party again met at
the theatre, and the festivities concluded at a late hour, with a
display of fire-works, the federal officials being well pleased, and
perhaps a little surprised at the exuberant loyalty of the Mormons.

    A few weeks after this gala-day citizens and soldiers again united
in fraternal gathering to mourn the loss of their president. <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[61](#fn_1017) When news of his assassination was
first received, the volunteers could with difficulty be controlled from
venting their fury on the inhabitants, who, as they imagined, were
exulting over this deed of infamy. Soon, however, they were forced to
acknowledge themselves in error, for Lincoln had ever been friendly
toward the Mormons, and by none was he more respected. On the 19th of
April, the day set apart for the funeral solemnities at Washington,
business was suspended in Salt Lake City; the flags on the public
buildings were hung at half-mast and covered with crape; many of the
stores and residences were dressed in mourning, and long before the
appointed hour more than three thousand persons, among them being many
gentiles, were assembled at the tabernacle. The platform was occupied by
the civil and military functionaries and a number of prominent

<span id="page_626">p. 626</span>

citizens, the stand and organ being draped in black. The exercises
commenced with an anthem by the choir, followed by a prayer from
Franklin D. Richards. Then came an eloquent address from Amasa Lyman,
and an impressive eulogy on the life, character, and services of Lincoln
by Norman McLeod, the chaplain at Camp Douglas, the funeral rites
concluding with a benediction by Wilford Woodruff.

    Soon after the departure of Connor, orders were received to disband
the volunteers; but the alarm caused among gentile citizens by further
Mormon troubles caused a portion of them to be retained until they could
be replaced by regular troops. Of the many crimes laid to the charge of
the saints at this period, and by some ascribed to the agency of the
church, the murders of Newton Brassfield and King Robinson were the most
notorious. <span id="fr_1018"></span>[62](#fn_1018) In the spring of
1866 Brassfield, formerly a citizen of California and more recently of
Nevada, married the wife of one of the elders, then employed on a
foreign mission. Application was made and granted for a writ of habeas
corpus to obtain possession of the children, the case being still
pending when the assassination occurred. On the 2d of April he was shot
dead by some unknown person while about to enter his hotel. <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[63](#fn_1019) A reward of $4,500 was offered by the

<span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

gentile community, but without success, for the arrest of the murderer,
who was probably a relative of the elder's, as the sentiment of the
Mormon community required that the nearest of kin should avenge the
wrongs of an absent husband. <span id="fr_1020"></span>[64](#fn_1020)

    King Robinson, a native of Maine, and in 1864 a resident of
California, was appointed in that year assistant surgeon at Camp
Douglas. <span id="fr_1021"></span>[65](#fn_1021) When the volunteers
were mustered out of service he practised his profession in Salt Lake
City, and in the spring of 1866 married the daughter of a physician, Dr
Kay, who in his life-time had been a pillar of the church, but whose
wife and children were apostates. The doctor was an intimate friend of
Norman McLeod, and at the time of his assassination a superintendent of
the gentile Sunday-school. <span id="fr_1022"></span>[66](#fn_1022)
While at Camp Douglas, he ascertained that certain ground in the
neighborhood of Warm Springs was unoccupied, and supposing it to be a
portion of the public domain, took possession of it, and erected a
building thereon. The city council claimed that the land belonged to the
corporation, and ordered the marshal to destroy the improvements and
eject the claimant. The doctor brought the matter before the court, but
the chief

<span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

justice decided against him. <span id="fr_1023"></span>[67](#fn_1023)
Soon afterward other property belonging to Robinson was destroyed at
midnight by a gang of twenty or thirty men, some of them in disguise,
Alexander Burr, of the police force, with several others as accomplices,
being accused, though not identified. By the advice of his counsel,
Robinson gave notice that he intended to hold the city responsible for
damages. Two days later he was aroused near midnight to attend a
patient, and when a short distance from his dwelling was struck on the
head with a sharp instrument, and then shot through the brain. The
murder was committed at a corner of Main Street in bright moonlight, the
doctor's cries were heard by his neighbors, and seven persons were seen
running away from the spot, but no arrests were made, <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[68](#fn_1024) the verdict of the coroner's jury
being that the deceased had died by the hands of parties unknown. <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[69](#fn_1025) By the gentiles the doctor's
assassination was attributed to his contest with the city authorities,
though in fact the murder may have been neither ordered nor
premeditated. If it were so, it would seem improbable that seven persons
should have been intrusted with the secret, and that such time and place
should have been selected.

    Other murders and outrages were ascribed to the Mormons about this
date, some of gentiles and some of their own apostate countrymen. <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[70](#fn_1026) So great was

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

the alarm among gentile merchants, that, with a few exceptions, they
signed an agreement to leave the territory, on condition that their
property should be purchased by the authorities at a low valuation. The
answer was that they had not been asked to come, and were not now asked
to depart; they could stay as long as they pleased, and would not be
molested if they did not molest others. No further deeds of violence
occurred, the excitement gradually died away, and with the approaching
completion of the overland railroad a better feeling prevailed.
Contracts had been awarded without distinction to Mormon and gentile;
travel had increased, and with it traffic and the circulation of money,
and for a brief space all felt a common interest in the country's
prosperity.

 

    Not least among the benefits caused by the building of the railroad
was the gradual cessation of Indian hostilities, which had continued,
with little intermission, from the date of the Mountain Meadows
massacre. The natives had no alternative but to steal or starve; the
white man was in possession of their pastures; game was rapidly
disappearing; in the depth of winter they were starving and almost
unclad, sleeping in the snow and sleet, with no covering but a cape of
rabbit's fur and moccasons lined with cedar bark; even in summer they
were often compelled to subsist on

<span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

reptiles, insects, roots, and grass seeds. Farm reservations had been
opened for their benefit, <span id="fr_1027"></span>[71](#fn_1027) and
in 1859 it was stated by the superintendent of Indian affairs that an
appropriation of $150,000 would enable him to provide for all the
destitute among the 18,000 natives then inhabiting the territory. No
appropriation was made at this date, though, as will presently appear,
liberal provision was made a few years later for certain of the Utah
tribes.

    Between 1857 and the close of 1862 outbreaks were of frequent
occurrence, <span id="fr_1028"></span>[72](#fn_1028) and until the
arrival of the

<span id="page_631">p. 631</span>

volunteers, no effectual curb was placed on the hostile tribes. On the
29th of January, 1863, the battle of Bear River was fought, twelve miles
north of Franklin, between some three hundred of the Shoshones and
Banhacks, under their chiefs Bear Hunter, Pocatello, and Sanpitch, and
about two hundred then of Connor's command, its result effectually
putting a stop to hostilities in Northern Utah. For fifteen years the
northern tribes had infested the overland mail route, slaughtering and
plundering emigrants and settlers, until their outrages had become
unbearable. Reaching Franklin by forced marches, during an intensely
cold winter, the snow being so deep that their howitzers did not arrive
in time to be of service, the troops approached the enemy's camp at
daylight on the 29th, and found them posted in a ravine through which
Battle Creek enters Bear River. Their position was well chosen, the
ravine being six to twelve feet deep, about forty in width, with steep
banks, under which willows had been densely interwoven, and whence they
could deliver their fire without exposing themselves. Attacking
simultaneously in flank and front, Connor routed them after an
engagement lasting four hours, and, their retreat being cut off by
cavalry, the band was almost annihilated. <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[73](#fn_1029) Among the slain was Bear
Hunter, <span id="fr_1030"></span>[74](#fn_1030) the other chieftains
making their escape. Had the savages committed

<span id="page_632">p. 632</span>

this deed, it would pass into history as a butchery or a massacre.

    Of Connor's command, which consisted of 300 volunteers, but of whom
not more than two thirds were engaged, <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[75](#fn_1031) fourteen were killed and forty-nine
wounded. A number of rifles and nearly 200 horses were captured, and
more than seventy lodges, together with a large quantity of provisions,
destroyed. This defeat completely broke the power and spirit of the
Indians, and the result was immediately felt throughout Northern Utah,
especially in Cache county, where flocks and herds were now
comparatively safe, and where settlements could be made on new and
favorable sites hitherto considered insecure. <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[76](#fn_1032)

    During the spring of this year an outbreak occurred among the Utahs
in the neighborhood of the Spanish Fork reservation. A party of
volunteers, under Colonel G. S. Evans, defeated them in two
engagements. <span id="fr_1033"></span>[77](#fn_1033) In April 1865 an
Indian war broke out in Sanpete county, spreading to adjacent districts,
and lasting without intermission until the close of 1867, under the
leadership of a chieftain named Blackhawk. Although the militia of the
southern counties were constantly in the field, and reënforcements were
sent from Salt Lake City under General Wells, the California volunteers
being then disbanded, more than fifty of the Mormon settlers were
massacred, an immense quantity of live-stock captured, <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[78](#fn_1034) and so wide

<span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

spread was the alarm that many of the southern settlements were for the
time abandoned, <span id="fr_1035"></span>[79](#fn_1035) the loss to the
community exceeding $1,100,000. <span id="fr_1036"></span>[80](#fn_1036)
Of this sum no portion was voted by congress, the memorials of the Utah
legislature asking for reimbursements being ignored, although the
militia had served for more than two years without pay, and the governor
had declared that their claims were just and their services
necessary. <span id="fr_1037"></span>[81](#fn_1037)

<span id="page_634">p. 634</span>

    After the affair of Bear River treaties were concluded with the
Shoshones and Bannacks on the 12th and 14th of October, 1863, <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[82](#fn_1038) whereby travel on the principal
routes to Nevada and California was rendered secure, the stipulations
being faithfully observed, and the Indians receiving in return annuity
goods to the value of $21,000 for a term of twenty years. <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[83](#fn_1039) In June 1865 a treaty was made with a
number of the Utah tribes, whereby they agreed to remove within one year
to a reservation in the Uintah Valley, relinquishing their claim to all
other lands within the territory, receiving as compensation $25,-000
annually for the first ten years, $20,000 for the next twenty years, and
$15,000 for thirty years thereafter. <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[84](#fn_1040) Annuities were also to be granted to
the chiefs, dwellings erected for them, and lands ploughed, enclosed,
and supplied with live-stock and farming implements. A school was to be
maintained for ten years, during nine months in the year; grist and
lumber mills and mechanics’ shops were to be built and equipped at the
expense of the government, and $7,000 voted annually for ten years in
aid of various industries. The Indians were to be protected on their
reservation; must not make war except in self-defence; and must not
steal, or if they did, the stolen

<span id="page_635">p. 635</span>

property must be returned, or its value deducted from their
annuities. <span id="fr_1041"></span>[85](#fn_1041) Under these
stipulations, though the treaty was not formally ratified, many of the
Utahs, among whom was the chief Blackhawk, were gathered and dwelt in
peace on the reservation.

    In 1864 a memorial had been presented by the Utah legislature,
asking that the Indians be removed from their smaller
reservations, <span id="fr_1042"></span>[86](#fn_1042) and in the same
year acts were passed by congress authorizing the appointment of a
surveyor-general for Utah, providing that the Indian title to
agricultural and mineral lands be extinguished, and the lands laid open
to settlement, ordering the superintendent of Indian affairs to collect
as many of the tribes as possible in the Uintah Valley, and
appropriating for agricultural improvements the sum of $30,000. <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[87](#fn_1043) The site was well selected, being
remote from routes and settlements, and enclosed by mountain ranges,
which were impassable for loaded teams during nine or ten months in the
year. It contained at least two millions of acres, <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[88](#fn_1044) portions of it being well adapted for
agriculture and grazing, and was well supplied with timber and
water-power. In the summer of 1868 about 130 acres were under
cultivation, and it was estimated that the value of the produce would
reach $15,000; but on the 1st of July swarms of grasshoppers settled

<span id="page_636">p. 636</span>

on the land, and within a week nine tenths of the crop were destroyed.
In other years the result was fairly encouraging, when it is considered
that the Indian is by nature a hunter, averse to all manual labor, and
subsists mainly on meat. For the year ending June 30, 1869, the amount
appropriated for the Uintah agency was but $5,000. <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[89](#fn_1045) Small as this sum was, it served to
prevent any serious depredations, <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[90](#fn_1046) for a bale of blankets or a few sacks
of flour, distributed in proper season, accomplished more than their
weight in gold expended in military operations and military
surveillance.

<span id="page_637">p. 637</span>

<span id="page_638">p. 638</span>

<span id="page_639">p. 639</span>

<span id="page_640">p. 640</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_957"></span>[604:1](hou25.htm#fr_957) After Cumming's
departure, Secretary Wooton became acting governor, but resigned as soon
as the southern secession was announced. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 445, 591.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[604:2](hou25.htm#fr_958) In *Waite's The
Mormon Prophet*, 76; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 201; *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 592, it is stated that Dawson was entrapped into this
affair; in *Tucker's Mormonism*, 239; *Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*,
249; *Deseret News*, Jan. 1, 1862, that it was of his own seeking. In
*Id*., Jan. 14th, is a letter from Dawson to the editor of the *Deseret
News*, dated Bear River Station, *Utah Terr*., wherein the governor
states that he was badly wounded in the head and kicked in the chest and
loins. A copy of his first and only message to the legislature will be
found in *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1861-2, 12-26.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[605:3](hou25.htm#fr_959) For the seeond time,
as he arrived before Gov. Dawson, and on the resignation of Wooton
filled the vacancy. In *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1861-2, is a joint
resolution approving his first administration, which was, however, in
fact a nullity. A day or two before Cumming left the territory Stenhouse
asked him, 'How will Wooton get along?' 'Get along?' he replied; 'well
enough, if he will do nothing.' *Rocky Mountain Saints*, 445, note. Some
years later he was elected a representative conditional upon the
admission of Utah as a state. *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS., 29.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[605:4](hou25.htm#fr_960) A copy of it will be
found in the *Deseret News*, March 19, 1862.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[606:5](hou25.htm#fr_961) It would appear that
the Mormons hoped to succeed on this occasion. In a letter to Cannon,
dated Dec. 16, 1860, Hooper writes: 'I think three-quarters of the
republicans of the house would vote for our admission.' For copies of
the memorial and constitution, see *House Misc. Doc*., 78, 37th Cong. 2d
Sess.; *Deseret News*, Jan. 29, 1862. They were referred to the
committee on territories. In the *Millennial Star*, xxiv. 241-5, 257-61,
is a synopsis of the proceedings relating to the constitution and state
government. See also *Deseret News*, Jan. 22, 1862; *Sac. Union*, Feb.
14, 17, 1802. Meetings in favor of this measure were held at Provo,
Santaquin (a small settlement in Utah co.), Spanish Fork, Grantsville,
and Tooele, for an account of which, see *Id*., Jan. 15, 1862. Prominent
among those who opposed the admission of Utah was Judge Cradlebaugh,
afterward representative from Nevada, whose speech in the house, on Feb.
7, 1803, has already been mentioned.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[607:6](hou25.htm#fr_962) And regulations as to
solemnities, sacraments, ceremonies, consecrations, endowments,
tithings, fellowship, and all matters relating to 'the religious duties
of man to his maker.' *Utah Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 104.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[607:7](hou25.htm#fr_963) A copy of the act
will be found in *Cong. Globe*, 1861-2, app. 385. In 1855 a bill was
introduced for the suppression of polygamy and in the debates which
ensued Morrill took an active part. It was referred to a committee of
the whole. See *Cong. Globe*, 1855-6, pp. 895, 1491, 1501. In 1859 a
bill passed the representatives. *Id*., 1859-60, pp. 1559. For other
measures and discussions in congress between 1853 and 1862, relating to
roads, surveys, mails, appropriations, boundaries, public buildings,
Indian troubles and other matters, see *Cong. Globe*, 1853-4, pp. 286,
1437, 1440, 1472, 1621, 1701, 2236-9, passim; *Id*., 1854-5, pp. 5, 341,
540, passim; 1855-6, pp. 19, 39, 1451-2, 1473, 1491, 1495, 1497; 1856-7,
pp. 284, 392, 408, 418, 608; 1857-8, pp. 553, 564, 572-3, passim;
1858-9, pp. 119, 335, 341, 658, 1066; 1859-60, pp. 187-98, 474, 486,
500; 1866-1, pp. 326, 336, 840, 1132, 1159, 1195, 1197, 1288, 1302;
*Sen. Jour*., 33d Cong., 1st Sess., 1003; *Id*., 33d Cong., 2d Sess.,
574-5; 34th Cong., 2d Sess., 943; 34th Cong., 3d Sess., 63; 35th Cong.,
2d Sess., 450, 590, 660; 36th Cong., 1st Sess., 1041, 1045-6; 37th
Cong., 2d Sess., 1161; *H. Jour*., 33d Cong., 1st Sess., 1563; *Id*.,
33d Cong., 2d Sess., 723; 34th Cong., 1st Sess., 1837; 34th Cong., 3d
Sess., 376; 35th Cong., 1st Sess., 1325, 1366; 35th Cong., 2d Sess.,
323, 745, 759, 761; 36th Cong., 1st Sess., 1410, 1455-6; 36th Cong., 2d
Sess., 580; 37th Cong., 2d Sess., 1271, 1318-19. In *H. Misc. Doc*.,
100, 35th Cong., 1st Sess., is a memorial stating the grievances of the
Mormons, and asking that they be allowed a voice in the selection of
their rulers. In the senate, resolutions were submitted that committees
should inquire into the propriety of the Mormons electing their own
officials and no longer submitting their enactments to congress *Sen.
Misc. Doc*., 12, 36th Cong., 1st Sess. The committees reported
adversely.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[607:8](hou25.htm#fr_964) The first was to
commence above the rapids of the Jordan, where a dam was to be built,
and thence following the base of the mountains, on the east of G. S.
Lake Valley, to S. L. City, with depth sufficient for boats drawing two
and a half feet of water. *Utah Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1866), 175-6. The
<span id="page_608">p. 608</span> Cottonwood canal was to divert half
the waters of the creek and conduct them to S. L. City. *Id*. (ed.
1855), 277-8.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[608:9](hou25.htm#fr_965) Among other matters,
the city council was empowered to build and control hospitals, and to
direct the location of medical colleges, railroad tracks, depot-grounds,
gas-works, canals, and telegraph-poles within the city limits; and to
collect taxes on real estate for grading, paving, repairing, and
lighting streets, and for drainage purposes. *Id*. (ed. 1866), 119.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[608:10](hou25.htm#fr_966) One half per cent
for territorial tax, and for county tax a rate to be prescribed by the
county court, but not exceeding a half per cent. *Id*., 84.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[608:11](hou25.htm#fr_967) *Id*., 207-9. The
following is a complete list of the county seats in 1866, some of which
have already been mentioned. Grafton was the county seat of Kane co., St
George of Washington co., Parowan of Iron co., Salt Lake City, Beaver,
and Tooele of the counties of the same name, Circleville of Piute co.,
Fillmore of Millard co., Richfield of Sevier co., Nephi of Juab co.,
Manti of Sanpete co., Provo of Utah co., Heber City of Wasatch co.,
Farmington of Davis co., Ogden of Weber co., Brigham City of Box Elder
co., Wanship of Summit co., Littleton of Morgan co., Logan City of Cache
co., St Charles of Richland co., and Fort Bridger of Green River co. A
portion of Richland, later Rich, co., including the site of St Charles,
Paris, Bloomington, and other settlements, was afterward included in
Idaho. The county was first settled in 1863 by C. C. Rich. *Sloan's Utah
Gazetteer*, 1884, 29, 141.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[608:12](hou25.htm#fr_968) *Utah Acts Legisl*.
(ed. 1866), 219-23. For school purposes, a tax not exceeding one fourth
per cent was to be levied by the trustees of each district; but this
might be increased to as much as three per cent by vote of two thirds of
the tax-payers.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[608:13](hou25.htm#fr_969) By act of 1856, the
Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society was incorporated, 'with a
view of promoting the arts of domestic industry, and to encourage the
production of articles from the native elements in this territory.' The
society was required to hold an annual exhibition of the agricultural
products, live-stock, and articles of domestic manufacture. By act of
1862, amended in 1865, the Jordan Irrigation Company was incorporated,
with power to construct dams across the Jordan, and divert its waters at
any point not more than twelve miles above Jordan bridge. By acts of
1865 and 1866, the Ogden Cañon, Uintah, and Logan Cañon road companies
were incorporated; the first with the right of building a toll-road from
the mouth of the cañon to Ogden Valley, with privilege for thirty years;
the second with permission to construct a similar road from Utah Lake,
throurh Uintah Valley, to the eastward boundary of the territory,
connecting with the road to Denver, Colorado; the third with power to
build a toll-road from Logan City to the summit of the mountains <span
id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> dividing Cache and Rich counties, their
rights lasting 14 years. Ben. Holladay, Wm H. Hooper, and W. L. Halsey
were the body corporate of the Uintah Road Co., with privilege for 15
years. By act of 1865 the Overland Mail Company was authorized to make a
road across the Dugway Mountain, 105 miles west of S. L. City, and to
erect a toll-gate at or near the eastern Base of the mountain, with
privilege for ten years.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[609:14](hou25.htm#fr_970) By act of 1854,
repealing acts of the previous year, Brigham Young was empowered to
establish and control ferries and bridges at the Weber and Bear rivers
for an indefinite term. *Utah Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 267-8. By acts
of 1855 Parley Park and an adjacent valley to the south were granted for
20 years as herd-grounds to Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant, Sam.
Snyder, and their associates, and certain lands in Utah co. to Miles and
Franklin Weaver for the same purpose. By acts of the same year, Kimball
and his partners were authorized to make a toll-road from Big Cañon, S.
L. co., to Kamas prairie, Utah co., passing through Parley Park, and
Orson Hyde and others to build a toll-road and bridges in Carson co.,
which were to become the property of the territory after five years.
*Id*., 284-6. In 1857 John L. Butler and Aaron Johnson were granted the
control of one fourth of the waters of the Spanish Fork River for
irrigation purposes, during the pleasure of the legislative assembly.
*Id*. (ed. 1866), 179. In 1866 Alvin Nichols and Wm S. Godbe were
allowed to establish toll-bridges across the Bear and Malade rivers, the
privilege being for eight years. Other proceedings of the legislature
between 1854 and 1866 will be found in *Utah Acts Legisl*., and *Utah
Jour. Legisl*., passim, and in the files of the *Deseret News*. The
names of members are also given in Utah Jour. Legisl., for each year.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[609:15](hou25.htm#fr_971) A full copy of the
message will be found in *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1862-3, app.; and of
parts of it in *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 79-82. It was at first
suppressed by the Utah legislature. *Sen. Misc. Doc*., 37, 37th Cong. 3d
Sess.; but a senate committee ordered it printed. *Sen. Com. Rept*., 87,
37th Cong. 3d Sess. Other messages of the several governors will be
found in the <span id="page_610">p. 610</span> *Utah Jour. Legisl*., for
each year. See also *Deseret News*, Dec. 14, 1854, Dec. 19, 1855, Dec.
23, 1857, Dec. 22, 1858, Dec. 14, 1859, Apr. 16, 1862, Jan. 21, Dec. 16,
1863, Jan. 25, Dee. 11, 1865; *S. F. Alta*, March 10, 1854; *Sac.
Union*, Feb. 12, 1855, Feb. 12, 1856.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[610:16](hou25.htm#fr_972) In *Waite's The
Mormon Prophet*, 85-6, it is stated that the legislature ordered court
to be opened at St George on the third Monday in May, but as they did
not wish the session to take place until autumn, passed a second bill,
appointing the third Monday in October for the beginning of the term.
Waite preferred to open court in May, and having occasion to examine the
bill, found that the word 'May' had been erased and 'October'
substituted. This had been done by a clerk in the house, and presumably
by the order of members. The governor, who had inadvertently returned
the bill, ordered the record corrected, and sent a message to the
legislature, calling their attention to the forgery. Issue was taken
with him on the matter, one member producing a paper which, he averred,
was the original draught, and where October was the month appointed. In
the *Deseret News*, March 25, 1863, Waite is sharply censured for
holding court in the third district, where he had no jurisdiction.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[610:17](hou25.htm#fr_973) For copies of some
of the speeches, the resolutions, and petition, see *Waite's The Mormon
Prophet*, 88-95; *Tullidge's Hist S. L. City*, 307-11 The petition was
signed by several thousand persons. A counter-petition, signed by the
officers of Connor's command, will be found in *Waite's The Mormon
Prophet*, 95-7.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[611:18](hou25.htm#fr_974) The answers of the
governor and judges will be found in *Id*., 97-9.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[611:19](hou25.htm#fr_975) A correspondent of
the *S. F. Bulletin* writes under date Sept. 24, 1862: <span
id="page_612">p. 612</span> 'The third infantry California volunteers
wants to go home—not for the purpose of seeing the old folks, but for
the purpose of tramping upon the sacred soil of Virginia, and of
swelling the ranks of the brave battlers for the brave old flag.' About
$25,000 was subscribed by the men on condition that they were sent east,
one private named Goldthaite, in company G., contributing $5,000. On the
same date Colonel Connor wrote to General Halleck, stating that the men
had enlisted for the purpose of fighting traitors, that the infantry was
of no service in the territory, as cavalry alone could act effectually
against Indians, and there were enough men of that arm to protect the
mail route. 'Brigham Young,' writes the colonel, 'offers to protect the
entire line with 100 men. Why we were sent here is a mystery. It could
not be to keep Mormondon in order, for Brigham can thoroughly annihilate
us with the 5,000 to 25,000 frontiersmen always at his command.'

<span id="fn_976"></span>[612:20](hou25.htm#fr_976) By order of Col
Cook, his purpose being to disconnect it with the name of Floyd, who was
a secessionist. Stenhouse mentions a story current among the volunteers
to the effect that Brigham, on hearing of their approach, had ordered
the flag-staff at Fort Crittenden to be cut down and left on the public
road. This was not the case. The flag was hoisted on the brow of a hill
east of Brigham's residence. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 422,
602.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[612:21](hou25.htm#fr_977) Termed the bench.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[612:22](hou25.htm#fr_978) *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 603; *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS., 20; *Rae's
Westward by Rail*, 140; *Gazetteer of Utah*, 182. The site at first
included one square mile, but was afterward enlarged to 2,560 acres. The
men passed the winter of 1862-3 in dug-outs—in this instance holes dug
in the earth and covered with a frame-work of logs—permanent quarters
being built the following summer, without expense to the government,
except for the nails and shingles.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[613:23](hou25.htm#fr_979) Letter of David O.
Calder in *Millennial Star*, xxv. 301-2; *Harrison's Crit. Notes on
Utah*, MS., 20. Colonel Connor denied that he had any designs against
the first presidency. In *Stenhouse's Rocky Monntain Saints*, 607, it is
related that one of the parties to whom Waite referred was a Mormon, who
had recently married the three widows of a wealthy merchant in S. L.
City. It was thought that this would furnish a good test of the law
against polygamy. No arrest was made, however, as it was feared that
difficulties might arise if Waite should try a case that lay within
Kinney's jurisdiction.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[613:24](hou25.htm#fr_980) The Mormons feared
that Brigham might be taken to Washington for trial. For several days
hundreds of men kept watch in and around his residence. Elders were also
instructed to visit the various wards and warn the saints of the danger
to person and property, from the lawless conduct of the troops. Parties
patrolled the streets at night to protect the citizens; the movements of
the soldiery were carefully watched, and all trade with the camp was for
a time forbidden. *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[614:25](hou25.htm#fr_981) Though its centre
was two and a half miles from the city hall, it lapped over the
municipal boundary. *Id*., 609, note.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[614:26](hou25.htm#fr_982) It was reported that
the waters of Red Butte cañon had been purposely fouled, being passed
through the stables of the volunteers. The troops were stationed near
the head of the stream, but it was denied that they had been guilty of
any such act, though doubtless the Mormons believed it. Later in the
year there may have been cause for complaint, as the supply for
irrigation was curtailed during the dry season.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[614:27](hou25.htm#fr_983) When Connor heard of
Brigham's order, he remarked to Stenhouse: 'I know, sir, that Brigham
Young could use up this handful of men; but there are sixty thousand men
in California who would avenge our blood.' *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[615:28](hou25.htm#fr_984) In his *Crit. Notes
on Utah*, MS., 18-20, Harrison states that the anti-polygamy act was
considered by the Mormons as directed mainly against Brigham Young and
the heads of the church. 'I will take the wind out of their sails,' the
former remarked, and at once caused himseft to be arrested and taken
before Judge Kinney. The witnesses were all his friends, among them
being some of his own clerks, and he was simply bound over, to appear
when called upon. It was not until nine years later that Brigham's name
appeared again in any case of the kind, and the act of 1862 had then
become void by virtue of the statute of limitations. See also *Deseret
News*, March 11, 1863; *S. F. Alta*, March 11, 14, 1863; *Sac. Union*,
March 12, 1863.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[615:29](hou25.htm#fr_985) Waite says that
Morris had received many previous revelations, which he had communicated
to Brigham and the apostles, that his life had been threatened, and that
he now appealed to the prophet for protection. *The Mormon Prophet*,
122.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[615:30](hou25.htm#fr_986) *Ibid*.;
*Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 594. Stenhouse also says that
Brigham answered them with a brief and filthy response.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[615:31](hou25.htm#fr_987) Near the point where
the Union Pacific railroad issues from Weber Cañon.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[615:32](hou25.htm#fr_988) Waite says that when
the Morrisites increased m number, Brigham ordered John Taylor and
Wilford Woodruff to investigate the matter. Summoning <span
id="page_616">p. 616</span> a meeting at South Weber, they asked whether
there were any present who believed in the new prophet. Seventeen
persons arose and declared their faith, stating that they would adhere
to it though it should cost them their lives. They were excommunicated,
but nevertheless the number of converts increased rapidly, and in a few
months mustered about 500 persons. *The Mormon Prophet*, 122-4.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[616:33](hou25.htm#fr_989) Joseph Morris, John
Banks, Richard Cook, John Parsons, and Peter Klemgard. A copy of the
summons is given in *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 596-7.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[617:34](hou25.htm#fr_990) The cannon were
loaded with musket-balls, which tore down the huts and pierced the sandy
hillocks, wounding some of the women and children, who had taken refuge
behind them. *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 417.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[617:35](hou25.htm#fr_991) In a sworn statement
made before Judge Waite, Apr. 18, 1863, Alex. Dow deposed: 'In the
spring of 1861 I joined the Morrisites, and was present when Joseph
Morris was killed.' 'Robert T. Burton and Joseph L. Stoddard rode in
among the Morrisites. Burton was much excited. He said: "Where is the
man? I don't know him." Stoddard replied, "That's him," <span
id="page_618">p. 618</span> pointing to Morris. Burton rode his horse
upon Morris, and commanded him to give himself up in the name of the
Lord. Morris replied: "No never, never!" Morris said he wanted to speak
to the people. Burton said: "Be damned quick about it." Morris said:
"Brethren I've taught you true principles—he had scarcely got the words
out of his mouth before Burton fired his revolver. The ball passed in
his neck or shoulder. Burton exclaimed: "There's your prophet!" He fired
again, saying: "What do you think of your prophet now?" Burton then
turned suddenly and shot Banks (the prophet's lieutenant), who was
standing five or six paces distant. Banks fell. Mrs Bowman, wife of
James Bowman, came running up, crying: "Oh! you blood-thristy wretch."
Burton said: "No one shall tell me that and live," and shot her dead. A
Danish woman then came running up to Morris crying, and Burton shot her
dead also.' *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 598-9; *Waite's Mormon
Prophet*, 127; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 418-19. Beadle throws doubt on
portions of Dow's testimony, and says that according to the statements
of members of the posse, Morris was killed because, after the surrender,
he ordered his followers to take up their arms and renew the fight.
Stenhouse relates that Banks was wounded at the time of Morris’ death,
but not fatally. In the evening he was well enough to sit up and enjoy
his pipe, but died suddenly, though whether by poison, pistol, or knife
is doubtful.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[618:36](hou25.htm#fr_992) *Waite's The Mormon
Prophet*, 126. Stenhouse says, six of the Morrisites killed and three
wounded. *Rocky Mountain Saints*, 599; Tullidge, six casualties only.
*Life of Brigham Young*, 339; Beadle, ten killed and a very large number
wounded. *Life in Utah*, 420.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[618:37](hou25.htm#fr_993) A nolle prosequi was
entered against one of the accused. Those condemned to the penitentiary
were loaded with ball and chain, and made to work on the roads. Harding,
in *Hickman's Destroying Angel*, 215. A detailed, but condensed account
of the Morrisite massacre, and perhaps one of the best, will be found in
*Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 122-7. For other versions, see *A Voice
from the West*, 5-12; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 593-600;
*Beadle's Life in Utah*, 413-21; *Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young*,
336-9; *Hickman's Destroying Angel*, 211-14; *Virginia City (Mont.)
Madisonian*, Nov. 24, 1877; :*Deseret News*, June 18, 1862, March 12,
1879; *S. L. City Tribune*, Aug. 11, 18, 1877. There are few material
discrepancies in the above accounts, except in the one given by the
*Deseret News*, though Beadle's work <span id="page_619">p. 619</span>
contains some details that do not appear elsewhere. He states, for
instance, that when the prisoners were first brought before Judge
Kinney, only five of them would sign bonds, and of the rest only a few
could speak English, the latter protesting against the entire
proceedings, and declaring that they would lie in jail till the devil's
thousand years were out' before they would admit that they were legally
dealt with. The account given in *A Voice from the West*, San Francisco,
1879, is written by one of the sect, and is purely from a Morrisite
standpoint. In the *Deseret News*, March 12, 1879, it is stated that
Morris had been excommunicated for adultery, that his followers boasted
that they would soon occupy the houses and farms of the Mormons, and
that Burton took command of the posse with great reluctance, after the
Morrisites had frequently defied the officers of the law. 'The
Morrisites,' says the church organ, 'commenced to fire upon the posse
with their long-range rifles, and having torn up the floors of their log
cabins and wickeups, dug np the earth and threw it against the walls.
They lay in these cellars firing through port-holes at the posse. There
were very close upon 200 men in these fortifications.' After the arms
were stacked, Burton, Stoddard, and some fifteen others entered the
camp, and Morris, being allowed at his own request to speak to the
people, cried out: 'All who are for me and my God in life or in death
follow me.' A rush was then made for the arms, whereupon the posse
opened fire, the sheriff firing two shots at Morris, Stoddard also
firing two or three shots, and two women being killed, though by whom is
not stated.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[619:38](hou25.htm#fr_994) Beadle states that
when he visited Utah in 1868, Burton was also assessor of S. L. co., a
general in the Nauvoo legion, a prominent elder in the church, and one
of the chiefs of the secret police. *Life in Utah*, 398.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[619:39](hou25.htm#fr_995) He was arrested in
Aug. 1876, and his bail fixed at $20,000. *Deseret News*, March 12,
1879; in July 1877, with bail at $10,000. *S. L. City Tribune*, July 28,
1877. A former indictment had been found in the Sept. term of 1870, but
the constitution of the grand jury was declared illegal by the U. S.
sup. court.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[620:40](hou25.htm#fr_996) And by some of the
Mormons. *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 421; *Hickman's Destroying Angel*,
163. Harding, in *Id*., 216, says that no Mormon signatures except that
of Hickman appeared on the petitions, but that several of the saints
called at his quarters after dark to intercede for the Morrisites.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[620:41](hou25.htm#fr_997) Beadle states that
Bishop Woolley called on Harding to remonstrate against the pardon,
saying, as he took his leave, that if it were granted, 'the people might
proceed to violence.' *Life in Utah*, 421. On pp. 423-5, he relates an
improbable story of a visit paid to the governor by Banks' widow, to
warn him of a plot against his life.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[620:42](hou25.htm#fr_998) To Joseph A.
Johnson, clerk of Kinney's court, for $200. *Beadle's Life in Utah*,
425. In 1868 Taylor recovered his property, with back rents for five
years.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[621:43](hou25.htm#fr_999) At a point about 175
miles north of S. L. City and now in Idaho Ter. It was named Camp
Connor.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[621:44](hou25.htm#fr_1000) He left S. L. City
on June 11th, being appointed consul at Valparaiso. *Deseret News*, June
17, 1863. Harding was a native of Milan, Ind., and when appointed
governor of Utah was about 50 years of age. He was an able lawyer, and a
man of energy and personal courage; but during his administration he
labored rather to win the approval of the American people than to deal
out strict justice. *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 107.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[621:45](hou25.htm#fr_1001) *Tullidge's Hist.
S. L. City*, 325; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 609, where it is
stated that Kinney's removal was caused by his subservience to the will
of Brigham. In the *Deseret News*, Apr. 27, 1864, are reports of his
first speeches in congress.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[621:46](hou25.htm#fr_1002) He afterward
followed his profession in Idaho City. *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*,
105, 111.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[621:47](hou25.htm#fr_1003) Before his
appointment to Utah, Drake had lived for many years at Pontiac, Mich. At
this date he was a man of thin, wiry frame, aged about sixty, of nervous
temperament, vigorous mind, and blameless life.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[622:48](hou25.htm#fr_1004) Doty, a native of
Salem, N Y, was admitted to the supreme court of Michigan in 1818, in
which year he began to practice law at Detroit, being then only 19 years
of age. In 1819 he was appointed secretary to the Mich. legislature; in
1834-5 he was a member of the Mich. legislative council, and introduced
a measure providing for a state government, which was adopted by the
council; in 1837 he was elected delegate to congress, and in 1849,
representative in congress from Wisconsin. *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*,
108-9; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 214-15; *Deseret News*, June 21, 1865.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[622:49](hou25.htm#fr_1005) On the day of his
funeral business was suspended in S. L. City. *Deseret News*, June 21,
1865.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[622:50](hou25.htm#fr_1006) In the first half
of 1869 Secretary E. P. Higgins acted as governor, during Durkee's
absence. His message to the legislature, while in that capacity, was
regarded as one of the most able ever presented to that body.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[622:51](hou25.htm#fr_1007) J. H. Beadle
author of *Life in Utah*.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[622:52](hou25.htm#fr_1008) Gov. Durkee was
born at Royalton, Vt, in 1802. He was one of the earliest settlers and
most prominent men in Wisconsin, and a member of its first legislature.
In 1855 he was elected U.S. senator, and was a stanch adherent of the
anti-slavery party. He died at Omaha on the 14th of Jan., 1870. *Deseret
News*, Jan. 26, 1870; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 215.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[623:53](hou25.htm#fr_1009) For organic act,
see *Laws of Wyoming*, 1869, 18-24.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[623:54](hou25.htm#fr_1010) In the organic
act, the southern boundary of Idaho was fixed at the 42d parallel.
*Idaho Laws*, 1863-4, p. 28. In 1850, when Utah was defined, it was
bounded on the north by Oregon, of which the southern boundary was the
same parallel.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[623:55](hou25.htm#fr_1011) *Colorado Laws*,
1861, p. 23.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[623:56](hou25.htm#fr_1012) In 1865 memorials
of the Utah legislature were presented to congress for the annexation of
territory in Colorado and Arizona. *Utah Acts*, 1865, pp. 91-2; *H.
Misc. Doc*., 53, 38th Cong. 2d Sess. For further proceedings in congress
relating to Utah, see i., 37th Cong. 3d Sess., 737; *Id*., 38th Cong. 2d
Sess., 562; 39th Cong. 1st Sees., 1339, 1383; *Sen. Jour*., 37th Cong.
3d Sees., 618; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 1009, 1029, 1159; 38th Cong. 2d
Sess., 503; *Gong. Globe*, 1862-3, 26, 60, 166, 210, 228-9, 1121; *Id*.,
1864-5, 117, 124, 157, 596, 942, 967, 996, 1028, 1172; 1865-6, 1494,
3509, 3522, 4190.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[623:57](hou25.htm#fr_1013) Hickman states
that in the autumn of 1863 Brigham offered him a large bribe to
assassinate Connor. *Destroying Angel*, 167. The ill feeling had been
considerably intensified by the appearance in *The Union Vedette*, a
newspaper first published at Camp Douglas, Nov. 20, 1863, of a number of
circulars signed by Connor and relating to the mining interests of the
territory. The general states his belief that Utah abounds in rich veins
of gold, silver, copper, and other minerals, invites miners and
prospectors to explore and develop them, and threatens the Mormon
leaders with martial law in case of interference. In a letter to Col
Drum, asst adjt-general at San Francisco, he writes: 'My policy in this
territory has been to invite hither a large gentile and loyal
population, sufficient by peaceful means and through the ballot-box to
overwhelm the Mormons by mere force of numbers, and thus wrest from the
church—disloyal and traitorous to the core—the absolute and tyrannical
control of temporal and civil affairs.' *The Daily Telegraph*, the first
number of which appeared July 4, 1864, with T. B. H. Stenhouse as editor
and proprietor, waged fierce war with the *Vedette*, which was issued at
Camp Douglas in Jan. 1864, as a daily paper. Early in 1865 Gen. Connor
stopped its publication. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 612;
*Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, p. 29. It was again published, however,
in June of this year at S. L. City, and continued till Nov. 27, 1867.
The *Telegraph* was afterward moved to Ogden, where the last number
appeared in July 1869. *Richards’ Bibliog. of Utah*, MS., 15. In Aug.
1859 a newspaper named *The Mountaineer* was published in S. L. City by
Seth M. Blair, James Ferguson, and Hosea Stout, being intended <span
id="page_624">p. 624</span> for secular news and for general
circulation, though friendly in its tone toward the saints. It lasted
only one year. *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[624:58](hou25.htm#fr_1014) A meeting of
officers and prominent citizens was held at Camp Douglas on the 28th of
Feb., and a committee of arrangements appointed.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[624:59](hou25.htm#fr_1015) Organized by
Connor with a view, as Tullidge says, to establishing a military
dictatorship in Utah. In a strongly anti-Mormon report to J. Bidwell,
rep. from Cal., dated Feb. 1867, Gen. Hazen admits that Connor was
unduly harsh toward the saints, remarking that his zeal as a catholic
may account for his rigor. *House Misc. Doc*., 75, 39th Cong. 2d Sess.,
4.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[625:60](hou25.htm#fr_1016) Stenhouse mentions
that before his departure a ball was given at the social hall, which
Brigham and his councillors declined to attend, the officers’ wives of
Camp Douglas also refusing to meet the Mormon women. *Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 612. Gen. P. Edward Connor, an Irishman by birth, came to the
U.S. early in life, and enlisted in the regular army, serving for five
years as a private soildier on the frontier. During the Mexican war he
raised a company of volunteers in Texas, and led them as their captain
at Buena Vista, where he was wounded, and received honorable mention in
the official despatches. At the close of the war he settled in
California, where in ten years he accumulated a fortune. At the
beginning of the civil war he was offered the colonelcy of the third
Cal. volunteers. *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 112-13.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[625:61](hou25.htm#fr_1017) On the 18th of
April a meeting of federal, civil, and military officers was held at S.
L. City, when arrangements were made for the funeral exercises. It is
worthy of note that Col Burton was appointed one of the committee of
arrangements. See *Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 335.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[626:62](hou25.htm#fr_1018) Gen. Hazen remarks
in his report: 'There is no doubt of their murder from Mormon church
influences, although I do not believe by direct command.' He recommends
that in future the commanding officer at Camp Douglas be ordered to send
one of the Mormon leaders to the state prison at Jefferson, Mo., for
each man that is assassinated, and that he be retained there until the
culprit is surrendered. *House Misc. Doc*., 75, 39th Cong. 2d Sess., 4.
Beadle states that, when most of the volunteers had been withdrawn, all
gentiles who had taken up land west of the Jordan were whipped, tarred
and feathered, or ducked in the Jordan, and their improvements
destroyed, and that Weston of the *Union Vedette* was seized, carried to
the temple block by night, and cruelly beaten. Life in Utah, 203-4. See
also *The Union Vedette*, in *Virginia and Helena (Mont.) Post*, Oct 9,
1866.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[626:63](hou25.htm#fr_1019) *Deseret News*,
April 5, 12, 1866. In the former number it is stated that two other
cases of shooting had occurred within less than three weeks, one of the
parties, named Mayfield, being dangerously wounded by a soldier who
mistook him for a gambler with whom he had had some difficultyThe
account of Brassfield's murder and its cause as related in the *Deseret
News* agrees <span id="page_627">p. 627</span> essentially with the one
given in *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 615, except that according
to Stenhouse's version no attempt was made to arrest the murderer, while
in the *Deseret News* it is stated that he was pursued and several shots
fired at him. Beadle, *Life in Utah*, 204-5, says that the woman had
repudiated her former marriage, that Brassfield, who had taken her trunk
and clothing from her former residence, was arrested for larceny, and a
day or two later, while in the street in custody of the marshal, was
shot in the back by a hidden assassin, no special effort being made to
arrest him.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[627:64](hou25.htm#fr_1020) Stenhouse relates
that General Sherman, on hearing of the assassination, telegraphed to
Brigham that he hoped to hear of no more murders of gentiles in Utah,
and reminded him that there were plenty of soldiers, recently mustered
out of service, who would be glad to pay him a visit. Brigham replied
that Brassfield had seduced a man's wife, and that life in S. L. City
was as safe as elsewhere if people attended to their own business.
*Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 616. See also *The Dalles Daily
Mountaineer*, May 17, 1866.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[627:65](hou25.htm#fr_1021) He was afterward
sent to Camp Connor. *The Union Vedette*, Oct. 25, 1866, in *Beadle's
Life in Utah*, 206.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[627:66](hou25.htm#fr_1022) McLeod was at this
time preaching at Independence Hall in opposition to Mormonism, and the
doctor no doubt shared his sentiments. Both were heartily disliked by
the Mormons. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 616-17.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[628:67](hou25.htm#fr_1023) During the trial
Robinson's counsel raised the point that the city, on account of the
non-performance of certain acts, had no legal existence. *Deseret News*,
Nov. 14, 1866.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[628:68](hou25.htm#fr_1024) Parties were
indicted for the murder by the grand jury, in 1871, but there was no
evidence against them except that, they had been seen in the
neighborhood. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 617-18.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[628:69](hou25.htm#fr_1025) *Deseret News*,
Nov. 14, 1866; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 616-20, 735-41,
where are copies of the speeches of counsel. In commenting on the case,
the *Deseret News* remarks that the investigation was conducted without
the least effort to discover the assassins, unless it could be shown
that they were Mormons. For other accounts, see *Beadle's Life in Utah*,
206-9; *Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi*, 363; *Rusling's Across
America*, 183-9; *Virginia and Helena Post*, Oct. 30, 1866; *Boisé City
Statesman*, Nov. 3, 1866; *Austin, Reese River Reveillé*, Oct. 29, 1866;
*Virginia City Post*, Nov. 3, 1866. A large reward was subscribed for
the arrest of the murderers, at the head of the list being the name of
Brigham Young for $500.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[628:70](hou25.htm#fr_1026) Among the latter,
Beadle mentions the cases of three apostates named Potter, Wilson, and
Walker—the first a brother of those murdered at Springville <span
id="page_629">p. 629</span> in 1857—who were arrested at Coalville,
Weber co., for stealing a cow, and placed in charge of a party of
policemen, one of them a Danite named Hinckley. Walker escaped to Camp
Douglas, but Wilson and Potter were killed by the officers. The
murderers were arrested, but escaped from the marshal. Soon afterward a
colored man, known as Negro Tom, called on the federal officials to
state that he could give important evidence concerning certain murders.
A few days later he was found with his throat cut and his body horribly
mangled, about two miles east of the city. *Life in Utah*, 211-12. See
also *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 621. The latter relates that
Judge Titus caused the arrests, in consequence of which one of the
apostles, to mark his contempt for the judge, had a chemise made, about
ten feet in length, and ordered it to be handed to the judge as a
present. Titus regarded the matter as a threat, as well as an insult,
considering that the night garment was intended as a shroud. In 1866 a
man named Beanfield, from Austin, Nev., had some difficulty with the
Mormons and was shot. *Bowles, Our New West*, 266. See also *S. F.
Call*, Nov. 1, 16, 1866, April 14, 1867; *S. F. Times*, Aug. 15, Oct.
25, 1867; *Sac. Union*, Oct. 31, 1866.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[630:71](hou25.htm#fr_1027) Among them the
Spanish Fork reservation, including nearly 13,000 acres, was opened in
1855 in Utah Valley. Here about 2,500 bushels of wheat were raised in
1859. There were others on Sanpete Creek, in the valley of that name, on
Corn Creek, in Fillmore Valley, and at Deep Creek and Ruby valleys. On
each there were about 25 acres in wheat, and a small quantity of
vegetables were raised. J. Forney, in *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1859, pp. 367-9.
In these reports for the years 1856-63, and in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st
Sess., xi. no. 42, are many statements and suggestions as to the
character of the Indians, their condition, treatment, reservation work,
and intercourse with the white population. As they were little heeded,
it is unnecessary to mention them in detail. The names of the various
superintendents of Indian affairs and Indian agents will be found in the
*American Almanac*.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[630:72](hou25.htm#fr_1028) For troubles in
southern Utah in 1857-8, see *Little's Jacob Hamblin*, 47 et seq. In
Oct. 1858, Hamblin with eleven others left the Santa Clara settlement to
visit the Moquis on the eastern side of the Colorado, thus paving the
way for Mormon colonization in that direction. On Feb. 25, 1858, a
descent was made on one of the northern settlements by 250 Shoshones.
Two settlers were killed, five wounded, and a large number of cattle and
horses driven off. On the 1st and 9th of March the herds of the settlers
in Rush Valley were raided and a quantity of stock stolen. On the 7th,
100 horses and mules were taken from the farm of John C. Naile at the
north end of Utah Lake. *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. pt
ii. pp. 74-5, 80-2. On Sept. 10th, Utah Indians violated the persons of
a Danish woman and her daughter, near the Spanish Fork reservation.
*Id*., 152; *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1859, p. 362. In the summer of 1859 an
emigrant party, en route for California, was surprised in the
neighborhood of the Goose Creek mountains, and at least five men and two
women killed, the massacre being caused by the slaughter of two Indians
who entered the camp for trading purposes. *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1859-60, pt
ii. 210-11. On Aug. 14th, this body of Indians was attacked by Lieut Gay
with a company of dragoons, and about 20 of them killed. In his message
to the Utah legislature, dated Dec. 12, 1860, Gov. Cumming states that
though a suitable force had been appointed for the protection of the
northern emigrant route, many persons had been murdered presumably by
roving bands of Shoshones and Bannacks. *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1859-60,
p. 8. In the summer of 1860, Mayor Ormsby, with a party of Carson Valley
militia, was decoyed into a cañon and perished with all his command, the
cause of the outbreak being the slaying by emigrants of a chief, named
Winnemucca. *Burton's City of the Saints*, 582. See also *Moore's Pion.
Exper*., MS., 15-19. For further Indian depredations up to 1863,
measures taken to prevent and punish them, and remarks thereon, too
voluminous to be mentioned in detail, see *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1859-60, pt
ii., 231-44, 1861, 21, 1862, 210-14, 1863, 419-20; *Sen. Doc*., 36th
Cong. 2d Sess., ii. no. 1, pp. 69-73; *House Ex. Doc*., 37 Cong. 3d
Sess., iv. no. 3, pp. 78-80, 82-5, v. no. 30; <span id="page_XXX">p.
XXX</span> *Hayes’ Scraps, Los Angeles*, iv. 96; *Deseret News*, March
17, Apr. 14, July 7, Nov. 3, 17, 1858, Feb. 16, Aug. 3, 24, 31, Sept.
21, Nov. 16, 1859, May 30, Aug. 1, Oct. 3, 1860, Feb. 13, 1861, Apr. 16,
June 11, Aug. 13, Sept. 17, 24, Oct. 8, Nov. 26, Dec. 10, 31, 1862;
*S. F. Alta*, May 11, Aug. 16, 17, Sept. 6, Oct. 20, 28, 29, 1858, Jan.
18, March 29, 30, July 6, Sept. 8, 12, 16, 21, 22, 28, Oct. 6, 28, 1859;
*S. F. Bulletin*, May 8, Aug. 18, Oct. 28, 29, Nov. 26, 1858, Aug. 24,
30, Oct. 31, Nov. 19, 1859, Oct. 4, 8, 1862; *Sac. Union*, Aug. 10, 12,
Sept. 28, Oct. 2, 5, 12, 19, 31, Nov. 2, 11, 14, Dec. 7, 1857, March 3,
July 21, 29, Aug. 17, Sept. 4, Oct. 20, Nov. 16, 25, 31, 1858, Feb. 18,
23, March 16, Apr. 15, May 10, Aug. 11, 31, Sept. 17, 19, 22, 30, Oct.
5, 7, 27, Dec. 2, 19, 1859, Apr. 6, May 4, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 21, 23,
24, 28, 30, 31, June 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12, 14, 16, 20, 26, July 6, 7, 9,
12, 13, 14, 21, 31, Aug. 1, 21, 23, Oct. 2, 1860, Apr. 4, 24, 29, May 8,
9, 31, June 7, 11, Aug. 15, 18, Sept. 3, 18, 22, Oct. 2, Dec. 26, 1862.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[631:73](hou25.htm#fr_1029) Connor states that
he found 224 bodies on the field, and how many more were killed he was
unable to say. A copy of his official despatch will be found in
*Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 283-6.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[631:74](hou25.htm#fr_1030) And two inferior
chiefs, named Sagwitch and Lehi, *Id*., 286.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[632:75](hou25.htm#fr_1031) Seventy-six were
disabled by frozen feet. Letter of General Halleck in *Id*., 287.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[632:76](hou25.htm#fr_1032) In addition to the
official despatches of Col Connor and Gen. Halleck, Tullidge gives in
his *Hist. S. L. City*, 289-90, two other accounts of the battle at Bear
River, one copied from a historical note in the Logan Branch records,
and the other from Col Martineau's sketch of the military history of
Cache co. Both differ from the official reports as to the number killed,
the former placing it at 200, and a great many wounded, the latter
stating that the dead, as counted by an eye-witness from Franklin,
amounted to 368, besides the wounded who afterward died, and that about
90 of the slain were women and children. For other versions, see *Hayes’
Scraps, Indians*, v. 214-17.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[632:77](hou25.htm#fr_1033) The volunteers
numbered 140. Among the killed was Lieut F. A. Teale. *Sloan's Utah
Gazetteer*, 1884, 29.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[632:78](hou25.htm#fr_1034) Accounts of the
various massacres and depredations Will be found in *Wells’ Narr.*, MS.;
*Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 29-30; *Utah Sketches*, MS.,
13-14, 43, 136-48, 153-7; see also *Robinson's Sinners and Saints*,
162-5; <span id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> *Codman's Round Trip*, 219-20,
243-5. The leading incidents are briefly as follow: On the 9th of April,
1865, Blackhawk and his band visited Manti, where they boasted of having
stolen some cattle at a neighboring settlement, and wanted to hold a
'big talk.' On the next day some of the Manti citizens, who rode forth
to ascertain the truth of the matter, were fired upon and one of them
killed, the Indians retiring up Salt Creek Cañon in Sevier co., where
they killed two herdsmen. A party sent in pursuit a few days later was
overpowered with the loss of two men. On May 29th the savages massacred
a family of six persons at Thistle Valley in Sanpete co., slaying two
others about the same time. In July three settlers were murdered, and
several wounded. Many cattle had now been driven off, and the people of
Sanpete, Sevier, Millard, Piute, Beaver, Iron, Washington, and Kane
counties kept guard over their stock with armed and mounted men. Between
Jan. and the beginning of April 1866 several raids were made in Kane
co., five settlers being killed, and a man named Peter Shirts with his
family sustaining a siege for several weeks until relieved by militia.
Between April 22d and the end of June six persons were killed and others
wounded in Sanpete and Piute counties, two of them while attempting to
recover cattle driven off from the Spanish Fork reservation. Early in
1867 James J. Peterson with his wife and daughter were killed near
Glenwood, Sevier co., and their bodies mutilated. The vigilance of the
militia kept the Indians in check for the remainder of this year, and
only three other settlers were killed, the soldiery also losing three of
their number. F. H. Head, sup. of Indian affairs, in *Ind. Aff. Rept*,
1866, p. 124, states that the number of marauders was not more than 50
or 60.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[633:79](hou25.htm#fr_1035) Sevier and Piute
counties were entirely abandoned, together with the settlements of
Berrysville, Winsor, upper and lower Kanab, Shunesburg, Springdale,
Northup, and many ranches in Kane co., and Pangwitch and Fort Sanford in
Iron co. *Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 30. Six flourishing
settlements in Piute co., four on the borders of Sanpete, and fifteen in
Iron, Kane, and Washington counties, were entirely abandoned. Joint
memorial of legislature, in *Laws of Utah*, 1878, p. 167.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[633:80](hou25.htm#fr_1036) For newspaper
reports of Indian depredations, difficulties, expeditions, and battles
between 1863 and 1867, see, among others, *The Deseret News*, Jan. 21,
28, Feb. 11, March 18, Apr. 8, 15, 22, May 13, 20, July 1, 1863, June 7,
1865, May 10, 1866, June 5, 12, 1867; *Union Vedette*, July 8, 13, 31,
Aug. 4, 17, Nov. 5, 9, 1865; *S. F. Bulletin*, Jan. 26, Apr. 14, 15, May
4, June 9, July 10, 1863, Aug. 8, 1864, Apr. 20, 1866; *S. F. Alta*,
Feb. 17, 19, May 8, June 11, 12. July 6, 7, 1863, Aug. 12, Sept. 3,
1864, July 8, 1865, May 1, 16, 22, June 10, 14, 15, July 31, Aug. 8,
1867; *S. F. Call*, Jan. 5, March 22, June 8, 14, 21, Aug. 10, 11, Oct.
29, 1865, May 14, June 2, 4, 5, 9, 11, July 24, Aug. 1, 3, 8, 9, 1867;
*Sac. Union*, Jan. 31, Feb. 12, 13, 17, Apr. 14, 28, May 16, 30, June
13, 1863, Apr. 20, July 30, Aug. 20, 31, 1864, Feb. 7, June 9, Aug. 4,
26, 31, 1865, Aug. 5, 1867; *Gold Hill News*, March 17, July 8, 1865;
*Carson Appeal*, June 10, Aug. 2, 1865; *Boisé Statesman*, June 8, Dec.
12, 1865, Nov. 9 1867; *Watsonville Pajaro Times*, May 16, 1863.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[633:81](hou25.htm#fr_1037) See the
certificate of Gov. Charles Durkee, appended in 1869 to the joint <span
id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> memorial, in *Laws of Utah*, 1878, p. 167.
Geo. W. Emery, who was governor in Feb. 1878, stated that he knew
nothing of the facts, and had no recommendation to make. Two former
memorials had been forwarded, the first in 1868. *House Misc. Doc*., 99,
40th Cong. 2d Sess., 19; the second in 1869. *Id*., 41st Cong. 1st Sess.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[634:82](hou25.htm#fr_1038) The first in
Tooele Valley and the second at Soda Springs. They were confirmed by the
senate, but with amendments which were forwarded to Gov. Doty, with
instructions to obtain the consent of the Indians. *Ind. Aff. Rept*,
1864, p. 16. On the 30th of July, 1863, a treaty had been made with
Pocatello and others whereby the roads to the Beaver Head and Boisé
River gold mines and the northern California and southern Oregon roads
were made secure. Another treaty was concluded with the western
Shoshones at Ruby Valley, Oct. 1st. *Rept of James Duane Doty*, in
*Id*., 1864, p. 175.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[634:83](hou25.htm#fr_1039) *Id*., 176. In his
message to the legislature, dated Dec. 12, 1861, Gov. Doty remarks:
'These are the first treaties ever made by the U.S. with the bands of
Shoshones; and it is somewhat remarkable that they have adhered to their
stipulations with a fidelity equal to that of most civilized nations.'
*Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1864-5, pp. 11-12.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[634:84](hou25.htm#fr_1040) The appropriations
were to be made on the supposition that the Indian tribes would muster
5,000 souls, and were to be increased or diminished in proportion to
their numbers. *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1865, p. 151.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[635:85](hou25.htm#fr_1041) A synopsis of the
provisions of this treaty, which was negotiated by O. H. Irish,
superintendent of Indian affairs in 1865, will be found in *Id*., 150-1.
See also *Deseret News*, June 14, 1865.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[635:86](hou25.htm#fr_1042) *Utah Acts*,
1863-4, pp. 7-10, 13.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[635:87](hou25.htm#fr_1043) *U.S. Acts*, 38th
Cong. 1st Sess., 67-8; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., 16-17; *House Ex. Doc*., 46
Cong. 3d Sess., xxvi. 971-3. The salary of the surveyor-general was to
be $3,000 a year, and his powers and duties similar to these of the
surveyor-general of Oregon. The usual school reservations were made. By
act of July 16, 1868, it was ordered that the public lands of the
territory should constitute a new land district, to be named the Utah
district, and that the preemption, homestead, and other laws of the U.S.
should be extended over it. *Id*., 973-4. In 1862 this district was
merged with that of Colorado. *U.S. Acts*, 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 51,
100-1. In *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1864, p. 16, Commissioner Wm P. Dale states
that the Uintah Valley had been set apart for an Indian reservation as
early as Oct. 1861, but that on account of the imperfect geographical
knowledge of the country its exact limits could not then be defined.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[635:88](hou25.htm#fr_1044) *Id*., 17. The
tract enclosed the whole region drained by the Uintah River and its
upper branches, as far as its junction with the Green River.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[636:89](hou25.htm#fr_1045) Pardon Dodds, in
*Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1868, 156. Dodds, who was then Indian agent at Uintah,
states that at least $20,000 was needed.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[636:90](hou25.htm#fr_1046) During the summer
of 1868 a few unimportant raids were made in Sanpete co., whereupon Col
Head and others repaired to Strawberry Valley, Uintah, and a treaty of
peace was concluded. *Deseret News,* Aug. 26, 1868.

    Among the most recent works on Utah is *The History of Salt Lake
City and its Founders, by Edward W. Tullidge.* The first volume, which
is a reprint from *Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine,* was issued in 1884,
and relates the leading incidents of Mormon history between 1845 and
1865, the purpose being to continue it to a more recent date, adding
thereto the records of other towns and counties, and forming when
completed a history of the entire territory. The work is somewhat in the
nature of a compilation, and consists largely of copies of official
reports and documents, together with numerous extracts from other works,
more especially from *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints.* Mr Tullidge
follows the text of Stenhouse very closely in portions of his work,
though writing from a different standpoint, and sometimes borrows his
language with very slight alterations and without acknowledgment. The
chapters relating to the Utah war occupy a large portion of the first
volume. They are carefully considered, and contain much that is not
found elsewhere. The work is published by authority of the city council,
and under supervision of its committee on revision.

*    The Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and Complete History of the
Mormons, from the First Vision of Joseph Smith to the Last Courtship of
Brigham Young, by T. B. H. Stenhouse.* New York, 1873. This work, as its
title indicates, carries the story of Mormonism from its earliest
inception up to within a few years of the death of Brigham. Besides
giving a complete outline of the political history of the latter-day
saints, it contains chapters on the Mormon theocracy and priesthood, on
polygamy, and on the book of Mormon, together with descriptions of the
domestic and social condition of the Mormons, and of the various
outrages commonly ascribed to them, more especially of the Mountain
Meadows massacre. The book is profusely illustrated, entertaining in
style, and though containing 761 pages of printed matter, can be read
with interest throughout. The author was for 25 years a Mormon
missionary and elder, during which period he was on familiar terms with
the apostles, and for twelve years held daily intercourse with the
president of the church. As he relates, he 'has no pet theories to
advance, no revelations to announce, no personal animosity to satisfy.
He has simply outgrown the past.' Though at times unduly severe, it is
in the main one of the most impartial works yet published by anti-Mormon
writers. Stenhouse, a Scotchman by birth, was converted to Mormonism in
1846, being then 21 years of age. He afterward labored as a missionary
in England, Scotland, and various parts of Europe, <span
id="page_637">p. 637</span> founding the Southampton conference, and
being for three years president of the Swiss and Italian missions. In
1869 he apostatized, and soon afterward removed to the city of New York,
where he found employment as a journalist and wrote the above work. His
decease occurred in 1882. See *Stenhouse's Tell it All,* preface;
*Burton's Rocky Mountain Saints,* 272; *S. F. Bulletin,* March 7, 1882.

*    Exposé of Polygamy in Utah: A Lady's Life among the Mormons, by Mrs
T. B. H. Stenhouse.*New York, 1872. *Tell It All: The Story of a Life's
Experience in Mormonism. An Autobiography; by Mrs T. B. H. Stenhouse.*
Hartford, Conn., 1879. *An Englishwoman in Utah: The Story of a Life's
Experience in Mormonism. An Autobiography; by Mrs T. B. H. Stenhouse.*
London, 1880. The last two of these works are almost identical, except
that one or two chapters of the former are omitted in the latter volume.
Beginning with her first introduction to Mormonism about the year 1849,
until the date of her own and her husband's apostasy, some 20 years
later, the authoress gives what is claimed to be a plain, unvarnished
record of facts which have come under her own notice. A few months after
the publication of the *Exposé of Polygamy,* Mrs Stenhouse was asked to
lecture on that subject, and wherever she spoke was requested to give
her narrative more circumstantially and in more detail. Finally she
accepted the suggestion of a gentile newspaper, published at S. L. City,
to 'tell it all.' Hence the title and subject-matter of this work.
Though claiming no literary merit, it is well told, and certainly tells
enough, while containing nothing that can be termed positively
indelicate.

*    The Mormon Prophet and his Harem: or, An Authentic History of
Brigham Young, his Numerous Wives and Children, by Mrs G. V. Waite.*
Cambridge, 1866. Apart from the opening chapter, which contains the
early life of Brigham, the first half of this work is devoted to the
political history of Utah. Its main interest centres, however, in the
information given in the latter portion, as to the family and social
relations of the Mormon leader. There is the inevitable chapter on
polygamy, written, the authoress remarks, as dispassionately as the
writer's utter abhorrence of the system will permit. There is also a
chapter where the mysteries of the endowment house are described in the
form of a burlesque, and others where Brigham is set forth as prophet,
seer, revelator, and grand archee. The volume is compact and well
written; but though many of the facts may have been gathered, as is
claimed, from original sources, they contain little that is not well
known at the present day.

*    Life in Utah: or, The Mysteries and Crimes of Mormonism, being an
Exposé of the Sacred Rites and Ceremonies of the Latter-Day Saints, with
a Full and Authentic History of Polygamy and the Mormon Sect from its
Origin to the Present Time, by J. H. Beadle.* Philadelphia, etc., 1870.
Though the author claims to have had access to valuable personal records
and other private sources of information, his book has no special value.
There are chapters on Mormon society, Mormon theology and theocracy,
Mormon mysteries, theoretical and practical polygamy, but all these
matters have been better treated by others, while the historical
portions of the work are far inferior to those of Stenhouse. In relating
the crimes of the Mormons, Mr Beadle claims that the statements for and
against them have been equally presented. The reader need only turn to
his account of the Mountain Meadows massacre to find that this is not
the case. Here, and elsewhere, in the usual vein of looseness and
exaggeration, crimes are alleged against the saints that have never been
sustained, and all extenuating circumstances are omitted. Murders are
laid to their charge of which there is no evidence, and which are not
even mentioned by the leading authorities. The volume forms one of the
many works that have been written on Mormonism with a view to pander to
the vicious tastes of a certain class of readers rather than to furnish
information.

    The following is a more complete list of the authorities consulted
in the preceding chapters: *Taylor's Rem.,* MS.; *Wells’ Narr.,* MS.;
*Utah Notes,* MS.; *Jennings’ Mat. Progr.,* MS.; *Early Hist. Carson
Valley,* MS.; *Little's Mail Service,* MS.; *Incidents in Utah Hist.,*
MS.; *Nebeker's Early Justice,* MS.; <span id="page_638">p. 638</span>
*U. S. Acts and Res.,* 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 53-8, 111, 307, 453-8; 33d
Cong. 2d Sess., 611; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., 368, app. iii.-iv.; 37th
Cong. 2d Sess., 51, 100-1; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 67; *Id.,* 2d Sess.,
16-17; 46th Cong. 3d Sess., *H. Ex. Doc.,* 47, pt 3, 947, 972-3; *H.
Jour.,* 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 458, 1804; *Id.,* 2d Sess. 602; 32d Cong.
2d Sess., 72, 104, 232, 243-4, 780; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., 1563; *Id.,* 2d
Sess., 164, 246; 34th Cong. 3d Sess., 253, 376; 35th Cong. 1st Sess.,
1325, 1366; *Id.,* 2d Sess., 323, 745, 759, 761; 36th Cong. 1st Sess.,
1455; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 1271, 1318-19; *Id.,* 3d Sess., 737; 38th
Cong. 2d Sess., 562; 39th Cong. 1st Sess., 1339, 1383; *H. Misc. Doc.,*
31st Cong. 1st Sess., no. 18; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 58; 35th Cong.
1st Sess., no. 100; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 32; *Id.,* 2d Sess., no.
10; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 78; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 53; 39th Cong.
2d Sess., no. 75; 40th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 99; 41st Cong. 1st Sess., no.
19; *H. Ex. Doc.,* 31st Cong. 1st Sess., no. 5, 1002-4; 32d Cong. 1st
Sess., no. 2, 272, 444-6; *Id.,* no. 25, 1-4, 7-8, 14-33: *Id.,* 2d
Sess., no. 1, 299-300, 437-45; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 1, pt 1, 12,
441-7, pt 3, 821; *Id.,* no. 18; *Id.,* 2d Sess., no. 1, pt 1, 224, pt
2, 63; 34th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 1, pt 1,504, 515-26, 568-76, pt 2,
166-8; *Id.,* 3d Sess., no. 1, 6-7, no. 37, 2-3, 128, 142-3; 35th Cong.
1st Sess., no. 2, pt 1, 23-6, pt 2, 6-9, 21-38; *Id.,* no. 33, passim;
no. 71, passim; no. 93, 40-9, 77, 86-96; no. 99, passim; no. 138,
passim; *Id.,* 2d Sess., no. 2, pt 1, 8-10, 69-92, 77; pt 2, passim; pt
3, 780 2; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 1, pt 2, 14-15, 121-256, 608; *Id.,*
no. 78; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 58, no. 97; *Id.,* no. 3, 78-85, no.
30, passim; 39th Cont. 2d Sess., no. 1, pt 2, 14-26; no. 20, 7-10; 41st
Cong. 2d Sess., passim; *Id.,* 3d Sess., no. 1, pt 2, it. 72; *H. Com.
Rept,* 33d Cong. 2d Sess., no, 39, passim; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no.
201, passim; *S. Jour.,* 31st Cong. 2d Sess., 406; 33d Cong. 1st Sess.,
1003; *Id.,* 2d Sess., 574-5; 34th Cong. 1st and 2d Sess., 943; *Id.,*
3d Sess., 63, 298; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., 338, 1007-8; *Id.,* 2d Sess.,
450, 590, 660, 36th Cont. 2d Sess., 521-59; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 1161;
*Id.,* 3d Sess., 618; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 1009, 1029; *Id.,* 2d Sess.,
503; *S. Ex. Doc.,* 32d Cong. 2d Sess., no. 33, passim; 33d Cont. 2d
Sess., no. 33, 1-11; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 67; passim; *Id.,* 2d
Sess., no. 36, 68-73; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 32, passim; no. 42,
passim; no. 52, 301-6; *Id.,* 2d Sess., no. 1, 69-73, 224; 37th Cont.
1st Sess., no. 1, 58; *S. Misc. Doc.,* 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 201,
passim; no. 240, passim; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 12, passim; 37th
Cong. 3d Sess., no. 37; *S. Com. Rept,* 37th Cong. 3d Sess., no. 87,
passim; 45th Cont. 2d Sess., no. 142, passim; *Cong. Globe,* 1849-50,
1850-1, 1851-2, 1853-4, 1854-5, 1855-6, 1856-7, 1857-8, 1858-9, 1859-60,
1860-1, 1861-2, 1862-3, 1863-4, 1864-5, 1865-6, passim; *Sec. Inter.
Rept,* 40th Cong. 2d Sess., 10-11, 173-89, 361-95; *Sec. Treas. Rept,*
1865, 326; 1866, 391; 1867, 442-3; *Com. Ind. Aff. Rept,* 1856, 227-9,
267; 1857, 306-8, 324, 380; 1859, 22, 365-73; 1861, 21; 1862, 210-14;
1863, 419-20; 1864, 16, 175-8; 1865, 143-4, 147-53; 1866, 124-5, 128-9;
1868, 5-6, 151-2; 1869, 270-1; 1870, 141-4, 191-2, 330-59; 1871, 545-51,
606-51, 683; *Wilson, Ind. Agt at G. S. L., Rept,* Sept. 4, 1849,
passim; *Chart. and Const.,* ii. 1236-40; *Stat. 8th Census,* passim;
*Rept Corn. Land-Office,* 1864, 20; *Millen. Star,* xx. 107-9, 125,
186-9, 532, xxii. 348, 453-4, xxiv. 241-5, 257-61, xxvii. 118-20, 133-6,
150-2, 165-6, xxxii. 744-5, xxxvii. 673-6; *S.* *Jour. (Cal.),* 1850,
429-42, 1296; 1853, 645; *S. Jour. (Nev.),* 1867, 64-5; *Utah Gov.
Mess.,* 1870, 7-18; *Jour. Legis.,* 1851-68; *Acts,* 1855-68;
*Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City,* 5, 24-32, 56-8, 63, 336; *Id., Quart.
Mag.,* i. 190-8, 479, 526-8, 536-7; *Id., Life of Young,* 30-1; 196-212,
239-318, 329-55, 385-7; *Id., Women,* etc., 244, 353-8, 414-22, 441-8;
*Stenhouse's R. M. Saints,* p. xxi., 262-471, passim, 591-621, 713;
*Id., Les Mormons,* 39-41, 148-50, 172-202; *Stenhouse's (Mrs) Tell It
All,* 248, 266-9, 324-39, 380-5, 462-3, 486-7, 496-8, 500-26, 548-9,
627-52; *Id., Englishwoman,* passim; *Burton's City of the Saints,* 2,
5, 21-5, 209-32, 265-99, 304-59, 406-32, 506-82; *Lee's Morm.,* 16-35,
132-3, 218-50, 232, 240, 269-87, 379 -84; *Remy's Journey to* G. S. L.,
i. 189-200, 214-18, 446-52, 470-95, ii. 212-14, 240-5; *Richards’
Narr.,* MS., 22-4, 35, 123-4; *Richards’ (Mrs) Remin.,* MS., 39-46;
*Revue des Deux Mondes,* 194-211; *Rusling's Across Amer.,* 183-90;
*Robinson's Sinners and Saints,* 162-5, 180; *Rae's Westward by Rail,*
127-8, 140, 169-82; *Paddock's La Tour,* 301-2, 323, 348-9; *Hunt's
Merch. Mag.,* xxx. 639; <span id="page_639">p. 639</span> *Hickman's
Dest. Angel,* 57-68, 107-12, 118-49, 158, 166-7, 205-9; *Hyde's Morm.,*
28-49, 121-3, 147-50, 177-82; *Greeley's Overland Jour.,* 206-57;
*Gun-nison's Morm.,* vii.-xiv., 83, 141-3, 146-7; *Gwin's Mem.,* MS.;
*Green's Morm.,* 453-4; Glines (J. H.), in *Utah Co. Sketches,* MS.,
21-2; Llewellyn, in *Id.,* 43; Jones, in *Id.,* 54-6; Morrison, in
*Id.,* 136-48; McFadyen, in *Id.,* 153-7; Teas-dale, in *Id.,* 100-11;
*Olshausen's Gesch. Morm.,* 153-89, 237-44; *Ferris’ Utah and Morm.,*
167-9, 185-90; *Kirchoff's Reisb.,* etc., i. 107-8; *Marshall's Through
Amer.,* 177, 192; *McClure's Three Thousand Miles,* etc., 150, 435;
*Waite's The Morm. Prophet,* 23-59, 60-113, 122-31, 214-46, 266-72, 278;
*Murphy's Min. Res.,* 87; *Little's Jacob Hamblin,* 45-7, 56-7, 75, 140;
*Linforth's Route,* etc., 75-77, 104-16; *Ludlow's Heart of Cont.,*
301-2; *Mackay's The Morm.,* 176, 199-200, 233, 238-48, 258-9, 276;
*Ebey's Jour.,* MS., i. 146, v. 154, 219; *Car-valho's Incid. of Trav.,*
141-3, 151-9, 188-99; *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 168-266, 390-485; *Id.,
Western Wilds,* 300-9, 490-530; *ld., Uudevel. West,* 646-53; *Codman' s
Round Trip,* 171-2, 210-45; *Cradlebaugh' s Speech,* passim; *Bertrand's
Mem. Morm.,* 97-133, 246-8; *Busch, Die Morm.,* 53-5; *Id., Gesch.
Morm., 46-*158, 307-30; *Dana's Great West,* 271; *Schiel's Reise,*
etc., 81-94, 100-2; *Bowles’ Our New West,* 226, 266-8; *Young's Wife
No. 19,* 228-61, 270-6, 341-8, 382-4; *Townsend's Morm. Trials,* 32-4;
*Wadsworth's Wagon Road,* 12; *Campbell's Idado,* 11-12; *Corr. Hist.
Soc. Mont.,* 44-5; *Comittant's Civili. Inconnues,* 29; *Clark's
Statement,* MS., 10; *Dixon's White Conquest,* i. 188-98; *Siskiyou Co.
Affairs,* MS., 21; *Revue Orient. et Amer.,* v. 299-306; *Cradlebaugh's
Nev. Biog.,* MS., 1; *Kinney's (J. .F.) Speech,* Mar. 17, 1864; *Doc.
Hist. Mex.,* 3d ser., 100-12; *Moore's Pion. Explor.,* MS., 15-19;
*Marcy's Thirty Years,* 267-75; *De Lacy's Montana as It Is,* 81;
*Brackett's U.S. Cavalry,* 177-9; *Hutchings’ Cal. Mag.,* ii. 196, iv.
345-9; *Hygiene U.S. Army,* 332-3; *Atlantic Monthly,* iii. 573-84; *De
Smet's West. Missions,* 396; *Boadicea's The Morm. Wife; Frisbie's
Retain.,* MS., 32-4; *Chandless' Visit to Salt Lake,* 154, 157 et seq.;
*Trans. Wyom. Acad. Sciences,* 1882, 81-2; *Simpson, Explor.,* 23; *Life
among the Morm.,* 186-93; *Smith's Rise, Prog.,* etc., 19-30; *Saxon's
Five Years,* 292-4; *Snow's Poems,* i. 225-6, 265-6; *Stansbury's
Explor. and Surv.,* 130-5, 148-50; *Spence's Settler's Guide,* 251,
259-60; *Tucker's Morm.,* 222-46, 277, 280-7; *Times and Seasons,* v.
692; *Utah Pamph., Polit.,* no. 14, 6-8; *Stanford's Weber Co.,* MS.,
23; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 19-60, 178-290; *Hughes' Voice from West,*
passim; *Lee (J. D.), Trial,* passim; *Smith's Mystery and Crime,* 30;
*Hollister's Resour. of Utah,* 8; *Huntington's Vocab. Utah and Shoshone
Dialects,* 27-9; *Hand-book on Morm.,* 67-72; *Hittell's Scrapbook,* 94;
*Hayes’ Scraps, Cal. Pol.,* vii. 57; *Id., Indians,* v. 214-17; *\]d.,
Los Angeles,* iv. 96, viii. 228-31, xvii. 3, 7; *Id., S. Bernardino,* i.
53, 58, 60; *Id., Utah,* passim; *Rodenbough's Second Dragoons,* 172-3;
*Richardson's Beyond the Mississ.,* 347-8, 362-3; *Shelton (R.)* and
*Meik's Def. of Morm.*, passim; *Cram's Topog. Mem.,* 25-32; *Crimes of
L. D. Saints,* 48-82; *Möllhausen's Tagebuch,* 429-30; *Id., Reisen,*
etc., 25, 141, 410; *Id., Das Mormon.,* 35-7, 102-7; *Pratt's
Autobiog.,* 483; *Morse's Wash. Ter.,* MS., ii. 15-18; *Smucker's Hist.
of Morm.,* 216; *Rinehart's Mem.,* MS., 3; *Harper's Mag.,* xliv. 602;
*Pac. R. R. Repts,* ii. 26-7; *Putnam's Mag.,* ii. 263, v. 225-36; *Utah
Rev.,* Feb. 1882, 243-6; *Trib. Alman.,* 1850, 51; 1854, 67; *Amer.
Alman.,* 1850, 109; 1851, 297; 1852, 116; 1853-61, passim; *Fisher's
Amer. Stat. Ann.,* 1854, 120; *Sloan's Utah Gazett.,* 24-8; *Amer.
Quart. Reg.,* iii. 588-95; *S. L.* *Direc.,* 1869, 64, 173; *Des. News,*
1855-77, too numerous to quote; *Vidette,* July 31, 1865; *Review,* Jan.
27, 1872; *Contributor,* v. 312-13, 446; *S. F. Alta,* 1849-76, too
numerous to quote; *Chronicle,* June 17, 1877; Jan. 13, 1881;
*Examiner,* Nov. 8, 1871; Jan. 10, 1872; July 21, 1875; *Times,* 1867,
Feb. 2, June 4, 6, 13, Aug. 9, 15, Oct. 25; 1868, May 8, July 13, Sept.
29, Oct. 10, Dec. 17; 1869, Jan. 4, Mar. 23, May 20, Sept. 16; *Post,*
1877, Mar. 13, 22, 23, 24; 1878, Oct. 11; *Herald,* 1851, Nov. 2, 4;
1852, Aug. 21; 1853, June 12, Sept. 30, Dec. 3, 24; 1854, Feb. 22, May
31, June 25, Aug. 23, Oct. 1, 19; 1855, Mar. 14, Apr. 6, May 7, July 3;
1856, May 12, Nov. 11, 13; 1857, Feb. 25, May 14, June 19, Oct. 6, 12,
27, Nov. 2, 12, 25, 30, Dec. 1, 7, 17, 30; 1858, Jan. 12, 15, Mar. 11,
Apr. 1, May 11, 27, June 29, July 10, Aug. 13; 1861, Jan. 30;
*Bulletin,* too numerous to quote; <span id="page_640">p. 640</span>
*Call,* 1864, June 25, Aug. 17; 1865, Jan. 5, Mar. 3, May 6, June 1,
July 29, Aug. 10, Oct. 3, Nov. 1; 1866, Nov. 1; 1867, Apr. 14, May 14,
June 2, July 24, Aug. 1; 1869, Sept. 3; 1872, May 23, Sept. 23, Oct. 14,
Nov. 19; 1875, July 18, 21; 1877, Feb. 16, Mar. 9, Apr. 1, May 3; 1881,
July 30; *Stock Rept,* 1874, July 30, Nov. 27; 1875, July 24, 31; 1876,
Sept. 23; 1879, May 2; *Stock Exchange,* Mar. 24, 1877; *Californian,*
Jan. 26, 1848; *Min. and Scien. Press,* July 31, 1375; Mar. 31, \]877;
*Courier de S. F.,* Mar. 26, 1869; *Spirit of the Times,* July 14, 1877;
*Pac. Rural Press,* Mar. 31, 1877; *Wide West,* Jan. 3, 1858; *Cal.
Star,* Jan. 29, 1848; *Golden Era,* May 18, 1856; *Oakland Tribune,*
Mar. 24, 1877; *Appleton's Jour.,* xi. 592-3, 623; *Cal., Its Past
Hiptory,* 211-16; *Cal. Mercant. Jour.,* 1860, 183-4; *Sac. Union,*
1855-67, too numerous to quote; *Bee,* May 24, Nov. 2, 1869; *Antioch
(Cal.) Ledger,* Nov. 21, 1875; June 12, 1877; *Napa Co. Reporter,* Apr.
7, 1877; *Calaveras Chron.,* Mar. 31, 1877; *Mariposa Gazette,* Mar. 31,
1877; *Wilmington Jour.,* Dec. 9, 1866; *Havilah Courier,* Apr. 27,
1867; *Copperopolis Courier,* Mar. 23, 1867; *Watsonville, Pajaro
Times,* May 16, 1863; *Petaluma Argus,* Mar. 16; 1877; *Sonoma
Democrat,* Mar. 31, 1877; *Stockton Herald,* Sept. 28, 1871;
*Independent,* June 15, 1867; Nov. 4, 1875; June 11, 1879; *San José
Argus,* Dec. 5, 1874; *Herald,* June 6, 1877; *Times,* Nov. 23, 1879;
*Lassen Advocate,* Mar. 31, 1877; *Anaheim Gazette,* Mar. 24, 31, 1877;
*Sta Cruz Sentinel,* May 12, June 30, 1877; *Los Angeles Express,* Mar.
24, 31, 1877; *Herald,* Mar. 24, 1877; *Republican,* Mar. 23, 24, 1877;
*San Buenaven-tura, Ventura Signal,* Mar. 31, 1877; June 24, 1877; *Free
Press,* Apr. 7, 1877; *Winnemucca (Nev.) Silver State,* July 19, 1875;
*Eureka Sentinel,* July 17, 1875; *Belmont Courier,* Oct. 28, 1873; May
5, 1877; *Prescott Miner,* Dec. 18, 1874; Apr. 11, 1879; *Austin, Reese
Riv. Reveil.,* July 12, 1864; Aug. 18, 1865; Oct. 29, 1866; Jan. 22,
1867; *Gold Hill News,* 1864, Dec. 20; 1865, Mar. 17, July 8; 1872,
Sept. 21; 1875, Feb. 1, Apr. 10, July 21, Aug. 4; 1876, Sept. 12; 1877,
Mar. 12, May 25; *Dayton, Lyon Co. Sentinel,* July 16, 1864; *Times,*
Mar. 24, 1877; *Elko Independent,* Aug. 7, 1875; Apr. 15, 1882; *Carson
Appeal,* June 10, Aug. 2, 1865; Nov. 19, 1874; July 18, 1875; Oct. 27,
1876; *State Register,* Sept. 10, 1871; Sept. 26, 1872; *Kanesville
(Iowa) Front. Guard.,* 1849, Feb. 7, Oct. 3, 17, 31, Nov. 14; 1850, Mar.
6, May 29, June 26, Aug. 21; 1851, Mar. 21, Apr. 18, Aug. 22, Sept. 22;
1852, Feb. 6, 20, Mar. 4, 11, 18, 25; *Boisé (Idaho) News,* Dec. 5,
1863; Feb. 20, Mar. 5, 1864; *Statesman,* 1865, June 8, Dec. 12; 1866,
Nov. 3; 1867, June 16, Sept. 14, Nov. 2; *Idaho City, Idaho World,* Oct.
1, 1875; *Honolulu (Hawaii) Friend,* July 1, 1846; *Virginia (Mont.)
Madisonian,* Nov. 24, 1877; *Post,* 1866, Oct. 8, 30, Nov. 3; *Helena
Independent,* July 29, 1875; Apr. 5, 1877; *Herald,* Jan. 6, 1876;
*Walla Walla (Wash.) Statesman,* Oct. 10, 1863; *Olympia Pion. and
Democ.,* Aug. 8, 1856; *Puget Sound Courier,* Sept. 22, 1876; *Seattle,
Puget Sound Herald,* Sept. 15, 1858; *Whatcom, Bellingham Bay Mail,*
Apr. 3, 1875; *Portland (Or.) Standard,* Apr. 6, 1877; *Bee,* Oct. 31,
1878; *Oregonian,* 1859, Oct. 15; 1863, June 10; 1865, Feb. 7, July 8,
13, Aug. 4, 17, Oct. 6, Nov. 9, 11; 1877, Apr. 7; *Salem, Oregon
Statesman,* 1854, Jan. 24, May 2; 1857, July 28, Aug. 11, 18, Sept. 15,
29, Oct. 20, Nov. 3, Dec. 1, 29; 1858, Jan. 5, 12, Feb. 16, Mar. 16, 30,
June 15, July 13, Oct. 12; 1862, Apr. 14, June 30; *Jacksonville Democ.
Times,* Mar. 31, 1877; *Oregon City, Oregon Argus,* 1857, Feb. 27, Dec.
12, 26; 1858, Jan. 2, 23, Feb. 13, 20, 27, Mar. 6, 13, Apr. 24, June 19,
July 16, 30, Aug 7, 14, 28, Sept. 11; 1866, Dec. 22; 1868, Sept. 11;
*Spectator,* 1846 Aug. 6 20; *Astoria Astorian,* July 20, 1878;
*Roseburg Plaindealer, Apr.* 28, 1877; *The Dalles Mountaineer,* 1866,
May 17, June 8; 1867, Feb. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Schisms and Apostasies. 1844-1869.](hou26)
