[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft22)  [Next](efft24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PISKIES IN THE CELLAR.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

<span id="img_07"></span> [![](tn/07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07.jpg)  
"HE AVAILED HIMSELF OF HIS OPPORTUNITIES."

ON the Thursday immediately preceding Christmas-tide (year not recorded)
were assembled at "The Rising Sun" the captain and men of a Stream Work
 <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) in the Couse below. This Couse was
a flat alluvial moor, broken by gigantic mole-bills, the work of many a
generation of tinners. One was half inclined, on looking at the
turmoiled ground, to believe with them that the tin grew in successive
crops, for, after years of turning and searching, there was still enough
left to give the landlord his dole, and to furnish wages to some dozen
Streamers. This night was a festival observed in honour of one Picrous,
 <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29) and intended to celebrate the
discovery of tin on this day by a man of that name. The feast is still
kept, though the observance has dwindled to a supper and its attendant
merrymaking.

Our story has especially to do with the adventures of one of the party,
John Sturtridge, who, well primed with ale, started on his homeward way
for Luxulyan Church-town. John had got as far as Tregarden Down without
any mishap worth recording, when, alas I he happed upon a party of the
little people, who were at their sports in the shelter of a huge granite
boulder. Assailed by shouts of derisive laughter, he hastened on
frightened and bewildered, but the Down, well known from early
experience, became like ground untrodden, and after long trial no gate
or stile was to be found. He was getting vexed, as well as puzzled, when
a chorus of tiny voices shouted: "Ho I and away for Par Beach!" John
repeated the shout, and was in an instant caught up, and in a twinkling
found himself on the sands of Par. A brief dance, and the cry was given:
"Ho! and away for Squire Tremain's cellar!" A repetition of the Piskie
cry found John with his elfish companions in the cellars at Heligan,
where was beer and wine galore. It need not be said that he availed
himself of his opportunities. The mixture of all the good liquors so
affected him that, alas! he forgot in time to catch up the next cry of
"Ho! and away for Par Beach!" In the morning John was found by the
butler, groping and tumbling among butts and barrels, very much muddled
with the squire's good drink. His strange story, very incoherently told,
was not credited by the squire, who committed him to jail for the
burglary, and in due time he was convicted and sentenced to death.

The morning of his execution arrived; a large crowd had assembled, and
John was standing under the gallows tree, when a commotion was observed
in the crowd, and a little lady of commanding mien made her way through
the opening throng to the scaffold. In a shrill, sweet voice, which John
recognised, she cried: "Ho! and away for France!" which being replied
to, he was rapt from the officers of justice, leaving them and the
multitude mute with wonder and disappointment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[1](efft23.htm#fr_27) Robert Hunt, *Popular
Romances of the West of England*. 1st series, p. 76.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[2](efft23.htm#fr_28) A "Stream Work" is a place
where tin is obtained from the drift deposits. "Streamers" are the
tinners who wash out the tin.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[3](efft23.htm#fr_29) Picrous day is still kept
up in Luxulyan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Edwin and Sir Topaz](efft24)
