[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft24)  [Next](efft26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE TWO SERVING DAMSELS.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md)

Two serving damsels of this place declared, as an excuse, perhaps, for
spending more money than they ought upon finery, that the pixies were
very kind to them, and would often drop silver for their pleasure into a
bucket of fair water, which they placed for the accommodation of those
little beings in the chimney corner every night before they went to bed.
Once, however, it was forgotten, and the pixies, finding themselves
disappointed by an empty bucket, whisked upstairs to the maids' bedroom,
popped through the keyhole, and began in a very audible tone to exclaim
against the laziness and neglect of the damsels. One of them who lay
awake and heard all this, jogged her fellow-servant, and proposed
getting up immediately to repair the fault of omission; but the lazy
girl, who liked not being disturbed out of a comfortable nap, pettishly
declared "that, for her part, she would not stir out of bed to please
all the pixies in Devonshire." The good-humoured damsel, however, got
up, filled the bucket, and was rewarded by a handful of silver pennies
found in it the next morning. But ere that time had arrived, what was
her alarm as she crept towards the bed, to hear all the elves in high
and stern debate, consulting as to what punishment should be inflicted
on the lazy lass who would not stir for their pleasure.

Some proposed "pinches, nips, and bobs," others to spoil her new
cherry-coloured bonnet and ribands. One talked of sending her the
toothache, another of giving her a red nose; but this last was voted a
too vindictive punishment for a pretty young woman. So, tempering mercy
with justice, the pixies were kind enough to let her off with a lame
leg, which was so to continue only for seven years, and was alone to be
cured by a certain herb, growing on Dartmoor, whose long and learned and
very difficult name the elfin judge pronounced in a high and audible
voice. It was a name of seven syllables, seven being also the number of
years decreed for the chastisement.

The good-natured maid, wishing to save her fellow-damsel so long a
suffering, tried with might and main to bear in mind the name of this
potent herb. She said it over and over again, tied a knot in her garter
at every syllable as a help to memory then very popular, and thought she
had the word as sure as her own name, and very possibly felt much more
anxious about retaining the one than the other.

At length she dropped asleep, and did not wake till the morning. Now
whether her head might be like a sieve, that lets out as fast as it
takes in, or if the over-exertion to remember might cause her to forget,
cannot be determined; but certain it is that when she opened her eyes
she knew nothing at all about the matter, excepting that Molly was to go
lame on her right leg for seven long years, unless a herb with a strange
name could be got to cure her. And lame she went for nearly the whole of
that period.

At length (it was about the end of that time) a merry, squint-eyed,
queer-looking boy started up one fine summer day, just as she went to
pluck a mushroom, and came tumbling, head over heels, towards her. He
insisted on striking her leg with a plant which be held in his hand.
From that moment she got well, and lame Molly, as a reward for her
patience in suffering, became the best dancer in the whole town at the
celebrated festivities of Mayday on the green.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[1](efft25.htm#fr_31.md) Mrs. Bray, *The Borders of
the Tamar and the Tavy*, vol. i., p. 178.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tulip Bed](efft26.md)
