[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft44)  [Next](efft46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# OUTWITTING THE BOGIE  <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

AN elf once asserted a claim to a field hitherto possessed by a farmer,
and after much disputing they came to an arrangement by agreeing to
divide its produce between Lhem. At seed-time the farmer asks the Bogie
what part of the crop he will have, "tops or bottoms." "Bottoms," said
the spirit: upon hearing which his crafty antagonist saws the field with
wheat, so that when harvest arrived the corn falls to his share, while
the poor Bogie is obliged to content himself with the stubble. Next year
the Bogie, finding he had made such an unfortunate selection in the
bottoms, chose the "tops"; whereupon the crafty farmer sets the field
with turnips, thus again outwitting the simple claimant. Tired of this
unprofitable farming, the Bogie agrees to hazard his claims on a mowing
match, the land in question to be the stake for which they played.
Before the day of meeting, the canny earth-tiller procures a number of
iron bars, which he strews among the grass to be mown by his opponent;
and when the trial commences, the unsuspecting goblin finds his progress
retarded by his scythe continually coming into contact with these
obstacles, which he takes to be some hard species of dock. "Mortal bard
docks these!" said he; "Nation hard docks!" His blunted blade soon
brings him to a standstill; and as, in such cases, it is not allowable
for one to sharpen without the other, he turns to his antagonist, now
far ahead, and, in a tone of despair, inquires: "When d'ye wiffle-waffle
(*whet*), mate?" "Waffle!" said the farmer, with a well feigned stare of
amazement, "oh, about noon, mebby." "Then," said the despairing Bogie,
"I've lost my land!" So saying be disappeared, and the farmer reaped the
reward of his artifice by ever afterwards continuing the undisputed
possessor of the soil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[1](efft45.htm#fr_51.md) T. Sternberg, *The Dialect
and Folk-Lore of Northamptonshire*, p. 140.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hunted Hare](efft46.md)
