[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft25)  [Next](efft27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE TULIP BED.  <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)

NEAR a pixy field in this neighbourhood there lived on a time an old
woman who possessed a cottage and a very pretty garden, wherein she
cultivated a most beautiful bed of tulips. The pixies, it is
traditionally averred, so delighted in this spot, that they would carry
their elfin babies thither, and sing them to rest. Often at the dead
hour of the night a sweet lullaby was heard, and strains of the most
melodious music would float in the air, that seemed to owe their origin
to no other musicians than the beautiful tulips themselves; and whilst
these delicate flowers waved their heads to the evening breeze, it
sometimes seemed as if they were marking time to their own singing. As
soon as the elfin babies were lulled asleep by such melodies, the pixies
would return to the neighbouring field, and there commence dancing,
making those rings on the green which showed, even to mortal - eyes,
what sort of gambols had occupied them during the night season.

At the first dawn of light the watchful pixies once more sought the
tulips, and though still invisible could be heard kissing and caressing
their babies. The tulips, thus favoured by a race of genii, retained
their beauty much longer than any other flowers in the garden; whilst,
though contrary to their nature, as the pixies breathed over them they
became as fragrant as roses; and so delighted at all this was the old
woman who possessed the garden, that she never suffered a single tulip
to be plucked from its stem. At length, however, she died; and the heir
who succeeded her destroyed the enchanted flowers, and converted the
spot into a parsley bed, a circumstance which so disappointed and
offended the pixies that they caused it to wither away; and indeed for
many years nothing would grow in the beds of the whole garden. But these
sprites, though eager in resenting an injury, were, like most warm
spirits, equally capable of returning a benefit; and if they destroyed
the product of the good old woman's garden, when it had fallen into
unworthy hands, they tended the bed that wrapped her clay with
affectionate solicitude. For they were heard lamenting and singing sweet
dirges around her grave; nor did they neglect to pay this mournful
tribute to her memory every night before the moon was at the full; for
then their high solemnity of dancing, singing, and rejoicing took place,
to hail the queen of the night on completing her silver circle in the
skies. No human hand ever tended the grave of the poor old woman who had
nurtured the tulip bed for the delight of these elfin creatures; but no
rank weed was ever seen to grow upon it; the sod was ever green, and the
prettiest flowers would spring up without sowing, or planting, and so
they continued to do till it was supposed the mortal body was reduced to
its original dust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[1](efft26.htm#fr_32.md) Mrs. Bray, *The Borders of
the Tamar and the Tavy*, vol. i., p. 180.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fisherman and the Piskies](efft27.md)
