[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft11)  [Next](efft13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FAUSE FABLE OF THE LORD LATHOM.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md)

### A FAYNED TALE.

WHEN the war was 'twixt the Englishmen and the Irishmen the power of the
English so sore assaulted the Irishmen that the king of them, being of
Ireland, was constrained to take succour by flight into other parts for
his safeguard; and the queen, being pregnant and great with child, right
near her time of deliverance, for dread of the rudeness of the
commonalty, took her flight into the wilderness, where her chance was to
suffer travail of child, bringing forth two children, the one a son, the
other a daughter; when after by natural compulsion she and such
gentlewomen as were with her was constrained to sleep, insomuch that the
two children were ravished from the mother; and the daughter, as it is
said, is kept in Ireland with the fairies. Insomuch that against the
time of death of any of that blood of Stanleys she maketh a certain
noise in one quarter of Ireland, where she useth \[to stay\].

The son was taken and borne away with an eagle, and brought into
Lancashire, into a park called Lathom Park, whereas did dwell a certain
lord, named the Lord Lathorm the which Lord Lathom, walking in his park,
heard a child lament and cry, and perceived the skirts of the mantle
lying over the nest side, and made his servants to bring down the child
unto him.

And whereas both he and his wife being in far age, and she past
conceiving of child, considering they never could have issue, reckoning
that God had sent this child by miracle, they condescended to make this
child their heir, and so did. At length this Lord Lathom and his wife
deceased, and this young man, which was named Oskell of Lathom, reigned
and ruled this land as right heir, and he had to issue a daughter which
was his heir and child by the Lady Lathom.

It chanced so that one Stanley, being a younger brother of the House of
Wolton in Cheshire, was servant to the Abbot of West Chester. This young
man Stanley was carver to the Abbot, and he would not break his fast on
the Sunday till he had heard the high mass. Insomuch that it chanced one
Sunday when the meat was served on the table, he had so great hunger he
carved the pig's head, and conveyed one of the ears of the pig and did
eat it.

When the Abbot sat down, and perchance missed the pig's ear, he was
miscontent and in a great fume, and reviled so extremely and so
heinously this young Stanley, that he threw the napkin at his head, and
said he would do him no more service, and departed. And he came to the
king's court, and obtained his service, and proved so active a fellow
that the renown sprang and inflamed upon him, insomuch that the fame and
bruit descended from him around this realm.

And when, as the use then was, that noble adventurers would seek their
fortune and chance into divers and strange. nations, one renowned
gallant came into England, and he called as challenger for death and
life, come who list Insomuch that the king commanded this Stanley to
cope, with him; and, to make short protestation, his chance was to
overthrow the challenger and obtain the victory. Then the king made him
knight, and gave him certain lands to live on.

After this foresaid Stanley came for marriage to the daughter of Oskell
of Lathom, which was found in the eagle's nest, and obtained her favour,
and espoused her. And then after the death of Oskell he was Lord Lathom,
and enjoyed it many years. And for such service as he did afterwards the
king made him Lord Stanley; and he was the first lord of the name; and
so by that reason the Stanleys descended of Lathom give the eagle and
the child in their arms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[1](efft12.htm#fr_13.md) *Journal of the British
Archaeological Association*, vol vii., from Hare's MSS., vol. ii;
reprinted in Harland and Wilkinson's *Lancashire Legends*, p. 259.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Whittington and his Cat](efft13.md)
