[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft55)  [Next](efft57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# GHOSTS.

## A BISHOP'S GHOST <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)

HENRY BURGWASH, who became Bishop of Lincoln on the 28th of May 1320, is
chiefly memorable on account of a curious ghost story recorded of him in
connection with the manor of Fingest, in Bucks. Until the year 1845,
Buckinghamshire was in the diocese of Lincoln, and formerly the bishops
of that see possessed considerable estates and two places of residence
in the county. They had the palace of Wooburn, near Marlow, and a
manorial residence at Fingest, a small secluded village near Wycomb.
Their manor-house of Fingest, the ruins of which still exist, stood near
the church, and was but a plain mansion, of no great size or
pretensions. And why those princely prelates, who possessed three or
four baronial palaces, and scores of manor-houses superior to this,
chose so often to reside here, is unknown. Perhaps it was on account of
its sheltered situation, or from its suitableness for meditation, or
because the surrounding country was thickly wooded and well stocked with
deer; for in the "merrie days of Old England," bishops thought no harm
in heading a hunting party. Be this as it may, certain it is that many
of the early prelates of Lincoln, although their palace of Wooburn was
near at hand, often preferred to reside at their humble manor-house of
Fingest. One of these was Henry Burgwash, who has left reminiscences of
his residence here more amusing to posterity than creditable to himself.
"He was," says Fuller, "neither good for church nor state, sovereign nor
subjects; but was covetous, ambitious, rebellious, injurious. Yet he was
twice lord treasurer, once chancellor, and once sent ambassador to
Bavaria. He died A.D. 1340. Such as wish to be merry," continues Fuller,
"may read the pleasant story of his apparition being condemned after
death to be *viridis viridarius*--a green forester." In his *Church
History*, Fuller gives this pleasant story: "This Burgwash was he who,
by mere might, against all right and reason, took in the common land of
many poor people (without making the least reparation), therewith to
complete his park at Tinghurst (Fingest). These wronged persons, though
seeing their own bread, beef; and mutton turned into the bishop's
venison, durst not contest with him who was Chancellor of England,
though he had neither law nor equity in his proceeding." He persisted in
this cruel act of injustice even to the day of his death; but having
brought on himself the hatred and maledictions of the poor, he could not
rest quietly in his grave; for his spirit was doomed to wander about
that land which he had, while living, so unjustly appropriated to
himself. It so happened, however, as we are gravely informed by his
biographer, that on a certain night he appeared to one of his former
familiar friends, apparelled like a forester, all in green, with a bow
and quiver, and a bugle-horn hanging by his side. To this gentleman he
made known his miserable case. He said, that on account of the injuries
he had done the poor while living, he was now Compelled to be the
park-keeper of that place which he had so wrongfully enclosed. He
therefore entreated his friend to repair to the canons of Lincoln, and
in his name to request them to have the bishop's park reduced to its
former extent, and to restore to the poor the land which he had taken
from them. His friend duly carried his message to the canons, who, with
equal readiness, complied with their dead bishop's ghostly request, and
deputed one of their prebendaries, William Bacheler, to see the
restoration properly effected. The bishop's park was reduced, and the
common restored to its former dimensions; and the ghostly park-keeper
was no more seen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[1](efft56.htm#fr_64) Chambers's *Book of Days*,
vol. 1. p. 690.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Clergyman's Ghost](efft57)
