[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft49)  [Next](efft51.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE WITCH AND THE TOAD  <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md)

AN old woman called Alsey--usually Aunt Alsey--occupied a small cottage
in Anthony, one of a row which belonged to a tradesman living in
Dock--as Devonport was then designated, to distinguish it from Plymouth.
The old woman possessed a very violent temper, and this, more than
anything else, fixed upon her the character of being a witch. Her
landlord had frequently sought his rent, and as frequently he received
nothing but abuse. He had, on the special occasion to which our
narrative refers, crossed the Tamar and walked to Anthony, with the firm
resolve of securing his rent, now long in arrear, and of turning the old
termagant out of the cottage. A violent scene ensued, and the vicious
old woman, more than a match for a really kind-hearted and quiet man,
remained the mistress of the situation. She seated herself in the door
of her cottage and cursed her landlord's wife, "the child she was
carrying," and all belonging to him, with so devilish a spite that
Mr.--owned he was fairly driven away in terror.

On returning home, he, of course, told his wife all the circumstances;
and while they were discoursing on the subject--the whole story being
attentively listened to by their daughter, then a young girl, who is my
informant--a woman came into the shop requiring some articles which they
sold.

"Sit still, father," said Mrs.----- to her husband; "you must be tired.
I will see to the shop."

So she went from the parlour into the shop, and, hearing the wants of
her customer, proceeded to supply them; gossiping gaily, as was her
wont, to interest the buyer.

Mrs.----- was weighing one of the articles required, when something
falling heavily from the ceiling of the shop, struck the beam out of her
hand, and both--the falling body and the scales--came together with much
noise on to the counter. At the same instant both women screamed;--the
shopkeeper calling also: "Father! father!"--meaning her husband
thereby--with great energy.

Mr.----- and his daughter were in the shop instantly, and there, on the
counter, they saw an enormous and most ugly toad sprawling amidst the
chains of the scales. The first action of the man was to run back to the
parlour, seize the tongs, and return to the shop. He grasped the swollen
toad with the tongs, the vicious creature spitting all the time, and,
without a word, he went back and flung it behind the block of wood which
was burning in the grate. The object of terror being removed, the wife,
who was shortly to become the mother of another child, though usually a
woman who had great command over her feelings, fainted.

This circumstance demanding all their attention, the toad was forgotten.
The shock was a severe one; and although Mrs.------ was restored in a
little time to her senses, she again and again became faint. Those fits
continuing, her medical attendant, Dr.------, was sent for, and on his
arrival he ordered that his patient should be immediately placed in bed,
and the husband was informed that he must be prepared for a premature
birth.

The anxiety occasioned by these circumstances, and the desire to afford
every relief to his wife, so fully occupied Mr.-----, that for an hour
or two he entirely forgot the cause of all this mischief; or, perhaps
satisfying himself that the toad was burnt to ashes, he had no curiosity
to look after it. He was, however, suddenly summoned from the bedroom,
in which he was with his wife, by his daughter calling to him, in a
voice of terror:

"O father, the toad, the toad!"

Mr.----- rushed downstairs, and he then discovered that the toad, though
severely burnt, had escaped destruction.

It must have crawled up over the log of wood, and from it have fallen
down amongst the ashes. There it was now making useless struggles to
escape, by climbing over the fender.

The tongs were again put in requisition, with the intention this time of
carrying the reptile out of the house. Before, however, he had time to
do so, a man from Anthony came hastily into the shop with the
information that Aunt Alsey had fallen into the fire, as the people
supposed, in a fit, and that she was nearly burnt to death. This man had
been sent off with two commissions--one to fetch the doctor, and the
other to bring Mr.--with him, as much of the cottage had been injured by
fire, communicated to it by the old woman's dress.

In as short a time as possible the parish surgeon and Mr.----- were at
Anthony, and too truly they found the old woman most severely burnt--so
seriously indeed there was no chance that one so aged could rally from
the shock which her system must have received. However, a litter was
carefully prepared, the old woman was placed in it, and carried to the
workhouse. Every attention was given to her situation, but she never
recovered perfect consciousness, and during the night she died.

The toad, which we left inside the fender in front of a blazing fire,
was removed from a position so trying to any cold-blooded animal, by the
servant, and thrown, with a "hugh" and a shudder, upon one of the
flower-beds in the small garden behind the house.

There it lay the next morning dead, and when examined by Mr.-----, it
was found that all the injuries sustained by the toad corresponded with
those received by the poor old wretch, who had no doubt fallen a victim
to passion.

As we have only to deal with the mysterious relation which existed
between the witch and the toad, it is not necessary that we should
attend further to the innocent victim of an old woman's vengeance, than
to say that eventually a babe was born--that that babe grew to be a
handsome man, was an officer in the navy, and having married, went to
sea, and perished, leaving a widow with an unborn child to lament his
loss. Whether this was a result of the witch's curse, those who are more
deeply skilled in witchcraft than I am may perhaps tell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[1](efft50.htm#fr_57.md) Robert Hunt, *Popular
Romances of the West of England*, 2nd series, p. 105.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Witch and Hare](efft51.md)
