[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft37)  [Next](efft39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FAIRY THIEVES.  <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

A FARMER in Hampshire was sorely distressed by the unsettling of his
barn. However straightly over-night he laid his sheaves on the
threshing-floor for the application of the morning's flail, when morning
came all was topsy-turvy, higgledy-piggledy, though the door remained
locked, and there was no sign whatever of irregular entry. Resolved to
find out who played him these mischievous pranks, Hodge couched himself
one night deeply among the sheaves, and watched for the enemy. At length
midnight arrived, the barn was illuminated as if by moonbeams of
wonderful brightness, and through the key-hole came thousands of elves,
the most diminutive that could be imagined. They immediately began their
gambols among the straw, which was soon in a most admired disorder.
Hodge wondered, hut interfered not; but at last the supernatural thieves
began to busy themselves in a way still less to his taste, for each elf
set about conveying the crop away, a straw at a time, with astonishing
activity and perseverance. The keyhole was still their port of egress
and regress, and it resembled the aperture of a bee-hive on a sunny day
in June. The farmer was rather annoyed at seeing his grain vanish in
this fashion, when one of the fairies said toanother in the tiniest
voice that ever was heard: "*I weat, you weat*?" Hodge could contain
himself no longer. He leaped out crying, "The devil sweat ye. Let me get
among ye!" when they all flew away so frightened that they never
disturbed the barn any more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[1](efft38.htm#fr_44.md) T . Keightley, *The Fairy
Mythology*, p. 305, quoting the *Literary Gazette* for 1825.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Boggart](efft39.md)
