[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft26)  [Next](efft28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FISHERMAN AND THE PISKIES  <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

JOHN TAPRAIL, long since dead, moored his boat one evening beside a
barge of much larger size, in which his neighbour John Rendle traded
between this place and Plymouth; and as the wind, though gusty, was not
sufficient to cause any apprehension, he went to bed and slept soundly.
In the middle of the night he was awoke by a voice from without bidding
him get up, and "shift his rope over Rendle's," as his boat was in
considerable danger. Now, as all Taprail's capital was invested in his
boat and sear, we may be sure that he was not long in putting on his
sea-clothes, and going to its rescue. To his great chagrin, he found
that a joke had been played upon him, for the boat and barge were both
riding quietly at their ropes. On his way back again, when within a few
yards of his home, he observed a crowd of the little people congregated
under the shelter of a boat that was lying high and dry on the beach.
They were sitting in a semicircle, holding their hats towards one of
their number who was engaged in distributing a heap of money, pitching a
gold piece into each hat in succession, after the manner in which cards
are dealt. Now John had a covetous heart; and the sight of so much cash
made him forget the respect due to an assembly of piskies, and that they
are not slow to punish any intrusion on their privacy; so be crept slyly
towards them, hidden by the boat, and, reaching round, managed to
introduce his hat without exciting any notice When the heap was getting
low, and Taprail was awaking to the dangers of detection, he craftily
withdrew his hat and made off with the prize. He had got a fair start
before the trick was discovered; but the defrauded piskies were soon on
his heels, and he barely managed to reach his house and to close the
door upon his pursuers. So narrow indeed was his escape, that he had
left the tails of his sea-coat in their hands. Such is the evidently
imperfect version of an old legend, as it is remembered by the fishermen
of the present generation. We may suppose that John Taprail's door had a
key-hole; and there would have been poetical justice in the story, if
the elves had compelled the fraudulent fisherman to turn his hat or
pocket inside out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[1](efft27.htm#fr_33) *Choice Notes: Folk-Lore*,
p. 76.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Fairy Caught](efft28)
