[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft68)  [Next](efft70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MILLER AT THE PROFESSOR'S EXAMINATION  <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82)

THERE once came to England a famous foreign professor, and before he
came he gave notice that he would examine the students of all the
colleges in England. After a time he had visited all but Cambridge, and
he was on his road thither to examine publicly the whole university.
Great was the bustle in Cambridge to prepare for the reception of the
professor, and great also were the fears of the students, who dreaded
the time when they must prove their acquirements before one so famous
for his learning. As the period of his arrival approached their fears
increased, and at last they determined to try some expedient which might
avert the impending trial, and for this purpose several of the students
were disguised in the habits of common labourers, and distributed in
groups of two or three at convenient distances from each other along the
road by which the professor was expected.

He had in his carriage arrived at the distance of a few miles from
Cambridge when he met the first of these groups of labourers, and the
coachman drew up his horses to inquire of them the distance. The
professor was astonished to hear them answer in Latin. He proceeded on
his way, and after driving about half a mile, met with another group of
labourers at work on the road, to whom a similar question was put by the
coachman. The professor was still more astonished to hear them give
answer in Greek. "Ah," thought he, "they must be good scholars at
Cambridge, when even the common labourers on the roads talk Latin and
Greek. It won't do to examine them in the same way as other people." So
all the rest of the way he was musing on the mode of examination he
should adopt, and just as he reached the outskirts of the town, he came
to the determination that he would examine them by signs. As soon,
therefore as he had alighted from his carriage, he lost no time in
making known this novel method of examination.

Now the students had never calculated on such a result as this from
their stratagem, and they were, as might well be expected, sadly
disappointed. There was one student in particular who had been studying
very hard, and who was expected by everybody to gain the prize at the
examination, and, as the idlest student in the university had the same
chance of guessing the signs of the professor as himself, he was in very
low spirits about it. When the day of examination arrived, instead of
attending it, he was walking sadly and mournfully by the banks of the
river, near the mill, and it happened that the miller, who was a merry
fellow, and used to talk with this student as he passed the mill in his
walks, saw him, and asked him what was the matter with him. Then the
student told him all about it, and how the great professor was going to
examine by signs, and how he was afraid that he should not get through
the examination. "Oh! if that's all," said the miller, "don't be low
about the matter. Did you never hear that a clown may sometimes teach a
scholar wisdom? Only let me put on your clothes, with your cap and gown,
and I'll go to the examination instead of you; and if I succeed you
shall have the credit of it, and if I fail I will tell them who I am."
"But," said the student, "everybody knows that I have but one eye."
"Never mind that," said the miller; "I can easily put a black patch over
one of mine." So they changed clothes, and the miller went to the
professor's examination in the student's cap and gown, with a patch on
his eye.

Well, just as the miller entered the lecture-room, the professor had
tried all the other students, and nobody could guess the meaning of his
signs or answer his questions. So the miller stood up, and the
professor, putting his hand in his coat pocket, drew out an apple, and
held it up towards him. The miller likewise put his hand in his pocket
and drew out a crust of bread, which he in like manner held out towards
the professor. Then the professor put the apple in his pocket and
pointed at the miller with one finger: the miller in return pointed at
him with two: the professor pointed with three; and the miller held out
his clenched fist. "Right!" said the professor; and he adjudged the
prize to the miller.

The miller made all haste to communicate these good tidings to his
friend the student, who was waiting at the mill; and the student, having
resumed his own clothes, hastened back to hear the prize given out to
him. When he arrived at the lecture-room the professor was on his legs
explaining to the assembled students the meaning of the signs which
himself and the student who had gained the prize made use of.

"First," said he, "I held out an apple, signifying thereby the fall of
mankind through Adam's sin, and he very properly held up a piece of
bread, which signified that by Christ, the bread of life, mankind was
regenerated. Then I held out one finger, which meant that there is one
God in the Trinity; he held out two fingers, signifying that there are
two; I held out three fingers, meaning that there are three; and he held
out his clenched fist, which was as much as to say that the three are
one."

Well, the student who got the prize was sadly puzzled to think how the
miller knew all this, and as soon as the ceremony of publishing the name
of the successful candidate was over he hastened to the mill, and told
him all the professor had said. "Ah!" said the miller, "I'll tell you
how it was. When I went in, the professor looked mighty fierce, and he
put his hand in his pocket, and fumbled about for some time, and at last
he pulled out an apple, and be held it out as though he would throw it
at me. Then I put my hand in my pocket, and could find nothing but an
old crust of bread, and so I held it out in the same way, meaning that
if he threw the apple at me I would throw the crust at him. Then he
looked still more fiercely, and held out his one finger, as much as to
say he would poke my one eye out, and I held two fingers, meaning that
if he poked out my one eye I would poke out his two, and then be held
out three of his fingers, as though he would scratch my face, and I
clenched my fist and shook it at him, meaning that if he did I would
knock him down. And then he said I deserved the prize."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[1](efft69.htm#fr_82) *Folk-Lore Record*, vol.
ii. p. 173.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stupid's Mistaken Cries](efft70)
