[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft57)  [Next](efft59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE HAUNTED HOUSE  <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66)

ABOUT half a mile from Tavistock there is a farm called Down House; the
dwelling itself was rebuilt about eleven or twelve years ago. It was
considered before an ancient place, and haunted by ghosts. Here is a
story of one. The family who resided there well knew the hour of the
night in which the ghosts made their appearance, and always took care to
go to bed before they came. But it happened on a time that a child was
very ill, and asked its mother for water. She went to the pitcher to get
some, when the child refused any but such as might be got directly from
the pump. The mother became quite distressed, unwilling to displease the
child, yet afraid to go down to the pump, as it was about the hour in
which the ghost walked. She considered upon it a little while, and at
last said: "In the name of God I will go down." She did so. Passing over
the stairs she perceived a shadow, and then she heard footsteps; and
when she came to the pump she felt a hand on her shoulder. She turned
and perceived a tall man. Summoning a good resolution, however, she
said: "In the name of God, why troublest thou me?" The ghost replied:
"It is well for thee that thou hast spoken to me in the name of God;
this being the last time allotted me to trouble this world, or else 1
should have injured thee. Now do as I tell thee, and be not afraid. Come
with me, and I will direct thee to a something which shall remove this
pump. Under it is concealed treasure."

This something was procured, and applied as the ghost directed. The pump
was quickly removed, when under it there lay a great deal of money. She
was desired to take up the treasure and stock her farm with it. And the
spirit told her that if ever any person molested or deprived her of her
property, he would suffer well for it. He then ordered her to go and
give the water to the child, who, in reward for her courage and trust in
God, should recover. The cock crew; directly the figure dwindled again
to a shadow, ascended through the air, and she watched till he soon
became a small bright cloud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[1](efft58.htm#fr_66) Mrs. Bray, *The Borders of
the Tamar and the Tavy*, vol. II p. 129.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ghost-Laying Stories](efft59)
