[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](efft00)  [Next](efft02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# JACK THE GIANT-KILLER.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="img_03"></span> [![](tn/03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03.jpg)  
"HE BEHELD WITH TERROR A HUGE GIANT, DRAGGING ALONG A FAIR LADY AND A
KNIGHT"

IN the reign of King Arthur, there lived in the county of Cornwall, near
the Land's End of England, a wealthy farmer who had one only son called
Jack. He was brisk and of a ready lively wit, so that whatever he could
not perform by force and strength he completed by ingenious wit and
policy. Never was any person heard of that could worst him, and he very
often even baffled the learned by his sharp and ready invention.

\*

In those days the Mount of Cornwall was kept by a huge and monstrous
giant of eighteen feet in height, and about three yards in compass, of a
fierce and grim countenance, the terror of all the neighbouring towns
and villages. He lived in a cave in the midst of the Mount, and would
not suffer any one else to live near him. His food was other men's
cattle, which often became his prey, for whensoever he wanted food he
would wade over to the main-land, where he would furnish himself with
whatever came in his way. The good folk, at his approach, forsook their
habitations, while he seized on their cattle, making nothing of carrying
half-a-dozen oxen on his back at a time; and as for their sheep and
hogs, he would tie them round his waist like a bunch of bandoliers. This
course he had followed for many years, so that all Cornwall was
impoverished by his depredations.

One day Jack, happening to be present at the town hall when the
magistrates were sitting in council about the giant, asked what reward
would be given to the person who destroyed him. The giant's treasure,
they said, was the recompense. Quoth Jack, "Then let me undertake it."

So he furnished himself with a horn, shovel, and pickaxe, and went over
to the Mount in the beginning of a dark winter's evening, when he fell
to work, and before morning had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and
nearly as broad, covering it over with long sticks and straw. Then
strewing a little mould upon it, it appeared like plain ground. This
completed, Jack placed himself on the contrary side of the pit,
fartherest from the giant's lodging, and, just at the break of day, he
put the horn to his mouth, and blew, Tantivy, Tantivy. This unexpected
noise aroused the giant, who rushed from his cave, crying: "You
incorrigible villain, are you come here to disturb my rest? You shall
pay dearly for this. Satisfaction I will have, and this it shall be, I
will take you whole and broil you for breakfast," which he had no sooner
uttered, than tumbling into the pit, he made the very foundations of the
Mount to shake. "Oh, giant," quoth Jack, "where are you now? Oh faith,
you are gotten now into Lob's Pound, where I will surely plague you for
your threatening words: what do you think now of broiling me for your
breakfast? Will no other diet serve you but poor Jack?" Thus having
tantalised the giant for a while, he gave him a most weighty knock with
his pickaxe on the very crown of his head, and killed him on the spot.

This done, Jack filled up the pit with earth, and went to search the
cave, which he found contained much treasure. When the magistrates heard
of this, they made a declaration he should henceforth be termed Jack the
Giant-Killer, and presented him with a sword and an embroidered belt, on
which were written these words in letters of gold--

"Here's the right valiant Cornish man,  
Who slew the giant Cormelian."

The news of Jack's victory soon spread over all the West of England, so
that another giant, named Blunderbore, hearing of it, vowed to be
revenged on the little hero, if ever it was his fortune to light on him.
This giant was the lord of an enchanted castle situated in the midst of
a lonesome wood. Now Jack, about four months afterwards, walking near
this wood in his journey to Wales, being weary, seated himself near a
pleasant fountain and fell fast asleep. While he was enjoying his
repose, the giant, coming for water, there discovered him, and knew him
to be the far-famed Jack, by the lines written on the belt. Without ado,
he took Jack on his shoulders and carried him towards his enchanted
castle. Now, as they passed through a thicket, the rustling of the
boughs awakened Jack, who was strangely surprised to find himself in the
clutches of the giant. His terror was not yet begun, for on entering the
castle, he saw the ground strewed with human bones, the giant telling
him his own would ere long increase them. After this the giant locked
poor Jack in an immense chamber, leaving him there while he went to
fetch another giant living in the same wood to share in Jack's
destruction. While he was gone, dreadful shrieks and lamentations
affrighted Jack, especially a voice which continually cried--

"Do what you can to get away,  
Or you'll become the giant's prey;  
He's gone to fetch his brother, who  
Will kill, likewise devour you too."

This dreadful noise had almost distracted Jack, who, going to the
window, beheld afar off the two giants coming towards the castle. "Now,"
quoth Jack to himself, "my death or my deliverance is at hand." Now,
there were strong cords in a corner of the room in which Jack was, and
two of these he took, and made a strong noose at the end; and while the
giants were unlocking the iron gate of the castle he threw the ropes
over each of their heads. Then drawing the other ends across a beam, and
pulling with all his might, he throttled them. Then, seeing they were
black in the face, and sliding down the rope, he came to their heads,
when they could not defend themselves, and drawing his sword, slew them
both. Then, taking the giant's keys, and unlocking the rooms, he found
three fair ladies tied by the hair of their heads, almost starved to
death. "Sweet ladies," quoth Jack, "I have destroyed this monster and
his brutish brother, and obtained your liberties." This said, he
presented them with the keys, and so proceeded on his journey to Wales.
Having but little money, Jack found it well to make the best of his way
by travelling as fast as he could, but losing his road, he was
benighted, and could not get a place of entertainment until, coming into
a narrow valley, he found a large house, and by reason of his present
needs took courage to knock at the gate. But what was his surprise when
there came forth a monstrous giant with two heads; yet he did not appear
so fiery as the others were, for he was a Welsh giant, and what he did
was by private and secret malice under the false show of friendship.
Jack, having told his condition to the giant, was shown into a bedroom,
where, in the dead of night, he heard his host in another apartment
muttering these words--

"Though here you lodge with me this night,  
You shall not see the morning light:  
My club shall dash your brains outright!"

"Say'st thou so," quoth Jack; "that is like one of your Welsh tricks,
yet I hope to be cunning enough for you." Then, getting out of bed, he
laid a billet in the bed in his stead, and hid himself in a corner of
the room. At the dead time of the night in came the Welsh giant, who
struck several heavy blows on the bed with his club, thinking he had
broken every bone in Jack's skin. The next morning Jack, laughing in his
sleeve, gave him hearty thanks for his night's lodging. "How have you
rested?" quoth the giant; "did you not feel anything in the night?"
"No," quoth Jack, "nothing but a rat, which gave me two or three slaps
with her tail" With that, greatly wondering, the giant led Jack to
breakfast, bringing him a bowl containing four gallons of hasty pudding.
Being loath to let the giant think it too much for him, Jack put a large
leather bag under his loose coat, in such a way that he could convey the
pudding into it without its being perceived. Then, telling the giant he
would show him a trick, taking a knife, Jack ripped open the bag, and
out came all the hasty pudding. Whereupon, saying, "Odds splutters, hur
can do that trick hurself," the monster took the knife, and ripping open
his belly, fell down dead.

Now, it fell in these days that King Arthur's only son requested his
father to furnish him with a large sum of money, in order that he might
go and seek his fortune in the principality of Wales, where lived a
beautiful lady possessed with seven evil spirits. The king did his best
to persuade his son from it, but in vain; so at last granted the
request, and the prince set out with two horses, one loaded with money,
the other for himself to ride upon. Now, after several days' travel, he
came to a market-town in Wales, where he beheld a vast concourse of
people gathered together. The prince demanded the reason of it, and was
told that they had arrested a corpse for several large sums of money
which the deceased owed when he died. The prince replied that it was a
pity creditors should be so cruel, and said, "Go bury the dead, and let
his creditors come to my lodging, and there their debts shall be
discharged." They accordingly came, but in such great numbers that
before night he had almost left himself moneyless.

Now Jack the Giant-Killer, coming that way, was so taken with the
generosity of the prince, that he desired to be his servant. This being
agreed upon, the next morning they set forward on their journey
together, when, as they were riding out of the town, an old woman called
after the prince, saying, "He has owed me twopence these seven years;
pray pay me as well as the rest," Putting his hand to his pocket, the
prince gave the woman all he had left, so that after their day's
refreshment, which cost what small spell Jack had by him, they were
without a penny between them. When the sun began to grow low, the king's
son said, "Jack, since we have no money, where can we lodge this night?"
But Jack replied, "Master, we'll do well enough for I have an uncle
lives within two miles of this place; he is a huge and monstrous giant
with three heads; he'll fight five hundred men in armour, and make them
to fly before him." "Alas!" quoth the prince, "what shall we do there?
He'll certainly chop us up at a mouthful. Nay, we are scarce enough to
fill one of his hollow teeth!" "It is no matter for that," quoth Jack;
"I myself will go before and prepare the way for you; therefore tarry
and wait till I return." Jack then rode away full speed, and coming to
the gate of the castle, he knocked so loud that he made the neighbouring
hills resound. The giant roared out at this like thunder, "Who's there?"
He was answered, "None but your poor Cousin Jack." Quoth he, "What news
with my poor Cousin Jack?" He replied, "Dear uncle, heavy news, God
wot!" "Prithee," quoth the giant, "what heavy news can come to me? I am
a giant with three heads, and besides thou knowest I can fight five
hundred men in armour, and make them fly like chaff before the wind."
"Oh, but," quoth Jack, "here's the king's son a-coming with a thousand
men in armour to kill you and destroy all that you have!" "Oh, Cousin
Jack," said the giant, "'this is heavy news indeed! I will immediately
run and hide myself and thou shalt lock, bolt, and bar me in, and keep
the keys until the prince is gone." Having secured the giant, Jack
fetched his master, when they made themselves heartily merry whilst the
poor giant laid trembling in a vault under the ground.

Early in the morning Jack furnished his master with a fresh supply of
gold and silver, and then sent him three miles forward on his journey,
at which time the prince was pretty well out of the smell of the giant.
Jack then returned, and let the giant out of the vault, who asked what
he should give him for keeping the castle from destruction. "Why," quoth
Jack, "I desire nothing but the old coat and cap, together with the old
rusty sword and slippers which are at your bed's head." Quoth the giant,
"Thou shalt have them; and pray keep them for my sake, for they are
things of excellent use. The coat will keep you invisible, the cap will
furnish you with knowledge, the sword cuts asunder whatever you strike,
and the shoes are of extraordinary swiftness, These may be serviceable
to you, therefore take them with all my heart." Taking them, Jack
thanked his uncle, and then having overtaken his master, they quickly
arrived at the house of the lady the prince sought, who, finding the
prince to be a suitor, prepared a splendid banquet for him. After the
repast was concluded, she wiped his mouth with a handkerchief, saying,
"You must show me that handkerchief to-morrow morning, or else you will
lose your head." With that she put it in her bosom. The prince went to
bed in great sorrow, but Jack's cap of knowledge instructed him how it
was to be obtained. In the middle of the night she called upon her
familiar spirit to carry her to Lucifer. But Jack put on his coat of
darkness and his shoes of swiftness, and was there as soon as her. When
she entered the place of the evil one, she gave the handkerchief to old
Lucifer, who laid it upon a shelf, whence Jack took it and brought. it
to his master, who showed it to the lady the next day, and so saved his
life. On that day, she saluted the prince, telling him he must show her
the lips to-morrow morning that she kissed last night, or lose his head.
"Ah," he replied, "if you kiss none but mine, I will" "That is neither
here nor there," said she; "if you do not, death's your portion!" At
midnight she went as before, and was angry with old Lucifer for letting
the handkerchief go. "But now," quoth she "I will be too hard for the
king's son, for I will kiss thee, and he is to show me thy lips." Which
she did, and Jack, who was standing by, cut off the devil's head and
brought it under his invisible coat to his master, who the next morning
pulled it out by the horns before the lady. Thus broke, the enchantment
and the evil spirit left her, and she appeared in all her beauty. They
were married the next morning, and soon after went to the court of King
Arthur, where Jack, for his many great exploits, was made one of the
Knights of the Round Table.

Having been successful in all his undertakings, Jack resolved not to
remain idle, but to perform what services he could for the honour of his
king and country, and besought King Arthur to fit him out with a horse
and money to enable him to travel in search of strange and new
adventures. "For," said he, "there are many giants yet living in the
remotest part of Wales, to the unspeakable damage of your majesty's
liege subjects; wherefore, may it please you to encourage me, I do not
doubt but in a short time to cut them off root and branch, and so rid
all the realm of those giants and monsters of nature." When the king had
heard this noble request, he furnished Jack with all necessaries, and
Jack started on his pursuit, taking with him the cap of knowledge, sword
of sharpness, shoes of swiftness, and invisible coat, the better to
complete the dangerous enterprises which now lay before him.

Jack travelled over vast hills and wonderful mountains, and on the third
day came to a large wood, which he had no sooner entered than he heard
dreadful shrieks and cries. Casting his eyes round, he beheld with
terror a huge giant dragging along a fair lady and a knight by the hair
of their heads, with as much ease as if they had been a pair of gloves.
At this sight Tack shed tears of pitv. and then. alighting from his
horse, he put on his invisible coat, and taking with him his sword of
sharpness, at length with a swinging stroke cut off both the giant's
legs below the knee, so that his fall made the trees to tremble. At this
the courteous knight and his fair lady, after returning Jack their
hearty thanks, invited him home, there to refresh his strength after the
frightful encounter, and receive some ample reward for his good
services. But Jack vowed he would not rest until he had found out the
giant's den. The knight, hearing this, was very sorrowful, and replied,
"Noble stranger, it is too much to run a second risk; this monster lived
in a den under yonder mountain, with a brother more fierce and fiery
than himself. Therefore, if you should go thither, and perish in the
attempt, it would be a heartbreaking to me and my lady. Let me persuade
you to go with us, and desist from any further pursuit." "Nay," quoth
Jack, "were there twenty, not one should escape my fury. But when I have
finished my task, I will come and pay my respects to you."

Jack had not ridden more than a mile and a half; when the cave mentioned
by the knight appeared to view, near the entrance of which be beheld the
giant sitting upon a block of timber, with a knotted iron club by his
side, waiting, as he supposed, for his brother's return with his
barbarous prey. His goggle eyes were like flames of fire, his
countenance grim and ugly, and his cheeks like a couple of large
flitches of bacon, while the bristles of his beard resembled rods of
iron wire, and the locks that hung down upon his brawny shoulders were
like curled snakes or hissing adders. Jack alighted from his horse, and,
putting on the coat of darkness, approached near the giant, and said
softly, "Oh! are you there? It will not be long ere I shall take you
fast by the beard." The giant all this while could not see him, on
account of his invisible coat, so that Jack, coming up close to the
monster, struck a blow with his sword at his bead, but, missing his aim,
he cut off the nose instead. At this, the giant roared like claps of
thunder, and began to lay about him with his iron club like one stark
mad. But Jack, running behind, drove his sword up to the hilt in the
giant's back, which caused him to fall down dead. This done, Jack cut
off the giant's head, and sent it, with his brother's head also, to King
Arthur, by a waggoner he hired for that purpose.

Jack now resolved to enter the giants' cave in search of his treasure,
and, passing along through a great many windings and turnings, he came
at length to a large room paved with freestone, at the upper end of
which was a boiling caldron, and on the right hand a large table, at
which the giants used to dine. Then be came to a window, barred with
iron, through which he looked and beheld a vast of miserable captives,
who, seeing him, cried out, "Alas! young man, art thou come to be one
amongst us in this miserable den?" "Ay," quoth Jack, "but pray tell me
what is the meaning of your captivity?" "We are kept here," said one,
"till such time as the giants have a wish to feast, and then the fattest
among us is slaughtered! And many are the times they have dined upon
murdered men!" "Say you so," quoth Jack, and straightway unlocked the
gate and let them free, who all rejoiced like condemned malefactors at
sight of a reprieve. Then searching the giants' coffers, he shared the
gold and silver equally amongst them.

It was about sunrise the next day when Jack, after seeing the captives
on their way to their respective places of abode, mounted his horse to
proceed on his journey, and, by the help of his directions, reached the
knight's house about noon. He was received here with all demonstrations
of joy by the knight and his lady, who in an honourable respect to Jack
prepared a feast which lasted many days, all the gentry in the
neighbourhood being of the company. The worthy knight was likewise
pleased to present him with a beautiful ring, on which was engraved a
picture of the giant dragging the distressed knight and his lady, with
this motto--

"We are in sad distress, you see,  
Under a giant's fierce command,  
But gain our lives and liberty  
By valiant Jack's victorious hand."

But in the midst of all this mirth a messenger brought the dismal
tidings that one Thunderdeil, a giant with two heads, having heard of
the death of his two kinsmen, came from the northern dales to be
revenged on Jack, and was within a mile of the knight's seat, the
country people flying before him like chaff. But Jack was no whit
daunted, and said, "Let him come! I have a tool to pick his teeth; and
you, ladies and gentlemen, walk but forth into the garden, and you shall
witness this giant Thunderdell's death and destruction."

The situation of this knight's house was in the midst of a small island
encompassed with a moat thirty feet deep and twenty feet wide, over
which lay a drawbridge. Wherefore Jack employed men to cut through this
bridge on both sides, nearly to the middle; and then, dressing himself
in his invisible coat, he marched against the giant with his sword of
sharpness. Although the giant could not see Jack, he smelt his approach,
and cried out in these words--

"Fee, fi, fo, fum  
I smell the blood of an English man  
Be he alive or be he dead,  
I'll grind his bones to make me bread!"

"Say'st thou so," said Jack; "then thou art a monstrous miller indeed."
At which the giant cried out again, "Art thou that villain who killed my
kinsmen? Then I will tear thee with my teeth, suck thy blood, and grind
thy bones to powder." "You will catch me first," quoth Jack, and
throwing off his invisible coat, so that the giant might see him, and
putting on his shoes of swiftness, he ran from the giant, who followed
like a walking castle, so that the very foundations of the earth seemed
to shake at every step. Jack led him a long dance, in order that the
gentlemen and ladies might see; and at last, to end the matter, ran
lightly over the drawbridge, the giant, in full speed, pursuing him with
his club. Then, coming to the middle of the bridge, the giant's great
weight broke it down, and he tumbled headlong into the water, where he
rolled and wallowed like a whale. Jack, standing by the moat, laughed at
him all the while; but though the giant foamed to hear him scoff; and
plunged from place to place in the moat, yet he could not get out to be
revenged. Jack at length got a cart-rope and cast it over the two heads
of the giant, and drew him ashore by a team of horses, and then cut off
both his heads with his sword of sharpness, and sent them to King
Arthur.

After some time spent in mirth and pastime, Jack, taking leave of the
knights and ladies, set out for new adventures. Through many woods he
passed, and came at length to the foot of a high mountain. Here, late at
night, he found a lonesome house, and knocked at the door, which was
opened by an ancient man with a head as white as snow. "Father," said
Jack, "have you entertainment for a benighted traveller that has lost
his way?" "Yes," said the old man; "you are right welcome to my poor
cottage." Whereupon Jack entered, and down they sat together, and the
old man began to discourse as follows:--" Son, I am sensible you are the
great conqueror of giants, and behold, my son, on the top of this
mountain is an enchanted castle, maintained by a giant named
Galligantus, who, by the help of an old conjurer, betrays many knights
and ladies into his castle, where by magic art they are transformed into
sundry shapes and forms; but, above all, I lament the misfortune of a
duke's daughter, whom they fetched from her father's garden, carrying
her through the air in a burning chariot drawn by fiery dragons, when
they secured her within the castle, and transformed her into the shape
of a white hind. And though many knights have tried to break the
enchantment, and work her deliverance, yet no one could accomplish it,
on account of two dreadful griffins which are placed at the castle gate,
and which destroy every one who comes near. But you, my son, being
furnished with an invisible coat, may pass by them undiscovered, where
on the gates of the castle you will find engraven in large letters by
what means the enchantment may be broken." The old man having ended,
Jack gave him his hand, and promised that in the morning he would
venture his life to free the lady.

In the morning Jack arose and put on his invisible coat and magic cap
and shoes, and prepared himself for the enterprise. Now, when he had
reached the top of the mountain he soon discovered the two fiery
griffins, but passed them without fear, because of his invisible coat.
When he had got beyond them, be found upon the gates of the castle a
golden trumpet hung by a silver chain, under which these lines were
engraved--

"Whoever shall this trumpet blow,  
Shall soon the giant overthrow,  
And break the black enchantment straight;  
So all shall be in happy state."

Jack had no sooner read this but he blew the trumpet, at which the
castle trembled to its vast foundations, and the giant and conjurer were
in horrid confusion, biting their thumbs and tearing their hair, knowing
their wicked reign was at an end. Then the giant stooping to take up his
club, Jack at one blow cut off his head; whereupon the conjurer,
mounting up into the air, was carried away in a whirlwind. Thus was the
enchantment broken, and all the lords and ladies who had so long been
transformed into birds and beasts returned to their proper shapes, and
the castle vanished away in a cloud of smoke. This being done, the head
of Galligantus was likewise, in the accustomed manner, conveyed to the
Court of King Arthur, where the very next day, Jack followed, with the
knights and ladies who had been so honourably delivered. Whereupon, as a
reward for his good services, the king prevailed upon the aforesaid duke
to bestow his daughter in marriage on honest Jack. So married they were,
and the whole kingdom was filled with joy at the wedding. Furthermore,
the king bestowed on Jack a noble habitation, with a very beautiful
estate thereto belonging, where he and his lady lived in great joy and
happiness all the rest of their days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](efft01.htm#fr_0) Collated from sundry
Chap-books. (Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1711-1835.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Princess of Canterbury](efft02)
