[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](efft56)  [Next](efft58.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A CLERGYMAN'S GHOST.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md)

IN the south of Devon, some eighteen or twenty years ago, a reverend
gentleman, of large landed property, held a small benefice in his
immediate neighbourhood, for the purpose of evading residence in another
quarter. He was accustomed to perform the duty every Sunday, and was
conveyed to the church in his chariot through one of those narrow, shady
lanes for which that country was then so justly famed. He died, and his
remains were consigned to the vault in the church of the above-mentioned
benefice, with much pomp and ceremony, and followed by a long procession
of friends, tenants, and the surrounding neighbourhood. But his spirit
was not supposed to rest in peace. Villagers returning from their
labours had been terrified by the sound of carriage-wheels in the shady
lane; and one had even seen the chariot itself drawn by headless horses.
The rumour spread, till it was confidently asserted in the cider shops
that "twelve parsons" had been convened to lay the spirit in the Red
Sea. Still, the lane was believed to be haunted; and on investigating
the reason why the spell had not taken effect, it was conjectured that,
as one of the twelve parsons had been the intimate friend of the
deceased--as he knawed the trick--he would communicate it to him, and so
render it abortive. That parson was therefore struck out of the list,
and the vicar of an adjoining parish, lately come into residence, from
"Lunnun town," did it all *hisself* and neither chariot nor horses *was
ever knawed to walk again*. This superstition was current under the
immediate knowledge of the writer of this anecdote.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[1](efft57.htm#fr_65.md) *Athenaeum*, 7th November
1846, p. 1142, quoted by Jabez Allies, *On the Antiquities and Folk-Lore
of Worcestershire*, p 464.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Haunted House](efft58.md)
