[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yvhf06)  [Next](yvhf08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432515268/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, \[1930\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE

And the Rishi Vashisht, preceptor of the Divine Ram, went on:

"The poison plant of the world's illusion springs from the mind
entangled in sensuous enjoyment. But it is through mind alone, that the
ills of mind can be cured and eradicated. Those who live in this world
without attachment to worldly objects, like a duck in a pond, are the
true conquerors of the mind. For what are they—but vermin—those who
cling to the objects of the senses, and taste not of the fruit of
renunciation? One ought to rid the mind of all thoughts of ego, and fix
it on the Soul Supreme, according to the teachings of the Vedas (Four
books of Wisdom), to attain complete bliss and harmony in life.

"Even as one thorn removes another thorn, so the higher mind of a man,
will remove the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

impurities from the lower mind of man. To cleanse the mind of its
defilements and desires is the first step on the high road to salvation,
trodden by the great Saint and Sages.

"When the mind that wavers and flickers like a flame in the wind, is
steadied and made one-pointed, as it were, through desirelessness, then
alone is the Real Truth that sustains the Universe made manifest in all
its refulgent majesty. May you tread this Sacred and Ancient Path
(Yoga), O Ram, and by knowing the true nature of your own self, and
freeing your mind from all worldly entanglements, attain to the highest
bliss of salvation. May your mind, freed from hankerings and longings
for the objects of the world, be merged in God-Consciousness. Past,
present and future become as one, to he who has controlled his mind, and
conquered his worldly desires. When all the shining tinsel of the world
becomes a mere nothing. then alone is mind conquered. These thoughts of
attachment and possession,—that this is mine, that is thine, etc.,
belong to the realm of the lower mind. When all such lower thoughts of
differentiation are lost, and the Atma, One behind

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

all, is recognized, then alone the sorrows of the world cease to exist.
May you, O Ram, attain to that Divine State. When the mind is fully
controlled and the desires arising from it are destroyed, then alone
comes surcease from pains and afflictions that torment humanity. When
the baser passions of the mind are slain, then one attains perfect
peace, and becomes, as it were, the fountain head of peace in the world
for the salvation of suffering humanity.

"By meditating on the heart, spiritual Wisdom awakens, all doubts
vanish, and the mind is contented. This mind of ours, is susceptible to
all kinds of influences, hankering after [worldly](errata.htm#2.md)
pleasures, and this is the greatest obstacle in the path of salvation.
Control your. mind with the thought that these worldly objects are the
merest tinsel compared to the liberation which is a veritable
treasure-trove of all bliss and happiness. Then will you be freed from
all worldly thoughts of possession and differentiation, arising from an
overgrown ego.

The Divine State of liberation, where one is freed from the cycle of
birth and death, confers untold bliss, and is everlasting like the
Eternal One Himself.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

"It is indeed hard to find in this world, a mind really free from the
snare of the senses. To control this ever-fluctuating mind and make it
one-pointed is the aim of all meditation, and is the theme of all
discourses on metaphysics. Constant meditation on the One Unchanging
Reality of the Universe, which is God, the Self Supreme. The mind takes
on the qualities it meditates upon. For that reason the wise keep within
strict control, those tendencies of the mind which incline it toward the
baser objects, and in the end attain the Bliss of complete freedom,
liberation, or Nirvana.

"The moment desires and distractions crop up in the mind, they should be
weeded out. The destruction of sensuous desires is akin to the
destruction of ignorance. Desirelessness leads to the peace of
salvation. Constant effort is necessary to attain such bliss. With the
realization of the Supreme and Sustaining Reality of the Universe, one
sees that all worldly objects are false and unreal to the core,—mere
illusions, nothing else, like bubbles on the deep."

Prince Ram asked: "Tell us, O Saint, how one can destroy ignorance?"

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Rishi Vashisht, the Preceptor, replied; "Through ignorance it is, O Ram,
that the Atma, which is eternal, is forced to go though the cycle of
births and deaths. To conceive of the illusion, which besets the
embodied soul as real, is ignorance, and a barrier to seeing true
reality. A man, free from births and deaths, and realizing the
all-refulgent reality of the Universe, perceives that desires are a
creation of Maya. Extinction of lower desires is the extinction of
ignorance."

Prince Ram asked his preceptor, the Holy Vashisht: "All visible objects
of name and form, O Lord, you say are illusions, and that illusion is
destroyed by meditation on the true reality of the Atma. Pray, what is
this thing called Atma?"

Rishi Vashisht replied: "It is the Wisdom of the Brahma (God), who has
no visible form. All things of the world, perceived through our senses,
contain the essence of Brahma, such as growth, mind, birth and death,
which are illusory, not real. Brahma alone is true and self-existent,
the Creator and Upholder of the Universe. Out of that Supreme Soul,
which is Eternal, Immortal, and Absolute, arose the intelligence that
governs

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the Universe. This Atmic Jnan is the Absolute Self shining every where.

"From the Brahma arise different forces and powers like waves and
currents in the ocean. To realize Oneself as Brahma is the goal; but to
know the soul as distinct from the body is to know the truth and be free
from ignorance. It is only the fancy of fools, that gives illusion the
garb of reality. The wise have pierced the veil of illusion by the
shafts of their Jnan (Wisdom). Know then, this body, this wealth, these
kith and kin are not real. Atma alone is real and eternal. Perform
actions in this world without being absorbed by them."

Sri Ram then said: "How marvelous it is that illusion, which is unreal,
should cause so much pain and suffering in the world, and that which
appears so solid and concrete should be but a manifestation of Maya. O
Master, I cannot believe this Universe really came out of the unreality.
How do you account for the pains of King Lavana?"

Saint Vashisht answered: "King Lavana was not bound by the results of
his actions, as he performed them without attachment, and with complete
indifference to the outcome. One morning

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

while sitting in solitude, the King fell into a profound reverie and
thought of performing mentally the Raj-suya Vajna, as performed by his
powerful ancestor Harish Chandra. He thought of all the accessories to
the Sacrifice, and in imagination offered oblations to the gods, and
went through all the details of the sacrifice. When he awoke from his
reverie, it was night-fall. It is a rule that whoever performs the Royal
Sacrifice, must undergo great pain and suffering. So the King of the
gods, Indra, sent a celestial messenger to inflict suffering on King
Lavana. The mendicant, who appeared before the King, and put him into a
trance in which he suffered cruelly, was none other than Indra's
messenger. This I discovered by my ascetic powers. So you will see from
this episode, that actions performed even mentally have far-reaching
consequences.

<span class="small">The story of King Lavana is as follows: A mendicant
came to the Court of King Lavana and besought him to witness has powers.
On the King consenting, the mendicant waved a peacock feather before the
King's face, and immediately the King sank into unconsciousness, while
his body writhed fearfully. When some time later the King recovered
consciousness, his minister asked him what he</span>

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="small">had experienced. The King replied "I felt dizzy when
the mendicant waved the fan. Then I saw a horse coming toward me. On the
mendicant's suggestion I rode the horse and was carried away to a dense
forest, where I fell from the horse and felt very thirsty. While I lay
dying of thirst, I saw a young woman pass my way with a pitcher of
water. I asked for water, but the girl refused, saying that she was
low-born and could not give water to the King unless he married her and
promised to live with her folks. In my extremity, I consented. I married
the girl, but found it very hard to live with her folks, who were no
better than barbarians. I moved up on the hill top and built a house.
There I lived with the girl for eight years, and we had two sons. Then
there was a severe draught, and as a result, terrible famine. People
died by the hundreds and thousands for want of food. I started, with my
wife and sons, for some other land. On the way, my wife died from
fatigue and exhaustion and my sons cried for food. Unable to see them
suffer, I killed myself. Just at this point I recovered consciousness."
So said the King, and all present marvelled at the strangeness of the
dream. They looked around for the ascetic but he was nowhere to be
found.—by the Author.</span>

"O Ram," continued the Rishi Vashisht, "I will speak to you of the
nature of Jnan and Ajnana—Wisdom and Ignorance. Each of these is
seven-fold in character. Wisdom enables men to perceive the true reality
of the Universe and thereby obtain salvation; whereas, ignorance, by

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

regarding the physical body as the real "I", leads to bondage.

"Now, the difference between a seer and one who is denied spiritual
vision. The seers are those who have conquered illusions, and have
awakened to a realization of the true reality of the Universe. The
ignorant slaves of illusion. Shallow human intelligence causes doubts
and disbeliefs and leads men astray. This is but delusion. Wisdom leaves
no room for doubts or disbeliefs. To the man who has attained true
Wisdom, the human soul and the Supreme Soul becomes One.

"The seven states of ignorance are Bindu-jagrat, Jagrat, Maha-jagrat,
Swapnajagrat, Swapuna, Sushupti, Bindu-jagrat is the primary state of
partial perception. In the second state the individual begins to
perceive the difference of mine, thine and his. In the third state the
man begins to have some conception of the relationship between man and
the Universe. In the fourth state the mind realizes its supremacy over
matter. The fifth state is really the dream state. In the sixth state
the individual recalls to mind things long past. In the seventh state
the individual realizes the futility

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

of all his previous states, fraught with pain and suffering.

 

"There are likewise seven states of Wisdom, although any number of
divisions and subdivisions can be made. These seven states of Wisdom
lead to Nirvana. They are Subeccha or right desire, Vicharan or
contemplation, Tanumansi, the state in which the mind is alert,
Satwapatti or the generation of the serenity of the mind, Asansakti or
detachment of the mind from [worldly](errata.htm#3.md) things, Padarth
Bhavana, the perception of the truth and reality, and Turya or light.
These states free the seeker from delusion, and lead gradually to
complete Nirvana or salvation and to the end of pain and suffering.
Subhecha or right desire is of course the longing and desire for
spiritual enlightenment. Vicharana is defined as meditation or
contemplation of the things of spirit and mind, contemplation of the
Divinity that pervades the Universe, and the realization of the Godhead,
These two states lead to the third stage of keen intellectual
perception, which naturally leads to the real truth or divine
philosophy. Atma Jnan (Wisdom of the self) brings about emancipation

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

from the thraldom of worldly things. This state confers ineffable bliss
and enlightenment on the seeker. By logical sequence in that state of
advancement, the student realizes his relationship with the Divine, and
his relationship with the Universe. here he sees, knows and understands
all. Then the last state of complete enlightenment and mastery is
reached, when the very presence of the man radiates spiritual light.
Such a soul is free from the cycle of birth and death. He is called
Jivan-mukta (bodily emancipated). These souls are free indeed. Free
front worldly longings and desires, pleasure, pair, success, failure,
praise, blame, profit, loss, victory and defeat are as one to them. They
have attained salvation by the continued discipline of their mind, by
unceasing effort in the realm of divine philosophy.

"Rising by degrees from one spiritual stage of enlightenment to another,
until having passed through the seven stages, you attain liberation.
Those who have subjected their mind and acquired true perception of the
Divine within, are truly great, worthy of every respect, and adoration.
Others have to go through innumerable births and deaths. One desire
leading

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

to another, thus the wheels of Maya move on, and the soul is bound more
and more, until true awakening comes, and the man starts on the path of
enlightenment. This path begins with the desire for spiritual light, and
attains completion with acquirement of that light, by means of the seven
stages described above. Such a one realizes Brahma and becomes one with
Brahma, the first Cause of the Universe, the Source of Ineffable Bliss,
the Ocean of Power, the Sun of Spiritual Illumination, Immortal,
Untreated, All-pervading, All-seeing, All-knowing, All-powerful, Supreme
Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe."

 

Rishi Vashisht continued: "O Ram, I will narrate further the story of
King Lavana to illustrate the working of the Maya. On recovering
consciousness, the King was seized with a great longing to visit the
strange country he had dreamed of, so he started for the Vindhya
mountains. and in due time reached the impenetrable forest that cover
its slopes.

 

He wandered about hither and thither unlit he reached the North, where
he came upon a settlement of the very people he had dreamed

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

about. And wonder of wonders, these people were actually suffering from
famine and in a miserable plight. The King and his courtiers saw an old
woman bewailing the loss of her children, who had died during the
famine. As they listened to her lament, they discovered with much
surprise that the old woman was weeping for the girl whom the King had
married in his dream, by whom he had two sons, and who had died while on
the way to a land of plenty. Greatly moved by the incident, the King
pacified the old woman, giving she and her tribesmen food and clothing,
and conducting them to his kingdom. He then sought an explanation of the
mystery, at the feet of the learned. After due discipline, meditation,
and study he attained the Bliss of Nirvana. It is thus, O Ram, O Ram,
that illusion works and gives the unreal, the appearance of the real."

Ram asked: "How was it, O Master, that what the King saw in his dream
actually came to pass?"

Muni Vashisht replied: "You will better understand this incident by the
story of Gandhi, which I will narrate for your benefit later on. What
happened in this case was not really true,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

only a conjurer's trick played by Indra's messenger on the consciousness
of the King and those aborigines on the Vindhya Mountains. The King
experienced in his unconscious state, and the tribesmen saw in their
conscious state, that was all. But that is how illusion works, tricking
us into believing as real that which is not, piercing the veil of
illusion, O Ram, by the shining shaft of Jnan (Wisdom of the self). May
you attain that state of bliss, my son, in which the human soul becomes
one with the Divine—the state of complete Nirvana. May you realize the
Divinity within you, and know it to be the same that brought the world
into being and pervades and sustains it. Conquer, O Ram, by ceaseless
meditation, the ignorance of illusion, and attain the One Omnipotent and
Omniscient God, from whom the world evolved, and in whom it resolves
itself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Queen Chundalai, The Great Yogin](yvhf08.md)
