[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yvhf10)  [Next](yvhf12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432515268/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, \[1930\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

### SURAGHO

"Even though thou pursue thy appointed path through the world, O Ram,
there is beneficent quietude in the throne of the All-Wise, if thou but
recognize the Knower with thy mind. So long, Ram, as you attain the
Atmic state by thy constant mastery of externals, your mind will ever be
engaged in enquiry into the unlimited pure wisdom (inculcated by your
wise Guru and the Holy precepts). The supreme state may be reached
through Atmic enquiry; by turning aside from worldly objects.,
discernment of the true significance of the Books of Wisdom; one's own
intelligence; initiation by a Guru; refraining from taking the life of
any living thing; purity; or it can be attained by one's intelligence
alone. Lacking all else, liberation will be his who is possessed of
subtle and stainless intelligence, and is initiated by a Guru.

Upon hearing Muni Vashisht, Ram enquired:

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The persons named
by you divide into two classes. One class frees itself of pain and
attains the unity of wisdom by going into Samadhi while still doing the
work of the world; the other retires from action in the world and goes
into Samadhi. Of these two which is superior? Please enlighten me
clearly on this point."

To which Vashisht answered: "In Samadhi there is recognition of the
inactivity of this world. The mind becomes completely passionless, with
no concern for the world or its objects. Whether one enters Samadhi from
amid the turmoil of the world, or the quiet depths of a forest, there is
no difference. Both have attained complete equipoise of mind, and the
incalculable fruits of the great meditation are theirs. In this state of
illumination, the serenity of mind is absolute. Therefore, O Ram, it
matters not by what door one enter:, the sublime state of Samadhi—within
lies liberation.

"When the desires are extinct, the performance of actions will be as if
not done, like one, who, deep in mental concentration does not hear the
voices of by-standers. But if the gross mind still has desire, though
one has withdrawn

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

from worldly action, then one's actions are performed in the dreaming
state when the body is as if paralyzed. Know, O Ram, when the mind
performs action, but is yet free from it, that state is called the
blissful Samadhi; the unchanging Nirvana and
[transcendent](errata.htm#15) bliss.

"The two kinds of vision, meditation and non-meditation, are the results
of the steady mind and the oscillating mind. Therefore, all the
attributes of the mind must be controlled. It is said, that meditation
is the firm mind itself, devoid of desire or vexatious thoughts. Pain,
internal or external, wears away in this Nirvanic state. A mind which is
above its worries will reach Nirvana. Desires breed endless pain and
misery in mental worry, and should therefore be reliquished.

"When all conception of "I" among the multitude of visibles is
vanquished, it does not matter where you live, O Ram, whether in a
house, on a hillside or in the great forest. The blessed of quiescent
mind, who have let go egoism find in the busiest household, the solitude
of the forest. They who stroll in a street. desiring nothing therein,
really possess the street. Similarly, to

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

those in full spiritual beatitude, the city and the wood are the same.
The forest retreat and the city abode become alike to him of
introspective mind, and the functions of sleeping, waking or walking do
not disturb this tranquillity of mind.

"O quiescent mind, thou twin of Prana, thy cooling dew will chill the
hot flowers of desire, and over all the universe shall be sweet peace.
But should the mind become heated with the illusion of the world, then
the hot breath of desire will sweep over the universe, like a great
raging forest fire, leaving but ashes in its wake.

"The inner processes of mind are revealed in external actions. The
earth, sky and air are all manifestations of the lower mind. He who
loses himself in earthly joys will never enjoy the surpassing delight of
Samadhi. But he who recognizes that the function of the lower mind must
operate, but yet is aloof from mundane enjoyment, finds pure delight in
Atma (wisdom). He who lives in the life of others, spurning wealth, and
seeing the world as it really is, is the real Knower.

"Whether death comes now or at the end of a

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

cycle, these wise ones will never be corrupted in mind. The Vedas
proclaim them as the blessed conquerors of the illusory conceptions of
duality and belief in endings and beginnings, true enjoyers of bliss. By
these characteristics, may we recognize those who have attained wisdom.
But the recognition will not aid, O Ram, in the conception of the
universal soul, for in words alone wisdom does not lie. Only in the
divine word OM is Brahma hidden.

"O, benignant Ram, I shall relate to thee a story which illustrates the
attainment of Atmic wisdom. Hear thou this history of Suragho, which is
indeed wonderful.

"Suragho was a mighty hunter and ruler of the Kiratas <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9). He lived with his people, who were adepts
in archery, in the Kailasa hills on the summit of the Himalayas.

"Whilst he administered royal justice with strict impartiality,
rewarding the righteous and punishing the wrongdoers, he soliloquized:
'If in the exercise of my royal power I afflict my people, are not their
pains mine? Yet, if I do not punish them according to prescribed law,
they shall have lived in vain. It is indeed a difficult

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

task to rule over a kingdom.'

"The tender king was sorely troubled in mind.

"Muni Mandavya made a timely appearance. To him Suragho paid honor, and
addressed him: 'O virtuous Muni, thy coming fills me with happiness. It
is indeed a blessing to know that I am in thy notice. Thou, righteous
Lord, hast long been free from melancholy of spirit. Help me to clear my
mind of the misgivings that assail me. What else torments the mind of
man more than doubt? My head is awhirl, O Muni, with the miseries and
joys my subjects experience in obeying my will. Let the sun of wisdom
light the darkness of my mind, and equality of vision comfort me.'

"Muni Mandavya replied: 'Atmic enquiry will clear away the fog of
illusion, [Suragho](errata.htm#16). Ask thyself ceaselessly, Who am I?
Whence came the universe? Whence came birth and death? If you do this
faithfully the reward of the Brahmic Seat shall be yours. When you make
Atmic enquiry habitual, your mind will obey your will and you will cease
your agonizing. To a poised mind the ups and downs of life appear
trivial.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Does the elephant
flee at sight of oxen tracks? What is of no consequence to the wise is
appalling to others. For does not the rain, gathered in the footprint of
a cow, seem an ocean of incalculable area to a mosquito? Know thou,
Suragho, that the farther removed thou art from worldly distractions,
the brighter the light of God illumines thee. Just so long as you are
engrossed in the affairs of the world, the true principle of God will
not be recognized by you. Deific light will not shine when dualities
still exist in the mind. It is as difficult to realize Atmic Reality, as
to know that the alchemy of gold is not more to nature, than that of the
baser metals. Therefore, longing for the things of the world must cease.
The reward is the attainment of [liberation](errata.htm#17)—the supreme
Brahmic state. O illustrious hunter, control your mind, and keep it free
from bodily and unwise desires; so shall you then attain the stainless
and beneficent Principle.'

"So saying Muni Mandavya returned to his own abode.

"The mighty hunter withdrew into his cave and in solitude began enquiry
into origin of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the "I". His meditations took the following form.—How absurd, he
thought, to call my body "I", for my body is composed of flesh and bone,
which in its separate arts is passive. Hence my body is not 'I'. The ten
organs of sense are other than the 'I'. I am not, then, the organs of my
body. What remains is ego. What actuates my ego? Consciousness. But the
universal consciousness cannot be termed the Reality. Therefore, I shall
free myself from the Jiva <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) state and
become "THAT" <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*\*](#fn_11) which above all
else, I desire to know. The fullness of wisdom,
[changeless](errata.htm#18) and stainless, alone is my Reality. This
[transcendent](errata.htm#19) Wisdom pervades all like the strand upon
which pearls are strung,—Vishnu, Brahma, Devendra, Yama and all other
states. This supreme and powerful Wisdom or Realization is not tainted
by worldliness, is of divine aspect, and finds completion in all
objects; has neither existence nor non-existence; is subtle and
permeates all, even the abode of Truth where lives Brahma. This
consciousness is the residual of all other potencies. It is due to
motion or fluctuation of this consciousness, and to nothing else, that
the diversified objects of this world are due.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

"Having [relinquished](errata.htm#20) the objective world and freed
himself from the shackles of desire and delusion—delusion which follows
one even in his seventh rebirth—Suragho maintained equality of vision,
as one stationary in the Sushupti <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12)
state. Free at last, though living in Atmic reality, he reached the
Brahmic state and attained the status of a Brahman, like unto Raja Rishi
Viswamitra, of extraordinary meditation.

"Thus did Suragho reach the Sushupti or dreamless state, wherein action
is stilled, like a picture of a candle alight. In that state he was, and
the opposites of love and hate, blessing or curse, association or
separation, intelligence or ignorance, assailed him not.

"Vashisht continued, O Ram, pillar of strength hear also what took place
between Suragho who attained, and a Raja Rishi named Parnada. Suragho
had a friend, Parigha by name, of the race of Paraseeka, who was also a
king. When Parigha's kingdom suffered a ten year drought, and famine and
his people perished in great numbers, his heart gave way . He left his
native country and went into a forest to meditate, denying himself food
and subsisting

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

upon dry leaves. Because of this he was called Parnada <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13). Through the renunciation he practiced
and his holy meditations, he attained Atmic wisdom, for none could
compete with the strenuosities of this kingly recluse. This Muni, who
traveled the three worlds as though he walked thru the room of a
dwelling, appeared before King Suragho. Each responded to the other's
affectionate greeting and found pleasure in reciting their respective
experiences.

"In welcome Suragho said, 'My heart overflows with joy and exquisite
bliss. I hail thee, O, honorable One.'

"Parnada answered; 'The sight of thee lifts me into that Jnana <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*\*](#fn_14) state into which Muni Mandavya
initiated you. O, King, art thou able to direct thy worldly affairs with
equality and clarity of vision? Hast thy body, changed by the passing
years, remained free from diseases, either physical or mental? Canst
thou preserve thy equilibrium of mind amid the inordinate luxuries of
wealth? Hast thou been able to merge into Samadhi <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_15) without thought, by following the
paths of extreme serenity and solitude and

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

forms actions or not, he who has Realized will always be poised in the
Samadhic state. O Brother in Attainment, they who have not equanimity of
mind will never be able to go into Samadhi, even though they sit in the
Padme posture and offer salutations to Brahma. It is the fullness of
Atmic wisdom which constitutes the noble Samadhi. If the mind controlled
by concentration knows Reality, such a wise one may be said to enjoy
Samadhi. The intelligence of the wise, free from illusion, yet mindful
of worldly action, will not forget for a moment the eternity of Atmic
Reality. As air flows freely in any direction, the wise intelligence
will always follow the path of unchanging Atmic wisdom. The wise, who
are in rapport with the indivisible Intelligence, having abandoned the
illusion of the opposites except as worldly recognition is necessary,
can be said to have attained the Brahmic Seat. Therefore, those blessed
in wisdom, who refrain from too much consideration for bodily action,
and who have enlivened the intelligence by the acquisition of holy
knowledge, may penetrate everywhere. Thou hast recognized the
Intelligence which is wondrous and

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

changeless. Thou hast attained the Brahmic state. Thy mind has been
purged from worldliness, and thy heart is liberated from egoism. Having
known the certainty of Atma, thou art complete and full in thy Self.

"Suragho made answer: 'Of what avail are circuitous expressions? To say
it briefly, it is this, when all longing for the fruits of action cease,
and the mind looks upon all equally, being directed within itself, then
Brahmic bliss arises, the incomparable Wise-Vision is developed, and the
resolute Atmic Reality alone illumines.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[140:\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_9) Hunters.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[143:\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_10) Ego

<span id="fn_11"></span>[143:\*\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_11) Brahma

<span id="fn_12"></span>[144:\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_12) Dreamless.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[145:\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_13) Parna—leaves; ad—to
eat.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[145:\*\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_14) Wisdom.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[145:\*\*\*](yvhf11.htm#fr_15) Blissful state.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Long-Lived Yogi and the Secret of His Longevity](yvhf12)
