[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy03)  [Next](rwy05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### 3. THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES OF RAJA YOGA

We will concern ourselves mainly with Raja Yoga, a system which has been
found to be most applicable to the mental and physical conditions in
which we live. Raja Yoga has eight principles. These are: (1)
*Yama*—non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, and
non-receiving of any gifts; (2) *Niyama*—cleanliness, contentment,
mortification, study and self-surrender to good; (3) *Asana*—posture;
(4) *Pranayama*—control of vital body forces; (5)
*Pratyahara*—introspection; (6) *Dharana*—concentration; (7)
*Dhyana*—meditation; (8) *Samadhi*—super-consciousness.

*Yama* and *Niyama* constitute the moral training without which no
practice of Yoga will succeed. As this moral code becomes established,
the practice of Yoga will begin to be fruitful. The Yogi must not think
of injuring either man or animal through thought, word or deed. However,
this should not be extended to the limits to which the Jains of India
carry it. Their creed forbids them to kill even an insect, and many
never bathe lest by placing their bodies in water they may drown some
creature living upon them. Yoga is logical. Its principles are not rules
of magic that must be followed

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

without deviation, but general principles that expand to cover the
exigencies of any situation.

Before continuing with our discussion of Raja Yoga, we should make a
distinction between that school of thought and another, called Hatha
Yoga.

Hatha Yoga deals entirely with the body. The sole aim of that school of
Yoga is to make the body physically strong. For a strong body, however,
you can achieve almost the same effects as those given by Hatha Yoga by
enrolling in a gymnasium course at any muscle-building establishment.
The exercises of Hatha Yoga are difficult and demand years of steady
endeavor. Through this system, it is claimed that a Yogi can establish
perfect control over every part of his body. The heart can be made to
stop or go at his bidding and can control the flow of blood and the
sensations of his nervous system.

The result of this part of Yoga is to make men stronger and to prolong
their lives; good health is its one goal. From the point of view of the
Raja Yogi, the person who perfects himself in Hatha Yoga is merely a
healthy animal. This system does not lead to spiritual growth or give
man the help to meet his need for relaxation which is found in Raja
Yoga. However, certain aspects of Hatha Yoga have become part of the
regime of Raja Yoga. These include some of its exercises, dietary
aspects, and disease preventives, which provide the physical state of
well-being which enables the proper pursuit of Yoga.

The exercises, or postures, are called *asanas*. These are a series of
exercises which should be practiced daily until certain higher states
are reached. They constitute the next stage in Yoga. At first, a posture
should be adopted which can be held comfortably for a fairly long time.
It has become

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

necessary to adapt the traditional Yoga postures to meet the needs of
Western man. While there is no evidence of any physical or physiological
difference between the people of the East and West, there are certain
acquired differences.

Ours is a civilization in which much time, both at leisure and at work,
is spent in a sitting position. In the East, the great mass of people
are unfamiliar with the chair in its different forms. Theirs is what
might be called a "squatting" culture. Hence muscular development from
childhood on is along different lines. Postures in which the Indian
naturally relaxes would be torture for the Westerner. The position which
is easiest is the proper one to use.

You will discover later that in the carrying out of these physiological
matters there will be a good deal of action going on in the body. Nerve
currents will have to be displaced and given new channels. New
vibrations will begin and the constitution will in effect be remodeled.
The main part of the action will lie along the spinal column, so that it
is necessary to hold the spinal column free by sitting erect and holding
the chest, head and neck in a straight line. Let the whole weight of the
body be supported by the ribs and in an easy natural posture with the
spine straight. You will find that you cannot think high thoughts with
the chest in. Such is the effect on the body of what we call the mind.

After you have learned to have a firm, erect seat, you should perform a
practice called the purification of the nerves. In the words of one of
the ancient scriptures, or Upanishads, "the mind whose dross has been
cleared away by *pranayama* becomes fixed in the path of Yoga ... first
the nerves are to be purified, then comes the power to practice
*pranayama*."

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The technique for this is as follows: stopping the right nostril with
the thumb, with the left nostril inhale according to your capacity.
Without pausing, exhale through the right nostril, while closing the
left one. Now, inhale through the right nostril and exhale through the
left. Practice this three or five times at four intervals of the day—on
awaking, at midday, in the evening and before going to sleep. Within
fifteen days to a month, purity is attained; then begins *pranayama*.

Practice is absolutely necessary. You may read about Yoga by the hour,
but without practice, you will not make progress. We never understand
without experience. You will have to see and feel this yourself, as
explanations and theories will not do. There are several obstructions to
practice. The first is an unhealthy body. You must keep your body in
good health. Be careful of what you eat and drink and what you do.
Always use a mental effort to keep the body strong. Keep in mind that
health is but a means to an end.

The second obstruction is doubt. We always are skeptical about things we
cannot see. You will naturally have doubts as to whether there is any
truth in this philosophy. With practice, however, even within a few
days, the first glimpse will come, giving encouragement and hope. A
widely-quoted commentator on Yoga has written: "When one proof is
realized, however little that may be, that will give us faith in the
whole teachings of Yoga." If you should concentrate on the tip of your
nose, in a few days you will begin to smell the most beautiful
fragrance. That will be enough to show that there are certain mental
perceptions that can be made without contact with physical objects.
Remember, too, that these are only the means. The aim, the goal, the end
of this

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

training is the liberation of the soul and freedom from tension and
fear. You must be master of your surroundings. Nature or the world about
you must not rule you. Never forget that the body is yours, you do not
belong to the body.

Now, we may consider *pranayama*, or breath control. What has this to do
with concentrating the powers of the mind? Breath is like the flywheel
of your living machine. In a big engine you will find that the flywheel
moves first and that motion is conveyed to finer and finer machinery
until the most delicate and finest mechanism in the machine is set in
motion. Breath is like that flywheel, supplying and regulating the
motive power to everything in the body.

Consider that we know very little about our own bodies. We cannot know.
Our attention is not discriminating enough to catch the very fine
movements that are going on within. We can know of them only as our
minds enter our bodies and become more subtle. To get that subtle
perception, we must begin with the grosser perceptions, thus reaching
the mysterious something which is setting the whole engine in motion.
That is *prana*, the most obvious manifestation of which is the breath.
Along with the breath, we slowly enter the body, which enables us to
discover the subtle forces and how the nerve currents are moving
throughout the body. When we perceive and learn to feel these forces, we
begin to get control over them and the body.

The mind is also set in motion by the different nerve currents, bringing
us to a state in which we have perfect control over body and mind,
making both our servants. Knowledge is power, and to get this power we
must begin at the beginning, the *pranayama* restraining the *prana*. As
you follow this text, you will see the reasons for each exercise

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

and learn which forces in the body are set in motion. You must practice
at least twice a day, preferably in the early morning and toward
evening. When night passes into day and day passes into night, there is
a state of relative calmness. At those times, your body will also have a
tendency to become calm. Take advantage of these natural conditions and
practice then. Make it a rule not to smoke or eat until you have
practiced. If you do this, the sheer force of hunger will prevent any
tendency to laziness.

If possible, it is best to have a room devoted to your practice of Yoga
and to no other purpose. Do not sleep in that room; you must keep it
holy. You must not enter the room until you have bathed and are
perfectly clean in body and mind. Place flowers and pleasing pictures in
the room. Have no quarreling, or anger or unholy thought there. Allow
only those persons to enter who are of the same thought as you are.
Eventually, an aura of holiness will pervade that space, and when you
are sorrowful, doubtful or disturbed, entrance into that room will make
you calm. If you cannot afford a room, set aside a corner; if you cannot
do that, then find a place inside your house or out where you can be
alone and where the prospect is pleasing.

Sit in a straight posture. The first thing to do is to send a current of
holy thought to all creation. Mentally repeat, "Let all things be happy;
let all things be peaceful; let all things be blissful." Do so to the
East, South, North and West. The more you do, the better you will feel.
You will find that the easiest way to make yourself healthy is to see
that others are healthy, and the easiest way to make yourself happy is
to see that others are happy. Afterwards, if you believe in God, pray.
Do not pray for money, or health, or heaven, but for knowledge and
light; every other prayer is

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

selfish. The next thing to do is to think of your own body and see that
it is strong and healthy. Your body is the best instrument you have.
Think of it as being adamant. Like a strong ship, it will help you to
cross this ocean of life. Freedom is never reached by the weak. Throw
away all weakness. Tell your body it is strong; tell your mind so. Have
unbounded faith and hope in yourself. By following the instructions
above, you will open your mind to the Yogic forces. Another important
aspect of Yoga, the postures, will be discussed in a later section.

#### The Secret of Prana

*Pranayama* may seem at first to be totally involved with breathing.
However, breathing is only one of the many exercises through which we
get to the real *pranayama*, or control of the *prana*. According to old
Indian philosophers, the universe is composed of two materials, one of
which is called *akasa*, the omnipresent, all-penetrating existence.
Everything that has form, or that is made up of compounds, evolves from
the *akasa*. The *akasa* becomes air, liquids, solids, the sun, moon,
stars and comets. It is the *akasa* that forms animal and plant life. It
is everything we see, all that can be sensed and everything that exists.
It cannot be perceived, as it is so subtle that it is beyond all human
perception. It can be seen only when it has become gross and taken form.
At the beginning of creation there was only this *akasa*, at the end of
the cycle, solids, liquids and gases melt into the *akasa* again, and
the next creation evolves from the *akasa*.

The *akasa* is manufactured into our universe by the power of *prana*.
Just as *akasa* is the infinite omnipresent *material* of our universe,
so is *prana* the infinite, omnipresent

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

*power* of this universe. At the beginning and at the end of a cycle
everything becomes *akasa* and all the forces that are in the universe
resolve back into the *prana*. In the next cycle, out of this *prana* is
evolved everything that we call energy or force. It is the *prana* that
is manifested as motion, the power of gravity and magnetism. The *prana*
is manifested as the actions of the body, nerve currents and thought.
All thought and all physical motion are manifestations of *prana*. The
sum total of all force in the universe, mental or physical, when
resolved back to its original state, is called *prana*. The knowledge
and control of this *prana* is really what is meant by *pranayama*.

This opens the door to almost unlimited power. Suppose, for instance,
one understood the *prana* perfectly and could control it. What power on
earth could there be that would not be his? Many believe he would be
able to move the sun and stars out of their places, to control
everything in the universe from the atoms to the biggest suns because he
would control the vital force of the universe, the *prana*. When the
Yogi becomes perfect, there might be nothing in nature not under his
control. All the forces of nature might obey him as his slaves. But let
us not reach beyond the stars!

The control of the *prana* is the one goal of *pranayama*. This is the
purpose of the training and exercises. Each man must begin where he
stands, must learn how to control the things that are nearest to him.
Your body is the nearest thing to you, nearer than anything else in the
universe, and your mind is the nearest of all. The power which controls
this mind and body is the nearest to you of all the *prana* in the
universe. Thus, the little wave of *prana* which represents your own
mental and physical energies is the nearest wave of all that infinite
ocean of *prana*. You must first learn to

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

control that little wave of *prana* within you. If you will analyze the
many schools of thought in this country, such as faith-healers,
spiritualists, Christian Scientists, hypnotists, therapists and many
psychologists and psychiatrists, you may find that each attempts to
control the *prana*. Following different paths, they stumbled on the
discovery of a force whose nature they do not know, but they
unconsciously use the same powers which the Yogi uses and which come
from *prana*.

This *prana* is the vital force in every being and the finest and
highest action of *prana* is thought. There are several planes of
thought. Instinctive thought has been called "conditioned reflex" by
Western scholars. If a mosquito bites you, your hand will strike it
automatically. All reflex actions belong to this plane of thought. There
is also a higher plane of thought, the conscious. You reason, judge,
think, see pros and cons of certain situations.

Reason, however, is limited; its sphere is very small. We are constantly
confronted with facts which penetrate our consciousness from the
outside, facts which are ordinarily beyond the powers of the reason. The
Yogi believes the mind can exist on this higher plane, the
superconscious. When the mind has attained to that state which is called
*samadhi*—perfect concentration or superconsciousness—it goes beyond the
limits of reason, and comes face to face with facts which instinct or
reason can never know. Manipulation of the subtle forces of the body,
which are different manifestations of *prana*, if trained, stimulates
the mind, which progresses to the plane of the superconscious.

Let us repeat that *pranayama* has little to do with breathing, except
insofar as breathing is an exercise which helps you attain control of
the vital forces. The most obvious manifestation

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of *prana* in the human body, therefore, is the motion of the lungs. If
that stops, all the other manifestations of force in the body will also
stop. This is considered to be the principal gross motion of the body.
To reach the more subtle, we must utilize the grosser and so travel
toward the most subtle. Breath does not produce the motion of the lungs.
On the contrary, the motion of the lungs produces breath. *Prana* moves
the lungs, and the motion of the lungs draws in air.

From the explanation above, it can be seen that *pranayama* is not
breathing, but controlling that muscular power which moves the lungs.
Muscular power which travels through the nerves to the muscles and from
those to the lungs, making them move in a certain manner, is the
*prana*. Once this *prana* is controlled, we find that other actions of
the *prana* in the body slowly come under control. If we have control
over certain muscles, why not obtain control over every muscle and
nerve? What stands in the way? At present, control is lost, and the
motion has become automatic. We cannot move our ears at will, but we
know that animals can. We do not have that power because we do not
exercise it. This is what is called atavism.

We know that physical agility which has been lost can be brought back to
manifestation. It has been shown, moreover, that by sincere work and
practice, it is not only possible, but even probable that every part of
the body can be brought under perfect control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Obtaining Relaxation Through Yoga](rwy05.md)
