[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy01)  [Next](rwy03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### 1. THE ORIGIN OF YOGA

The basic problem of every living creature is survival in a hostile
world. Countless generations ago, from the teeming human masses of the
East, where man lived in ever-present dread of famine, disease, flood,
invasion and vengeance of the gods, Yoga, a system or method of
attaining physical and mental serenity under adverse and even horrible
conditions, was introduced.

Man, in his essence, has changed little in the course of historic time.
The philosophy of Yoga and its practice, which enabled the Indo-Aryan to
survive the stresses of his time, can also enable people of the modern
Western world to achieve contentment and security in the face of the
cold war, the hydrogen bomb, missile, counter-missile and
counter-counter-missile and other perils in a rapidly changing world.

Scholars who have attempted to trace the beginnings of the practice of
Yoga have found that its principles were well established as far back as
the time when the written word was new. There are many "books" of Yoga
among the oldest scripts in Sanskrit, the ancient sacred language of
India. Even these refer to a distant past in which the secrets of Yoga
were passed on from generation to generation by word of mouth. Only the
Indian form of Yoga is well known in

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> America and
Europe, but there is strong evidence that Yoga principles were known to
the Egyptians and Chinese and that there were monastic societies among
the Hebrew Essenes who were, from reliable historical evidence, groups
of Yoga practitioners. Perhaps the recent discovery of the Dead Sea
Scrolls will reveal some of the secrets of this philosophy that have
been lost in the shadows of the years.

#### What Is Yoga?

The word "Yoga" cannot be translated into English. In the Sanskrit, it
derives from the root "Yuja," which is to join or weld together. Just as
two pieces of metal are welded together to become one, so in the
philosophy of Yoga, the embodied spirit of the individual becomes one
with the Universal Spirit through the regular practice of certain
physical and mental exercises. In another definition, Yoga is the art of
life and its philosophy is meant to furnish the principles that justify
and explain that art.

One of the Sanskrit texts, the Bhagwad-Gita, describes Yoga as
equanimity of mind which results in efficiency of action. For those to
whom Yoga represents a religion as well as a way of life, Yoga means the
union or linking together of man with God, or the disunion or separation
of man from the objects of physical sensation in the material world. It
is the science or skill which leads the initiate by easy steps to the
pinnacle of self-realization.

There are many common misconceptions which stand between the truths of
Yoga and those who live in the Western world. Many Americans have heard
more about Yogis, or those who practice Yoga, than about Yoga itself.
They picture the Yogi as an Indian fakir, swathed in rags, who spends
his life on a bed of nails or sits motionless underneath

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

a tree until birds build nests in his hair. Their knowledge of Yoga is
gained from supposedly esoteric literature or from side-show performers
billed as "Swamis" or "Yogis" who stick pins through their flesh or
permit themselves to be buried alive. More charitably, they may think of
the Yoga convert as some mildly eccentric individual who enjoys standing
on his head before breakfast.

Nevertheless, the true spirit and practice of Yoga has already spread to
this country and has achieved what might be called a high degree of
respectability. A number of colleges and universities, including such
institutions as the University of Southern California, offer courses in
Yoga. Also, such prominent athletes as Parry O'Brien, long-time holder
of the world's shot-put record, have studied and practiced Yoga. It has
spread even to the halls of our national Congress where Representative
Francis P. Bolton's practice of Yoga has received nationwide press
coverage. Stripping the "magic" from Yoga reveals that it is a practice
that effectively enables its user to meet the stresses of modern life,
and offers relaxation that may stand between its adherents and the
stomach ulcers or psychiatrist's couch that are so common today.

You need not retire to an "Ashram," or Yoga retreat, to acquire the
benefits of this system; rather, you can attain the serenity and
relaxation that it affords through the information in this volume.
Practicing Yoga takes but a few moments a day, although Yoga itself
gradually fills the entire day of the person who pursues it with faith
and belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Control of the Brain and Nervous System](rwy03)
