[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy02)  [Next](rwy04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

### 2. CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND NERVOUS SYSTEM

To attain a condition in which the fullest relaxation is possible, it is
essential to control the brain and the nervous system. In old Sanskrit
tracts we find the statement: "When the nervous system is relieved of
all its impurities, there appears the perceptible signs of success ...
the glowing color of health."

While speaking of the "brain," we must, to some extent, drop the Western
traditional concept of the brain as the sole seat of consciousness. As
far back as 2,500 years ago, the Yogins were in conflict with the
accepted Hindu medical science of the time. These ancient medical men
held, as did the ancient Greeks, that the heart was the seat of
consciousness. The Yogins, on the other hand, stated that the brain,
with its highly involved nervous system, was one unit which represented
the true physical medium of human mental activity. There is an
interwoven cerebro-spinal system and an autonomic nervous system. In the
Yoga system of histology, the cerebro-spinal system is said to consist
of the *sahasradala*, the brain, and the *susumna*, the spinal cord,
which are enclosed within the cavities of the cranium and the spinal
cord

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

or vertebrae. Linked together in the autonomic nervous system is a
double chain of ganglia which are situated on each side of the spine and
which extend from the base of the skull to the tip of the coccyx.

There are seventy-two thousand *nadis*, or nerves, which form a
countless number of nerve endings. Of the *nadis*, about a dozen have
been thoroughly studied by the Yogins. Three have been found to be of
primary importance: The *ida*, or left nostril, the *pingala*, or right
nostril, and the *susumna*, the spinal cord. These are believed to
exercise control over voluntary and automatic responses of the human
body and can be brought under control by Yogic methods.

Centuries before the recognition of electrical force by scientists, the
Yogins had evolved a theory of nerve-impulse transmission which has won
acceptance from Western medical investigators in this century. If we
substitute the word *prana* for electrical impulse, we find that the
oldest Yoga principles of neurology are now endorsed in the modern
theory of nerve action. We can now understand that the Yogins
anticipated the principles of electrical phenomena by discovering the
positive and negative animal-magnetic currents which are the nerve
impulses and which may be controlled and adjusted by Yoga practice.

The physical and mental well-being of every individual depends on the
fine adjustment of the nervous system which controls even the secreting
glands. One of the benefits of a Yoga regime is the control or restraint
of the various modifications which may take place in the nervous system.
In addition to the beneficial effects of the physical aspects of Yoga on
the gross and finer muscles and tissues, it also establishes, through
the postures and attitudes and psycho-physiological practices, complete
control over the nervous system.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Only when the
nerve impulses can pass in harmony through the spinal cord may
*samadhi*, a state of suspended sensation, be reached.

#### Nervous Ailments

It is now fashionable to attribute many forms of disease to "nerves,"
which is a symptom, not a disease. Since the nervous system is in direct
and intimate relationship with every part of the body, the slightest
disorder in any organ registers upon the nervous system. Conversely, any
serious nerve disorder will cause functional distress, and it is often
impossible to disassociate the cause from the effect.

What we term "nervous weakness" is actually the response of a neglected
or abused nervous system. The conditions that we lump together under the
heading of "nerves" are merely the call of the nervous system for better
care. Purification of the nervous system is possible through an improved
mental attitude, rest, relaxation and recreation and the benefits of
postures, or *asanas*, which adjust the tone of the spine and its
components.

#### Some Aids to Mental Hygiene

Freedom from emotion is one of the tenets of Yoga. Early modern
psychologists discovered a strong relationship between the emotions and
the body in terms of increased or reduced ductless gland secretion,
respiration, circulation and blood pressure. Yoga medical investigators
have attributed diabetes, arteriosclerosis, nephritis and other diseases
to the effects of emotion on the glandular system and thence on the body
organs. *Samatva*, or absolute freedom from emotions, has been set as
one of the prime essentials for the health of

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the nerves and brain. Even a minor emotional flare-up or a long period
of subdued anxiety will affect the body.

#### Concentration

A method of avoiding emotions and anxieties is to train or habituate the
mind to concentrate on a chosen object. This concentration is called
*dharana*. Without purposeful concentration, the mind diffuses its
energies in varied directions, while with strong concentration, the mind
can be freed of distractions and can approach a state of detachment or
non-awareness of extraneous matters. This is the essence of
concentration. The habit of concentration is known to produce a sedative
effect, similar to that induced by deep breathing, with manifold
benefits to the health of the nervous system.

#### The Need for Recreation

In India, a troubled individual is often able to retire for a while to
an Ashram, or retreat, where he can live under the best possible
conditions for the practice of Yoga and self-realization. (Note the use
of the "retreat" by the Roman Catholic and other religions as a means to
attain spiritual relaxation.)

One of the most depressing factors in the Western world is the monotony
of occupation and the hectic pace required in almost every occupation or
profession. In many cases, a change of occupation has effected radical
cures in instances of nervous disorder, but this is not always feasible.
However, any change in mental or physical occupation—and the change must
be mental as well as physical—will add substantially to the health and
tone of the nervous system.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Persons of sedentary habits will find relief in outdoor sports, such as
mountain climbing, hiking, swimming, in addition to the practice of the
Yoga exercises. For mental relaxation, the Yogins, whose troubled times
were yet more calm than life is today, found their recreation in a
mental state—in study and love of nature. By seeking unison with nature,
they found that their entire beings were called into delightful activity
with almost no effort of the will. They learned that the mind which lost
itself in the love of nature found its nervous system refreshed, its
vital forces renewed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Eight Principles of Raja Yoga](rwy04)
