[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy04)  [Next](rwy06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### 4. OBTAINING RELAXATION THROUGH YOGA

While the *asanas* or postures which will be described later are a basic
part of the practice of Yoga, we should continue our study of Raja Yoga,
the non-physical phases of this practice. Some readers may find they
cannot follow the rigid discipline of a full Yogic life; others may be
seeking an easier path to relaxation, and may feel that they are less
concerned with their physical than their mental states.

Breath control is an essential first step in obtaining a state of
relaxation. If you can, assume the Padmasana or Lotus Pose (page
[35](rwy06.htm#page_35).md) or place yourself in a comfortable sitting
position. Taken directly from the ancient Sanskrit texts, the *Hatha
Yoga Pradipika* of Swatmaram Swami, published in 1893, provides a
specific guide for relaxation through breathing exercises.

There are three Yogic terms which you should know: "*puraka*" is the
term for inhalation; "*rechaka*" for exhalation; "*kumbhaka*" for
retention of breath. Yogic instructions are: the Yogi assuming the Lotus
Pose should draw in the *prana* (breath) through the *ida* (left
nostril), and, having retained it as long as he can, exhale it through
the *pingala* (right nostril). Again, inhaling through the right
nostril, he

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

should hold his breath as long as possible and exhale slowly through the
left nostril. He should inhale through the same nostril by which he
exhaled and having restrained the breath to the utmost (until he is
covered with perspiration, or until his body shakes) he should then
exhale slowly, as exhaling forcefully would diminish the energy of the
body.

These exercises should be performed four times a day—in the early
morning, at midday, evening and midnight—slowly increasing the number
from three, each time, to eighty. Their effects are described as "to
render the mind and body slender and bright." Although in the direct
translation from the Sanskrit, the *ida* is named as being the left
nostril and the *pingala* as the right one, these words more properly
designate the two supposed conduits which connect with the nostrils, and
thence conduct throughout the entire body the vital air (the *prana*)
that enters with the atmospheric air.

Before undertaking these exercises, persons of phlegmatic temperament
are directed to go through the following course of preparation: (1)
Cleanse the gullet with a strip of cloth, the width of four fingers, by
swallowing it and then withdrawing it. Start gradually at the rate of
one hand-span's length daily; (2) Take daily enemas of water; (3)
Cleanse the nostrils by putting up a thread and drawing it out by way of
the mouth; (4) Look without winking at a minute object with concentrated
mind until the tears come; (5) With head bent down, turn the viscera of
the body to right and left; (6) Breathe in and out rapidly, like a
bellows. Internal concentration, causing the stomach to empty itself by
vomiting, is also recommended.

According to the Hindu system of physiology, there are seventy-two
thousand *nadis* or channels leading from the throat to the *kundali* in
the pelvic region. When these channels

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

have been purified by proper breath control, the body is ready to absorb
the fullest *prana* from the atmosphere. Then, according to the old
tracts, "the body becomes lean, the speech eloquent, the inner sounds of
the individual's body are distinctly heard, the eyes are clear and
bright, the body is freed from all disease, the seminal fluid is
concentrated, the digestive fire is increased and the *nadis* are
purified."

#### Looking Inward for Relaxation

It is known that long and close concentration upon any given part of the
body will induce sensations there and, sometimes, even movement. Control
over unused muscles may be obtained in this way. While it is a basic
claim for Hatha Yoga that the breathing exercises can lead to control
over the mind by supplying arterialized blood to the brain, and thus
control mental by physical action, it is also claimed that strong,
persistent concentration of the mind will induce controlled breathing,
thus directing physical action by mental.

A story is told of a student whose teacher made him sit meditating in
silence for twelve years and at last commanded him to pronounce the
sacred syllables A.U.M. This he did with the following results: "When
the student came to the first syllable, *rechaka*, or the process by
which the air in the lungs is pumped out, set in naturally. When he
finished the second syllable, *puraka*, or the process of inhalation,
set in. At the end of the third syllable, *kumbhaka*, or the process of
retention, set in, and in a short time he had settled into the pure and
elevated state of *samadhi*, which may be defined as perfect
relaxation."

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

This story illustrates the largeness of the claim on behalf of Raja
Yoga, or mental Yoga, that it brings physical Yoga with it, provided
that the mental processes take the form of long-continued silent
concentration. It also supports the claim that what it brings is
important, since the *pranayama* of the student soon brought him into
perfect absorption.

#### The Asanas

Though many *asanas*, or postures, are unsuited to people who habitually
sit in chairs, those who practice Yoga often find themselves falling
into these poses almost involuntarily. Many believe that the *asanas*
are natural positions of relaxation into which the body falls when freed
from the controls of the conscious mind and from the postures into which
they have been trained in our so-called "civilized living." William
Flagg, one of the first Westerners to probe the secrets of Yoga, once
stated: "A leg has jerked itself upwards and pressed the sole of its
foot against the other as high up as seemed possible; this has happened
hundreds of times." The posture here imitated is sitting on a foot, and
its efficacy is supposed to lie in the pressure upon the nerve centers
in the foot, leg and region of the perineum.

Another *asana* resembling the "plant balance" of modern gymnastics is
described thus: "Plant your hands firmly on the ground and support your
body on your elbows, pressing against the sides of your loins. Raise
your feet in the air stiff and straight on a level with the head." This
position was attempted while the practitioner was seated in an easy
chair, and failed to be completed only because the back of the chair
kept the head from falling to the level of the feet. The legs were
lifted from the floor and thrust out stiffly, while the weight of the
body was made to rest on the elbows, which were resting on the arms of
the chair. This was repeated not

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

only once, but a great number of times. The elbows were pressed against
the sides, forcefully and involuntarily hammering themselves violently
and repeatedly against the sides, giving excellent massage to both liver
and spleen.

The Shavasana, said to eliminate fatigue and induce calmness of mind, is
described as lying on one's back at full length like a corpse. Often,
when lying on his side, the practitioner has been turned over on his
back as though by a power foreign to him, though apparently using his
own muscles. This resulted in a curious sensation, which reproduced on
the feet, ankles and seat of the body the compression which is
obtainable by sitting on the feet, Eastern fashion. It was as if a
foreign body were pressed against the person's sides with a force equal
to what would be felt in the postures of Hatha Yoga. Sometimes several
of the parts in question were acted upon simultaneously.

Another incident of a similar nature is described by Flagg in the
practice of the *mudras*, or acts for putting the body in good
condition. The Nauli Mudra is described: "With the head bent down, one
should turn right and left the intestines of the stomach with the slow
motion of a small eddy in the river." Something like this interior
movement is produced by one process of the Swedish movement-cure. It
consists of sitting on a stool, bending the body forward as far as
possible and rotating the trunk of the body like the spoke of a
horizontal wheel. The head represents the tire and the seat, the hub. It
was just this movement that, in the case of two persons observed, was
set up as often as kumbhaka, or the suspension of the breath, was
practiced, neither of them having an idea of such a result. The Nauli
Mudra is considered one of the most important of all Hatha exercises,
and the body rotation is one of the most effective of the Swedish
exercises.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

#### Concentration

A Yoga technique for concentration is expressed as "looking fixedly at
the spot between the eyebrows." Many have reported that while cleansing
the mind of thought, the eyeballs would of themselves roll upward as far
as they could go, and hold themselves there.

The Shambhavi Mudra provides almost complete relaxation by dividing the
conscious concentration. It consists of fixing the mind on some part of
the body and the eyes rigidly and unwinkingly on an external object.
Often while you are concentrating intently with your eyes closed, they
will seem to open almost of themselves and fix on some object within
range, always rigidly and without winking.

Another direction for the Yogi says: "Direct the pupils of the eyes
toward the light by raising the eyebrows a little upward." Often while
trying this, your eyebrows will raise themselves as if to get out of the
way of the eyes. In the motions noted here and in others, it seems as
though an intelligent power beyond conscious reach takes the Yoga
adherent out of his own hands. This power appears to assume control of
voluntary and involuntary muscles, working them independently of the
person's will, though, it should be noted, never against it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Corrective Poses of Yoga](rwy06.md)
