[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy06)  [Next](rwy08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### 6. SPECIFIC ASANAS FOR WEIGHT REDUCTION

The slim, svelte figure is a goal of our culture, especially for the
female sex, so that the next series of *asanas* may be of particular
interest to women. From the point of view of Hatha Yoga, the elimination
of excess fat has been one means of achieving body-mind harmony. Even
before modern insurance actuaries pointed out the correlation between
excess weight and high mortality, Yogis had determined that every pound
of weight above normal (particularly for persons over forty) shortens
life by one year. While many persons have ruined their health and even
courted death by attempts to lose weight through chemical pills or
starvation diets, the Yoga reducing method improves body tone while it
trims excess poundage. One of the goals of Hatha Yoga is
*mrnalakomalavapu*, or the slimness of a lotus stalk.

Recent medical findings on overweight, which were also foreshadowed by
the Yogins, indicate that the accumulation of body fat is a symptom
rather than a disease. In the great majority of cases, obesity is due to
psychological rather than physical causes. In a small number of persons,
obesity may result from faulty or subnormal functioning of the endocrine

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

glands. However, most fat people owe their condition to overnutrition or
underoxidation of the food consumed, or a combination of both. Unused
surpluses of ingested food are deposited in the body tissues as fat, and
accumulate in those parts of the body which are least affected by
muscular action. Fatty deposits in certain parts of the body may not be
too noticeable, but deposits in the area of the hips and abdomen are
both unsightly and difficult to remove by ordinary means. Everyone has
heard the complaint of the dieter that "my face looks thinner, but the
fat stays on my hips and stomach!"

Another aspect of obesity which is generally overlooked by the reducing
faddist and the Western exercise "schools" is that improper elimination
is a great contributor to stoutness. One of the basic objectives of the
Yoga postures in the reducing regime is to exercise the trunk and
mid-trunk. At Yoga institutes in India it has been found that the first
successful step in the removal of excess fat is to combat constipation
by eliminating the use of laxatives and substituting proper Yoga
exercises. These postures and movements, which massage internally and
invigorate the muscles and walls of the abdomen, have been found to be
successful in the treatment of cases of functional and chronic
constipation.

While the Yoga postures discussed above enhance tonicity of the
extremities, hygiene of the trunk is important for general good health
and is especially important for tense or obese persons. The daily
postural exercises already described will supply adequate tonicity to
the thorax. However, special attention is needed for the abdomen and the
waist. Abdominal tonicity can be achieved in two ways: by systematic
exercise of abdominal muscles by anterior and posterior movements, and
through mechanical effects on the inner muscles by intra-abdominal
compression.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

#### Hastapadangustasana, or Toe-Finger Pose

The Toe-Finger Pose offers a variation for forward and sideward
movements. Stand erect with your legs straight, chest thrown forward and
hands at your sides. While exhaling, slowly raise one leg straight
forward, until it is at a right angle to your body. Avoid bending your
knee. Balancing your body on one leg, stretch your arms forward, and
either touch or take hold of the raised leg with the fingers of one or
both hands. Maintain this position for only a few seconds at first,
during suspension of breath. Inhale while returning to the starting
position.

<span id="img_05100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![With practice,
you'll be able to straighten your leg completely in the Toe-Finger
Pose.](tn/05100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05100.jpg)  
With practice, you'll be able to straighten your leg completely in the
Toe-Finger Pose.  
</span>

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Repeat this posture three times in one minute, lifting each leg
alternately. For best effects, do it in the morning. To establish
harmony between motion and breathing: (1) Raise leg forward and exhale
for two seconds; (2) maintain pose as shown in illustration and exhale
for four seconds; (3) return to starting position and inhale for two
seconds.

A variation of this pose is to raise your leg sideways instead of
forward. Other movements remain unchanged. If you are unaccustomed to
exercise, start by lifting your leg without attempting to touch or hold
your toes.

<span id="img_05200"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![Hastapadangustasana, or Toe-Finger Pose](tn/05200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05200.jpg)  
Hastapadangustasana, or Toe-Finger Pose  
</span>

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

You will probably find that in the early stages your fingers cannot be
made to touch your toes, or that your knee tends to bend. Try to rectify
these errors each time you practice the posture. If, however, you feel
muscular strain, place your hands on your hips and practice the leg
movements with the appropriate breathing. An analysis of the benefits of
this pose shows that the flexion of the hip, followed by exhalation,
increases abdominal compression. In addition, slow, steady, alternate
movements provide a mild internal massage to the viscera by utilizing
the muscles and tendons of the normally inactive lower abdomen and hips.

#### Hastapadasana, or Hand-Leg Pose

Consistent practice of the Toe-Finger Pose should improve the flexion of
your hips. As this proceeds, you should also try to increase the
intra-abdominal pressure through an exercise which induces maximum
stretch of the posterior muscles. This may be achieved by utilizing the
Yoga Hand-Leg Pose, or Hastapadasana, and its variations.

Start this pose with the now-familiar Triangle Pose, standing erect with
your feet together. Next bend forward at a right angle, while reaching
your toes. Try to keep your feet together and your knees straight. To
obtain the hygienic benefits of this posture, it is essential to keep
your legs straight.

With your legs straight, exhale and bend forward from the waist slowly.
The aim is to be able to hold your ankles with your hands, keeping your
head pointed downward. Maintain this position for a few seconds, while
suspending your breath. Then return to the starting position, while
exhaling. (1) Bend forward, reaching the toes, and exhale for

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="img_05400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Hastapadasana, or
Hand-Leg Pose](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg)  
Hastapadasana, or Hand-Leg Pose  
</span>

two seconds; (2) maintain pose for four seconds, while suspending your
breath; (3) return to starting position and inhale for two seconds.
Repeat the exercise with a two-second pause after each movement.
Complete four rounds in one minute.

Grasping your ankles will be difficult in the beginning, but with
regular practice it will become easier. When you can comfortably hold
your ankles tightly, try to fold your arms near the elbows. Then draw
your head closer to your knees. This practice should be continued for
several weeks. Finally, try to rest your forehead between your thighs
just above your knees. Try this pose with slow, normal breathing at
first, especially if you plan to hold it for more than four

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

seconds. As a precaution, do not breathe in deeply during this pose, for
there is a possibility that this could injure the delicate internal
organs which are now in a condition of intra-abdominal pressure.

This is probably the first really difficult posture that you have
attempted. For the best results, allow a fairly long time for the
completion of the posture. Keep in mind that the goal is not to become
proficient at holding the pose, but to acquire the benefits of regular
practice. Undue effort that causes muscular strain or a feeling of
personal inadequacy will be harmful. A posture which cannot be achieved
in the morning may often be attained in the evening, since the day-long
use of the body may make the limbs and trunk more supple. Women should
not practice this posture or any other which involves intra-abdominal
pressure during the first three days of menstruation or during
pregnancy.

#### Purpose of These Poses

The benefits derived from the poses just discussed result from their
twofold action. They effectively stretch the posterior muscles which
support the abdomen, hips and waist, thus increasing the tone of the
abdominal and pelvic organs. They also help to loosen and reduce
unhealthy and unnecessary fatty tissue. Above all, they effectively
reduce constipation and induce natural, regular elimination. Much
tenseness and stress is not due to the pressures of outside influences
or nerves, but results from bodily discomfort because natural functions
are hampered. The noxious effect of autointoxication is caused by a lack
of proper tonicity. This is what the Yoga postures and exercises can
overcome if followed faithfully—the achievement of "mens sana in corpore
sano"—a sound mind in a sound body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Specific Postures For Relaxation](rwy08)
