[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy11)  [Next](rwy13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### 11. SEXUAL PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES IN YOGA

In the Vedic and Upanishad periods of Yoga, total abstinence from sexual
intercourse (*brahmacarya*), whether by action, mind or word was
considered to be one of the highest virtues leading to Yoga. Later
exponents of Yoga, however, interpreted the injunction toward a
continent life to mean that one should maintain a dispassionate attitude
toward sexual matters, and that there should be purity in sex. Some of
the earlier Yogins stated that Yoga is mainly for the householder. The
sage Swatmarama said that anyone can hope to achieve complete success in
Yoga, even while living a wayward life, if he or she followed Yoga
practice of sex hygiene. This is a practice for the cleanliness and
preservation of the generative organs and the preservation of virility.
Some of the older manuscripts state that a man may be considered
celibate in the Yoga sense if he observes hygienic sex relations within
the marriage bonds. In one of the tracts, it is stated that even a
prostitute can attain the highest object of life by following Yoga.

One of the problems that may be encountered in the practice of Yoga is
that it may build up in the adherent such powerful sexual strength that
it will be necessary to

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

sublimate this drive. The manuals of Hatha Yoga suggest: (1) Observance
of certain practices which influence the activity of the urogenital
organs; (2) cool baths; (3) irrigation of the genital passages; and (4)
active continence.

#### The Useful Processes

The *bandhas* and *mudras* discussed earlier are said to have a powerful
effect on sexual potency. One *asana* of particular value in this
respect is called *Asvinimudra*. In this, an attempt is made to simulate
the action of a mare after she has excreted the bowel contents. This
*asana*, or *mudra*, is best performed in a squatting position, or in
any convenient posture which will allow free movements of the anal
muscles. While practicing this, with every exhalation of the breath,
contract the anus, concentrating on the anal sphincters and the broad
ligaments of the perineum (which support the muscular fibers of the
prostate and the erector muscles of the penis in the male and the
muscles of the urogenital region in the female). After a deep and
prolonged contraction, inhale slowly and let these muscles relax
completely.

When this is practiced, it increases blood circulation, and through its
wavelike contraction and expansion and full relaxation, provides an
internal massage to the deeper sex organs. It also gives tone to the
reproductive organs, since it affects the finer sympathetic nerve
endings. It is claimed that even sexual debility may be overcome through
lengthy and regular practice of this exercise. It is suggested that this
exercise be practiced only in the evening before retiring, and for about
two minutes at a time.

A problem affecting many men is frequent nocturnal discharges. To
alleviate this, a pose known as Gorakasana

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

has been found highly effective. Join the soles of the feet together in
front of the genitals with the toes pointing outward. Now, move the body
by lifting it slightly from the ground, placing your weight on the two
extended hands. Place your heels under the anus. Let the feet cover the
seam of the perineum breadthwise, and hide your legs from the knees down
with your thighs. Keep your hands pressed on your knees to cause a
steady pull backward. Vary the strength by pressure on your knees. This
posture works on the connective muscles of the groin and thigh, and
indirectly stretches both the superficial and deeper urogenital muscles.
It aids elasticity of the muscle fibers in this area, and
correspondingly increases the circulation of blood.

#### Harmful Sexual Habits

Incomplete sexual acts, such as unsatisfied intercourse, self-abuse and
often-repeated sexual excitements without orgasm, cause congestion of
the sexual organs because of sustained dilation of the numerous
capillaries in this region. There may also be harmful psychological
effects. Under these abnormal conditions, the congested organs grow
weaker for want of proper blood circulation. Their functions ultimately
become so impaired as to set in strong reactions which, on the slightest
sexual irritation or suggestive situation, cause premature emissions. In
consequence, the muscular response also becomes poor, with feeble
erections in the male, and inactivity of the clitoris and failure of the
erectile tissues in the vaginal orifice to produce the necessary
gripping in the female.

Other troublesome conditions in this area arise from inflammation of the
inner sex organs. This congestion or inflammation

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

is accompanied by high tension, restricted motion, impaired circulation
of blood and functional alterations which are more severe in women than
in men. These situations are generally relieved by practice of
*Asvinimudra*, which provides for drainage of the blood and more
equalized circulation. This posture may be accompanied by a period of
resting after the exercise, with the genital regions higher than the
heart which, in turn, is followed by stretching exercises.

#### Use of Cool Bath

In advice to both celibates and married men, the tracts recommend the
use of a cool bath (about 65° F.) before retiring as a means of avoiding
nocturnal emissions. Older persons and those with lowered vitality might
find it more effective to use a slightly colder hip bath (about 55° F.),
while keeping the feet in a warm foot bath (about 100° F.). This will
help maintain a favorable circulation.

The irrigation of the sexual passages, described in detail in the Yoga
tracts, might be difficult and perhaps even dangerous for the novice. It
is suggested that a nurse or doctor be consulted for instruction in
hygiene of the urogenital region.

#### Active Continence

On the matter of continence, there is considerable difference of opinion
even among the Yogic authorities. Some maintain that by disuse of the
sex organs, the sex-endocrine glands become functionally impaired. On
the other hand, differing authorities hold that passive continence is
compatible with health and, further, that the sex glands are like

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

tear glands and sweat glands and do not atrophy or become impaired with
disuse.

The traditional Yoga belief is that preservation of the internal sex
fluids within the body has the greatest physiological value. It is also
held that preservation of the seminal fluid contributes toward building
a strong physical and mental constitution through biochemical economy,
as the emissions contain large percentages of iron, phosphorus and
calcium. Yogins also stated that, under the stimulus of excitement, a
much larger quantity of the fluid is produced and secreted and, when
reabsorbed, these extra fluids promote corresponding activity of the
lymphatics and become transformed into life-energy.

The conditions necessary to fill the objective of conserving life-energy
through the preservation and absorption of sexual fluids into the system
are the normal physiological contact of the sexes, and sufficient
nutrition to allow the sex glands to secrete without loss. (A heavy milk
diet is recommended for this purpose.) In short, it is better to engage
in sexual activities when necessary. This will cause less strain and
will expend less energy than will be expended through the effects of
self-denial and repressions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. How to Achieve Painless Childbirth Through Yoga](rwy13.md)
