[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy09)  [Next](rwy11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### 9. SANKYA YOGA—YOGA OF THE MIND

One of the lesser known schools of Yoga which seems to be particularly
well suited to our search for relaxation of mind is the Sankya Yoga,
based on the *sutras*, or writings, of the sage Kapila. Hindus believe
this Yoga philosopher was none other than the god Vishnu, the son of
Brahman, in one of his earthly reincarnations. On the surface, the
*sutras* seem to be merely a series of philosophical propositions, yet
students of this school affirm that a study of them will lead to
*samadhi* and mental deliverance.

The Sankya philosophy states that the ills of life may be palliated by
means discovered from reason, and that final deliverance—the ultimate of
what we might call relaxation and harmony with the environment—can be
achieved by "a method consisting in a discriminative knowledge of
perceptible principles, and the imperceptible one and the thinking
soul."

The commentaries state: "The accurate discrimination of those principles
into which all that exists is distributed by the Sankya philosophy;
*vyakta*, that which is perceived,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

sensible, discrete; *avyakta*, that which is unperceived, indiscrete,
and *jna*, that which knows or discriminates. The first is a matter of
its perceptible modifications; the second is crude, unmodified matter,
and the third is soul. The object of the Sankya Yoga is to define and
explain these three things, the correct knowledge of which is in itself
release from worldly bondage and exemption from exposure to human ills,
by the final separation of soul and body."

There is nothing in this school of Yoga of any postures, movements,
breath control or any effort of the mind save what is implied in any
philosophical study. In other Yogas, knowledge that sets the soul free
comes at the end of long, specific courses of practice and in the form
of intuition or spiritual impression similar to that in which a saint
learns the truth after he has lost his reason in an ecstatic trance.
Kapila's teaching is addressed to the waking reason alone.

#### The 16 Sutras of Kapila

The practice of Kapila, which dates back to the seventh century of the
Christian era, consists first of meditation on the following *sutras*.
Each holds an inner meaning that responds to the individual mind which
studies them: (1) An expression of Yoga is to be made; (2) Yoga is the
suppression of the transformation of the thinking principle; (3) the
seer abides in himself; (4) otherwise he becomes assimilated with
transformations; (5) the transformations are fivefold, and either
painful or not painful; (6) they are known as right knowledge, wrong
knowledge, fancy, sleep and memory; (7) right knowledge is direct
cognition, or interference or testimony; (8) wrong knowledge is false
conception of a thing whose real form does not answer to it in reality;
(9) fancy is

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the notion called into being having nothing to answer to it in reality;
(10) that transformation which has nothingness for its basis is sleep;
(11) memory is not allowing that which is known to escape; (12)
suppression of memory is secured by application and non-attachment; (13)
application is the effort toward the state (*stilhi*) in which the mind
is at a standstill; (14) this becomes a position of firmness, being
practiced for a long time without intermission and with perfect
devotion; (15) the consciousness of having mastered every desire, so
that one does not thirst for objects perceptible or scriptural, is
non-attachment; (16) that is highest, wherein from being the *purusa*
(soul), there is entire cessation of any desire for the *gunas* (things
of sense).

#### The Practice

The practice recommended by Pantajali, one of the earlier followers of
this school of Yoga, consists of meditation on the *sutras*, the
exercise of faith, energy, memory and discriminative judgment, ardent
desire to attain to *samadhi*, or a trance, constant repetition and
intense meditation on the message of Kapila. There should also be
intense concentration on a single thing, sympathy with happiness,
compassion for misery, complacency toward virtue and indifference to
evil. Other means of achieving this state are breathing exercises
(Pranayama), and concentration on sensuous enjoyment by those who cannot
steady their minds but through a form of sensual pleasure. This is done,
according to the text, "by fixing the attention on one of the five
senses of smell, taste, color, touch and sound. These are respectively
reproduced by concentrating on the tip of the nose, the tip of the
tongue, the forepart of the palate, the middle of the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

tongue, and the root of the tongue. The sensation in each case is not
merely a flash of pleasurable feeling, but a kind of complete absorption
in the particular enjoyment meditated upon."

There is also concentration on the *joytis* (light). To help
concentration you must imagine that in the heart there is a lotus-like
form with eight petals which has its face turned downward. You must
believe that this can be raised by exhaling the breath, then meditate
upon this thought, while pronouncing the mystic sounds A.U.M. The effect
of this is that a calm light is seen "like that of the moon or sun,
resembling a calm ocean of milk." Concentration may also be on the
condition of deep sleep, or finally, according to one's own
predilection—that is to say, on any chosen thing.

So much for the objects of concentration. The states induced by it and
other results will now be considered. The test of proper concentration
is acquired in "a mastery extending from the finest atom to infinity."
The two kinds of concentration are the argumentative, or mixed, and the
non-argumentative, or pure. The latter results in bliss, intuition and
revelation.

#### Obstructions

While it may seem that the method of Yoga under discussion is an easy
path to fulfillment and relaxation in its pure sense, it may require
time to achieve results. The soul or mind must be purged of distractions
or obstructions. These include ignorance, the sense of being, desire,
aversion, attachment. Each of these may have to be overcome by sincere
and sometimes lengthy meditation and self-examination.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

#### Accessories

Accessories along this path are forbearance, observance, posture,
regulation of breath, abstraction, contemplation, absorption and trance.
Each of these terms has a specific meaning in Yoga that we will now
consider.

*Forbearance* means abstinence from killing, falsehood, theft,
incontinence and greediness. *Observance* means purity, contentment,
mortification, study and resignation to the authority of a higher
divinity. *Posture* is that which is easy and steady. *Regulation of the
breath* is control of the vital body forces. *Abstraction* means drawing
away the senses from their objects in the same way that thoughts are
drawn away, abstracted from theirs, whence "follows the greatest mastery
over the senses." *Contemplation* means fixing the mind on something.
*Absorption* means so fixing the mind that it becomes one with the
object of contemplation. *Trance* is when this fixing of the mind is
carried so far that the thinker, the thinking and the thing thought of
are one.

These last three together constitute *samyama*, which is the way to
several occult powers and which conducts the Yogi to conscious
*samadhi*. The other five accessories are called external means, and are
useful only in obviating distractions. As do other schools of Yoga,
Kapila adherents claim a list of *siddhis*, or miraculous powers,
through the attainment of *samyama*. They are:

\(1\) Knowing the past and the future; (2) recollecting previous
incarnations; (3) discerning the state of a person's mind by outward
signs like complexion, tone of voice, etc.; (4) reading the thoughts of
others; (5) the power to become invisible; (6) knowing the time of one's
death by meditating on his Karma or by portents such as specters,
dreams, etc.;

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (7) attracting the
good will of others; (8) acquiring the power of an animal, as the
strength of an elephant, by meditating on it; (9) knowing the "subtle,
the remote and the obscure" by contemplating the inner light, such as
Yogis are able to evoke by performing *rechaka*, or exhalation.

Also, (10) the knowledge of space by contemplating the sun; (11)
knowledge of the starry regions by contemplating the moon; (12)
knowledge of the motion of the stars by contemplating the pole-star;
(13) knowledge of the internal arrangement of the body by contemplating
the important nerve centers near the navel. (The nerve centers are
termed *circles*, *padmas*, *chakras*. Contemplation on these centers is
an important part of Yoga practice.); (14) destroying hunger and thirst
by contemplating the pit of the throat; (15) making the body fixed and
immovable by contemplating the *karma-nadi*, a nerve in which the vital
air is supposed to reside; (16) the power of seeing the things called
*siddhas*, or *mahatmas*, by contemplating the light in the head. (This
is said to appear somewhere near the pineal gland or coronal artery, or
over the medulla oblongata, and can be seen by concentrating on the
space between the eyebrows.); (17) the power to accomplish all of the
above by *pratibha*, which is that degree of intellect which develops
itself without any special cause, generally termed "intuition," and can
be developed by simply contemplating the intellect; (18) knowledge of
the mind of another or of one's own by contemplating the nerve center of
the heart; (19) knowledge of one's soul as distinct from his mind, by
contemplating himself.

There is another group of *siddhis* which verge on the preternatural and
may be meant literally or figuratively, as they appear in the original
manuscripts of the school of Yoga. These are: (1) Entrance into and
possession of another body,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

whether living or dead, by discovering through contemplation on the
nerves the particular one by which mind can pass in and out; (2)
levitation of the body and the ability to die at will; (3) effulgence of
the body, halos about the head; also clairaudience or the power to hear
distant sounds by concentrating on *akasa*, the ether conveying sound;
(4) ability to pass bodily through space by concentration on the
relation between the body and *akasa*; (5) the condition known as
*mahavideha*, in which knowledge of every description is within easy
reach of the ascetic and obtainable without effort; (6) mastery over the
elements by concentrating on their natures respectively; (7) the
attainments of *anima* and the other eight *siddhis*, as also perfection
of the body and the corresponding non-obstruction of its functions; (8)
beauty, gracefulness and strength, adamantine hardness of body; (9)
mastery over the organs of sense by concentration on their natures; (10)
as a result of this mastery, fleetness of body equal to that of mind,
sensation independent of the body or the organs of sense and the ability
to command anything or create anything at will; (11) mastery over all
things and knowledge of all, by contemplating the distinctive relation
of soul and mind; (12) *Kaivalya*, the highest end, state of oneness, of
being one and alone, obtained by renouncing attachment to even these ten
last-named high occult powers.

It can be seen that the intense thought required to produce such a
system as that of Kapila amounts to mental concentration sufficient to
induce a state of mind that results in ecstasy and lets in supernal
light. Intense and persistent devotion as well as hard thinking is
required for an understanding of this system. The truth or falsity of
the preceding propositions have nothing to do with the ultimate results.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The formulation
described here contains enough concentrated work to carry the adherent
to the desired end, though the student may lag behind.

The disposition that was shown by Kapila to rely on intellectual
conviction—a reliance condemned by the magicians of old—is manifested at
present by many schools of so-called magical healers, and on a higher
level, perhaps, by lay analysts and psychiatrists, who claim to cure by
simply telling the patient only the truth.

Neither truth nor untruth can be shown to have magical power, but
concentration on untruth or truth, long continued, will still the mind
and thereby permit nature to do its work. The principle of Kapila was to
set up reason against revelation. When, by force of concentration on the
construction of his system, he had attained to *samadhi* in its ultimate
stage, such impressions confirmed him in his previous conclusions. They
revealed to him that release obtained by his methods was complete and
final. Naturally, he must have felt that he had both reason and
revelation on his side. However, reason is no more infallible than its
mystical offspring, revelation. The modern Western adherent will be
wiser and profit most from Yoga as he practices more and theorizes less.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Yoga Principles of Diet](rwy11)
