[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rwy12)  [Next](rwy14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/054808047X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Relax With Yoga*, by Arthur Liebers, \[1960\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

#### 12. HOW TO ACHIEVE PAINLESS CHILDBIRTH THROUGH YOGA

To achieve painless, or "normal," childbirth, Yoga offers exercises and
postures which will foster healthful development of secreting organs,
especially those located within the waist and pelvic zones, and of the
muscular and nervous systems.

The Western fashion world demands that women have thin waists. Actually,
a woman requires a larger waist because her liver, stomach, spleen,
kidneys, pancreas and colon are in the waist zone, and are
proportionately larger than these organs in the male. This is part of
nature's provision for motherhood. The fashionable small waist
necessarily is accompanied by displaced stomach and bowels and perhaps
by a dislocated liver and a "floating" kidney.

The health of the woman's internal organs is largely dependent on proper
nutrition and drainage which eliminates all physiological impurities
from the body. Women's pelvic organs are often congested. In the case of
abdominal displacement, the pressure of the displaced organs inhibits
normal, free flow of blood which, in turn, affects the health of

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

the abdominal viscera and the sex organs. Woman is more prone to this
combination of unhealthy complications, as her sex organs are within the
same cavity as the visceral organs.

Constipation is the first evidence of the lack of tonicity of this part
of the body. Alleviation, according to Yoga, can come only from full
stretching of the anterior and deep muscles. The woman who wants easier
childbirth through Yoga, should keep in mind that these exercises are
not the muscle-building type, but specific non-violent and non-fatiguing
exercises.

#### Matsyasana, or Fish Pose

A pose especially developed to contribute to the health of the pelvic
and sex organs, this exercise provides both gentle exercise and a deep
internal massage. Sit with your legs fully stretched out and adjust the
footlock, as directed for the Semi-Lotus Pose, by folding the legs so
that the feet are against the opposite groins, with the soles turned
upward. While inhaling, slowly and carefully fall back, using your arms,
if necessary, to guide your fall. Next, lay supine, with your legs
folded, keeping the footlock in place. For comfort in the supine
position, you may fold your arms under your head as a cushion. To
complete this *asana*, return to the starting position while exhaling.
Try to repeat this exercise about five times a minute. At first work at
this for about one minute. Later you can extend the time to three
minutes. The exercise can be used at all times. However, it should be
discontinued during advanced pregnancy.

The ethical and the Yogic points of view are that in all that concerns
sex physiologically, the consummation of the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

ideal for woman is motherhood. It has been found in India that those
women who have regularly followed Yoga exercises normally enjoy
pregnancies which are free of pathological or psychological problems.
Childbirth to them is devoid of any gruesome experience. The Yoga diet
is the most suitable during pregnancy and the Yoga processes of
cleansing and elimination, which have been dealt with in other parts of
this book, supply the best antitoxic measures. However, the principles
of Yoga are in no way an antithesis to modern medicine. No woman should
feel that the practice of Yoga is a substitute for prenatal and
postnatal care.

Painless childbirth does not mean complete absence of pain. The term, as
used medically, means an easy delivery which is quite possible for the
great majority of mothers. However, it may be affected by such factors
as the pelvic construction, the form of presentation, etc. Perhaps the
greatest factor in easy childbirth is the tone and power of contraction
of the uterine muscles and the abdominal muscles. The groundwork for
painless parturition must be laid early in life, and the young girl who
begins Yogic exercises soon after puberty will be certain to achieve
proper development of both the external and deeper muscles. The mature
woman may have to work more intensively to correct her body tone. Full
results may depend on the degree to which the body has been neglected
and the care with which the postures are carried out regularly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Glossary of Yogic Terms](rwy14)
