<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cha03)  [Next](cha05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Works of Stephen Charnock*, \[1628-1680\] at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A Discourse of the Cleansing Virtue of Christ's Blood

###### by

#### Stephen Charnock

*And the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.* 1
John 1. 7.

The apostle, in the beginning of the chapter, puts the saints to whom he
writes in mind of the Gospel he had writ, wherein he had declared to
them that Word of life which had been with the Father, and was
manifested to the world, and which he now declares again, that they
might have a fellowship with the apostles in the truth, and not with the
false teachers in their errors; and for an incentive, assures them that
the fellowship of those that kept the truth as it is in Jesus was with
the Father and with the Son: ver. 3, 1 That which we have seen and heard
declare we unto you, that you also may have fellowship with us; and
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son, Jesus Christ:
with the Father, as the source and spring of eternal life and happiness;
with the Son, as mediator, who has opened the way to us, removed the
bars, and given us an access to and a communion with the Father. For by
sin we were alienated from God, our sin had caused justice to lock up
the gates of paradise, and forbid such guilty and polluted offenders to
approach to the pure majesty of God. The apostle, to encourage them to
cleave to the gospel, proposes to them a fellowship with God by the
means of Jesus Christ, his Son and our Mediator, as the chief happiness
and felicity of man, and that which can only afford them a full and
complete joy. And afterwards, ver. 5, 1 'This then is the message which
we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in
him there is no darkness at all;' he prescribes to them the means
whereby they may keep up a communion with God, which he infers from the
transcendent excellency of the divine nature, who is light: light, in
regard of the clearness of his knowledge; light, in regard of his
unstained purity, not tainted with the least spot or dust of evil, not
having anything unworthy in his nature, nor doing anything unbecoming in
his actions. If, therefore, our conversations be in darkness., if we
wallow in the mire of any untamed, unmortified lust, what soever our
evangelical professions may be, or howsoever we may fancy ourselves
entered into a fellowship with the Father by the means of the mediator,
it is but a lying imagination; for how can there be a communion between
two natures so different, between light and darkness, purity and
impurity, heaven and hell, God and the devil? But if our conversation be
agreeable to gospel precepts, we have then a fellowship with him: ver.
7, 'if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship
one with another,' i.e. God has a fellowship with us in affection and
delight, and we have a fellowship with God in salvation and happiness;
God gives himself to us, and we give ourselves to God. He bestows grace
and pardon on us, and we resign up our hearts and affections to him. And
this is a certain proof that we are interested in the expiatory virtue
of the blood of Christ. Or else those latter words may be a prevention
of an objection which might result from the apprehension of the relies
of corruption in the best man in this life. Since God is infinitely pure
light, without darkness, and we have so much darkness mixed with our
best light, we must for ever despair of having any fellowship with God;
the infinite distance, by reason of our indwelling corruption, will put
us out of all hopes of ever attaining such a sovereign felicity. But
this reply is prevented by this clause of the apostle: 'And the blood of
Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.' Let not the sense of
your daily infirmities animate any desponding fears. If you square your
hearts and lives in all sincerity according to the gospel rule, there is
a provision made for your security in the blood of Christ. God will wipe
off the guilt of your defects by the virtue of that precious blood which
has been shed for your reparation. The apostle here supposes remainders
of sin in those that have the privilege of walking with God, and
interest in the blessings of the covenant.

*The blood of Jesus Christ.* By this is meant the last act in the
tragedy of his life, his blood being the ransom of our souls, the price
of our redemption, and the expiation of our sin. The shedding his blood
was the highest and most excellent part of his obedience, Philip. ii. 8,
His whole life was a continual suffering, but his death was the top and
complement of his obedience, for in that he manifested the greatest love
to God and the highest charity to man. The expiatory sacrifices under
the law were always bloody, death was to be endured for sin, and blood
was the life of the creature; the blood or death of Christ is the cause
of our justification.

*His Son*. His sonship makes his blood valuable. It is blood, and so
agreeable to the law in the penalty; it is the blood of the Son of God,
and therefore acceptable to the lawgiver in its value. Though it was the
blood of the humanity, yet the merit of it was derived from the
divinity. It is not his blood as he was the son of the virgin, but his
blood as he was the Son of God, which had this sovereign virtue. It is
no wonder, therefore, that it should have such a mighty efficacy to
cleanse the believers in it, in all ages of the world, from such vast
heaps of guilt, since it is the blood of Christ, who was God; and
valuable, not so much for the greatness of the punishment whereby it was
shed, as the dignity of the person from whom it flowed. One Son of God
weighs more than millions of worlds of angels.

*Cleanseth*. Cleansing and purging are terms used in Scripture for
justifying as well as sanctifying. The apostle interprets washing of
both those acts: 1 Cor. vi. 11, 'But you are washed, but you are
sanctified, but you are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God.' The latter words are exegetical of the former;
they both are the fruits of the merit of the blood of Christ. The one is
the act of the Father as a judge appeased by that blood, the other the
act of the Spirit as a sanctifier purchased by that blood. And so the
'washing of us in the blood of Christ,' spoken of Rev. i. 5, is to be
understood of justification. Sanctification is expressed, ver. 6, by
'making us kings and priests to God,' giving us royal and holy natures,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God; and several times the word
"chafar", which signifies to expiate, appease, is translated to
sanctify, Exod. xxix. 33, 36, and to cleanse, ver. 37; and a word that
signifies cleansing is sometimes put for justifying, as in the third
commandment, Exod. xx. 7, 'The Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain,' "lo yenakeh", will not cleanse or purge them.
But it must be understood of cleansing from guilt, because it refers to
the penalty of the law. It is here used in this sense; it is spoken to
them that are sanctified and have a fellowship with God, that if they
walk in the light, God will impute to them the blood of his Son for
their absolution from the guilt of all their infirmities.

The blood of Christ cleanseth.

1\. It has a virtue to cleanse. It does not actually cleanse all, but
only those that believe. Nor does it cleanse them from new sins, but
upon renewed acts of faith. There is a sufficiency in it to cleanse all,
and there is an efficacy in it to cleanse those that have recourse to
it. As when we say a medicine purges such a humour, we understand it of
the virtue and quality of the medicine, not that it purges unless it be
taken in, or otherwise applied to the distempered person.

2\. The blood of Christ *cleanseth,* not *has cleansed,* or *shall
cleanse.* This notes a continued act. There is a perpetual pleading of
it for us, a continual flowing of it to us. It is a fountain set open
for sin, Zech. xiii. 1. There is a constant streaming of virtue from
this blood, as there is of corruption from our nature. It was shed but
once, it is applied often, and the virtue of it is as durable as the
person whose blood it is.

3\. The blood of Christ cleanseth. The apostle joins nothing with this
blood. It has the sole and the sovereign virtue. There is no need of
tainted merits, unbloody sacrifices, and terrifying purgatories. The
whole of cleansing is ascribed to this blood, not anything to our own
righteousness or works. It admits no partner with it, not the blood of
martyrs nor the intercessions of saints.

4\. The blood of Christ cleanseth us from *all sin.* It is an universal
remedy. Whatsoever has the nature of sin, sins against the law and sins
against the gospel. It absolves from the guilt of sin, and shelters from
the wrath of God. The distinction of venial and mortal sins has no
footing here; no sin but is mortal without it, no sin so venial but
needs it. This blood purges not some sort of sins, and leaves the rest
to be expiated by a purgatory fire. This expression of the apostle, of
*all sin,* is water enough to quench all the flames of purgatory that
Rome has kindled; what sins are not expiated by it are left not to a
temporary, but an eternal death; not to a refining, but a consuming
fire. So that we see these words are an antidote against fears arising
by reason of our infirmities, a cordial against faintings, an
encouragement to a holy walk with God. It is a short but a full
panegyric of the virtue of the blood of Christ.

1\. In regard of the effect, *cleansing.*

2\. In regard of the cause of its efficacy. It is the blood of *Jesus,*
a saviour; the blood of Christ, one appointed, anointed by God to be a
*Jesus;* the blood of the *Son of God,* of one in a special relation to
the Father, as his only begotten, beloved Son.

3\. In regard of the extensiveness of it, *all sin.* No guilt so high
but it can master, no stain so deep but it can purge; being the blood of
the Son of God, and therefore of infinite virtue, it has as much force
to demolish mountains of guilt as level mole-hills of iniquity.

The words are a plain doctrine in themselves:

*Doct*. The blood of Christ has a perpetual virtue, and does actually
and perfectly cleanse believers from all guilt. This blood is the
expiation of our sin and the unlocking our chains, the price of our
liberty and of the purity of our souls. The redemption we have through
it is expressly called the forgiveness of sin, Eph. i. 7, 'In whom we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sin,' - by a
*metonymy* of the effect for the cause; remission was an act of
redemption. When the apostle, Heb. x. 14, tells, 'That by one offering
he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified,' he places this
perfection in the remission of sin, ver. 17, 18. He did in the offering
himself so transact our affairs, and settle our concerns with God, that
there was no need of any other offerings to eke it out or patch it up.
As the blood of the typical sacrifices purified from ceremonial, so the
blood of the anti-typical offering purifies from moral uncleanness. The
Scripture places remission wholly in this blood of the Redeemer. When
Christ makes his will and institutes his supper, he commends this as our
righteousness: Mat. xxvi. 28, 'This is my blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for many for the remission of sins,' according to the
title and end given it in the prophet, Zech. ix. 11. 'By this blood of
the covenant the prisoners are delivered from the pit of corruption,
wherein there was no water; no water to quench our thirst, no water to
cleanse our souls, but mud and mire to defile them. This was the design
of his death, as himself speaks: Luke xxiv. 46, 47, 'That repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name amongst all nations.'
And Peter, in his discourse at Cornelius his house, comprises in this
the intent of the whole Scripture: 'To him give all the prophets
witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins,' Acts x. 43. As this was the justifying blood in the
time of the prophets, so it will be the justifying blood to the end of
the world. By this blood only the robes of any are made white, Rev. vii.
14; by this blood the accuser of the brethren is overcome and cast in
his suit, Rev. xii. 10, 11. The maintaining of justification by this
blood seems to be the great contest between the true church and the
anti-Christian state.

(1.) The blood of Christ is to be considered morally in this act. The
natural end of blood in the veins is a reparation of the substance of
the body by a conversion of the blood into it. And the proper use of
blood is not to cleanse, for it defiles and bespots anything whereon it
is dropped; but morally considered, as the shedding of b1ood implies
loss of life and punishment for a crime, so blood is an expiation of the
crime, and a satisfaction to the law for the offence committed against
it. As the shedding innocent blood does morally pollute a land, so the
shedding the blood of the malefactor and murderer does morally cleanse a
land: Numb. xxxv. 33, 'Blood defiles the land, and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood that is shed therein but by the blood of him that
shed it'. Had not this blood of Christ been shed, our sins had not been
pardoned, our souls had not been secured, our chains had continued, and
our terrors had been increased; the strokes of justice bad been felt,
and the face of mercy had been veiled; we had wholly been the vassals of
the one, and foreigners to the other.

(2.) The cleansing is to be doubly considered. There is a cleansing from
guilt, and a cleansing from filth, both are the fruits of this blood:
the guilt is removed by remission, the filth by purification. Christ
does both: he cleanses us from our guilt as he is our righteousness,
from our spot as he is our sanctification; for he is both to us, 1 Cor.
i. 80, the one upon the account of his merit, the other by his efficacy,
which he exerts by his Spirit. The proper intendment of the blood of
Christ was to take off the curse of the law, and free us from our guilt;
the washing off our stains is the proper work of the Spirit, upon that
account signified to us by water in the prophets. The blood and water
flowing from the side of Christ upon the cross were distinct, John xix.
34, 35, as appears by the great seriousness wherewith John affirms the
relation: 'He that saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he
knows that he saith true.' These two liquors flowed from his side
distinctly, and do not mingle in their streams; and this seems to be so
disposed by the providence of God, to signify that from the death of
Christ there flow two sorts of benefits of a different nature, and which
ought to be differently considered; viz., sanctification, represented by
water destined to washing; and justification, which arises from
satisfaction, represented by the blood shed for remission of sin. These
both spring up from the death of Christ, yet they belong to two distinct
offices of Christ. He justifies us as a surety, a sacrifice by
suffering, as a priest by merit; but be sanctifies us as a king, by
sending his Spirit to work efficaciously in our hearts. When we consider
the blood of Christ, we consider Christ as a sacrifice; and sacrifices
were called purifications, kaqarmata, not in regard of washing away the
filth, but expiating the guilt of sin; yet indeed the justifying virtue
of this blood is never exerted without a sanctifying virtue accompanying
it. As blood and water flowed out of the side of Christ together, so
blood and water flow into the heart of a sinner together. The typical
blood of the covenant, when sprinkled by Moses upon he book and people,
was mixed with water, Heb. ix. 19, 20, to signify that holiness,
signified by water, accompanies the application of propitiation,
signified by blood. All the force of sin consisted in condemnation, to
which it had subjected men as it was a transgression of the law, and in
conjunction therewith it had defiled the soul as it was loathsome, and
filthy. Now Christ shed his blood to make an expiation of sin, and sent
his Spirit to make a destruction of sin. By virtue of his death there is
no condemnation for sin, Rom. viii. 1, 3; by virtue of the grace of his
Spirit there is no dominion of sin. Rom. vi. 4, 14.

(3.) This cleansing from guilt may be considered as meritorious or
applicative. As the blood of Christ was offered to God, this
purification was meritoriously wrought; as particularly pleaded for a
person, it is actually wrought; as sprinkled upon the conscience, it is
sensibly wrought. The first merits the removal of guilt, the second
solicits it, the third ensures it; the one was wrought upon the cross,
the other is acted upon his throne, and the third pronounced in the
conscience. The first is expressed, Rom. iii. 26, his blood rendered God
propitious; the second, Heb. ix. 12, as he is entered into the holy of
holies; the third, Heb. ix. 14, Christ justifies as a sacrifice in a way
of merit; and when this is pleaded, God justifies as a judge in a way of
authority. Christ laid the foundation of a discharge from all guilt upon
the cross, and procures an actual discharge upon the first look of a
sincere faith towards him; and when this blood is sprinkled upon the
conscience, it 'purgeth it from dead works,' Heb, ix. 14, from the guilt
of death we contracted by sinful works, and from the sentence of death
which the law pronounced by reason of those works, that thereby we may
have a liberty to appear before God, and be fit to serve him. The
sprinkling the tabernacle and the vessels of the sanctuary, and the
person officiating in it, was the applying of the propitiation made by
the sacrifice to those things for the special consecration of them unto
God. No blood was sprinkled but the blood of the victim, solemnly
offered unto God upon the altar, according to his own appointment; no
blood applied to the conscience can cleanse it but the blood of this
great sacrifice, which is peculiarly called 'the blood of sprinkling,'
as it is the blood of the covenant, Heb. xii. 24. The virtue of it
conveyed as sprinkled is from the propitiation it made as shed. A *not*
*guilty* is entered into the court of God when this blood is pleaded,
and a not guilty inscribed upon the roll of conscience when this blood
is sprinkled. It appeases God's justice and quenches wrath. As it is
pleaded before his tribunal, it silences the accusations of sin; and
quells tumults in a wrangling conscience, as it is sprinkled upon the
soul.

2\. The evidence of this truth well appears;-

(1.) From the credit it had for the expiation and cleansing of guilt,
before it was actually shed, and the reliance of believers in all ages
on it. The blood of Christ was applied from the foundation of the world,
though it was not shed till the fullness of time. They had the benefit
of the promise of redemption before the accomplishment of the sacrifice
for redemption. The cleansing we have now is upon the account of the
blood of Christ already shed; the cleansing they had then was upon the
account of the blood of Christ in time to be shed: the one respects it
as past, the other as future. We must distinguish the virtue from the
work of redemption. The work was appointed in a certain time, but the
virtue was not restrained to a certain time, but was communicated to
believers from the foundation of the world, as well as extended to the
last ages of the world.

Several considerations will clear this.

\[I.\] The Scripture speaks but of one person designed for this great
work. John Baptist speaks of 'the Lamb of God,' pointing to one lamb
appointed to 'take away the sins of the world,' John i. 29. The world is
to be understood cronkkwV, for all ages, all times of the world; as the
same is meant, I John ii. 2, 'He is a propitiation for our sins: and not
for ours only, but also for the sins, of the whole world;' and he, and
only he, is the propitiation, by once offering of himself. Not for the
sins of us only that live in the dregs of time, and the declining age of
the world, but of those that went before in all ages of the world, from
its youth till his appearance in the flesh and expiring upon the cross.
Christ is said to be the one mediator, in the same sense that God is
said to be the one God: 1 Tim. ii. 5, 'For there is one God, and one
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.' As there is but one
creator of man, so there is but one mediator for men. As God is the God
of all that died before Christ came, as well as of those that lived
after, so Christ is the mediator of all that died before his coming, as
well as of those that saw his day. They had Christ for their mediator,
or some other; some other they could not have, because there is but one.
They might as well have had another creator besides God, as another
mediator besides the man Christ Jesus. In regard of the antiquity of his
mediation from the foundation of the world, he is represented, when he
walks as mediator in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, with
'hair as white as wool,' a character of age, Rev. i. 14. As God is
described so in regard of his eternity, Dan. vii. 9. There is but one
God from eternity, but one mediator, whose mediation has the same date
as the foundation of the world, and runs parallel with it; but one
captain of salvation also for many sons, Heb. ii. 10, that were brought
to glory. All that were brought to glory were brought into that happy
state by this captain of salvation, as made perfect by sufferings; so
that either none were brought to glory before the sufferings of Christ,
which is not true, or they were brought to glory by virtue of the
sufferings of that captain of salvation. If that one captain were not a
perfect head of salvation but by shedding his blood, then those that
were under his conduct from the beginning of the world could not be
perfect, but upon the account of his passion. For they had no perfection
but in and by their head; the same way that he was justified for them,
they were justified by him.

\[2.\] This one mediator was set forth ever since the fall of man as the
foundation of pardon and recovery. The covenant of grace commencing from
the time of the fall of man, the virtue of this blood, which is the
blood of the covenant, bore the same date; and, indeed, the blood of the
Redeemer, as the way of procuring restoration, was signified in that
first promise, which was the first dawning of the covenant of grace
after that black night of obscurity the revolt of man had drawn upon the
world, Gen. iii. 15. The recovery of man from that gulf of misery the
head or subtle brains of the serpent had cast them into, is promised
there to be by a man (for that must be signified by the seed of the
woman), and some great and worthy person able for so great an
undertaking, and to be effected by suffering, intimated by bruising his
heel, which could not be without something of blood in the case. Satan
would not cease, but express his enmity against the dissolver of his
works, and the deliverer of his captives. It must also signify a
deliverance from that which he was reduced to by the subtilty of the
serpent, and that was sin and destruction. It could not be meant of a
freedom from a bodily death, because this promise being made before, the
pronouncing the sentence of a bodily death, which was not till ver. 19,
was a bar to any such thought, for it had been a mockery, a falsity in
God to promise Adam a redemption for that, and afterward overturn his
promise by threatening that which he had promised before to redeem him
from. This bruise, therefore, that the seed of the woman was to receive
from the devil, at what time soever it should be inflicted, was to
extend in the virtue of it to Adam, and his believing posterity that
should come upon and go off the stage of the world before the revolution
of that time wherein it was to be transacted; otherwise, the making of
this promise to him, which should not distil any gracious dews upon him,
had been to feed him with mere smoke, a thing unbecoming the Creator of
the world. Besides, it was declared in types and figures. As the
ceremonial uncleanness, which the legal sacrifices were appointed to
purge, was an image of the moral impurity which needed expiation, so the
blood of beasts, shed for the cleansing of it, was a shadow of that
blood which was designed in the fullness of time for the expiation of
the other. Nay, there were not only types of it, but plain prophecies
concerning it. The righteousness whereby all believers are justified is
witnessed in the whole current of Scripture, both by the law and the
prophets, to be without the works of the law: 'Even that righteousness
of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ,' Rom. iii. 21, 22. And
therefore when there was a conference between Moses and Elias on the one
part, and Christ on the other, the subject of it is not anything but
that of his decease, Luke ix. 81: the declaration of that being the
chief intent of the types of the law, instituted by the ministry of
Moses; and of the prophets, whereof Elias was the chief, though not in
the publishing of the mediator, yet in the peculiar mark of the favour
of God in his translation to heaven. But Isaiah is the plainest and most
illustrious in the proclamations of the coming, the design and methods
of the Redeemer. And particularly the pardon of sin by virtue of his
suffering is discovered: Isa. xliii. 24, 25, 'Thou hast made me to serve
with thy sins, then hast wearied me with thine iniquities.' Then it
follows, 'I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgression for my
own sake.' Christ is said to serve with their sins; and Isa. liii. is a
comment upon this, showing what kind of servitude it was that the
Redeemer endured, and what that weariness was which he sustained for our
iniquity, viz. that he was wounded, bruised, and offered up. The whole
scope of the chapter proves this, for it is spent in numbering up the
benefits of the Messiah, the calling of the Gentiles, and gathering a
church from all parts of the world, vers. 5, 6, &c., and vers. 19, 20;
and in the last part describes the chiefest benefit by the Messiah, viz.
propitiation and remission of sin; and to show that pardon was wholly
free, he removes all false causes of pardon, human merit, and legal
sacrifices: ver. 22, 23, 'Thou hast not called upon me, thou hast not
filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices;' and then publishes the merit
of the Messiah, serving with, or in their sins, upon which account out
of mere grace the sins of men are blotted out, ver. 24, 25; as much as
to say, Not thou, 0 Jacob, by thy duties and offerings hast merited the
blotting out of thy sins. That glory is only due to me, who served with
thy sins in dying and suffering, and paid the price of redemption, that
by this means, without thy merit, thy sins might be wiped out; and, ver.
27, 28, he declares the rejection of the Jewish church, the giving Jacob
to a curse and Israel to reproach, for their refusal of this way of
redemption.

\[8.\] Though these promises and prophecies of the expiation and
cleansing of sin were something obscure to them, and though they did not
exactly know the method how it would be accomplished, yet that sin
should be pardoned was fully revealed, and something of the method of it
might be known unto them.

*First*, That sin should be pardoned was fully revealed to them, and
their faith had something clear for their support. It was sufficient
that he had published a time wherein and a seed whereby Satan's head
should be bruised, and afterwards bad proclaimed his name in text
letters, to be 'a God pardoning iniquities, transgressions, and sins,'
Exod. xxxiv. 6. How could Jacob without the knowledge of this say at his
expiring hour that he had waited for God's salvation? Gen. xlix. 18; how
could David else so earnestly have begged for a purging hyssop? how
could he be confident that there was a grace to make him as white as the
unspotted snow, and his bloody soul as pure as unstained wool? Ps. li.
7; how could Manasseh have with so much confidence laid himself at the
feet of God in his prison, had he looked upon him only as a revenging
and not a pitying God? The promise of God's being their God was often
inculcated to them, assuring them thereby that the thing should be done,
that nothing of pardon and the fruit of it should be wanting to them,
though the manner was not declared in that promise; for the promise of
God's being their God included all spiritual blessings, particularly
this of cleansing from sin, without which he could not be their God in a
way of grace, but their judge in a way of wrath.

*Secondly,* They might know something of the method and manner of it.
The mercy of God was revealed, the pardon of sin assured, and sacrifices
instituted among the Jews to keep up their faith in the expectation of
this promised expiation; but the manner how, and the merit whereby, was
not so clearly drawn out to their view, which is fully opened to us in
the gospel, Eph. iii. 5. The types indeed were obscure; it is a hard
matter to understand them now since the revelation of the gospel, much
harder to spell them out by that moonlight before the sun was risen. Yet
the believers then could not be ignorant, but there was some excellent
thing wrapped up in them, that they were not appointed for any
excellency they had in themselves, or any power to propitiate God and
appease his anger, which God's disdainful speaking of them many times,
when they rested upon their external sacrifices, might inform them of.
They might collect from thence that they all had reference to some
richer blood, and were images of some nobler sacrifice, besides what the
foundation promise would mind them of, that some great person in our
nature was designed for the bruising the serpent's head, by suffering
the bruising of his heel by the force of the serpent. They could not
read that glorious and comfortable name of God, Exod. xxxiv. 6, but that
clause, ver. 7, that he would 'by no means clear the guilty,' (which
belongs to his name as well as the other of pardoning, and is uttered in
the same breath), might startle them, and would seem to be an exception
to dash out the comfort of all the foregoing titles. How they could
reconcile such distant terms of a God pardoning, and yet not clearing
the guilty, without a reflection upon some grand expiatory sacrifice,
which might render to justice what was due for their crimes, and draw
forth from mercy what was necessary for their misery, I understand not.
No doubt but some of them saw something of the Messiah's work wrapped up
in the typical sacrifices and ceremonies; for it is not likely that they
should all be wholly ignorant of the intendment of them. It is very
likely that Job, who was not a Jew, but an Edomite, and, as some think,
died that year the Israelites came out of Egypt, had the knowledge of
redemption by the Messiah, and why might not the Israelites also have
some knowledge of it as early? No question but they had; the place in
Job is remarkable: Job xix. 25, 'I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth.' Most, both of
Protestants and papists, understand it of Christ. The word is "go'el" a
Redeemer by right of affinity, as Christ was, being our brother by the
assumption of our nature; and he seems to speak not only of one that was
a redeemer in act, but a redeemer by office, and his appearance to be in
the latter day refers to his incarnation in the latter age of the world,
whom himself also should behold with his eyes at the resurrection. It is
some extraordinary and remarkable thing that he would have so noted, for
ver. 23, 24, he speaks: 'Oh that my words were now written! Oh that they
were printed in a book, that they were graven with an iron pen, and lead
in the rock for ever.' He would have it perpetually preserved and
marked; and the comfort he took in the consideration of this his
Redeemer to be incarnate so possesses him that it is observed that he
does not utter such heavy complaints to the end of the book as he had
done before. Christ was as much Job's Redeemer before his incarnation
and passion as ours since; yet as to the manner how he was to redeem,
the price he was to pay, there was a veil upon him, till it was cleared
up by the prophets, upon a nearer approach of the dawning of the
fullness of time; for though they had some revelation of the Messiah as
a great person, a great priest after the order of Melchisedec, a great
king, a special favourite of God, yet how was he to cleanse sin they
were ignorant of. As they did not know what new doctrines he would
reveal as a prophet, or what kind of kingdom he should have as a
monarch, so they did not fully know what kind of sacrifice he should
offer as a priest. They had some kind of knowledge, but not a distinct
one.

\[4.\] The ancient patriarchs had faith, and were actually pardoned.
They had the same spirit of faith as those had which lived in the times
of the gospel, 2 Cor. iv. 13. Noah is said to be 'a just man, and
perfect in his generations,' Gen. vi. 9, when he was young and when he
was old; but how? 'He found grace in the eyes of the Lord,' ver. 8. He
denied his own righteousness, and fled to the grace of God, which could
not be exhibited to him but in Christ; for no grace without contented
justice. The ground of all the comfort and joy Abraham had was the sight
of the appearance of this bleeding Redeemer, though afar off, John viii.
56. To what purpose was that sight, without a benefit redounding to him
from it? And that great patriarch was justified by faith in him; which
the apostle discourses of, Rom. iv.; and hereupon he was called 'the
father of the faithful,' as being the first express pattern of
justification set down in Scripture. For he was not the father of the
faithful by carnal procreation, but upon the account of religion; the
father, as he was the teacher by his example, the name of fathers being
given to instructors. If he were not therefore cleansed and counted
righteous upon the account of his blood, he could not be set forth as a
pattern of justification unto others, the pattern being written one way
and the copies another. It was the sole promise of the blessed seed
which was the cause of his justification, not sacrifices or
circumcision. The same righteousness is imputed to the father as is to
the children, and the same to the children that was to the father. He
and we have the same faith, the same object of faith; and by what we are
justified, by the same he was justified. It was the same blessedness he
and we have, the same gospel he and we beard, Gal. iii. 8. The grace
conferred upon David was from Christ: how could his sin else have been
remitted, for which no sacrifice was appointed under the law? Ps. li.
16, 17, 'Thou desiredst not sacrifice, else would I give it.' Supposing
the legal sacrifices were sufficient, without any relation to something
else to expiate the sin for which they were appointed, how should those
sins of presumption which David was guilty of be expiated, since there
was no institution of any legal victim for them? Surely the Israelites
were not left destitute of help in this case. And God, by providing no
sacrifice for those sins, intimated that there was a nobler sacrifice
yet behind. The Messiah as a priest was in David's eye, whom he calls
his Lord, though he was to proceed out of his loins, Ps. cx. 1, 4.
David's Lord by another right than as God, for he does distinguish him
from the Father as Lord, and therefore David's Lord by another right, a
right of redemption. The Jews had a sufficient account that the
sacrifices of the law could not purge sin, in the sacrifice of the red
heifer, Num. xix. 2, which could not expiate their sins. If it had a
virtue to this purpose, why should the priest who sacrificed her and
sprinkled the blood before the tabernacle, and the person that burnt
her, and the person that gathered up the ashes, wash their clothes
afterwards, and be unclean till the evening, ver. 7, 8, 9, who were more
likely than the rest to be expiated by it? Their sins were pardoned, but
impossible to be so by the blood of bulls and goats, Heb. x. 4, yet not
without the interposition of a bloody sacrifice; for 'without blood
there is no remission,' Heb. ix. 22, whereby the apostle proves the
necessity of the sacrifice of Christ. And could sin be pardoned without
a sacrifice, the apostle's argument to evince the unpardonableness of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, or of those that refused the sacrifice
of Christ, would be invalid, for his reason to prove it unpardonable is
because there is no more sacrifice for it; all which supposes the
necessity of a satisfaction to justice by blood, to open the way to the
throne of grace, and put any man into the favour of God. It was this
blood, therefore, shed upon the cross, whereby the transgressions under
the first testament were purged, and upon the account of which the
promised inheritance was received, Heb. ix. 15. Christ could not else
have pronounced a blessedness upon faith without the vision of him, as
he does, John xx. 19, 'Blessed are they that have believed, and have not
seen,' meaning those that died in faith in the time of the law. And the
apostle is express in it, that Christ 'by that one offering perfected
for ever them that are sanctified,' Heb. x. 14, understanding those that
were sanctified, or cleansed, or pardoned before the actual offering, as
appears by the ground of this his inference, which was the insufficiency
of all other sacrifices to take away sin. There was never but one God
that justifies, never but one way of justification, and that by faith,
as the apostle argues, Rom. iii. 80, and therefore but one cause of the
justification of all them that went before, because but one object of
faith, the blood of the Messiah, the Redeemer of the world. In him only
all things were gathered and summed up into blessedness, Eph. i. 12, and
men are blessed in him, Ps. lxxii. 17. In his merit, says the Chaldee
paraphrase, understanding it of the Messiah.

\[5.\] And this might well be, on account of the compact between the
Father, the Judge, and the Son, the Redeemer. Had he not promised the
shedding of his blood, justice had dislodged the sinner from the world.
All hopes of regaining paradise had been lost, without it the authority
of the law had not been preserved, the sacredness of divine truth had
been violated, and the rectitude of his government laid in the dust by
an easy indulgence, and passing over the sin. Christ therefore stood up,
and promised his soul as a sacrifice for sin. He was before Abraham was:
John viii. 58, Before Abraham was, I am;' *I am,* I was what I am now, a
Mediator; by promise, by constitution, by acceptation; and therefore
'Abraham saw my day, and was glad,' as it is before, ver. 56. I was a
Lamb slain, accepted as a Lamb slain, as Mediator, upon credit. His
office was of a more ancient date than his incarnation; and he was the
same in the function of a Mediator before as he was after his taking our
flesh, the same for them in his compact as he was for us in the
performance. A man may be freed from prison upon the promise of a surety
worthy of credit, though the debt be not actually paid till some time
after, according to agreement; and the possession of a purchase may be
delivered, though a time afterwards be set for the payment of the price.
The payment of the ransom is not of absolute necessity before the
deliverance of the captive. Many were delivered from their bonds by God
before the payment made by Christ, but not before the payment promised
by him. The blood of this sacrifice as shed reaches us though sixteen
hundred years since it was poured out; but the blood of this sacrifice
promised by the Redeemer, and receiving credit with God, reached Adam
four thousand years before it was shed. God imparted the virtue before
Christ actually merited, and freed the captive before the ransom was
paid; yet upon the account of the promised merit and contracted ransom,
natural causes must be before the effect, moral causes may be after the
effect. The blood of Christ cleanses not as a natural, but as a moral
cause. He was in this respect a 'Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world,' Rev. xiii. 8: slain federally, though not actually;
imputatively, though not really; sententially in the acceptation of the
judge, though not executively in the enduring the passion; and therefore
he was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world efficaciously, by
whose blood the ancient believers were sprinkled, as well as those of a
later date.

And though some refer those words, *from the foundation of the world,*
not to the word *slain,* but to the writing of the names in the book of
life of the Lamb, 'whose names were written from the foundation of the
world in the book of the Lamb slain,' it will not much alter the thing.
The slaying of the Lamb was agreed, as well as the writing the names in
the book; and it will also follow, that no man had any place in the
book, but had also an interest in the Lamb slain, and the benefits he
enjoyed by virtue of the register were to flow to him through the blood
of the covenanting Redeemer, and their names were writ there upon the
credit of the Lamb to be slain; for in him was the choice made before
the foundation of the world, Eph. i. 4, and through him were the
blessings of pardon given out from the foundation of the world. Had not
this Lamb offered himself to be slain, man had been cast into
everlasting chains as well as the devils, who had no mediator, no lamb
to be slain for them. Well, then, it follows from hence, that the blood
of Christ is of a full credit with God. Christ was the same to the
patriarchs as to the apostles: Heb. xiii. 8, 'He was the same yesterday,
today, and forever;' yesterday, to Adam, four thousand years since.
*Yesterday,* in the Hebrew phrase, often signifies all the time past;
*today*, now in the time of his appearance *forever,* to the generations
that follow, not only in regard of his person and deity, but in regard
of his office and benefits. It is not meant of his deity, but of his
mediation, as will appear by the following verse, where the apostle
designs the alienating their judgments from too high an opinion of the
ceremonial rites and sacrifices. They never purged sin, but Christ was
the cause of the purgation of them under the law as well as under the
gospel, though he were not so distinctly known by them as by us. The
blood of Christ extended to believers in all ages; he was a seed for
Abraham as well as Abraham's seed: Gen. xxi. 12, 'In Isaac shall thy
seed be called;' "zera' lecha", a seed for thee, it may be rendered, a
seed for thy good, and eternal deliverance; not only a seed out of his
loins, but a seed for his benefit. As a flash of lightning out of a
cloud in the night enlightens all things both before and behind it, so
the righteousness and blood of Christ is imputed not only to men that
come after him, but to those that went before him. If the credit of it
were so great then, the merit of it is as great now, since the actual
effusion of the blood. It is therefore rightly a blood that cleanses
from all sin.

(2.) This was the true and sole end of his incarnation and death. All
the ends mentioned by the angel Gabriel to Daniel centre in this and
refer to it: chap. ix. 24, 'To finish the transgression, make an end of
sin, and make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness,' and thereby should all the visions and prophecies
concerning the Messiah and his work be fulfilled. And to this purpose
would 'the Most Holy' be 'anointed,' as the cause and foundation of all
that removal of sin mentioned before. All the words which signify sin,
and contain in them all sorts of sin, are here expressed, to show the
completeness of the design in regard of the subject the Messiah was to
remove out of the way. The word translated to *finish,* "chala'",
signifies also to *shut up* or *restrain;* and the word translated *to
make an end,* "chatam", signifies to seal up. Sin was to be restrained
from ravaging about at pleasure like a devouring monster, or shut up and
stopped from being an accuser to condemnation; and sealed up, not for
confirmation of sin, but for concealment of it, as things sealed are not
to be looked into but by persons authorised thereunto. It is a breach of
trust, and an invasion of another's right, to do it. So God is said to
cover sin, and Christ here to seal up sin by his blood, and for ever
hide it from the face of God, and to make reconciliation for iniquity,
or expiate it. Since it was sin only that was the cause of the enmity,
and which separated us from communion with God, wherein the happiness of
a creature is placed, there was a necessity, for our rescue from misery,
to remove our guilt, that that which tore us might be muzzled, that that
which accused us might be silenced, that that which was a bar to our
happiness might be demolished, that so the misery we endured might fly
from us, and the blessings we wanted might flow down to us. For this
cause the Messiah was anointed, and for this end he undertook his
employment on earth, to remove the obstacle which hindered our access to
God. Hence we find that the covenant of grace, when spoken of in the Old
Testament to be fully revealed in the latter days, contains chiefly
those promises of 'blotting out transgressions, and remembering sin no
more.'

\[1.\] This is the fundamental doctrine of the gospel. The apostle
therefore, with a particular emphasis, tells them this is a thing to be
known and acknowledged by all that own Christianity: I John iii. 5, 'And
you know that he was manifested to take away our sins.' You know nothing
of Christianity if you know not and believe not this, that Christ
appeared to take away the guilt of sin by a non-imputation, and to quell
the power of sin by a mortification of it; to remove the punishment it
had merited, and the corruption it had established in the hearts of men.
Sin therefore will perfectly be cleansed both by remission and
sanctification, else Christ would fall short of the end of his
manifestation. This was the doctrine the apostles were first charged to
publish, both as the reason of Christ's suffering and of his
resurrection, that 'remission of sins might be preached in his name
among all nations,' Luke xxiv. 46, 47; remission of sin, as purchased by
his death, and assured by his resurrection. The foundation of pardon was
in his passion, and the manifestation of the efficacy of his passion was
by his resurrection; both of them therefore were to be declared in order
to this end. And though Paul was not then present at this first
commission (as being one born out of due time, and summoned into the
office of apostleship afterward), yet his instructions were of the same
nature, and observed by him in the same order: I Cor. xv. 3, 'For I
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received,' viz. first,
'How that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures.' Set
aside this end, what attractive can there be in a crucified man, one
made the derision and reproach of his nation, to cause any to believe in
him? Faith particularly pitches upon the death of Christ, and
particularly eyes in that passion the intent both of the sender and of
him that is sent. The first thing himself published when be exercised
his office was this jubilee: Luke iv. 18, 19, 'The acceptable year of
the Lord,' wherein captives were to be delivered, debts to be remitted,
and bonds to be cancelled. That was the main end of his coming to die,
which, when done, was the sole reason of his advancement; the purging
sin, and our sin, was the ground of his glorious sitting at the right
hand of God, Heb. i. 3.

\[2.\] There could be no other end of his shedding his blood but this.
Since his death is called a 'sacrifice,' Eph. v. 2; a 'propitiation,' 1
John ii. 2, Rom. iii. 25, it can be for no other end but the cleansing
of sin; for this was the reason of the institution of sacrifices. Blood
shed in a sacrifice way implied blood criminal, and deserving to be
shed. Had he come upon the earth in a stately grandeur, to rout armies
of men, batter down the walls of cities and demolish empires, the
rooting out of tyranny and monsters might have been thought his design.
But this was no way for the expiation of sin, but the destruction of the
sinner. But coming to shed his blood, to be a sacrifice, to be the
reproach of men, and to be God's servant in this office, which he was
not by nature, what end can be imagined but somewhat in relation to sin,
and that both to the expiation and destruction of it? For dying and
shedding his blood for it was not the way to maintain sin, but to
abolish it; not a means to render iniquity lovely, but odious. If this
were not the issue of his death, it would be useless, his blood would be
shed in vain. His death, being a punishment and by way of sacrifice,
must be for some end, it could not be for anything relating to himself,
or to merit anything for himself; for, being God, there could be no
accession of happiness to him; he needed not to merit anything, because
he wanted nothing. All merit is a desert of something which is not at
present possessed, but desired to be possessed. He had not, nor could,
commit any sin for which he should become a sacrifice. The Deity is
incapable of unrighteousness and crime. The punishment was not therefore
upon any account of his own. No crime was committed by him in his
humanity that might merit the infliction of such a punishment; this was
impossible, for whatsoever crime had been committed in his humanity had
been the crime of his person, and so had been a spot upon his deity,
united in one person with his humanity. Besides, he took human nature to
suffer in it; his incarnation had an *ought to suffer* linked to it, so
that his shedding his blood was resolved on before any crime could be
committed, if it were to be supposed that in his humanity he were
capable of any error or miscarriage. His blood must be shed for some
other, and the punishment inflicted upon him which was merited by some
other persons. It could not be for the holy angels; they were innocent,
and not criminally indebted, and therefore obnoxious to no penalty. It
being for the taking away of sin, the word sin excludes the good angels,
who never sinned, but always obeyed God, Ps. ciii. 21; nor could it be
for the evil angels, for the Scripture excludes them from any
redemption, and binds them for ever in chains of darkness, to bear the
punishment in their own persons. Besides that, this punishment could not
properly be borne in any other nature specifically distinct from their
sinning nature, as it was. It must be for the sin of men, or for
nothing. And consequently the death of Christ would be an insignificant
thing; but it is utterly inconsistent with the wisdom and holiness of
God to appoint, and the wisdom and honour of Christ to agree, to a task
for nothing and to no purpose. Now since Christ offered his life to God
(which he did not owe upon his own account), a reward was due to him
upon the account of justice, which must consist in remitting something
which he owed, or imparting something which he wanted. No debt for
himself could he be charged with, no indigence could be in his humanity
upon his own account, since all happiness was due to that by virtue of
its union with the deity; nothing could be bestowed upon him for
himself, because he wanted nothing; nothing could be remitted to him,
because he owed nothing. Since therefore he so deeply humbled himself,
not for himself but for others, and that there was a merit on his part,
and consequently a just retribution on God's part due, it was necessary
it should be given to some others upon his account, that what they owed
might be remitted, and what they wanted might be bestowed. These could
be no other than men whom he came to justify, and to whom the debt owing
to God might be discounted, upon the account of Christ's payment.

3\. This cleansing sin is wrought solely by his own worth, as he is the
Son of God. It is therefore said in the text, the blood not only of
Jesus Christ, but of the Son of God. The blood of Jesus received its
value from his Sonship, the eternal relation he stood in to his Father.
Since sin is an infinite evil, as being committed against an infinite
God, no mere creature can satisfy for it, nor can all the holy works of
all the creatures be a compensation for one act of sin, because the
vastest heap of all the holy actions of men and angels would never
amount to an infinite goodness, which is necessary for the satisfaction
of an infinite wrong. One sin, containing in it an infinite malice, is
greater in the rank of evils than all good works heaped together can be
in the rank of goods. But this blood was not only the blood of Jesus, a
man, but the blood of that person that was the Son of God; of him who
was our surety as the Son of God before he was our surety as the Son of
man; who interposed as a surety four thousand years before his
incarnation and shedding his blood, though he could not act the part of
a surety without his incarnation and shedding his blood. Either we had
no surety before he was incarnate, or else the Son of God in his own
person was our surety. The shedding his blood was pursuant to that
interposition he made as the Son of God in our stead before he was the
Son of man; and it was truly the blood of that person who had offered
himself to be our surety, and been accepted in that relation, so many
ages before a created nature was assumed by him; so that, though his
humanity was a creature, and was necessary as a subject wherein the
satisfaction was to be performed, yet it added no worth to the
satisfaction of itself. The value which his blood had was from his
deity, his being the Son of God, in which condition he entered into his
relation of a mediator for us. It was the same person that was the
brightness of God's glory and the express image of his person; the same
person that upheld all things by the word of his power, who did by
himself, in that glorious person, 'purge our sins,' Heb. i. 3. The
priests under the law purged the sins of the people by the sacrifices of
beasts; this was an infinitely nobler victim, a beam of brightness
streaming from the eternal Father while be was purging our sins in his
eclipse; the express image of his person, while he was made a curse upon
the cross, upholding all things by the word of his power; while he bowed
his head under the weight of his sufferings, he was all this while
making an atonement for our sins, whence redounded an inconceivable
efficacy to his blood. The nature of man died, but he had another nature
as immortal as the person whose brightness he was, that lived to add
value to his sufferings. This divine person, by his own strength and in
this glorious relation, wrestled with the flames of wrath, and took hold
of the tribunal of justice, and by the value of his sufferings, smoothed
the face of a frowning God, assuaged the tempests of a provoked justice,
and placed before the tribunal of judgment a strong and everlasting
righteousness of his own composure, as a veil between the piercing eye
of divine holiness and the guilty and filthy state of a sinner. So great
a person, one equal with God, was necessary for the restoring his honour
and Sanctifying his name; so great a person was necessary for the
purging the fallen creature from his guilt and filth.

4\. Hence it follows that sin is perfectly cleansed by this blood. Since
it expiated the sins of former ages, since it was the end of his coming,
since he did what he did by his own worth, sin must be perfectly
cleansed, else the end of his coming is not attained, and his worth
would appear to be but of a finite value. All cleansing is the fruit of
this blood: the cleansing from guilt is wrought immediately by it; the
purging from filth is mediately by his Spirit, but as it was the
purchase of his blood.

(1.) The blood of Christ does not perfectly cleanse us here from sin, in
regard of the sense of it. Some sparks of the fiery law will sometimes
flash in our consciences, and the peace of the gospel be put under a
veil. The smiles of God's countenance seem to be changed into frowns,
and the blood of Christ appears as if it ran low. Evidences may be
blurred and guilt revived. Satan may accuse, and conscience knows not
how to answer him. The sore may run fresh in the night, and the soul
have not only comfort bid from it, but refuse comfort when it stands at
the door. There will be startlings of unbelief, distrusts of God, and
misty steams from the miry lake of nature. But it has laid a perfect
foundation, and the top stone of a full sense and comfort will be laid
at last. Peace shall be as an illustrious sunshine without a cloud, a
triumphant breaking out of love, without any arrows of wrath sticking
fast in the conscience; a sweet calm, without any whisper of a
blustering tempest; the guilt of sin shall be for ever wiped out of the
conscience, as well as blotted out of God's book. The accuser shall no
more accuse us, either to God or ourselves; no new indictment shall be
formed by him at the bar of conscience; nay, conscience itself shall be
for ever purged, and sing an uninterrupted *requiem,* and hymn of peace,
shall not hiss the least accusation of a crime. As God's justice shall
read nothing for condemnation, so conscience shall read nothing for
accusation. The blood of Christ will be perfect in the effects of it. As
it rent the veil between God and us, it will rend the veil between
conscience and us; no more frowns from the one, nor any more janglings
in the other. As Christ said, when he was giving up the ghost, 'It is
finished,' viz., the sense and sufferings under a guilty state, it is
then a believer may say his fears are finished, when he is breathing
forth his soul into the arms of his sacrificed Saviour. Iniquities shall
never more appear in their guilty charge to draw blood from the soul of
a penitent believer. The soul shall be without fault before the throne
of God, Rev. xiv. 5.

(2.) The blood of Christ does not perfectly cleanse us here from sin, in
regard of the stirrings of it. The old serpent will be sometimes
stinging us, and sometimes foiling us. The righteous soul will be vexed
with corruptions within it, as well as the abominations of others
without it. The Canaanite is in the land, and therefore the virtue of
the blood of Christ is expressed in our power of wrestling, not yet in
the glory of a triumph. It does not here perfectly free us from the
remainders of sin, that we may be still sensible that we are fallen
creatures, and have every day fresh notices and experiments of its
powerful virtue; and that his love might meet with daily valuations in a
daily sense of our misery. But this blood shall perfect what it has
begun, and the troubled sea of corruption, that sends forth mire and
dirt, shall be totally removed. Then shall the soul be as pure as
unstained wool, as spotless as the dew from the womb of the morning; no
wrinkles upon the face, no bubblings up of corruption in the soul. The
blood of Christ shall still the waves, and expel the filth, and crown
the soul with an everlasting victory. 'The spirits of just men' are then
'made perfect,' Heb. xii. 23.

(3.) But the blood of Christ perfectly cleanses us from sin here, in
regard of condemnation and punishment. Thus it blots it out of the book
of God's justice; it is no more to be remembered in a way of legal and
judicial sentence against the sinner. Though the nature of sin does not
cease to be sinful, yet the power of sin ceases to be condemning. The
sentence of the law is revoked, the right to condemn is removed, and sin
is not imputed to them, 1 Cor. v. 19. Where the crime is not imputed,
the punishment ought not to be inflicted. It is inconsistent with the
righteousness of God to be an appeased, and yet a revenging, judge. When
the cause of his anger is removed, the effects of his anger are
extinguished. Where there is a cleansing from the guilt, there
necessarily follows a removal of the punishment. What is the debt we owe
upon sin? Is it not the debt of punishment, which is righteously exacted
for the fault committed? When the blood of Christ therefore purifies any
from their guilt, it rescues them from the punishment due to that guilt.
Herein does the pardon of sin properly consist, in a remission of
punishment. The crime cannot be remitted, but only in regard of
punishment merited by it. If God should punish a man that is sprinkled
with the blood of Christ, and pleaded for by the blood of Christ it
would be contrary both to his justice and mercy: to his *justice,*
because he has accepted of the satisfaction made by Christ, who paid the
debt, and acquitted the criminal, when he bore his sin in his own body
upon the tree; it would be contrary to his *mercy,* for it would be
cruelty to adjudge a person to punishment, who is legally discharged,
and put into the state of an innocent person, by the imputation of the
righteousness of the Redeemer. Though the acts of sin are formally the
same that they were, yet the state of a cleansed sinner is not legally
the same that it was; for being free from the charge of the law, he is
no longer obnoxious to the severity of the law. 'There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ,' Rom. viii. 1. No matter left
that shall actually condemn, since Christ for sin, or as a sacrifice for
sin, condemned sin in the flesh, ver. 3.

(4.) The effect of this blood shall appear perfect at the last, in the
final sentence. It cleanses us initially here, completely hereafter. It
cleanses us here in law. Its virtue shall be manifest by a final
sentence. 'He that believes not is condemned already,' John iii. 18;
condemned by the threatening, but not by the pronounced sentence. So he
that believes is justified by the plea of this blood, justified in the
promise of the gospel, but not yet by public sentence, which is reserved
till the last day: 'After death the judgment,' Heb. ix. 27. As Christ
was justified after be had presented his blood, was owned to be God's
righteous servant by a public declaration in his exaltation, 1 Tim. ii.
16, so those that have an interest in this blood have a sentential
justification at their dissolution, by God as a judge, and fully
complete, when their persons shall be pronounced just, at the reunion of
the soul and body at the resurrection. Whence this time is called the
'day of refreshment,' Acts iii. 19, when sins shall be blotted out, when
God shall no more correct, and conscience shall no more reproach for
guilt. Sin is cleansed now, but said to be blotted out then, because
then all the parts of salvation shall be complete. Election was an act
of eternity, but then it shall be declared, in the separation of them
for ever from the rest of the world, to be with him in glory. Redemption
was purchased by the death of Christ, offered in the gospel, and
conferred upon the believer, but then it will be complete in a
deliverance from all enemies, and the last enemy, death. And therefore
called the 'day of redemption,' Eph. iv. 30. There shall then be an
endless repose from all sorrow within, and trouble without.
Sanctification is begun to be wrought here by the Spirit, but sin is not
abolished; all earthly affections are not completely put off. So it will
be with our justification, as it consists in pardon of sin; sins are
blotted out now, but then in a more excellent, full, and visible manner.
We need a daily pardon upon daily sin, but then God will absolve us once
for all, from all our faults committed in our whole lives, and no more
will be committed to need a pardon. There is here a secret grant passed
in our consciences; there, a solemn publication of it before men and
angels. Here every one receives a pardon in particular, as they come to
him. As those under the law had a particular expiation by the means of
the sacrifices presented by them, but in the annual day of expiation
there was a general propitiation for the sins of the people, and all
their iniquities together were carried into the desert, so the pardon
that was granted to particular believers shall then resolve into one
entire absolution of the whole body; when Christ shall pronounce them
all righteous, and present them unblameable, and without spot to his
Father. Justification is complete in this world, in regard that the
guilt of sin shall never return, and a person counted righteous shall
never be counted unrighteous; but not so complete that the sense of sin
shall never return. But then neither David's murder shall rise up
against him, nor Peter's denial of his master ever stare him in the
face. No need of fresh looks upon the brazen serpent for cure, because
there shall be no bitings by the fiery ones to grieve and trouble.

(5.) Hence, it cleanses from all sin universally. For since it was the
blood of so great a person as the Son of God, it is as powerful to
cleanse us from the greatest as the least. Had it been the blood of a
sinful creature, it had been so far from expiation, that it would rather
have been for pollution. Had it been the blood of an angel, though holy
(supposing they had any to shed), yet it bad been the blood of a
creature, and therefore incapable of mounting to an infinite value; but
since it is the blood of the Son of God, it is both the blood of a holy
and of an uncreated and infinite person. Is it not therefore able to
exceed all the bulk of finite sins, and to equal in dignity the
infiniteness of the injury in every transgressor? The particle *all* is
but a rational consequent upon the mention of so rich a treasure of
blood. The nature of the sins, and the blackness of them, is not
regarded, when this blood is set in opposition to them. God only looks
what the sinners are, whether they repent and believe. He was 'delivered
for our offences,' Rom. iv. 25, not for some few offences, but for all;
and as he was delivered for them, so be is accepted for them. The
effect, therefore, of it is a cleansing of all, both the original and
additional transgressions; the omissions of that good God has
righteously commanded, and the commissions of that evil he has holily
prohibited. Men have different sins, according to their various
dispositions or constitutions. Every man has his 'own way;' and the
iniquity of all those various sins of a different stamp and a contrary
nature, in regard of the acts and objects, God has 'made to meet' at the
cross of Christ, and 'laid them all upon him,' Isa. liii. 6. The sins of
all believing persons, in all parts, in all ages of the world, from the
first moment of man's sinning, to the last sin committed on the earth.
In regard of this extensive virtue, the scapegoat was a type of him; for
though there were not particular sacrifices under the law, appointed for
some sins, yet in that anniversary one, all the sins of the people were
laid upon the head of that devoted goat, to be carried into the
wilderness, Lev. xvi. 21, "'awonot", "pish'eyhem", "chato'tam". And the
same several words, signifying all sorts of sins, are there used, as God
uses, Exod. xxxiv. 7, when he proclaims himself a God forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin. And the first sin we read of cleansed
by this blood, after it was shed, was the most prodigious wickedness
that ever was committed in the face of the sun, even the murder of the
Son of God, Acts ii. 36, 38. So that, suppose a man were able to pull
heaven and earth to pieces, murder all the rest of mankind, destroy the
angels, those superlative parts of the creation, be would not contract
so monstrous a guilt as those did in the crucifying the Son of God,
whose person was infinitely superior to the whole creation. God then
hereby gave an experiment of the inestimable value of Christ's blood,
and the inexhaustible virtue of it. Well might the apostle say, 'The
blood of Christ cleanseth us from all sin.'

III\. Thing; How Christ's blood cleanses from sin. God the Father does
actually and efficiently justify; Christ's blood does meritoriously
justify. God the Father is considered as judge, Christ is considered as
priest and sacrifice. He was a 'Priest in things pertaining to God,'
Heb. ii. 17, 'to make reconciliation for the sins of the people,' He is
the 'fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness,' Zech. xiii. 1. And
'forgiveness of sin' is a fruit of 'redemption through his blood,' Col.
i. 14.

This is done,

1\. By taking sin upon himself. God collected all the sins from all
parts of the world, in all ages of the world, bound them up together,
and 'laid them upon' Christ's shoulders, Isa. liii. 6, alluding to the
manner of transferring the sins of the people by Aaron's laying his
hands upon the head of the sacrifice; so that, as the scape-goat purged
the people, Christ cleanses or justifies men by bearing their
iniquities, Isa. liii. 11. Not by bearing the pollution of them
inherently, but the guilt of them, or the curse which the sinner had
merited; for our sins could no more be transmitted to him, in the filth
and defilement of them, than the iniquities of the Israelites could be
infused into the scape-goat, but only in their curse and guilt. A beast
was not capable of spiritual pollution, because it wanted an
intellectual nature; nor Christ, because of the excellency of his
person. Christ took our sins upon him, not thereby to become sinful, but
to become devoted in a judicial manner, as a curse; and, therefore, his
being said to be 'made sin' in one place, ' that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him,' 2 Cor. v. 21, is to be interpreted by Gal.
iii. 13, wherein he is said to be 'made a curse to redeem us from the
curse of the law,' i. e. a person exposed to the vengeance of God, to
procure impunity for the offenders, that they might be absolved, and
treated as if they had never been criminal. He is 'the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world,' John i. 29, airwn: the word signifies
to *take up*, as well as to *take away.* He took the guilt upon his
shoulders, that he might for ever take it away from ours. As we are made
righteousness in him, so he was made sin for us. Now we are not
righteous before God by an inherent, but by an imputed righteousness,
nor was Christ made sin by inherent, but imputed, guilt. The same way
that his righteousness is communicated to us, our sin was communicated
to him. Righteousness was inherent in him, but imputed to us; sin was
inherent in us, but imputed to him. He received our evils to bestow his
good, and submitted to our curse to impart to us his blessings;
sustained the extremity of that wrath we had deserved, to confer upon us
the grace he had purchased. The sin in us, which he was free from, was
by divine estimation transferred upon him, as if he were guilty, that
the righteousness he has, which we were destitute of, might be
transferred upon us, as if we were innocent. He was made sin, as if he
had sinned all the sins of men, and we are made righteousness, as if we
had not sinned at all.

2\. By accounting the righteousness and sufficiency of his sufferings to
us. If we stand upon our own bottom, we are lost; our own rags cannot
cover us, nor our own imperfections relieve us. 'The whole world lies in
wickedness,' 1 John v. 19. God is a consuming fire, and we are
combustible matter; the holiness of God, and the soul of the most
righteous fallen creature, cannot meet without abhorrence on the part of
God, and terror on the part of man. Divine holiness cannot but hate us,
divine justice cannot but consume us, if we have no other righteousness
than our own imperfect one, to please the one, and be a bar to the
other. There is no justification by the law, but upon a perfect
righteousness, and we must be justified by the performance of the law,
or we can never be justified; for the law of God was not abrogated upon
the fall of man: it is the authority of the lawgiver, and not the
offence of the malefactor, which does abolish a law; but we cannot
perform the law ourselves. Alas! 'All have sinned and come short of the
glory of God,' Rom. iii. 23, of that righteousness which glorifies God;
and having once broken the law, we can never be said perfectly to keep
it; for if we had grace given us to perform it for the future, it nulls
not the breach of it for the time past. Since the law is not abrogated,
it must be exactly obeyed, the honour of it must be preserved; it cannot
be observed by us, it was Christ only who kept it, and never broke it,
and endured the penalty of it for us, not for himself; for the law
requires obedience of a creature, but demands not punishment but upon
default of obedience. The punishment was not inflicted on him for
himself, but for us; the 'Virtue of that must be transferred to us,
which cannot be any other way than by imputation, or reckoning it ours,
as we are one body with him. Besides, justification cannot be by any
thing inherent in us, for we are ungodly before the first instant of
justification, Rom. v. 5, and sinners and enemies, Rom. v. 10. Since
there is nothing but unrighteousness in us, a righteousness must be
fetched from something without us. If it be without us, it is not
inherent in us. What righteousness is in us after justification, cannot
be the cause of the justification which preceded that righteousness. The
effect never precedes the cause. If the righteousness whereby we are
justified be not inherent in us, but in another, how can it be our
righteousness, but by some way of counting it to us? God intended
Christ's suffering as the way of bearing iniquity for us, and accepted
him as one that bore our iniquities, and made this bearing iniquity the
ground of the justification of many: Isa. liii. 11, 'By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their
iniquities.' In his bearing our iniquities, there was the imputation of
our sins; in our justification, there must be the imputation of his
suffering. The counting another's righteousness to us is as reasonable
and easy to conceive as the counting our sins to another. Without this
way of reckoning it to us, we cannot conceive of the intercession of
Christ, or what pleas he can use. He is an advocate by virtue of his
propitiation, and his righteousness in it, 1 John ii. 1, 2. The plea,
then, must be of this nature: Father, I took flesh by thy order, and
suffered death according to thy pleasure; I gave my soul a ransom for
many, and the shedding of my blood was a sweet-smelling sacrifice. Thou
wouldst have me made a curse to free others from the curse, and to
receive wounds, that others might receive health. Let those, therefore,
that plead the merit of my suffering, be absolved from their guilt. I
have borne their sins, their iniquities thou didst cause to meet on me,
condemn them not to bear those iniquities I have borne already. To what
purpose did I bear them, if they must bear them too? And to what purpose
should they believe in me, if they must sink under the same condemnation
with those that refuse me? How this plea can be made without accepting
those sufferings for us, and counting the righteousness of them to us,
is not to be understood. Some compare this way of imputation to the sun
shining upon the wall, through a green or blue glass, whereby the true
colour of the wall is indiscernible while the colour communicated by the
glass is upon it; yet this colour is not the colour of the wall, but the
colour of the glass, and inherent in the glass, only reflected upon the
wall; so the righteousness whereby we are justified, and which covers
our iniquities from the sight of God, is inherent in Christ, but
transferred to us. The ground of this imputation is community of nature.
Because he 'took not the nature of angels,' it is not reckoned to them,
Heb. ii. 16, 17. If he had taken the nature of angels, it could not have
been reckoned to us, because he had not been akin to us. Had he taken
the nature of angels, it could no more have been imputed to us than the
fall of angels can be imputed to us; which cannot be, because we have
not an agreement in the same nature with them; and, next to that, the
ground of it is his resurrection from the grave. Had he lain in the
grave, his righteousness could not have been imputed to us, because it
had not been declared sufficient in itself; and the sufficiency of the
price, and the accepting it for a ransom, must precede the accounting of
it to another for his deliverance. That which is the evidence of the
perfection, and agreeableness of it to the judgment of God, is the
ground of the imputation of it to us; but his going to the Father,
whereof his resurrection was the first step, and his ascension the next,
is the convincing argument the Comforter makes use of to persuade men of
the fullness and exactness of it, John xvi. 10.

\(1\) This cleansing of us by imputing this blood to us, is by virtue of
union and communion with him. The apostle before the text speaks of a
fellowship with God and Christ, which implies union with Christ, and
then the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. What Christ did as a
common person, is accepted for us, but the actual imputation of it to us
depends upon our becoming one body with him. If we had not had a union
with Adam in nature, and been seminally in him, his sin could no more
have been imputed to us than the sin of the fallen angels could be
counted ours; so if we have not a union with Christ, his righteousness
can no more be reckoned to us than the righteousness of the standing
angels can be imputed to us. We must therefore be in Christ as really as
we were in Adam, though not in the same manner of reality. We were in
Adam seminally, we are in Christ legally; yet so that it is counted in
the judgment of God as much as if there were a seminal union. Believers
are therefore called the seed of Christ, Isa. liii. 10, Ps. xxii. 30.
And they are called Christ, 1 Cor. xii. 12; and 'the body of Christ,'
ver. 27. It is, says one, not numerically, but legally such. If we had
been in him seminally, as we were in Adam, righteousness would have been
communicated to all descending from him; but God has appointed a higher
way of communication by spiritual union. As those who were in Adam by
natural propagation are made guilty by his transgression to
condemnation, so all that are spiritually united to Christ are cleansed
from their many offences to justification, Rom. v. 16. As there was a
necessity of his union with us in our nature for our redemption, since
he could not be the Redeemer of mankind by death, as he was the Son of
God, unless he were also the Son of man, so there is a necessity of our
union with him in his Spirit. As there could be no expiation without a
satisfaction, no satisfaction to be made by Christ, unless there were an
imputation of our sins to him; and no imputation can be supposed, unless
he were united to us in our nature; so there can be no imputation of
anything in him to us, unless there be a strait union, whereby he
becomes our head and we his members. What does the apostle mean in that
wish of being 'found in Christ,' but this union, whereby be might have a
share in his righteousness? Philip. iii. 9. Not his own righteousness,
but the righteousness of God communicated through or by faith. And where
is our completeness, but in him? Col. ii. 10. As we are reckoned one
lump and mass with him, and being joined to him, are counted one spirit
with him, 1 Cor. vi. 17. Union with him goes first in order of nature
before justification; we are first united to him as our sponsor, and
being in him we are counted righteous. This is the apostle's assertion:
I Cor. i. 30, 'But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness,' &c. And so 'the righteousness of the
law,' Rom. viii. 4, dikaiwma tou nomou, or the just judgment of the law,
'is fulfilled in us,' saith Cocceius. We are judged to have in him a
perfect obedience, or we are judged not out of Christ as sinners, but in
Christ as his members.

(2.) This union is made by faith, and upon this account we are said to
be justified by faith. This is our willingness to receive Christ upon
the terms he is offered. Since a mediator is not a mediator of one, but
supposes in the notion of it two parties, there must be a consent on
both sides. God's consent is manifested by giving, our consent is by
receiving, which is a title given to faith, John i. 12; God's consent in
appointing and accepting the atonement, and ours in receiving the
atonement, which is all one with 'receiving forgiveness of sin,' Rom. v.
11. God's consent in the typical administration was evident in
appointing sacrifices, and the sending down fire from heaven for
consuming them. The sinner's consent was to be signified by laying his
hands upon the head of the sacrifice, intimating his union with that
sacrifice, and so by the sacrificing of it he was counted as quitted of
that guilt for which the sacrifice was offered. We must be as willing to
accept of this sacrifice as Christ was to offer this sacrifice, with a
willingness of the same kind; but, alas, what creature can mount to a
willingness of the same degree! God might have required many sharp
conditions of us, many years' troubles and sorrows, but he requires only
a willingness of us to receive and acknowledge the depths of his wisdom
and grace, and conform to his will in the new covenant. This makes up
the marriage knot between the sinner and the Redeemer. By this the soul
empties itself and clasps about a Saviour, and then Christ and the
believer are counted as one person legally; therefore, Christ dwelling
in us, and our having faith, are linked together as if they were the
same thing, Eph. iii. 17. By God's acceptance of this blood we are
rendered cleansable and justifiable. By our acceptance of it, it is
actually imputed to us, and we actually justified. However, when it was
shed by Christ, and received as a sweet-smelling sacrifice by God, it
made us pardonable; yet actual pardon is not bestowed without believing.
His blood avails none but those that he pleads it for, and he pleads it
not for those that come to God, but that 'come to God by him,' Heb. vii.
25, those that plead in his name for the benefits which are the purchase
of his blood. Without him, we are combustible matter before a consuming
fire, and cannot approach to the throne of God with any success. This
faith must go in order before cleansing or justification. The
righteousness of God is only 'upon them that believe,' Rom. iii. 22. 'We
have believed that we might be justified,' Gal. ii. 16. This faith is
not our righteousness, nor is it ever called so, but we have a
righteousness by the means of faith. By faith, or *through* faith, is
the language of the apostle: Rom. iii. 22, 25, 'Faith in his blood,'
faith reaching out to his blood, embracing his blood, sucking up his
propitiating blood and pleading it. Though faith is the eye and hand of
the soul, looking up and reaching out to whole Christ as offered in the
promise, yet in this act of it to be freed from the guilt of sin, it
grasps Christ as a sacrifice, it hangs upon him as paying a price, and
takes this blood as a blood shed for the soul, and insists upon the
sufficient value of it with God. Faith respects the subject wherein it
is as guilty, for it is a grace divesting a man of his own
righteousness, and emptying a man of his own strength and sufficiency,
and accusing the soul of guilt, and therefore eyes that which stands in
direct opposition to this guilt, the free grace of God accepting Christ
as a propitiation. It eyes that in craving justification, which God eyes
in bestowing it, which is the Redeemer's bearing iniquity, Isa. liii.
11. It has no efficacy of itself, but as it is the band of our union
with Christ. The whole virtue of cleansing proceeds from Christ the
object. We receive the water with our hands, but the cleansing virtue is
not in our hands, but in the water, yet the water cannot cleanse us
without our receiving it; our receiving it unites the water to us, and
is a means whereby we are cleansed. And therefore it is observed that
our justification by faith is always expressed in the passive, not in
the active; as we are *justified by faith,* not that *faith justifies
us.* The efficacy is in Christ's blood, the reception of it in our
faith. Though we are justified by faith, yet all our peace, and all
those blessings which are bundled up in peace with God, come in and
through our Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. v. 1. 'Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.'

IV\. The use.

If the blood of Christ has the only and perpetual virtue, and does
actually and perfectly cleanse believers from all sin, then it affords
us,

1\. A use of instruction.

\(1\) Every man, uninterested by faith in the blood of Christ, is
hopeless of a freedom from guilt while he continues in that state.
Without faith we are at a distance from God, by contracting in our
natural state a guilt that subjected us to the curses of the law, and we
remain under that wrath the state of nature put us into, till we are
interested by faith in the expiating blood of the Redeemer. All the
indictments that our own consciences, and, which is incomprehensibly
more, the omniscience of God, can charge upon us, remain in their full
force, are unanswerable by us, and we must inevitably sink under them,
till the blood of Christ, apprehended by faith, cancel the bond and raze
out the accusation. The blood of Christ is so far from cleansing an
unbeliever from all sin, that it rather binds his sins the faster on
him. Unbelief locks the sins on more strongly, so that the violations of
the law stick closer to him, and the wrath of God hangs over him. Those
that have no communion with Christ, have no interest in the blood of
Christ; for they are such as 'have fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ,' to whom John in the text appropriates this
privilege of being cleansed from all sin by the blood of Christ. Those
that slight the blood of Christ, render themselves incapable of
cleansing, because no other sacrifice can be offered, no other blood can
be presented to God of a value equal to it: 'No more sacrifice remains
for sin,' Heb. x. 26. There was but one bloody sacrifice appointed for
expiation, and there can be no less required of us for the enjoying the
benefit of it, than the receiving the atonement, Rom. v. 11. It is not
consistent with the honour of God to discharge men upon the account of
the sufferings of the surety, who will persist in that sin for which the
surety suffered, and make use if a Saviour to be freed from suffering,
but not freed from offending. It would be contrary to the end of our
Saviour's death to sprinkle that blood upon those that tread it under
their feet, which was shed for the gathering together the sons of God,
John xi. 52, to let the despisers of it have an equal share in the
benefits of it with those that receive it. It cannot be imagined that
God will ever make it a savour of life, as much to them that will not
value it, as to those that do.

(2.) No freedom from the guilt of sin is to be expected from mere mercy.
The figure of this was notable in the legal economy. The mercy-seat was
not to be approached by the high priest without blood, Dent. ix. 7.
Christ himself, typified by the high priest, expects no mercy for any of
his followers, but by the merit of his blood. What reason have any then
to expect remission upon the account of mere compassion, without
pleading his blood? Mercy is brought to us only by the smoke of this
sacrifice. The very title of justification implies not only mercy, but
justice, and more justice than mercy; for justification is not upon a
bare petition, but a propitiation. To be pardoned indeed implies mercy.
Pardon is an act of favour, whereby the criminal is graced and
gratified, but to be justified is to be discharged in a legal way, or by
way of compensation. A man may be pardoned as a supplicant, but not
pronounced righteous but upon the merits of his cause. He that employs
mercy, acknowledges guilt, but insists not upon a righteousness.
Justification or pardon is not the act of God as Creator, for then it
had been mere mercy; nor as a lawgiver, according to the terms of the
first covenant, for then no man after his revolted state could be
justified; but as a judge, according to the laws of redemption, and that
in a way of righteousness and justice, 2 Tim. iv. 8. God is not to be
sought to for this concern, but in Christ; nor mere mercy implored
without the Redeemer's merit, because God does not forgive our sins, or
reconcile our persons to himself, but for the propitiating blood of his
Son. To expect pardon only upon the account of mercy, is to honour one
attribute with the denial of, or overlooking the other. Though God be
merciful, yet he is just; his mercy is made known in remission, his
justice manifested in justification. Forget not the great demonstration
of his justice when you come to plead for mercy. Plead both in the blood
of Christ, God is merciful to none out of Christ; he is merciful to none
but to whom he is just: merciful to them in regard of themselves, and
their own demerits; just and righteous to them in regard of the blood
and merit of his Son.

(3.) There is no ground for the merits of the saints, or a cleansing
purgatory. The apostle saith not you have a treasure of the merits of
the departed saints; or you must expect a purgatory hereafter to cleanse
you from all your sins. He mentions only the blood of Christ as fully
sufficient and efficacious for this end. To set up other mediations,
atonements, satisfactions, is a contempt of the wisdom of God in his
ordination of this only one of his Son; of the holiness and justice of
God in accepting this, as if God had mistaken himself, when he
cheerfully received this as completely satisfactory to him, and
answering his ends; as if, notwithstanding his full pleasure with it, it
needed some addition from creatures to eke it out to a completeness. It
is a dishonour to Christ, accusing him of an imperfect satisfaction, of
an insufficient and infirm blood, a stripping it of its infinite value.
How can that be infinite which needs a finite thing to strengthen it,
and render it efficacious? He that goes to a muddy stream to wash
himself, disgraces the pure fountain he has in his own dwelling. This
the Romanists use in the form of absolution: 'Let the passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the blessed virgin, and of all the
saints, and whatsoever good thou hast done, and whatsoever thou hast
sustained, be to thee,' i. e. accounted to thee, or accepted for thee,
'for the remission of thy sins, the increase of thy grace, and the
reward of eternal life.' (Cajetan sum. p. 2. The first head, Absolution)
Nor is purgatory a small disparagement to the extensive virtue of this
cleansing blood. If the blood of Christ cleanses, what interpretation
can common reason and sense make of it, but that the person so cleansed
is exempted from any punishment for his crime? Is the blood of the Son
of God of so weak an efficacy, that it needs a cleansing fire in another
world to purge out the relies of guilt left behind by it in this? If
there must be such a penal satisfaction, where is the uncontrollable
virtue of this blood? If this blood, which is the blood of God, has not
a sufficient virtue, what finite fire can lay claim to it? What in
reason can be supposed to have it? And if it be perfectly purgative,
what need of anything else, that can never deserve the name of
satisfaction? Shall that God, who is goodness and righteousness itself,
punish a man for that crime which he has remitted upon so great a
compensation? If he be pardoned, with what justice can he be punished?
If he be punished by the severity of fire, with what mercy, or by what
merit, was he pardoned and justified? It is no friendship to the
perfection of God's justice to allege that he will punish that which he
has remitted, and as little right is done to the perfection of Christ's
meritorious blood, to make it of a half validity, a lame propitiation,
which requires something to be done or suffered by the sinner to render
it complete in the sight of God. With what face could Christ tell
sinners that came believingly to him in the world, that their 'faith had
saved them,' and they might 'go in peace,' if a purgatory satisfaction
were to be exacted of them after this life, and his own passion had been
unable to make their peace?

(4.) No mere creature can cleanse from sin. No finite thing can satisfy
an infinite justice; no finite thing can remit or purchase the remission
of an injury against an infinite being. A finite compensation can bear
no proportion to an infinite wrong. If pardon as well as regeneration be
a work of omnipotence, as we have lately heard, no creature but is as
unable to remove guilt from the soul as it had been unable to remove
deformity from the first matter and chaos. A creature can no more
cleanse a soul, than it can frame and govern a world, and redeem a
captived sinner.

(5.) There is no righteousness of our own, no services we can do, are
sufficient for so great a concern. To depend upon any, or all of them,
or anything in ourselves, is injurious to the value and worth of this
blood; it is injurious also to ourselves; it is like the setting up a
paper wall to keep off a dreadful fire, even that consuming one of God's
justice. The apostle does more than once complain of the seducers that
crept into the Galatian church, and would sow the tares of justification
by the law, and their own works, so that they made the death of Christ
in vain, Gal. ii. 2, and his work of no effect, Gal. v. 4; and tells
them there plainly, that the expectation of a justification upon such an
account was a falling from grace. If we are justified from our guilt by
works, they must be works before faith or after faith; not before faith,
for the corruption of nature remaining in its full force, without any
amendment, any alteration, or subduing by renewing grace, will check men
that understand anything of the woeful and deplorable, the weak and
impotent, condition of man by nature, from such a thought; and indeed
those that hold justification by works make faith in Christ necessary to
the acceptance of those works. Nor do works after faith justify, for
then a believer is not justified upon his believing, but upon his
working after his believing; so that faith then is not the justifying
grace, but a preparation to those works which justify, which is quite
contrary to the strain of the great apostle in his epistles, who
ascribes justification to faith in the blood of Christ, and to faith
without works. It is by faith we are united to Christ as the great
undertaker for us; by that we receive the atonement, and accept of the
infinite satisfaction made by the Redeemer to the justice of God. The
acceptance of this, and embracing this as done for us, and accepted by
God for us, cannot be an act of our works, but of our faith. All works
are excluded by the apostle, Rom. iv. 5, 6, without restraining them to
the works of the law, as he does sometimes in other places. Faith alone
is opposed to works in general, and therefore to all sorts of works; and
works after grace he does plainly exclude: Eph. ii. 8, 'By grace you are
saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: not of works, lest any
man should boast.' What works are those? Works after regeneration; for
they are those works to which they were 'created in Jesus Christ,' which
indeed, saith he, 'God ordained that we should walk in them,' not that
we should be saved or justified by them. And so, when he desires not to
be 'found in his own righteousness, which is of the law,' Philip. iii.
8, 9, can he understand only those works and that righteousness which he
had before his conversion to Christ? As though works after faith were
not more conformable to the law than works before faith; but let them be
works flowing from what principle soever, he renounces them all,
accounts them loss for Christ, and places no confidence in them. He did
not renounce the privileges of his birth, or strip himself of a love to
holy works, but of the opinion of any value they had with God of
themselves to justification. Whatsoever might come under the title of
his own righteousness he does cast away, as to any dependence on it, or
pleading of it before God. And may not his works, after his giving up
his name to Christ, be called is own righteousness, as well as those in
a state of nature? Though the principle was altered, yet the acts from
that principle were his own acts, and his own righteousness. So Abraham
was not justified by his works after believing, no more than by those
before: Rom. iv. 3, 'Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him
for righteousness.' For those words, cited out of Gen. xv. 6, were
spoken of Abraham, several years after his call and compliance with it
by faith, and here singled out as the cause of his justification,
without any concomitance of his own works flowing from that faith, or
any mixture of them, or consideration of them by God in this justifying
act. And David, though he was a great prophet, yet had not so distinct a
knowledge of the gospel as those that live in the times of the gospel,
yet under that legal administration wherein he was born, and bred, and
lived all his days, had no confidence in his own works, not in those
which he wrought as God's servant, out of love to him, fear of him,
trust in him; he refuses all venturing his soul upon them, before the
tribunal of God, when he desires God not to enter into judgment with
him: Ps. cxliii. 2, 'Enter not into judgment with thy servant;' 'Answer
me in thy righteousness,' ver. 1, not according to my own. Enter not
into judgment with thy servant; though I be thy servant, and mine own
conscience tells me I have an upright heart towards thee, yet I dare not
enter into a plea with thee upon my service, or stand before thy
judgment-seat in the strength of my works; and the reason he renders
shows that he understood it of justification, and is inclusive of all
men that ever drew breath, for it is as generally expressed as anything
can be: 'For in thy sight shall no man living be justified.' Not an
apostle, martyr, prophet, can stand before God when he compares his
action with the rule. David was far from any confident sentiment of his
own works, or the strength of the blood of legal sacrifices. How often
does he aggravate his crimes, and debase the value of his services, and
speak of the sacrifices, as unable to render a satisfaction to God! We
see the father of the faithful, the greatest type of Christ, and he that
seems the most rational among the apostles, disclaiming any
justification by their own works, even by those wrought by them after
they were really listed in the service of God.

And there is good reason for it.

\[1.\] No righteousness of man is perfect, and therefore no
righteousness of man is justifying. Whatsoever works do justify, must
be, in the extent of them, and all the circumstances, fully conformed
unto that precept that enjoins them. What man has a righteousness
commensurate with the rule of the law, whereby his works are to be
tried? Again, every man, the moment before his justification, is
ungodly, Rom. iv. 5. He is in that state just before his justification.
If he be justified by his own works, he is then justified by ungodly
works, and then a contradiction will follow, that a man is justified by
his merit of condemnation, and pronounced righteous upon the account of
his unrighteousness. It is as much as to say, a man shall be justified
by his sinfulness, and be judged an observer of the law by his
transgressing it.

*First*, The mixture of one sinful act among a multitude of good works,
renders a man imperfect, and consequently incapable of justification by
them. Suppose a man had only one sin, and all his other works clear
without a flaw, the law could not pronounce him righteous, because he
fell short of that universal and perpetual rectitude which the law
requires in all things: Gal. iii. 10, 'Cursed is he that continueth not
in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them.' If
he fails but in one thing, and that but once in his whole life, and that
but in the omission of any one circumstance it requires, be sinks under
the curse. But since a man never performed in his whole life a duty
entirely exact, with what face can he expect a justification from that
law, which he never observed with that exactness due to it in any one
action that ever he did? Works are debts; unless a debt be fully paid, a
man cannot be said to be a righteous person. If a man owes a thousand
pound, and pays nine hundred ninety-nine pound nineteen shillings, and
pays not that one shilling, which is as much due as the whole, he is
unrighteous in withholding that, and the bond may be put in suit against
him for that if the creditor please. What man ever paid the full debt of
works he owed to God by virtue of the law? How far is any man from
paying all the parts of his debt but one only? Suppose we had not only a
perfect work, but many perfect works, all perfect works but one the
works might justify themselves, but not justify the person that has a
stain upon him in the account of the law. But the case is more
deplorable for if God will contend with man, he 'cannot answer him one
of a thousand,' Job ix. 2, 3. Some of the Jews interpret it thus: that
the arguments and pleas men can bring from their own works, for their
defence before his tribunal, are so weak and trifling, that God in scorn
would not vouchsafe to give a reply to one plea of theirs among a
thousand. But rather it is to be understood, that man cannot render one
little reason among a thousand pleas for his own justification, on any
one of a thousand of those charges God can bring against him.

*Secondly*, There is not one act a man does, but there is matter of
condemnation in it. As the Scripture excepts every man from doing good,
as considered in his natural corruption, Rom. iii. 12, so it excepts
every man from doing any one pure good action: Eccles. vii. 20, 'There
is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sins not,' i. e. he
does not do any good work without a mixture of sin; and therefore the
Scripture pronounces a man's 'own righteousness as filthy rags,' Isa.
lxiv. 6. Righteousness in the whole extent of it, whatsoever he does
that is righteous in a way of eminency, is but a filthy rag, it is but a
shred, and that filthy too. And to think it is able to purge the soul
from sin, is as much as to think to wash away one mud by another. That
which is condemning cannot be justifying, that which falls short of the
holiness of the law cannot free us from the condemning sentence of the
law. But there is nothing that a man does but is defective, if compared
with the law, which requires an exactness of obedience in every act,
without any stain. It requires perfection in the person, and perfection
in every service; it allows no blemish, nor pronounces a man righteous,
where it does not find a completeness both for parts and time. It is so
far therefore from justifying, that it must needs condemn. 'For the
righteousness of the law must be fulfilled in every one of us,' Rom.
viii. 4. Whatsoever plea we can raise from our own works, will represent
us guilty, and that can never be the matter of our absolution, which has
sufficient matter of condemnation in it. Tainted work is never able to
maintain its standing before the infinite holiness of God.

*Thirdly,* All the works after grace fall short of the perfection
required in them by the law. I do not say they fall altogether short of
the perfection required in them by the gospel, i. e. fall short of that
integrity and sincerity which is our evangelical perfection; but they
fall short of that perfection which is required by the law. There is no
grace in any renewed man in this life in that perfect degree it ought to
be. Corruption of nature remains in every man, with regeneration of
nature. It is true there is a new principle put in, but not so powerful
as to abolish that principle which possessed us before, though it does
overmaster it. There is a 'flesh lusting against the spirit,' as well as
a 'spirit lusting against the flesh,' Gal. v. 17. And Paul, that was
renewed as much as any man we ever knew renewed, had a flesh that served
the law of sin, with a mind that served the law of God, Rom. vii. 25. No
grace is wrought to its full growth. There is staggering in our faith,
and coldness in our love, and hardness in our melting; and therefore it
was a good speech of Luther's, We can never be saved, if God does not
turn his eyes from our virtues as well as our sins. How can that, the
unrighteousness whereof was our burden before the throne of God, be our
righteousness before him? How can that heal us, which stands in need of
cure, and renders us sick? Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Or the highest righteousness out of an unclean newness, and an
imperfect regeneration? If our duties after grace be so corrupt that
they need something to render them acceptable, and accepted in the sight
of God, they can never be of that worth as to render our persons
righteous; for that which needs something to make itself valid, can
never make any other thing valid. If our duties want a pardon, and
something to cover the defects, and wipe off the blemishes of them, they
can never, upon any bottom of their own, plead themselves to be a
sufficient righteousness for a guilty sinner, guilty in the acting that
which is pleaded as a righteousness. No flesh can be justified in the
sight of God, and nothing that comes from flesh can be our
righteousness. The best man being in part flesh, all his works are in
part fleshly. Where the nature is wholly corrupt, the fruit cannot be
good; where the nature is in part corrupt, the fruit of the new nature
must be tinctured by the steams of the old, and therefore is too
defective to bottom our happiness upon.

And consider but these two things:

First, Men's own consciences cannot but accuse them of coming short of
the glory of God, in everything they do. Can any man upon earth say he
ever did a perfect action, that he dares venture his soul upon it, in
the presence of God? There is no man's conscience but must needs accuse
him of sin: 1 John i. 8, 'He that saith he has no sin, has nothing of
the truth in him;' and what man's conscience ever bore that testimony to
him, that he was perfect in all his works? Does it not rather witness
that be has numberless times violated the divine precepts? Who can say
he did perfectly exert an act of faith, so entire, fixed, steady, as
might suit the divine holiness, or that his love had such an intense
flame in any service he presented to God? No man yet, upon serious
consideration, did ever judge any one of big works perfect before God.
He must have very mean thoughts of the holiness of God, or be very
inconsiderate of his own actions, and not dive into all the matter and
circumstances of them, if he so judged. Indeed, Paul says, he knew
nothing by himself, i. e. of unfaithfulness in declaring the mysteries
of God, as to the matter and substance of them, yet would he not venture
his justification upon that bottom, 1 Cor. iv. 4. A self-justification
in this would be a self-condemnation: Job ix. 20, 'If I justify myself,
my own mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also
prove me perverse.'

Secondly, But, suppose there be no accusations of conscience, durst we
stand to God's trial of our works? The omniscience of God pierces
further than our knowledge; for 'who can understand the errors of his
ways?' Pg. xix. 12. If any action might be perfect in our account, shall
we therefore think it so in the account of God's unspotted holiness, who
is greater than our hearts, and knows more than our hearts? 'Who can
stand before so holy a God?' 1 Sam. vi. 20. Job, therefore, chap. ix.
21, would not know his own soul, though he were perfect, he would not
approve or boast of him. self in the presence of God; for he might be
ignorant of something in his own spirit which never yet reached his
notice, but was not unknown to God, that knew all things; he would
despise his life, i. e. overlook all his upright course, and bury it in
silence, when he comes to appear before God.

*Fourthly*, Since, therefore, all our own righteousness is of this hue,
it would be contrary to the justice and holiness of God to justify a man
for imperfect works. His judgment is always according to truth, Rom. ii.
2. If he should judge and accept that for a perfect righteousness which
is notoriously imperfect in itself, it would imply a defect in the
understanding of the judge, whereby he is changed, and judges that to be
exact holiness now which he judged not so before. But certainly, if it
be an imperfect righteousness, the infinite understanding of God can
never imagine it perfect, and the holiness of God would never deceive
itself in accepting that as perfect which is not in its own nature so.
If imperfect works of grace can justify now, what reason can be rendered
for the strictness God required of the first man in the first covenant,
and his severe dealing with him upon the transgression of it? The best
reason, and most becoming the majesty of God, is the holiness of his
nature, which is as infinite now as when he made the first covenant. If
that holiness can now content itself with an imperfect righteousness,
and pronounce us justified persons without a full conformity to the law,
it might take a little further step, and pronounce us righteous without
any conformity at all to it. If he could deny his holiness and truth in
one thing, he might upon the same account deny it in all, and so lay it
aside by degrees till it came to nothing. If we rightly understand the
infiniteness of God's holiness, we cannot conceive that anything
imperfect can justify us before so exact and strict a tribunal, where
sits the omniscience of God to see, the holiness of God to hate, and the
justice of God to punish, every defect and deviation from his law..

\[2.\] The design of God was to justify us in such a way as to strip us
of all matter of glorying in ourselves, and therefore it is not by any
righteousness of our own. This the apostle in many places asserts, Rom.
iii. 26, 27. He justifies by the law of faith, to exclude boasting,
which would not have been excluded by the law of works; and Eph. ii. 9,
'Not of works, lest any man should boast.' He had before spoken of
salvation or justification by grace, ver. 5; and to strike men's bands
off from resting on anything in themselves, and put our own
righteousness out of countenance, he repeats it again, ver. 8, 'By grace
ye are saved, and that not of yourselves; not of works,' because God
will have all boasting excluded. The apostle's argument holds as strong
against the works of grace as those of nature, the works after the
receiving of the gospel as those of the law; it would else be invalid,
for if we were justified by our own works, wrought by us after the grace
of redemption communicated to us, it would but little more exclude
boasting than the works of Adam wrought by him in the rectitude of his
nature, which was the gift of God to him. The natural principle of his
actions, as well as the gracious principle of a believer's, were
bestowed on them by God. That was an act of God's goodness, this of his
grace. And they are our works by grace, as well as the acts of Adam in
innocence would have been his works by nature. For though the works of
grace are wrought from a principle implanted by the Spirit of God, yet
they are not the works of that Spirit, no more than Adam's works could
be said to be the works of God, because they were from a principle
implanted in him by God. The works would have been Adam's, by the
concurrence of God as Creator, and those works are a believer's by the
concurrence of God as Redeemer. And if we were justified by them, there
would be as well matter of boasting as there would have been in Adam had
he stood and been efficiently justified or pronounced righteous upon his
innocent works. God hates any glorying before him. The pharisee,
therefore, that displayed his righteousness in the temple before God,
with some kind of reflection upon his own worth, Luke xviii. 10-12, with
some kind of exaltation of himself and contempt of the publican, went
away unjustified, though he did thankfully acknowledge his eminency in
morality above the publican to stream to him from the goodness of God.
And no good man in Scripture ever pleaded his own works in prayer to God
for his justification, though sometimes they have appealed to God
concerning their integrity in a particular action. Daniel disowns his
own righteousness, Dan. ix. 18; and the famous cardinal and champion of
the Romish church, upon his deathbed, would rely on the merits of
Christ, though he had disputed for the merit of works. So sensible are
men of the little matter they have to glory of in themselves, when they
are ready to stand before the tribunal of God. God in justification will
have the entire glory of his grace to himself; but if any work of ours,
though never so gracious, were the cause but in part of our
justification, we had whereof to glory. If we divided it between Christ
and ourselves, Christ would have but half the glory, and the other half
would be due to us.

To conclude, no man can be justified but by a covenant of grace, and by
the righteousness of God, not his own; since all men have been under the
corruption of original sin, no man has arrived to happiness by any
righteousness of his own. Every man being a sinner is under the curse of
the law, and being accursed by it, cannot be justified by it. The law
does not frown and smile upon a man at one and the same time. It
proposes no recompense but to those that entirely observe it, and
denounces a curse upon those that in the least do violate it; it
accuses, does not justify, and fills the conscience with darkness and
despair, not with comfort and peace.

6\. We are therefore justified by a righteousness imputed to us. 'The
blood of Christ cleanseth us from all sin.' It is not inherent in us,
but in the veins of Christ; it is not physically or corporally applied
to us, but juridical, in a judicial way, and therefore imputed to us,
and that for justification. Hence we are said to be justified by his
blood, Rom. v. 9. If justified by his blood, then meritoriously; the
merit of that blood must then be imputed to us, and we upon the account
of it pronounced righteous by God, since this blood was never inherent
in us. Hence forgiveness of sins and justification is often ascribed
unto it, Rom. iii. 23-25, Col. i. 14. As our iniquities were charged
upon him, so his righteousness is derived to us. Our iniquities were
never inherent in him, but imputed to him; so his blood never was
inherent in us, but imputed to us for the satisfaction of the law, and
so for our justification from the penalty and curse of it. If it were
our righteousness that were imputed to us, it would be an imputation of
debt, not of grace, Rom. iv. 4. It cannot be inherent righteousness,
because it is a righteousness imputed without works, ver. 6; but no
inherent righteousness is without works. Again, ver. 5, the object of
justification is an ungodly person, one that has no righteousness of his
own. But since there must be a complete righteousness to justify him, it
must be the righteousness of another, for being ungodly, it cannot be
his own. It is therefore by the righteousness of one man, Christ: Rom.
v. 19, 'As we are made sinners by one man's disobedience, so we are made
righteous by one man's obedience.' Our being made sinners by one man's
disobedience, was no personal act of our own, but a personal act of
Adam's; so we are made righteous, not by a personal obedience of our
own, but by the perpetual obedience of Christ, which cannot be of
advantage to us, unless some way or other counted to us.

*Use* 2; of comfort. The comfort of a a believer has a strong and
lasting foundation in the blood of Christ. All our sins met upon Christ
as they did upon the scape-goat, and were carried away with the streams
of his blood. A cleansing blood was not the language of the first
covenant. It required blood to be poured out in a way of revenge, not to
be poured out and applied for the pardon of others. What can relieve us,
if this blood, shed by a holy Saviour, and accepted by a righteous
judge, cannot? This blood has removed the curse, purchased our liberty,
and may therefore calm every believing conscience. What expression can
be more stored with comfort than this, 'The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanseth us from all sin.'

1\. The title is cheering. 'The blood of *Jesus Christ his Son*.' The
titles of the blood of God, and the righteousness of God, are enough to
answer all objections, and testify a virtue in it as incomprehensible as
that of his Godhead, which elevated it to an infinite value. What wounds
are so deep that they cannot be healed by the sovereign balsam of so
rich a blood? What sins are too great to be expiated, and what diseases
too desperate to be cured, by the blood of him that created the world?
How great is that blood, that must have more of value, since it is the
blood of the Son of God, than all sins can have of guilt, since they are
the sins of the sons of men! The blood of Christ is as much above the
guilt of our Sins, as the excellency of his person is above the meanness
of ours.

2\. And who can fathom the comfort that is in the extensiveness of the
object? *All sin*. As we are not limited in the Lord's prayer to pray
for the forgiveness of some debts only, and not for others, but pray for
the forgiving of trespasses indefinitely, so there is no stint set to
the virtue of this cleansing blood. All transgressions to it are like a
grain of sand, or the drop of a bucket to the ocean, no more seen or
distinguished when it is swallowed up by that mass of waters. It is a
'plenteous redemption,' since it redeems Israel, and all the Israel of
God, from all their iniquities, Ps. cxxx. 7, 8. His blood can cleanse as
many sins as his Godhead can create worlds, and those are numberless;
since there is no limits to his power there can be none to his blood.
Though our sins have weakened the law, and made it unable to save us,
yet they cannot weaken the omnipotent satisfaction of the Redeemer. The
multitude of sins in the sinner enhance the vastness of the payment made
by the surety. Let not any believing soul be dejected, or any soul that
would cordially believe and resign himself up to the conduct of Christ.
That blood that has cleansed so many from sin, and from such multitudes
of sins, in their several capacities, can cleanse you from all your
sins, were they as great as all those jointly that have been cleansed by
it from the beginning of the world. For what hindrance is there but that
it can do the same in one person that it has done in many? When we look
upon the multitude of our sins, our pride and vain imaginations, our
omissions of service, our carelessness in the ways of God, there cannot
but be a hanging down the head, till we lift up our eyes to the cross
and see all balanced by the blood of the Son of God, which cannot be
overtopped by the guilt of a believing person.

3\. And does not the word *cleanse* deserve a particular consideration?
What does that note but,

(1.) *Perfection*. It cleanses their guilt so that it 'shall not be
found,' Jer. 1. 20. What can justice demand more of us, more of our
Saviour, than what has been already paid? The everlasting death of a
believing sinner cannot be challenged by it, since the blood of a
redeeming Saviour has been shed for it. It were injustice to put the
creature upon an imperfect satisfaction, since the surety has given a
complete one; and injustice to punish him that is no longer guilty of a
crime in the judgment of the law of redemption, since by faith he relies
upon the blood of the Redeemer. Justice can no more condemn any that are
objects of mercy by receiving the blood of the second covenant, than
mere mercy can save any one that remains an object of revenging justice
under the first covenant. By this means we do not stand before God only
as innocent persons, but as those that have fulfilled the law, both as
to precept and penalty, Rom. viii. 4.

(2.) Continuance of justification; the present tense implies a continued
act. Christ's blood is never lost and congealed, as the blood of the
legal sacrifices. His blood is called a 'new way,' Heb. x. 19, 20,
prosjatoV; the word rendered *new* signifies a thing newly slain or
sacrificed. His blood is as new and fresh for the work it was appointed
to as when it was shed upon the cross, as full of vigour as if it had
been shed but this moment; it is a blood that was not drunk up by the
earth, but gathered up again into his body to be a living, pleading,
cleansing blood in the presence of God for ever. He did not leave his
body and blood putrefying in the grave, the sacrifice had then ceased
and corrupted, it had not been of everlasting efficacy, as now it is.
The justification of a believer stands upon as certain terms as the
justification of Christ himself before God. His was upon the account of
shedding his blood, ours upon the account of embracing his blood. He was
justified by God after his bleeding, Isa. 1. 6, 8, and brought in
triumph, and sending a challenge to any to condemn him, since God had
justified him, ver. 9; which words the apostle alludes to, Rom. viii.
33, 34, to show the unrepeatableness of justification, and applies them
to believers, though they were spoken by Christ in his own case. Christ
was justified by his resurrection: 1 Tim. in. 16, 'Justified in the
Spirit,' which is no other than what Peter expresses by being 'quickened
in the Spirit,' 1 Peter iii. 18. As Christ was justified by his
resurrection from all the sins which met upon him on the cross, and that
for ever, so are believers cleansed from all their guilt, and that for
ever, by virtue of this blood. The meritorious plea of this blood
continuing for ever, is not without the perpetual act of the righteous
Judge justifying those for whom it is pleaded.

Hence will follow security at the last judgment. His blood cleanses from
all sin here, and his voice shall absolve from all sin hereafter. He
that has been a propitiation for your guilt, and an advocate against
your accusers, shall never as a judge condemn you for your sins. He does
not indeed judge as a priest, but as a king; but his kingly power is but
subservient to his priestly office, since he was more solemnly confirmed
in that, viz. by an oath, than in the other; and therefore his royal
authority shall never ruin any whom his priestly sacrifice has restored
to their lost inheritance. Let no believing soul therefore despond, let
him draw this blood over his fears to stifle them, as God has done over
his sins to cancel them, and drown them in this same ocean into which
God has hurled his transgressions.

*Use* 3; of exhortation.

Have recourse only to this blood upon all occasions, since it only is
able to cleanse us from all our guilt. We have treasured up wrath, and
wounded conscience; nothing can pacify a severe wrath, and calm a
tempestuous conscience, but this blood. Had we but the guilt of one sin
upon us, we stood in need of an expiation by it as well as if we had ten
thousand. Every infinite wrong must have an infinite satisfaction.
Entertain no disparaging and little thoughts of this blood, which the
Scripture pronounces of so plenteous, unsearchable, and great a virtue.
It was God's intent to cleanse sin by it, when he agreed with the
Redeemer about shedding his blood: Isa. liii. 11, 'My righteous servant
shall justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.' It was set out
by him to this end, when it was shed. Zech. xiii. 1, 'In that day a
fountain shall be opened for the house of David,' the stronger spirits,
and men most according to God's heart, 'and for the inhabitants of
Jerusalem,' the weaker sort; for all a fountain to fill every private
cistern. Make not the covenant of God with his Son in vain; slight not
his grace by refusing to drink of his open fountain. The glory of
purging iniquity was reserved by God for this blood, it is committed to
no other; the blood of bulls and goats never had, never could, have the
honour of so great a work. It is the glorious title of his blood to
cleanse from all sins, as it is the honourable signification of his name
Jesus to save from all sins. We cannot please God more than by coming to
him for the pardon of our sins, upon the account of this blood he has so
delighted to honour. If we do not, we deny it the glory of its cleansing
virtue; we undervalue the efficacy of it, and would have it without any
subject to exercise its power on. We need not fear to approach to it,
since God has manifested it highly acceptable to him, and available for
us. The unsearchable riches of it should more encourage us than the
greatness of our guilt discourage our address. Have recourse to it by
faith, resting on the power of this blood, as the means appointed by
God, and intended by Christ, for the expiation of sin. Faith as
accepting Christ as a king does not justify, but faith as accepting
Christ as a priest and sacrifice, as shedding his blood, for we must
accept him in that office wherein he made the atonement; and that was
not as he was a prophet or a king, but as he was a priest and a
sacrifice; and therefore it is called, 'faith in his blood,' Rom. iii.
25, though indeed a faith in his blood is not without receiving him as a
king, and submitting to his precepts, as well as relying on his
sacrifice. He that receives the blood of Christ, as well as he that
names the name of Christ, must depart from iniquity, and avoid those
things which break the covenant. Mingle not any thing with his
satisfaction; let no muddy waters of your own be mixed with this gospel
wine. If we look for a justification by anything else, we forfeit all
right of justification by him: Gal. v. 2, 'Behold, I Paul say unto you,
that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;' take it
for a certain truth, for I as an apostle speak it, that if you have an
opinion that you shall be justified by circumcision, or anything of the
law, or of your own works, or would make them partakers with Christ in
this matter, Christ shall profit you nothing, you had as good never have
had a Christ made known to you, for any virtue you are like to derive
from him. As none died with him to expiate your guilt, so he will suffer
none to be joined with him in justifying your persons. Christ bears this
blood only in his hand, when he pleads for us; we should carry this
blood only in our hearts when we plead for ourselves. It is not his
blood only as shed does justify, but his blood pleaded in the court of
heaven by himself, and pleaded before the throne of God by the believing
sinner; without it we have no more plea than the apostate angels have,
whom God has cast out of his favour for ever. And since we contract
guilt every day, let us daily apply the medicine. The pleas of this
blood are renewed according to the necessity of our persons. As often as
an Israelite had been bitten by the fiery serpents, he must have looked
up to the brazen one, if he would not have been destitute of a cure; and
we, upon every sting of conscience, must look up to him who has been
lifted up upon the cross for our remedy. This blood is appointed for
sins after conversion, for those, that walk in the light. Since the
fountain is open every day, and we contract guilt every day, let not a
day pass without fresh applications of this blood upon any defects in
our walking with him; since, 'if we walk in the light,' and are
industrious to observe the will of God, 'the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanseth us from all sin.'

End

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discourse of the Efficient of Regeneration, Part I](cha05)

</div>
