[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nbr03)  [Next](nbr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NOTES ON THE REVELATION.

# Part Four

In this chapter, then, we have a very clear account, not of the details
of providential historical acting, but of Satan's mind, and ways, and
purposes concerning the purpose of God in its inceptive character; for,
as accomplished, it is clear he cannot touch it. Although I have little
doubt in my mind in what events these plans of Satan will specially shew
themselves, I have entered into them here very little, because God is
here instructing the Church what the plans are, rather than *how* they
are accomplished, save as presenting severally the agents: and if we are
not content to be instructed as God instructs us, we had better

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

not learn at all. I desire in scripture not to explain but to receive,
and, in communicating, to say what is there, not add thoughts. This may
seem a slight distinction; but the effect of the difference will soon be
seen in the formation of systems, instead of actual profiting by divine
instruction

There are three distinct parts in the chapter. First, the agents; the
woman in God's purpose to be delivered of a man-child (the depository of
earthly power to rule the nations); the dragon ready to devour him,
whose birth and character he partially knew (for scripture told it), and
whose speedy bringing forth was now apparent. The result is, that the
man-child, instead of acting in power at once, is hid, but in the place
of Godhead and power, and the woman flees. Thus the direct agents are
disposed of. We have, then, the second portion; in which the question is
between his (the dragon's) place there, and the angelic ministrations of
*God's power* ("His angels which excel in strength"); and the dragon
loses his place in heaven (he who had deceived the whole world), and he
is cast out into the earth, not properly the world. This is all the
direct statement made in this portion: for the question was, ruling the
nations. But then secretly this made a most important change in another
thing not so open in the world,--the Church, dwellers in heaven, the
brethren. This was the way heaven was specially affected by this event.
Salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God and the power of His
Christ were now come, <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) not *till*
then in power. There was that which was hidden to the world and not
understood, no more than Christ was, the heavenly-minded Church which
understands God's leading and most important meaning in these things
(what was next Himself, if I

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

may so speak). There was a witness to all Christ's glory on the terms
and grounds of God's holiness in heaven, as walking in the light as He
is in the light, having fellowship one with another, the blood of Jesus
cleansing them from all sin, all the time that Satan was in the heavens
drawing the third part of the stars--the ruler of the darkness of this
world--a people who walked indeed on earth, but in spirit and title and
nature, as given, dwelt in heaven; their Head being exalted above Satan,
even before God, and who had suffered and shed His blood for them,
though now, as yet, He had not taken His power ("all things were not yet
put under him"); wherefore Satan could torment. This people Satan had
been constantly accusing before God, for their inconsistencies, or
falsely, in order to distract, trouble, and hinder their assurance with
God, or their testimony for God. By the turning of Satan out of the
heavenly places of power this conflict and accusation ceased; the
heavens were cleared, that these might now declare His righteousness.

The actual catching up of the saints is not here mentioned, because the
Church should always expect it; <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) and
because the agents and their public acts being here in question, the
Church (one with Christ before the Father, the mystery hidden from ages
and known only by the Spirit) is not, as we have seen all through, the
subject; <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) but the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

acts, as they affect the brethren, looked at in their condition here
below, are noticed, because they are to reign with Christ, whose *power*
was now come.

The Church united to Christ and interested in Him as her Advocate and
Priest, and all those associated with the heavens, were now free. The
question then was between the dragon's wrath against those who were the
special scene of Christ's royalty, and the power of that Christ which
was now come: the trial of the Church had ceased. The subject being the
rule of the nations by the man-child, all the history of what passed in
the Church as to this is unnoticed; only the dragon remains in heaven;
the royalty not assumed: when it is, the change is noticed. Then, the
power though come is not, however, immediately exercised (that is, on
earth, for the heavens were already clear). The question then arises for
the woman upon earth--a question of royalty and power. The sphere of
this royalty and power in Christ being necessarily hated but
rescued, <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) and Satan's hatred and
animosity then directed against the remnant who were faithful to the
light they had, keeping the commandments of God and having the testimony
of Jesus, having the light there was--tile spirit of prophecy. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74)

The providential actual agencies follow; wherein these things are
accomplished. As to the position and condition of the inhabiters of
earth (of whom we have only heard as yet), for this period, thrice
repeated woe (in the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

second, the wide unformed mass of people too included, the inhabiters of
the sea).

We have further to remark, that (the moment the saints are introduced in
their own position and character, suffering while Satan is in the
heavens) the Lamb, its salvation, its strength, its joy, is at once
introduced, and their victory celebrated on high. It is the natural
association of the saints, as such--fellowship with the crucified One:
and therefore if only one or two saints be in their place, their
associations are with the Lamb. <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) It
will be remembered that the Lamb has not been mentioned all through the
historical part: that was providence; and the Church was, as it were,
hidden. This, in the course of external history, is its real
relationship--as Peter describes it, doing well, suffering for it, and
taking it patiently. The Lamb led the way in this their joy; while, as
to accusation, His blood gives them access to the throne where He is.

This account in chapter xii. of the dragon's doings, taking up the mind
of God in the throne as to it, the conflict by which he is cast out of
the heavens of rule, and his conduct upon earth when cast down there,
was quite the suitable introduction to the history of the manner and
development of it in human instrumentality; that the Church might know,
not merely its history, outside in the earth, but the meaning and truth
of it in its elementary and radical causes and facts in Satan's
position, power, and actings, relative to God's purposes. It relates to
the question of ruling the nations (*i.e.*, to Christ, as ruling, as He
will, with the saints, the nations); and shows the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

relative position of the parties (while the man-child is caught up to
God and His throne, or not actually in the scene), first in heaven, and
therefore (the evil ceasing, when cast out, to affect the saints of the
heavenlies) brought in thus, <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) by the
by, when their position has changed; and then on earth as affecting the
Jews, during the period in which God's purpose, and therefore those
interested in it, as a body, flee, in consequence of the dragon's
actings, into the wilderness, where they were nourished of God (*i.e.*,
not in the order of God's regulated covenant blessing, apparent in
manifested relationship, but of God supremely as such). All this time,
therefore of the dragon's prevalence in heaven first, or on earth, is
the time of the hiding and apparent disregard of God's relationship with
His people. Yet the object of these relationships becomes visible when
the earth comes in question, and the woman, though persecuted or
fleeing, is seen on earth (*i.e.*, the Jewish body

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

as such in connection with their place and promises, though,
unfulfilled). To this many of the Psalms refer--those in which God and
not Lord is used as the term of relationship with the Most High.

The saints may be united to the position of the man-child when removed
hence and taken to Christ; but the great signal manifestation of the
first statement of the chapter was, when Christ Himself was taken out of
the way. All, except that fact which characterizes all, is the statement
of the principles and relative position of the parties. There may be,
therefore, any lapse of time between the catching up of the man-child
and the subsequent actings of the Lord; for there is no note of time
connected with it: the facts are resumed, or, as to results, commenced
by the war in heaven. This is most signally fulfilled in this actual
final accomplishment when Satan is cast out (the commencement, in their
source, <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77)

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

of the very last events, that change the position of the saints of the
heavenlies; and when also the last events on earth relative to the Jews
begin to have their course). The providential agents, as far as the
moral prophetic earth is concerned, and the beasts, therefore, at this
point, as we have said, are thereupon taken up.

The apostle now traces equally from its origin, the earthly
circumstances of the power through which Satan operates; <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) and, as in the previous chapter, he first
gives us characteristically the subject of the prophecy. It is not here
of purpose necessarily, but of fact. Out of the floating mass of
population, he sees a beast rise up. It was not now a vision in heaven,
where the secret designs were carried on, but on earth, where the
instruments of these designs are produced and act; here, not purpose,
but fact.

The whole character of the beast, from beginning to end, is seen, but
pursued to, and therefore having its agency in, its last form. This
enables us to identify the beast all through, and brings him under the
character of guilt which has attached to him from the beginning, or
marked the course of his protracted progress, whatever unrestrained
iniquity this may shew itself in at the close. He is there-fore seen
rising out of the sea having all his heads and horns: on his heads names
of blasphemy--he bore them

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

high on his front; and the crowns were on his horns, which was the
latter form (*i.e.*, the imperial power divided). I do not carry this
farther than being definitely characteristic; for if it were carried
into detail, as at the close, we should have, assuming the identity
according to the ordinary interpretation of the beasts, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) three of the horns fallen. Further, this
beast had incorporated the characters of' Daniel's three other beasts,
but most of the Grecian leopard, though in ravening power and terror
like the first. To this beast the dragon (he had not formed it, that is
taken as the fact) gives his power, his seat, and great authority. Now,
I doubt not, this has its full scope of positive action and
manifestation from the close of the former chapter when, in its last
form, it will do Satan's work in the place of his power. But as we have
the elements of things in these chapters, we have seen the beast traced
from his very rise out of the sea; and whatever he so characteristically
does, <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80) when formed, comes under the
designation of holding the throne and power of Satan: It will be
exercised according to the character of the place where Satan is, heaven
or' earth, each the scene of the conflict whether Christ and His
joint-heirs are to have His creation, or Satan hold it by right of the
first Adam's fall and sin, the great question agitated, along with the
special redemption of the Church. Doubtless, when on earth it will be
more definite and formal, not necessarily more important. Nor can I see
why the conflict for the delivery of the earthly people and the
inheritance is of more or exclusive importance,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

rather than what is of heaven, in which the victory and fate of the
heirs is decided; though this be more secret, and known only to the
Church. Yet it must be remembered that that by which Satan troubles the
Church, while here, is that by which he holds the world. It is, then,
the great characteristic fact we have here as to the beast so formed: he
holds the dragon's place.

I may add, I hold the beast to be simply and plainly the Roman empire.

The next characteristic of the beast was the destruction and healing of
one <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) of the heads or forms of
government. This, observe, was subsequent to, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) and not preceding, the dragon's giving him
his power. And there was admiration in all the earth at the beast. The
Roman empire and its corporate power became in the earth the object of
their admiration, and laid hold on their minds. And they
worshipped <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83) that infidel power and
hostility to God, which had given power to the beast. The form in which
this shewed itself in man was the pursuit of his own will, simply
casting off the thought and principle of obedience. The shape which it
assumed, or had in this history, was the dominant power of the Roman
empire, not in its

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

apostasy, but in its self-will <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) and
self-aggrandizement--Satan's power without reference to God,--as the
apostle expresses it, "the course of this world, the prince of the power
of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of
disobedience." Whether this arrives to any formal open act at the close
is comparatively immaterial, save as an open act bringing down open
judgment. They worshipped also the beast--honoured it as the place, and
holder, and depositary of power (God being thus really put out of
sight). Pride here was the characteristic--personal pride and power;
"Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him?"

There seems to me to be an analogy here, or contrast, in falsehood, with
the gift of power and glory by the Father to the Son. On the dazzling
influence of this false glory and power the world hang's, and takes it
as that which holds the only place of power in it, shutting practically,
as we have said, God out of' it--"the inheritance ours." And they hang
on this evil power, to hold and keep it in human will--openly man,
secretly Satan; as openly it shall be (or manifestly) Christ, and
hiddenly (*i.e.*, not in personal manifestation, save by the Son) the
Father. And the world honoured the hidden and open power as we should
honour the Father and the Son, save that in us it is in the knowledge of
their persons. It was a false anticipation in deceit and power, by our
evil of what we own in principle now, and shall be declared in
millennial power and manifestation.

Thus far we have had the fact, and Satan's doings in it. We have, then,
the power of mischief as it is conferred upon the beast, he being thus
constituted and set up in power by Satan, and receiving Satan's place at
his hand. He is then given power to show all his will and thoughts,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

and to act for so long; for all these things are controlled: this with
its consequences from verses 5 to 8. Consequently, we have here what was
done by the beast, as before what was done *to* the beast, and about the
beast, whether by Satan or in the earth. First was given to the beast
extraordinary prevailing assumption to himself, "he spoke great things;"
it is not here *doing* but *speaking* in pride; it is his character, not
his acts: next, injurious words against others flowing from this
pride--blasphemies; and he was to continue the characteristic period of
forty-two months, or to practise, to act, for that period. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85) When we come to the literal use of it,
then it is earthly and literal. So, on the other hand, they that dwell
in heaven dwell literally in heaven. It is not merely their mystic
character; otherwise it is obvious it would be the 1260 years; and they
that dwell in heaven are the heavenly-minded remnant. We have then the
application of this character of the beast to its objects; "he
blasphemed God." It was not here mere apostasy: that might be its actual
course on earth, just denying the Father and the Son; but here it is his
formal character under Satan's power. He blasphemed the "name" of God,
instead of in the place of power owning its source--"and his
tabernacle," i. e., the presence of God among the saints, as of the
wilderness, their heavenly place, for so it was (the tabernacle was not
the wilderness nor was it the temple, as in chapter xxi. 22: the Jewish
body was driven into the wilderness: in manifested and lasting glory,
the Lord God and the Lamb are the temple). But it was the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

tabernacle or tent of God: this included the most holy and holy place.
This heavenly dwelling-place of God with the saints he blasphemed; <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) he would have the earth, the inheritance,
in his own way: this was an evidence there was a power beyond all this.
He blasphemed also those who were characterized by this
dwelling-place--dwellers in heaven, the saints of heavenly places. This,
as regards heavenly things, was what characterized the Church which sits
in heavenly places. Further, it was given him to make war with the
saints and overcome them here on earth. Satan they overcame, see chapter
xii. 11; <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87) but in present physical
persecution the beast overcame, and prevailed against the saints. It is
not, however, here a question of individual death, but of prevalence, as
in chapter xii. 11. But he had the day on earth, for this was not
redeemed nor vindicated to Christ yet. This is true also as regards
(within the range of the beast) the long protracted period of years, and
on earth <span id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88) in the crisis among the
Jewish people. <span id="fr_89"></span>[4](#fn_89) The next
characteristic was, "power was given him over all kindreds, tongues, and
nations:" this still was characteristic. It was to be the dominant power
on the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

earth, assuming and giving authority over the various subject nations.

There was another point connected with this manifestation, not exactly
characteristic, as given to him, but a consequence, a resulting fact.
All the dwellers upon earth should worship him. Their character we have
already noticed--those who, living within the sphere of the application
of the word and its light, the formed scene of God's revealed moral
providence, have not their πολίτενμα ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς, are not dwellers
in heaven, and as strangers and pilgrims seek a country, but "dwell upon
the earth." These were not written (for such was the security of the
others) from the foundation of the world, in the book of life of the
Lamb that was slain--characterized, not only by the book of life, but by
the sufferings <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90) of the Holy One, with
whom they were associated as strangers and pilgrims: "He that hath ears
to hear let him hear."

There is a great principle connected with all this working and character
of the beast upon earth, "he that leadeth into captivity shall go
there;" so it will be with him: but God will not depart from His
principles. He that uses the oppressing power shall be oppressed: the
Lord will judge it, be it where it may; "he that killeth with the sword
shall be killed with the sword." The saints' part is to suffer, to
endure the continuance of evil, while God permits it and power is given
to it. If the saints meddle with its principles and avenge themselves
here, they must suffer its consequences here: "they that take the sword
shall perish with the sword." Patient suffering is the saints' place, as
Christ. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91) They are not to take the
beast's character, because they suffer under it: it is warring with
God's providential

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

government, which leaves him thus to practise. The book of life is the
book of life of the Lamb slain.

Such was the grand secular power recognized in connection with the
purpose and plans of God during this time--to which Satan's throne and
power was given. This is no description of a personal Antichrist at all,
but the characteristic description of the corporate power of the beast.
Antichrist's deadly wound, for example, was never healed. The haste
which applies passages to an object (because there may be other passages
which prove an important link of the subject of the former with that
object), often deprives us of a vast deal of the instruction of the word
of God, and deters those from pursuing that link, who have seized the
neglected parts which are now, by a particular absorbing interest, all
set aside. The terror of the day of Antichrist is not characteristic of
the saint: he has, it seems to me, a consciousness of his union with the
Lord and gathering to Him, which sets him above the terror of
Antichrist's power, or of the day of the Lord upon him.

We have had the sign of Satan as the dragon in heaven, a secret for the
Church, for those who saw things there.

We have had the beast arise out of the sea (the tumultuous movings of
the nations, the mass of peoples), and, so formed, Satan give him his
power, and throne, and great authority. Now, out of the formed
arrangement of the scene of God's moral providence, the subject-place of
light and darkness, the earth, we have another beast come up. *In form
of power* he was like the Lamb, not in real meekness and suffering; but
he took the *similitude* of His power; yet his utterance, his voice, his
expression of himself, having this form of power, was like the dragon,
the great hostile power of Satan himself, prevailing over the stars of
heaven, and persecuting on earth: a very strange and singular
combination--the similitude of the power of Christ,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

in form--of Christ in His kingly power as Messiah, yet who had been the
rejected Lamb (it was not of the Son of man openly); but the expression
of the character of Satan when he spake. We have still, as a beast, a
corporate oppressing power, as such, though, in some sense, an
individual may actually wield its power; <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) but it is not the force of the symbol
"beast." Power so concentrated is rather a horn, though there may be
close connection between them. This did not set aside the existence of
the first beast, but was of another character; yet "he exercises all the
power of the first beast," before the first beast, in his
presence--still a very singular position. His power, however, is not, as
such, over kindreds and tongues and nations, but localized, and acting
on men's minds in influence when subject--not subjecting secularly
nations. He causes *the earth*, and them that dwell therein, to worship
the first beast; but to worship him as bearing this character, "whose
deadly wound was healed." <span id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93) It is in
this restored state or headship-form

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

of government of the beast that he does this. It is not the horns he
makes them worship, but the beast, whose deadly wound (of one of his
heads) was healed. Such is his character. Lamb-like as he may be in the
form of his own power, he wields the power of the first beast before
him; that is one point: another, he makes the earth and dwellers on
it--carnal-minded men--worship the first, whose wound was healed: these
were distinct points; for the whole character is here given. As to his
own doing, there is the open exhibition of judicial power *as* of God:
it was not (like the witnesses) "fire out of their mouth," a testimony
made good in judgment, but "fire down from heaven" in the sight of
men--the apparent exercise of God's judgments

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (as Elijah <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95)
did) outwardly. All this, remark, is an ecclesiastical or spiritual
power--a power ostensibly connected with divine things falsely, for it
is evil--but ostensibly, and verified to the eyes of men by the
exhibitions of power.

Moreover, he does miracles on the earth, by which he deceives those that
dwell on it, whose character we have so often seen, and leads them to
set up a resemblance of the beast whose deadly wound was healed--this
great corporate system, with a formal headship--and to give breath to
and thus apparently vivify this image to exercise controlling
authority--not to kill, but to cause to be killed, those who did not
worship this image. This was the doing of this second beast, the
spiritual being; they had power to do this. It is not said, he had them
all killed, but he had power to cause all this. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96)

But he did oppress in earthly things; he caused all to receive "the mark
of the beast" (in profession or service, as slaves), and would allow no
man to buy or sell, "save he that had the mark;" or if he had "his
*name*" it would do, though perhaps not thus actually a slave--or "the
number of his name." A person might be a ruler or leader in this system,
and then, though not actually a slave, he would have the character of it
yet more indelibly and intelligently stamped upon him. The name and the
number of the name would be there. I do not pretend to wisdom--indeed,
far from it; but I find, if the Lord means such a sense, tradition as
well as apostasy gives the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

number of his name. As I have said in the note, these seem to me not the
*last* actions in crisis, but the character of the *preparatory* agents:
we shall see the results afterwards. <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97)
That which is formal, and not ancillary in their character, may continue
and hold its place during the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

crisis--for example the blasphemy; for this was on his heads, it was
characteristically part of himself, not particular subservient conduct.
Both these parties are found at the judgment which closes the last three
years and a half; but the last is found, not exactly in the same form,
but, if I may so speak, in an exceedingly narrowed character; for the
moral operations previous to the last critical period are very different
from the conduct and its consequences which fill up that period, though
the parties may be the same, and have just the same spirit really. The
characters here are of much wider extent, having their description
comprehensively given here, as Satan's designs previously.

The historical process of the Lord's dealings follows. Special details
of the objects and character of His judgments succeed. In chapter xv.,
as I have said, there is a new great sign seen in heaven. The
description of the secret agency and the providential instruments on
earth has finished. The gracious effects of divine grace and spiritual
power, with open testimony and judgment, follow here. Mount Zion is a
modification of what was before seen. It is not yet the Lord returned in
judgment--then he is the Son of Man. And here we have, subsequent to
this, the patience of the saints under the prevailing power of the beast
and his image, and afterwards "blessed are the dead," and the Son of man
reaping the harvest of the earth. Moreover, we have a new song <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) sung before the

I see no reason to suppose that "they shall be given into his hand"
(Dan. vii. 25) means the saints, but rather times and laws.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

throne, and before the elders, which song none but the "hundred and
forty and four thousand" could learn; so that we are not dissociated
from heavenly places, for this throne was set in heaven. Yet Zion was
not the place of the temple, but the place of royalty: but, first, of
grace--the place of God's connection, in grace, with the earth before
the temple was built, where David had prepared a place for the
ark--contrasted with Sinai, the place of law to the earth--whence, too,
the law was to go forth in grace from the city of the great King, that
Zion that bringeth glad tidings."

Here, then, anticipatively of the time when the Lord God and the Lamb
should be the temple of the heavenly Jerusalem, when withal on earth
Solomon's glory should be all displayed, stood a Lamb, maintaining still
this character, not yet appearing in that of Son of man, but now drawing
towards His royalty, towards the earth, yet associated with His
suffering people still, and with the perfect number of the remnant,
having His father's name on their forehead, the manifestation of the
character plain upon them in grace connected with Him. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) Their great

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

characteristic was, having kept themselves pure. The dwellers upon
earth, we read afterwards, had been made drunk with the poison of
Babylon's fornication, but these had kept themselves pure though Babylon
was not yet fallen. They were redeemed from among men, from the earth--a
peculiar people in the power of their lives, in the midst of those
professors, while Babylon stood--not the reign of Christ in blessing,
not the wide-spread promulgation of the gospel, but purity, as an
undefiled few, following the Lamb, the holy Sufferer.

Though the world might have slighted them, as an unknown people, yet the
full perfect remnant of them was here found assembled. And as Zion, as
we have said, was the place where the ark was before the temple was
built (and the temple was the type of the established glory), so here we
find them assembled on Mount Zion; yet we are still in close connection
with the heavenly places; for the new song is sung before the throne and
before the elders. The harvest and dealings of the Son of man are
subsequent to this and the fall of Babylon. These are redeemed from the
earth (while the earth <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) went on,
*i.e.*, the earth as described in the two preceding chapters) to be
firstfruits to God and the Lamb. <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102)

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

We meet with this connection for the first time formally expressed. It
seems to me connected with fidelity during corruption, during which the
mediatorial work of Christ was confounded, corrupted, or denied, as the
mediatorial glory is described by the terms "Throne of God and the
Lamb," <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103) "The Lord God Almighty and
the Lamb are the temple of it," &c. So, in the true bride, contrasted
with the great whore that did corrupt the earth with her fornication, we
have the elect or heavenly Church (which is spoken of, therefore, as
coming down from heaven) contrasted with that earthly system which
connects itself with the kings of the earth. It is the Lord God that
judges her. The kings of the earth have their war with the Lamb.
"Firstfruits to God and the Lamb" seem to imply separation from the evil
of the one, and suffering in faithfulness to the Lamb, from the unbelief
of the other. They follow the Lamb wherever He goes, and are without
'fault before the throne of God. It is not properly the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Father's <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)
house they are received into, as identified with Himself--as hidden in
heavenly places. It was deliverance from this corruption as regards
worship, that formed a prominent part of the next of the seven messages
of this chapter--a public general announcement for all to hear of the
everlasting <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) gospel, declaring
judgment on subsisting things; and calling for true worship to recognize
God in the supremacy of His ministrations as the source of all things.
The connection of the hour of His judgment being come and the call for
true worship, supposes a gospel preached in the midst of apostasy and
corruption before the judgment. I believe the *principle* <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106) of this began at the Reformation (though
it was by no means the accomplishment of it), and that it will not be
fulfilled till the testimony to all--even the heathen nations--for a
witness, be fulfilled. The striking feature is the announcement

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

of the hour of God's judgment <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107)
being come. The next messenger announces the fall of Babylon. The
particulars of this are more fully given us farther on; but getting its
place in the course of events is of great moment, which is given us
here. The beast and his image still continue, but things are now closing
in; for the warning is next given, If any man worship him, he shall be
made to drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture into the cup of His indignation. This, therefore, is the
point of patience and faith now for the saints, keeping entirely aloof
from all connection with the beast; for as yet it was a prevailing
though judged power.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

But now the patience of the saints (who suffered even to death, at
least) closed. They were the happy ones; they rested from their labours,
and their works followed them.

On the announcement of judgment on those that worshipped the beast or
his image, or received his mark, and of the trial being the point of the
saints' patience, a voice was heard from heaven; not the next
progressive providential announcement (for it was no part of providence
or dealings below), but the heavenly declaration of the decreed state of
the saints, to whom this place was now publicly assigned in the economy
of God. Death of the saints was now quite done with; and the blessedness
of those of whom this was the portion was brought to light (not yet by
their public manifestation on earth, but by the announcement from heaven
to the ear of faith, that the time was come): a blessedness to which the
Spirit, who had been their secret strength in labour, and even to death,
now, with the same understanding and sympathy in joy, adds its "Yea."
This introduction of the Spirit is very beautiful in this connection.
When the earth was coming into blessing, they could not be left out in
the testimony of Him who had suffered with them. It will be seen that,
on the introduction of grace to the earth ("the Lamb on Mount Zion"),
all that follows in this chapter relates to the earth; but then, by the
voice from heaven, the portion of the saints is thereon given. Their
portion is given, too, as in the reward of glory, at least in
announcement--"Their works do follow them." This refers to manifestation
in glory. (Comp. 2 Thess. i.) <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108)

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

Anything the beast does after this is not mentioned here. It is the
account of God's dealings as towards the earth (the condition of the
saints having been stated in passing). The next step therefore is the
"harvest of the earth"--the execution of separating judgment in it;
which was the actual accomplishment of the announcement of the previous
verse--at least as regards its consequences in earth.

Then comes the vintage, which is pure wrath, not discriminating
judgment. All the grapes of that which had the form of His people upon
earth are trampled in the wine-press of God's wrath. This was done
"without the city," not yet mentioned since chapter xi. And there,
notice, it was "men" were slain; here, it is "blood came out:" the
destruction is dreadful. <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109)

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

This passes then from redemption out of the really apostate earth, seen
in the one hundred and forty-four thousand, when redemption from amid
profession was necessary, to the dealing of God, first in testimony, and
then in judgment, with evil in all its forms as to men, the beast being
reserved in judgment for a fuller description. This was rather the
judgment of' men, and their corruption under those circumstances, the
Lamb's open war and victory being another thing. This is God's judgment
of the state of things, not the Lamb's war with hostile power.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

We have here, then, a general prospective view of God's dealings with
the subject--apostasy (for subject it is to Him) first, saving His
saints out of it, preserving them pure; then testimony; then judgment.

Chapter xv. begins a new sign and a distinct subject. No longer various
parties in heaven with consequent effects--the child caught away, and
the patience and faith of the saints--but the plain statement of the
wrath of God being completed or fulfilled: not here, observe, the
judgment and victory of the Lamb over the beast; that is all special and
administrative, connected with the exhibition of the power and effect in
their followers.

Here was "another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels"
(this was providential government, not the Lamb or Son of man) "having
the seven last plagues." The sea was seen before the throne. Here it was
seen, not only in its fixed purity, but this connected with trial
judicial trial. But on it, having now gotten the victory, stood those
who had overcome the beast, and his image, and his mark, and the number
of his name. Neither secular persecution nor deceitful power had
prevailed over those faithful kept ones. They had the "harps of
God"--divine and well-tuned joy. The song they sung was of a double
character--the victory of God's power, the song of Moses--Jehovah Elohim
Shaddai's works were "great and marvellous;" and the truth and justice
of the *ways* of the King of nations <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110)--the song <span
id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111)--of

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the Lamb. It was not only for power exhibited; but, as the saints, they
understood, in the Spirit of the Lamb, the justice and truth of His
ways: so they celebrate the coming recognition of the Lord. Now His
judgments were made manifest, who should not fear Him? For He only was
holy: all else had failed. The Lord alone was to be exalted.

These had gotten the victory over everything of the beast. They were
conspicuous in joy, consequent on this, before the throne of God, the
elect remnant, faithful under the beast's power. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112) There was a complete and final
separation. They are not here seen as come forth to judgment with the
Lamb, or on their thrones, for He is not yet so manifested, but singing
His song. (Comp. Ps. xcii.) The judgments were on those who had the mark
of the beast, not yet on the beast; that was by the Lamb coming with the
saints. From these they were entirely exempt--seen in heaven. Faith may
anticipate it; but the full actual accomplishment of this would be on
the rapture of the victors, taking of the victors, to their scene of
glory. They were not under the altar, nor necessarily

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

killed; but they had the victory, refusing the mark of the beast.

The temple of the tabernacle of the testimony was now seen opened. In
chapter xi. it was the ark of the covenant that was seen securing all
for His people, while the power of evil remained unpunished; here, the
tabernacle of His testimony. For judgment was to go forth according to
His word. His judgments were made manifest, but for the deliverance of
His earthly people according to that word. The deliverance of the saints
is judgment, the judgment of the wicked. This was according to His
governing power over creation in providence. One of the four beasts gave
the angels the vials--vials fall of the wrath of God, who liveth for
ever and ever. The return is to past dispensation and circumstance in
this wrath, to Him whom we saw sitting on the throne before they were
opened, according to that character in which He judges by and from
Himself. The glory of God now displayed itself (*i.e.*, not in bright
blessing), but in the power and influence of His judgment, as Sinai
smoked, and "there went up a smoke out of his nostrils." "The tabernacle
of the testimony was opened," but not the callings of grace or warnings,
but for the execution and manifestation of judgments. It was not a time
of testimony, in this sense, but of judgment, and no one could come into
the temple: and, as the Lord speaks of the land, telling them their
testimony would close ("These be the days of vengeance, Flee!"), so here
(the saints first removed), it is no longer a time of reception but of
judgment. Separation having being made (*i.e.*, within the range of the
beast's influence), no one could now enter into the heavenlies: and the
earthly people who had taken and received the mark of the beast were
judged.

The judgment as yet, however, was not one of destruction.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The heavenlies <span
id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113) and the earth were now separated; and
instead of entering into the former, judgment was flowing from them on
the latter. But it was not the actual judgment of the quick by the Son
of man, but providential dealings of the wrath of God as such, and the
wrath filled up in them.

I do not say that this is the last woe. But we have-here that which was
connected with it, "Thy wrath is come;" and I am disposed to think all
that follows in that verse, though other things are mentioned also here.

But as the woe in chapter xii., pronounced on the descent of Satan, was
on the earth and on the sea, when he was cast out of heaven, so here, on
the distinction between heaven and earth and closing of the heavenlies
(the saints being on the sea of glass), the judgment sent on the earth
falls on the earth and sea too.

First, it was "poured" in the stricter sense "on the earth . . . . . a
grievous sore." A manifested plague from God fell on the men who had
received the mark of the beast, and who worshipped his image.

Next, all form of life was turned into death in the mass of the
population, "and every living soul" (they are not spoken of as written
in the book of life; but those who externally had life) "died." The
profession of being alive to God was blotted out of the mass of unformed
nations.

The sources of the state of the population became also the form and
power of death--the just judgment of those who had put the saints to
death. These were general judgments on the mass and on their condition.
Griesbach

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

reads, "I heard the altar saying." "Another out of the altar" would
apparently mean another angel, which would be unsuited to all the force
of these images. The force of "the altar" generally is clear; because
the slain saints are looked at as offered, as burnt offerings to God.
(Comp. chapter vi. 9, 10.) And the altar may be here heard to cry, as
the witness of all this slaughter of the saints of God. I hardly think
one saint would give this testimony from under or out of the altar. If
the ordinary reading be correct, then an angel announces it out of the
altar, recalling the mind to their having been in their death as burnt
sacrifices to God.

The fourth angel deals with the supreme power over the earth. But its
effect was only to make it hotter. Men suffered from intolerable tyranny
now; they would not be subject to God--now they only blasphemed Him.

The fifth poured out his vial on the throne of the beast, which was
really Satan's throne, the seat of his dominion and power. The effect
was darkness and confusion; and they, the people of his dominion,
"gnawed their tongues for pain." The beast and his armies, his active
evil and mischief, are not in question now; the vial was poured upon his
throne. There God's judgment reached him, in the other the Lamb's. The
pains and sores here connected seem to identify this class with the
first. God had still, to them, only the character of the God of heaven.

Under the sixth, that which flowed through, and gave its strength,
character, and prosperity to Babylon was dried up; that "the way of the
kings from the sun-rising might be prepared." The final destruction of
Babylon and the final combats still remained.

There is reference here plainly to the position of the Euphrates. It is
not, I conceive, the kings "of the east,"

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

but the kings who came from the east, τῶν ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν ἡλίου. This
drying up of the great river Euphrates prepared their way. I suppose,
from other passages, the Euphrates will, at any rate temporarily, be
dried up for Israel to pass over; but I do not see that this passage
applies to it in the midst of a symbolical prophecy, the vial being said
to be poured out on it. It is commonly, from a previous passage,
considered that it is the drying up of the Turkish power: it may be so,
or at least there may be something analogous, taking the whole chapter
in a subordinate and preparatory sense, which I believe it has had and
is having in our own days (as I have expressed of other chapters, only
over a longer period). Such application I believe this chapter has had;
and this falls in consistently with the whole plan of the protracted
scheme of prophecy, because the second beast loses its character as a
beast and becomes a false prophet before the final close.

The saints in chapter xv. had their victory over the effort to make them
worship the image of the beast; but it was the second beast, not the
false prophet, who sought to make them worship the image of the first.
But here he has the character of the false prophet, so that thus far
(*i.e.*, in principle) the victory had been obtained and could be
celebrated, by the Spirit, for the Church. But when we come to a more
positive fulfilment of judgment, and the actual bringing it into effect,
on the separation of the saints out of the scene, and the closing the
testimony of grace which gathered into the heavenlies, then there must
be something more distinct, something which makes way for the eastern
kings to take their part in the great catastrophe. The barrier and
resources of the western Roman empire were dried up, so that the way for
this coming in of the kings from the east was prepared.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thereon it is, that the unclean spirits go out
to gather the kings of the whole world to the battle of the great day of
God Almighty.

Chapter xiv. had given, so to speak, the ecclesiastical dealings of the
Lord; and testimony and grace was there. In chapter xv. we have the
separation of the saints appropriated to the heavenlies; and then, in
chapter xvi., the judgment on the earth, reaching primarily those who
had received the mark: all this in relation to *God*--subjection and
fidelity to Him--not the Lamb nor the Son of man wielding His power as
King of kings and Lord of lords.

But upon this judgment <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) (the drying
up of the Euphrates) the last struggle must commence; and Satan uses all
his energies to prepare his forces: but it is only for the battle of the
great clay of God Almighty. This is done (being a vision in the midst of
the course of the judgment) by the influence and principles of the
positive exercise of infidel self-will and enmity to Christ's power, the
concentrating spirit of empire in the beast (the Roman power), and the
spirit of Antichrist here (having changed its secular power of a beast
for its false influence on minds as a prophet). We see the sort of place
this holds in Judah in Jeremiah's time, and with Ahab, &c.: the manner
of it may be different, but it exercises this *guiding* character in
apostasy (the power to be wielded being held by another),

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

These three gather the kings (τῆς οἰκουμένης) of the whole organized
habitable earth to the battle of the great day of God Almighty. But now
Christ was nigh at hand. All this went on with multiplied human plans
perhaps, but to the saints it was the sign that Christ was at hand. And
He gathered them together." Who is He? This was the power and providence
of God by Christ, I apprehend: whatever the Satanic influence or
instrumentality, it was done, if through that, by Him. The spirits were
to go forth to gather; and they gathered: but it was really the Lord's
doing in judgment (Comp. Mic. iv. 11--13).

This battle, the scene of the Lamb's judgments, against whom the hatred
and opposition was, is reserved for His coming forth, and the display of
His power. We have an intimation of its connection with Hebrew
localities: the place has a Hebrew name, Armageddon. But this comes in
here by the bye; for it is the account of God's wrath, and the gathering
is all that has this character providentially. If there be allusion to
the place and term Megiddo, I should suppose it was, of the two, rather
Judges v. than the case of Josiah.

The seventh vial was poured into the air, that which affected the whole
scene below, the place of universal government and influence. The wrath
was still in the earth: so, in fact, in all. And now a voice from the
throne in the temple announced that all was finished (γέγονε), and the
power of God displayed itself in judgments and thunderings of His power;
for "the voice of the Lord is mighty in operation." And never was so
great an earthquake--so great a disruption of all the elements of
organized social existence. "The great city" (that frame-work and centre
of this organization) "was divided into three parts, and the cities of
the nations fell"--all the centres of organization of the nations extern
to

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

the great city. And great Babylon is here presented, not merely in its
civil sociality, but its full character before--"great Babylon came in
remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of His wrath." The particulars of her judgment also are
reserved for a fuller and exacter display, together with her character,
as was that of the beast. The precursory judgments have been stated
here, and the order of these final ones placed. The fall of Babylon is
connected with chapter xiv., where testimony is going on, as we have
seen.

Direct destructive judgment, in the way of plague, not proper judgment
before the throne, came down on men, along with this bringing the
corporate system of Babylon into remembrance. It was neither repentance,
nor, as I have said, anything of the final judgment of the throne--an
earthly thing; for men blasphemed God because of it, for it was very
great. Such is the effect of God's judgments when the wilful rebellious
heart is unchanged; such have all of us, unless in new life by grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[68:1](nbr04.htm#fr_70) Should not this be, "Now
is come the salvation and power and kingdom of our God, and the
authority of His Christ"?

<span id="fn_71"></span>[69:1](nbr04.htm#fr_71) \[I have no doubt *it*
is contained in the catching up of the man-child, as well as Christ
Himself.\]

<span id="fn_72"></span>[69:2](nbr04.htm#fr_72) It is looked at
corporately only as in heaven (as we have often seen) from the end of
chapter iii. The accuser of our brethren, therefore, is spoken of; for
the voice from heaven could not speak of suffering or accusation of
saints there, but of those who have been liable to it on earth. On the
supposition noticed above, these would be the class of sufferers still
to be gathered as slain in the last testimony, or who would not worship
the beast.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[70:1](nbr04.htm#fr_73) The time of Jacob's
trouble; but he is delivered out of it.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[70:2](nbr04.htm#fr_74) We have here the
important fact, that, after the celebration of the coming of salvation,
and the kingdom of our God, and the power of His Christ, and the casting
Satan down out of the heavenly places, three years and a half elapse
before his trial and persecution of the Jewish people closes; and they
are the object of his hatred; and Christ does not appear in their
behalf.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[71:1](nbr04.htm#fr_75) \[The Lamb is always the
suffering rejected One, who is after all the Lion of the tribe of Judah,
the centre of glory. In the historical fact this takes place on the
casting down of Satan, in which the kingdom and power are first
displayed.\]

<span id="fn_76"></span>[72:1](nbr04.htm#fr_76) This passage is a
remarkable one as regards the crisis; for the joy is properly in heaven.
The Church, properly speaking, is not in question. A voice accordingly
is heard in heaven; but it clearly expresses the mind of God in the
Church above; for it says "the accuser of our brethren," and has the
prospect of the kingdom as now come. It is as a gleaming out of the
Church's joy in heaven, before the saints are manifested with Christ, on
the cessation of the sufferings of those left on earth, and the clearing
of the heavenlies. The voice of heaven, the Church, is here rather
identified with the priesthood and expectation of Christ, but that in a
triumphant character, because accomplished by the casting down of Satan,
and the kingdom now come, though not yet established for three years and
a half upon earth.

I apprehend the proper application of the catching up of the man-child,
besides Christ, to be to the Church of the first-born--His body, and to
be undated, save by its precedence of all ulterior events, *i.e.*, of
all events below, and even of the war in heaven; for Christ and His body
cannot take their new relative place on earth, till Satan and his angels
are cast down.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[73:1](nbr04.htm#fr_77) Although I say their
source, which is true as to the administration of events and the moral
state of things, yet there is passed by here (as not the subject of the
chapter, and what can be hardly called an event, as changing the whole
order of administration and divine government itself),--the shaking of
the heavens, in order to the appearing of the sign and government of the
Son of man there: but this does not properly come in here; and therefore
I have only thus noticed it. Its date in the course of events may be
seen in Matthew xxiv. and Mark xiii.; but it forms no part of the course
of mere human events, but is a change in the heavenly administration of
their order. But the war in heaven, and the consequent casting down of
Satan to earth, do alter altogether the relative position of the saints,
heaven, and earth. The direct administrative exercise of all this is
deferred for three years and a half, to give time for the ripening of
God's purposes, the separation of the remnant of the Jews in their
tribulation, and the full Satanic rising of the earth against heaven:
but heaven could announce its joy at once, and woe to the inhabiters of
the earth and of the sea. But, the administration not being yet changed,
things otherwise <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> went on unrebuked,
until the earth being worse far by this, and in Satanic energy enlisted
against heaven, the Son of Man has to take the power into His own hands,
and the administration itself is changed. Then begins the administration
of the world to come, whereof we speak. This last is a most important,
and scripture speaks of it as a very seldom, event. It is what I
apprehend is called the end; "Then shall the end come." Sinai was the
manifest beginning; though there were other points connected with it in
the world and earth, to wit, Noah and Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[74:1](nbr04.htm#fr_78) Specially in his
workings, in these last events.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[75:1](nbr04.htm#fr_79) *i.e.*, of Daniel's
fourth beast with this.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[75:2](nbr04.htm#fr_80) \[This is an attempt to
connect by general terms the protracted period of the beast's existence
and the crisis, or last half week;. and till the clear light of the end,
this served to guide the conscience in a general way.\]

<span id="fn_81"></span>[76:1](nbr04.htm#fr_81) \[That is, it was seen
in this state subsequent to the healing what had received the deadly
wound.\] I suppose the wounded head was imperial. Many considerations
go, I think, to shew it, and make the point pretty clear. I doubt that
it was fully developed as a beast till then.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[76:2](nbr04.htm#fr_82) \[Rather it was seen
subsequent to it. First, he sees the general character of the beast as a
whole, and where his throne and authority, there this particular
characteristic in the state in which he considers him, not of the beast
in himself, but of the beast as he then saw him.\]

<span id="fn_83"></span>[76:3](nbr04.htm#fr_83) Admiration implies the
effect on a senseless imagination, though excited perhaps by a strong
cause--not the judgment or affections.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[77:1](nbr04.htm#fr_84) This, however, is the
apostasy of power.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[78:1](nbr04.htm#fr_85) This must be taken for
the last period of half the week, if taken in crisis and applied to the
full manifestation of his character, which the verse seems to do. It is
no part of this passage to say it is the last half week, but merely to
attach to the beast the characteristic period of his continuance. \[But
it gives that period as the duration of his practising.\]

<span id="fn_86"></span>[79:1](nbr04.htm#fr_86) \[This is all he could
do now. Satan the accuser was cast out of heaven, and indeed the saints
there. The beast's tendencies would have pleased the Jews before. Now it
persecuted the saints on earth too. The other Jews would be now in
rebellion.\]

<span id="fn_87"></span>[79:2](nbr04.htm#fr_87) This had been previously
to this period, which commenced on the closing of that by the casting
down of Satan. Up to the that they had suffered actual death; at least
they had not loved their lives unto death.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[79:3](nbr04.htm#fr_88) But I doubt that there
is any dated period connected with verse 7. It is characteristic, not a
question of time.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[79:4](nbr04.htm#fr_89) The elect there are
saved as regards the flesh \[save those who, being killed, get a
heavenly portion, the saints of the heavenlies of Daniel and those
particularly noticed as not worshipping him in chapter xx., here\].

<span id="fn_90"></span>[80:1](nbr04.htm#fr_90) This will have its
literal force in crisis in the land.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[80:2](nbr04.htm#fr_91) "If when you do well,
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God,"
says the Apostle Peter.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[82:1](nbr04.htm#fr_92) \[As the eighth head was
the beast.\]

<span id="fn_93"></span>[82:2](nbr04.htm#fr_93) The trials under the
beast are distinct from the mere preservation of purity; and the final
warning to have nothing to do with the beast comes after the
announcement of the fall of Babylon. Hence, we have the celebration of
the hundred and forty-four thousand, who have kept themselves pure; and
afterwards, distinct, those who have got the victory over the beast. It
does not follow that some of them may not have been involved in both
trials, or have kept themselves from one, and suffered under the Other,
but they are treated as distinct subjects; and there may be those who
are under the trial of the beast's actings, in general, preparatory to
his final conflicts in Judea, who have never been in the circumstances,
at any rate fully, of the hundred and forty-four thousand. They are
numbered before Babylon falls. The warning against the beast has its
peculiar force after. That chapter xiii. has had accomplishment in the
protracted period of years, may easily be understood; and if applied to
what is closing, its application is rather preparatory, not final; when
<span id="page_83">p. 83</span> the second beast falls, as a false
prophet merely (his secular character as a beast gone), this change has
taken place in him; he has lost his secular character and power as a
beast, and is merely a false prophet. It seems to me that all this is
previous to the last actings of Antichrist in Judea as the wilful
king: <span id="fr_94"></span>[\*](#fn_94) they are quite distinct in
character. This is preparatory in order to bring them, the dwellers on
earth, into his subjection, and carry them with him. The whole, save the
period of his blasphemous continuance, is not here date, but character,
or doings. He may draw after him the Gentile dwellers upon earth in this
way; and, when in the land, the same process may locally and
specifically continue there. The only date to the second beast is the
restoration of the wounded (as I suppose) imperial head.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[82:\*](nbr04.htm#fr_94) <span id="page_83">p.
83</span> \[This is a very important remark, which had long passed out
of my mind. I doubt its being quite exact, in saying "all this is
previous." It is distinct in character; but both may go on together and
in its distinct form at the end apply to Palestine, though dwellers on
earth be still characteristic. When the beast falls in Palestine, the
second beast is merely viewed as a false prophet; his person as kingly
seems superseded by the beast's presence. As in Isaiah xxiv. the
difficulty is as to the force of earth. The whole passage requires
maturer consideration. Note, the world, and kindred, tongues, and
nations are not formally put under the influence of the second beast.\]

<span id="fn_95"></span>[84:1](nbr04.htm#fr_95) \[Note here how solemn
it is that he should give the sign, which under Elijah was test of
Jehovah being God; and in 2 Thessalonians ii., what in Acts ii. is the
proof of Jesus being the Christ.\]

<span id="fn_96"></span>[84:2](nbr04.htm#fr_96) I repeat the remark of
the note on pp. [82](#page_82), 83; all this is characteristic, not of
time, save the restoration of the imperial head.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[85:1](nbr04.htm#fr_97) We have the distinction
of periods, I think, very distinctly marked in Daniel vii. The character
of the little horn--the last evil form of presumption against the Most
High in the beast--we have in verse 8: that is, its character before
God. The prophet saw this till the thrones were set; in 9, 10, judgment
set and books opened, not now the time of testimony. Then again he
beholds till the beast was slain, verse 11, because of the little horn's
great words. After this, the Son of man's kingdom is spoken of as given;
this in connection with the Lord. The saints, whether of the heavenly
places or simply saints, are introduced in the explanation, verse 21;
the character of the horn, as to the saints, is given--saints, whether
of the heavenlies or not--it is the horn's character. Then this is till,
first, the Ancient of days comes; then, judgment is given to the saints
of the heavenlies; thirdly, the saints, heavenly or on earth, possess
the kingdom. As to the actings of the little horn explained, we have,
first, his presumption against the Most High; next, he wears out the
saints of the heavenlies, and takes the Jewish times and festivals into
his power, and they are given up to him for a prescribed period; then,
the judgment sits, as in the close of verses 10, 11. Verse 25 seems to
me, then, properly the three years and a half antecedent to the
commencement of the judgment or the judgment-sitting; after that a
process goes on to take away, to consume, and to destroy; and then the
kingdom, under the whole heaven, is given to the *people of the* saints
of the Most High, thus connecting the earthly people at Jerusalem, the
city of the great King, with the heavenly people.

Chapter viii. I conclude to be an entirely different and opposed enemy;
and I believe the confounding the Assyrian and Antichrist <span
id="fr_98"></span>[\*](#fn_98) has much tended to obscure prophecy, and
embroil the mind as to the simplicity of its statements. <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> One is the enemy of Christ as coming from
heaven with the saints; the other His enemy, as associated with the
accepted remnant of the Jews at Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[85:\*](nbr04.htm#fr_98) \[Or even the beast,
for I do not hold the first beast as the personal Antichrist.\]

<span id="fn_99"></span>[86:1](nbr04.htm#fr_99) This is a very important
epoch. In chapter v. 9, they sing a new song. There was new subject of
praise when the Lamb who was in the midst of the throne took the book,
and assumed the <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> development of what was
to introduce the inheritance. The redeemed could say then, "They shall
reign," although the Lamb was still above, and the action of His power
was only heavenly or providential. Here, the Lamb, not having yet laid
aside this character and assumed that of Son of man, and judge, and
warrior, yet is associated with earth, and stands on Mount Sion. And
therefore they sing a new song before the living creatures and before
the elders: these not themselves taking a part in it (for it was not the
mystic Church's portion, nor the great witness therefore of redemption
for creation), but a special occasion of praise on the Lamb's taking a
place on Mount Sion, and associating Himself, though in a special manner
with the earth \[the once rejected Messiah\].

<span id="fn_100"></span>[87:1](nbr04.htm#fr_100) \[This seems to me, as
in John, the Father's name declared as He then revealed it, and as
Christ said, "My Father, of whom ye say that he is your God."\]

<span id="fn_101"></span>[88:1](nbr04.htm#fr_101) The second beast had
caused the earth to worship the first beast.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[88:2](nbr04.htm#fr_102) This, taken in the
crisis, would seem to imply that, besides the Church, properly so
called, whose place was in heaven, and, in that sense, the earth done
with, there would be a remnant redeemed from the earth still connected
with the Lamb (*i.e.*, the Sufferer owned by the name of His Father) and
learning a song sung before the throne, and before the elders--a
peculiar class, and having a song thus specially theirs. They were a
firstfruits redeemed from the earth, redeemed from among men. The body
of the Church, in its heavenly character, had passed out of the scene
before--had nothing to do with the earth. The refusing the beast after
is for <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> preservation in an earthly
place--a preservation enforced by a warning of unmingled wrath in the
presence of the holy angels, the ministers of His providence, and of the
Lamb, the Sufferer, whose grace, and power, and title, they refused and
rejected in the great controversy. These hundred and forty-four thousand
are more circumstantially like the Lord in His earthly portion and
taking up. They were not corporately looked at as the bride of Christ,
but as holding a special place as virgins--still, as contrasted with the
harlotry of evil in the protracted period, the remnant peculiarly and
separately preserved--in the crisis, a special remnant which we have
noted.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[89:1](nbr04.htm#fr_103) \[We must not confound
the throne of God and the Lamb, and the revelation of the Father in the
Son: our revelation of God is the latter, blessed be His name. The
former is governmental glory. There is an analogy in the protracted
period; but salvation ascribed to God and to the Lamb, and firstfruits
from the earth, introduce the millennium. See following note.\]

<span id="fn_104"></span>[90:1](nbr04.htm#fr_104) They were, rather, a
witness of the purity of the throne and of the Lamb, as King of kings,
and Lord of lords, for what became Him in the earth, and therefore, in
the full sense, are the dawn of that bright and blessed morning of the
earth from the Creator and Redeemer of it.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[90:2](nbr04.htm#fr_105) Everlasting I take to
be distinguished from any temporary or provisional good news. Canaan was
a gospel to Israel; the birth of Christ in the flesh was good news to
Israel. But this is the everlasting, αἰώνοις;--the full complete promise
of the results in the Son of man, formed on the intentions and rights of
God; and that as by redemption. It involved, therefore, the kingdom;
though, in some cases, only the basis might be laid. Any diligent
student of the gospels will see the transition, from promises presented
to the Jews in the person of Christ in the flesh, to this everlasting
gospel. Of this it is said, "Except a man be born again he cannot see
the kingdom of God;" and then earthly things and heavenly are brought
in.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[90:3](nbr04.htm#fr_106) \[The time given to
Jezebel to repent was, so to speak, run out then. Chapter ii.\]

<span id="fn_107"></span>[91:1](nbr04.htm#fr_107) When the everlasting
gospel then goes forth, it is not the bringing in a universal state of
blessedness, but a call to fear God amongst wide-spread apostasy of all
sorts, "for the hour of His judgment has come," as "this gospel of the
kingdom must first be preached to all nations, and then shall the end
come," *i.e.*, of the age. And this last, while I fully recognize what
precedes as involving the principles, is the strong final sense of the
passage, and therefore, as noticed in the preceding note, God is
announced as a Creator, who had a right to His creatures, and presented
Himself as such to men on the earth, as against all their idolatries,
resuming (first in testimony) His place as God in the earth. Babylon,
which had been the great corrupter of the earth, and the centre of
idolatry, is next judged of God.

There is another point connected with the hundred and forty-four
thousand and the everlasting gospel. The hundred and forty-four thousand
are redeemed from the earth, where the testimony is already a redemption
from the midst of prevailing evil in the limited sphere so
designated--in the crisis, probably, entirely confined to the land.
Before the judgment ("the end") comes, the everlasting gospel goes out
afresh to the nations (many of them, doubtless, in actual idolatry) to
announce the coming judgment, and to testify the good news of the coming
millennial kingdom and blessedness. These two spheres--earth, and people
and tongues and nations and languages--we have noticed as contrasted in
repeated instances.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[92:1](nbr04.htm#fr_108) In the protracted
period, verse 13 would refer, I apprehend, to the announcement of that
blessedness of the saints, which the harvest, looked at as in Matthew
xiii., in its application to them, would accomplish--in the crisis, to
their manifestation in this. This distinction is only what we actually
find in the interpretation <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> of that
parable in Matthew. In the parable, the tares are gathered in bundles in
the field, and the wheat into the garner: in the explanation, the tares
are burned in the field, and the righteous shine forth. This is
precisely the difference, and only this, I make here. The harvest and
vintage are two acts of judgment, the harvest being of much wider scope;
and, accordingly, in it there is not clear riddance of the corners of
the field as to the wheat. It may distinctively clear and take the
wicked, leaving those spared for earthly blessing. The vintage is pure
vengeance on a specific object (the religious system), which has its
character from earth--in the crisis, I apprehend, Jewish. Its grapes are
now fully ripe. This vengeance is actual earthly judgment: "blood came
out of the wine-press" far and wide. It was an actual and dreadful
judgment in the land. All these--all the contents of this chapter--are
God's religious warnings or dealings with the earth.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[93:1](nbr04.htm#fr_109) There may be an
application of what passes in this chapter to the crisis; and, in such
case, many dates would be ascertained, but the application is less
particular of part. Thus the song, being before the throne of God, must
be taken only as the commencing association of heavenly with earthly
things, and the re-cognition of the earthly by the heavenly powers. The
Lamb, <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> standing on Mount Zion, would
recognize the return of the Jews into suffering associated with the Lamb
amongst them in grace (that is, of a remnant among them). The
everlasting gospel would then be strictly that mentioned in Matthew,
"the gospel of the kingdom," (*i.e.*, that Christ was just coming in His
kingdom), which I have no doubt will so go out in all nations before the
end. The fall of Babylon would precede the harvest of the earth, and
then the last time of trouble would be to the Jewish people such as
never was, and Michael would stand up for them, and the sanctuary at
length be cleansed. In this case, I am inclined to think, the vine of
the earth would be rather the Jewish part of the profession, as in
Isaiah lxv., lxvi. Such judgment is certain. But there will be also the
apostasy to be destroyed; but that is rather in war against the royalty
of Christ then, and has assumed a worse form than mere apostasy or
profession. Viewed in this light, "without the city" would, in the
general application, refer to the great city of the corporate Roman
empire; in the application in crisis it would, as before, be taken for
Jerusalem.

In the application in the text ([p. 90](#page_90)) of the claim of true
worship, there are most important principles--the acknowledging God, not
man, as the source in creative power of every blessing, or order of
blessing, or power, or streams and fountains of true influence, and
consequent condition of men--than which there cannot be a more important
principle possible for daily use. The sense given above in the text I
believe to be the most important for the Church in the present time.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[95:1](nbr04.htm#fr_110) \[This is acknowledged
to be the true reading.\]

<span id="fn_111"></span>[95:2](nbr04.htm#fr_111) Though this chapter be
a distinct sign, yet, like the eleventh and twelfth, it is not
unconnected. It seems to apply itself to those who have passed through
the fire--not merely escaped corruption when Babylon prevailed. And the
judgment is not now the fall of Babylon and a warning against any's
receiving the mark of the beast, but judgment and plague on those who
had; <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> the faithful being out of the way
on the sea of glass mingled with fire. They had suffered, but were
therefore out of the way of the judgments: still the judgment is in the
earth.

In subject it follows, but is not, I apprehend, chronologically
consequent, but a distinct design, more secular in its general character
of judgments and dealings. The last of the saints too, not left on
earth, were now out of the way. Compare xiv. 13.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[96:1](nbr04.htm#fr_112) The imperial head
subsisted in the apostolic times--Cæsar. It may be noticed that the head
was destroyed in the West, and, taken in the protracted sense, was
restored and continued with the continuance of the hierarchy and the
pope set up at Rome who had the character of the image here described.
Any further or more literal accomplishment of it will have its place
more fitly in a subsequent chapter.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[98:1](nbr04.htm#fr_113) I doubt, as to the
crisis, that the heavens were yet changed--whether these signs did not
belong to the old heavens.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[101:1](nbr04.htm#fr_114) Although I do not
doubt this will have an actual physical accomplishment in gathering of
the nations or their powers and armies to battle, yet, as that which
concerns us all, I would say that in that which the Church is entitled
to understand--the more hidden working of the enemy in principle--this
is just going on: that a moral, and so far partial, fulfilment of what
preceded has taken place, and there is that which morally gathers them
now taking place, so that we have a date of locality as to the Church's
spiritual judgment and position given: the separation then only marked
in character, and morally also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Five](nbr05)
