[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nbr04)  [Next](nbr06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NOTES ON THE REVELATION.

# Part Five

The apostle is now called away to a fuller description of the woman and
the beast, not called up to heaven at all now, for her place and her
judgment are on earth. He is called by one of the angels, or messengers
of judgment, that had the seven vials of the wrath of God. These angels
had the character of perfect righteousness both divine and human: the
golden girdle in which the certain energy and pure power of divine
righteousness is maintained and vindicated; and white robes, in which
the spotlessness of human sanctity and faultlessness, as of God, is
expressed. One of these now comes to show the prophet the judgment of
the great whore that is seated, in her malignant influence, on the
masses of peoples. That is,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

the revelation is made according to the character and estimate of this
judgment.

The interpretation of this chapter is clearly of the greatest possible
importance, as to the form of the corporate power of man, as apart from
God, and setting up for independence of Him in the latter days. However,
the judgment (though much information be given of her, and of the beast
that is found to carry her) is definitely of her in one character,--the
great whore. She is judged as such, though much thereon depends; and
this I certainly conclude to be mainly her ecclesiastical character,
just as the bride, the Lamb's wife, with whom she is in eminent
contrast, is the Church; though heavenly glory be her portion, as false
earthly glory is the great whore's. But the union with the Lamb is the
real distinction of the one; her meretricious conduct (ecclesiastical
corruption) is of the other: doubtless the glory of the world is
eminently and intimately associated with this. Had she not this in play,
much of her grandeur and influence would be lost, and she would cease to
have this character. Her union with the world was her whoredom. Babylon
may have a king over it--so it is spoken of in the Old Testament; but
this is not its character here--she rides the beast. In the Old
Testament, she is never, accordingly, spoken of as committing
fornication; for in a certain sense (though, perhaps, through him, an
evil one), she belonged to the king of the earth: he had made her and
builded her for his majesty and his glory. Here, she rides on the beast,
using him,. though afterwards hated and impoverished, &c., by the ten
kings. Babylon of old had deceived the nations by the multitude of her
sorceries and enchantments; but that is another thing: evil or good, she
belonged to the king of Babylon; she rose by him, and fell with him.
Here she has no king, but lives in evil, her own mistress, with the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

kings of the earth. Israel was an adulteress, <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115) not Babylon, then.

*For this* she is judged, though other things and all worldly eclat
might surround her, and give her influence over the minds of others.

In the Old Testament, fornication is attached, not to Babylon, but to
Tyre, with reference to her merchandise.

The material feature here is, that Babylon is not the seat of earthly
power, ruled over and headed at any time by him who exercises apostate
royalty upon the earth, but an independent woman. So was Tyre in the
world, as thus spoken of: and, where the Prince of Tyre <span
id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116) is spoken of, it is not in human earthly
language, but the highest character of apostasy, such as can be reached
in its full character only by the great enemy, and, it would seem to me,
connected with a church or religious standing--a character and apostasy
far more terrible than the apostasy of the world, headed by its king, in
its full form builded by him. Worldly association, then, this has, and
wide extent of merchandising and wealth--a great system of worldly
prosperity; but its character for judgment is her fornication, not her
purple, her scarlet, and the like,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

though all these were connected with it, and designated her. Judgment
ruined her as to these; but they were not the cause of judgment. And
this is always the case: the becoming worldly, and by this spirit, and
to gain this wealth, pandering to the passions of the kings of the
earth, is just the very cause of this. But, as in old time the blood of
all righteous men was found in God's house, then apostate--not in the
world's or the wicked one's outwardly--judged in Jerusalem, not in
heathen Rome, so, ever: the ecclesiastical form of wickedness takes the
lead, not the worldly. The gainsaying is recorded as the gainsaying of
Korah, not of Dathan and Abiram, though the earth might swallow them up
too; and the beast may be judged as well as Babylon, but not presented
in the same sad terms in God's moral judgment, in the sight of men.
Moral corruption is ever worse than evil power.

Babylon was also the mother of harlots, and of the abominations or
idolatries of the earth. The invocation of a demon, under the name of
Paul, was worse than under the name of Hercules or Theseus; and the
uprooting of the mediation of Christ more fatal and destructive (as of
the remedy itself), than that of the unity of the one true Jehovah. She
was here a mystery. The apostasy of worldly power and grandeur was no
mystery to the escaped remnant of Babylon, and the Patmos prisoner of
Domitian. That the Church, which the apostle watched over, should assume
this form, was a mystery indeed,--ruling that which he was suffering
under as a poor despised follower of the crucified Jesus, and corrupting
a world of which the Church properly was the only true light. She was
the mother of the abominations of the earth; but her sway was over the
many waters, peoples, and tongues, and nations, and languages. Rome, I
cannot help believing, was the centre of this system. The golden cup was
in the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

whore's hand, not she a golden cup in the Lord's--she governed and rode
the ten-horned beast, that was her long general character, but not her
final one: she became the prey and spoil of the kings which had their
power with the beast. They gave their power, not to her any longer, but
to him. She, not the beast, was drunk with the blood of the saints, and
that, as seen sitting in her full ease and comfort there. And this was
matter of deep astonishment to the apostle, that she who connected
herself in his mind with such a character and pretension should be such.

Thus far the vision: but the interpretation follows, and (as has been
elsewhere remarked of Daniel and the parables) the interpretation
carries the facts of the prophecy into a further scene, altogether
consequent upon that in the prophecy. "The beast which thou *sawest*."
The interpretation takes up the time of the passage into this further
scene, which did not exist in the actual vision of the apostle; which
saw (in order to give her her full character) the woman in all her
splendour. "The beast which thou sawest, *was*" (to wit, the fourth
great empire), "and *is* not" (*i.e.*, had not, at the noticed period,
its united formal character), "and shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit"--shall resume this formal character, under the direct influence of
Satan, and then be destroyed. And all within the prophetic range of his
power (the *earth*--the woman's influence extended farther, "she sat on
the *waters*") should be amazed when they thus saw it. The seven heads
are seven mountains, on which the woman, not the whore, sitteth, "but
that great city which reigneth." This cannot mean merely Babylon; for
that was the whore's name already on her forehead, and therefore not an
explanation to be given. That was her symbolic character; this her local
explanation. There are also seven kings; these are <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

not the horns, they were not moreover contemporaneous. "Five are fallen,
one is" (I take this, from verse 9, to be a direct present explication
to the apostle), "the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must
continue a short space." This made the seven. One brief-lived head of
the beast was to arise before the last, after the apostle's days. The
Spirit of God has not thought it material to give a special designation
of this or the previous heads, as not in the present scene affecting the
Church or purposes of God, but merely identifying the beast, and not
suffering the Church to be led astray.

But there is that which is more distinctly noted, after all this is
completed, and all that properly formed the beast in full--an eighth
head <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117) (which is the beast itself,
as arising directly from Satan's power and influence) arises, which is
yet of the seven, which is connected with and takes its place among the
other heads and forms of the Roman empire, but is also a distinct,
definite power, the resurrection-beast of Satan's power; and in this
form it is that it goes into perdition.

We have now the woman, the beast, and its heads, described. We have then
the conduct of the ten horns, the ten kings. These properly belong to
the beast; they had received no kingdom at the time of the vision,
formed no part of the then system, but would receive power
contemporaneously with the beast. I do not see that this states that
they would exist all the time along with the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

beast, <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) but that they would not be
a power supplanting or without connection with the beast, but that they
would exist themselves, contemporaneously, and while the beast existed.
They would give their power to the beast. I have no doubt that mainly
the beast in its last form is here spoken of, but it is their character
generally. They give their kingdom and power to the beast; they have one
mind as to this. But though they did this corporately, they had a mind
of their own, or at least practically in action. These shall make war
with the Lamb: this shall be their conduct and end. The Lamb shall
overcome them, for He is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and then we
have His companions the Church and armies of heaven anticipatively
brought forward. He is not alone: they that are with Him are "called,
and chosen, and faithful." This was the history and the end of the ten
kings, but still characteristically; for, if we consult Daniel, three of
them fall. Their Victor is then declared and His companions. As the
confederacy of the kings gave (for it was man's will) their power to the
beast, the Lamb's companions were, on the contrary, *called*, and
*chosen*, and *faithful*. The "waters" are then explained so as to need
little comment, save as reminding of the extent of general moral
influence beyond the prophetic earth: she had her seat there, though she
sat on the beast too. Another characteristic was, that she had this
influence and place on the peoples and multitudes and nations; all this
was an independent influence proper to the woman, and this in her evil
character as the whore.

Another incident of much importance in the history is then brought
forward. These ten kings are to give their power to the beast. So "God
hath put into their hearts

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

to fulfil his will," and "these shall hate the whore, and shall make her
desolate, and eat her flesh" (devour her wealth and fatness) "and burn
her with fire." It was not specifically with these kings she had
committed fornication; that had been her general character with the
kings of the earth. These ten kings, however, desolate her: the will at
this time acts in them, not in the beast. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) They are the prominent and existing
actors, that they may give their power to the beast, whose final
character and end we have already seen. This goes on "until the words of
God shall be fulfilled." The woman, not the whore, is then designated as
that great city which reigneth over the kings of the earth (the
predominant associated power of the earth): <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120) but if acting by corrupt religion, not
doing so here as a false prophet, but as a city--a system in her
secular, carnal, and worldly, and wealthy character; yet that secularity
and wealth, the meretricious secularity <span
id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_121)

<span id="page_111.">p. 111.</span>

and wealth of an active, corrupting will--"the mother of harlots and
abominations of the earth."

Having thus seen her in her active will, in her connection with the will
of others, and her end in wealth and fatness, the announcement of her
fall as a corporate system is declared.

And here I find much more of the purely worldly part of the system; and
this is its character, though the other be not denied. And here she is
seen as fallen--Babylon the great, not spoken of here as the mother of
harlots, the whore, or the woman, but simply as Babylon the great, as a
city or dwelling-place. She had not ceased to exist, however, at all;
but she was fallen, and become the habitation of devils, and the hold of
every unclean spirit,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and the hold of every unclean and hateful bird. This was her present
condition and judgment--her condition morally--and as discerned by the
Church, who, through the Spirit, knew all things on the testimony of
God.

The fall of Babylon seems to be her losing the place of active,
governing, or leading power, ruling as such the beast and many waters,
involving her moral degradation, not destruction.

God now calls His people out of her. I do not say that this call had not
application whenever the truth of the third verse was perceived: but it
was now definite and positive, for the truth was declared judicially.
Woe to them who remained! Her sins had reached to heaven, and they would
receive of her plagues if they stayed. It was a warning on account of
consequences now. The separation must be made, for God had begun to
judge her. She had already fallen from power, the seductive power of
wealth and corruption. She still, it seems, said in her heart, she
should be a queen and see no sorrow--still maintained her pride, though
she was fallen; and the Church knew God was now judging her. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) The desolation of all the temporal
prosperity of the great city is sorrow and trouble to the kings of the
earth. This is a distinct thing from the ten horns hating her and
burning her with fire. The kings of the earth are the royal rulers, not
these specific ten horns, which give their power to the beast as
kingdoms; the horns were the power of the kingdoms, exercised by the
ruling power for the time, perhaps.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But all those who had been dwelling in the
security of the settled and ordered earthly system--the kings of the
earth, as the inhabitants of the earth--those who had been committing
fornication with the great whore--these bewailed her burning. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123) The ten were a definite class, brought
forward with the beast in his last actings against the Lamb, for the
accomplishment of which God puts it into their heart to get rid of the
great whore. The ten kings are never, as such, spoken of as committing
fornication with the harlot. The kings of the earth and inhabitants of
the earth are mentioned as having so conducted themselves. The rising of
the ten kings into active power is a distinctly noticed and subsequent
event. Their specific description as active is from chapter xvii.
12--17.

The destruction and judgment of the great city involved the ruin of all
mere secular interests--wealth--all that was Tyrian in its character,
though souls of men had been added to that renowned city's traffic; for
the great city traded in them also. Anything to enrich characterized the
conduct of the city, taught by direct and accomplished apostasy. The
city was, in a certain sense, distinct from the merchants. *She* was the
whole system; they stood aloof, from the fear of her torment when God
was judging her; and the ship-masters withal. But heaven and the holy
apostles and prophets were called to rejoice over her. She had been the
enemy of heaven, as the whole lust of the earth, to shut out God; and
withal the persecutor and enemy of the revelation and testimony of the
heavenly glory, the judgment of the world, and the coming of the Son of
man--in a word, of the great power of testimony by which the Church was
constituted in the world. Then came the statement of the sudden and
total manner of her

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

final destruction. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124) Her worldly
wealth, the power of riches, is marked as her great final character as
thus judged and destroyed. And here she was like Babylon of old; and in
her was found all the blood slain upon the earth--as in Jerusalem all
that was shed up to her destruction--as being the chief and perfected
form of apostasy from God.

In this description of Babylon we have the whole spirit

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and character of the world except power, royal power; for that is of
God, however used, and that (in the hands of the kings of the earth) was
corrupted by her; and then these ten horns or kings hated her and
destroyed all its fulness and power. These were not Babylon; but they
gave their power to the beast; so that power also which did come from
God, might be found in open rebellion against Him to whose hand all
power was intrusted and given--the Lamb; and thus the last and final
form of evil be produced, involving (for it was then the question whose
power was to stand) the destruction and setting aside of the form and
subsistence of apostasy.

Thus, in Babylon we have wealth, corruption, sorceries, arts, luxuries,
bodies and souls of men sold, fornication committed with the kings and
dwellers upon earth, and they made drunk with it: <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125) the principle of confederate will, but
the corruption (not the exercise) of royal secular power as of God,
though it might, by seduction, rule and govern this power, and thus
separate it from its divine source, and actually set aside and hinder
the unqualified assertion of its supremacy, as of God over all. This, as
we have seen, is distinct from the direct apostasy of power, which is
founded on the hatred and consumption of the whore, and has its place in
the beast. Power was given to Nebuchadnezzar, and he built Babylon. But
here we have the woman in the exercise of her own will corrupting and
ruling, uniting the characters of Israel towards

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God (save that she was a harlot, not an
adulteress, for she had been but espoused as a chaste virgin to Christ),
and Tyre towards the world. When in exercise, we have always the
ecclesiastical taking the lead in evil, as in Kore and the chief
priests: so here this mysterious woman sits on the beast and many
waters. When the kings begin to act, and are going to give their power
by their will, they begin by her destruction, or consumption at any
rate. And note, the act of *Christ's* power is on the *feet* and *toes*
themselves. *God* judges *Babylon* as a great moral system denying His
supremacy, not in open hostility to Christ's power.

We have the *fall* <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) of Babylon
distinguished, I think, from the *destruction* of Babylon. Her fall
includes moral degradation, and being the dwelling-place of unclean
spirits. This is judgment on her; and she falls because of her making
the nations drink of the wine of the poison of her fornication. (Chap.
xiv. 8.) This we find in the ecclesiastical course, so to speak, of
closing facts. Her final judgment we find in the close of the filling up
of the wrath of God. (Chap. xvi. 19.) The connection of the former seems
to be with chapter xviii. 2; of the latter, with chapter xviii. 21.

Thus Babylon was judged--removed out of the way with her corruptions,
which corrupted the earth; and the blood of the servants of the Lord God
was avenged. This is celebrated as the work of the Lord God by a
multitude in heaven, and the mystic representations of the redeemed; but
the worship was of God as sitting on the throne, whose power and
judgment had been thus exercised. The way

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

was now made free; and a voice comes forth out of the throne for the
voice of praise from all God's servants. His sons could always praise
Him in spirit; but here (the prevalence of evil being removed and "delay
no longer") they, in their character of servants, and all that feared
God, can praise Him; for He now reigned as the Lord God Omnipotent--that
character or those characters in which He dealt with the earth whether
as God, Creator, Promiser, and Shield of His people while strangers, or
the everlasting Accomplisher of all He had promised, Jehovah Elohim
Shaddai. All these He took now in power and reigned. This time takes us
back to chapter xi. 17: <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127) we have
had, in the interval, the source, character, and form of evil, and
judgment of all but the beast, and open power against the Lamb, which is
earthly. All secret or mere corrupt evil, all evil that had its place in
heaven, being removed, it was a question of open power--Satan's last and
hopeless resource on earth. The praise, accordingly, is returned to God
in this character of Lord God Almighty who reigneth; and gladness and
joy immediately came forth.

Then His first and immediate purpose manifests itself, before even the
Lamb's judgment of His earthly enemies; "the marriage of the Lamb is
come." This is a matter of ordinance and dispensation. We are now His
children; but the marriage of the Lamb is not yet come, nor is His wife
made ready. It is not here, then, children with the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Father. But the time for the Lord's manifest
glory being come, the Lord God takes His power, judges and removes the
evil worldly counterpart, and (the Lamb's wife made ready) the time for
it is come: these, however, were heavenly things, <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128) and they are passed by. The time, and
readiness and nature of her robes only, are passingly mentioned as an
important circumstantial characterizing the progress of events: and it
closes with pronouncing blessing on those who are called to the marriage
supper of the Lamb; and the prophet returns to the course on the earth
again, where the white-robed ones are found the companions of His glory
in judgment.

This closed the scene of what was properly heavenly, *i.e.*, the time
during which the Lamb (and His followers) were not manifested upon
earth. It closes with "these are the true sayings of God." The angel was
his fellow servant <span id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_129) and the fellow
servant of his brethren that had the testimony of Jesus; for the spirit
of prophecy still testified of Jesus. God was to be worshipped; this was
the great end of the book--to keep the Church in the holy simplicity of
true worship in the midst of ruin and apostasy.

Now the heaven is opened. It is not John caught up

The marriage supper seems to be rather the manifestation, as His
companions in glory; as the "blessed are the dead," &c., is the rest
from their labours, and reception of reward; I do not say the time, but
the peculiar blessedness is different. I have some notion that the
blessing, chapter xiv., has special connection with xiii. 10, and the
blessing here with xiv. 12.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

there. It is not a sign there. It is not the temple opened to him there;
but heaven is opened and One comes forth. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130) Heaven opened for the Holy Ghost to
descend on Jesus here. It opened for the angels of God to ascend and
descend on the Son of man. It opened for the Church (to wit, in Stephen
closing that period and scene) to see into heaven and be received there.
It now was opened, that the King of kings and Lord of lords Himself
should come forth thence to act on the earth--to judge and make war in
righteousness. It was now the time that power was to be applied to
righteousness <span id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131) in the earth. He
came in the manifestation of faithfulness and truth; He came with
scrutinizing and purging judgment; He came in the assemblage of many
royalties; and in the secret of His own power, which none knew but
Himself. His armies were in fine linen clean and white--heavenly
righteousness and purity--the priests of God. He came with divine
vengeance (His garment was dipped in blood), and in that title of the
manifestation of the power of God which was from creation downward, "the
Word of God." Thus He had created, thus revealed, thus judges. The
armies in heaven followed. None were in this conflict with Him on the
earth--His own arm brought salvation: He smites, rules, and treads the
wine-press of God's wrath. The power and title, in which He is now
publicly manifested, is "King of kings, and Lord of lords:" this recalls
to xvii. 14.

The birds of the air are summoned to the great supper of destruction.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

The ten kings were specially marked in their war against the Lamb; and
they did take a lead in it; but the expression here is more general. The
beast is found here, and the kings *of the earth*. Those who ruled the
earth were generally found refusing to submit to this royal
conqueror--to the Lord. The beast is first and prominent; then the kings
of the earth withal and their armies. It was the general character of
the state of the earth then.

The beast and the false prophet are *taken* and put in the lake of fire.
The prophet, by his characteristics, is identified with the second
two-horned beast which arose out of the earth, which has lost its
secular power, but not its character as counsellor of mischief in the
latter day. The remnant was slain with the sword of him that sat on the
horse--it "proceeded out of his mouth." For, though it was the actual
execution of judgment, and no longer merely the sword of the Spirit, but
of the Lord, in active imperial judgment of the quick, it was according
to the word. It was the judgment of the word which proceeded out of His
mouth: they died by that. The proper application of this is to those who
were against Him, as coming from heaven to judge those who were directly
under the influence and power of apostasy. Still, the *kings of the
earth* is wider than the *ten kings*, <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) and left general. I doubt, however,
whether it includes Gog, whose aim is against the land rather than the
Lamb, or even the Prince of princes. With Gog, it is the gratification
of covetousness, the lust of possessing. He goes against the land of
unwalled villages, and perishes in the mountains of Israel, after Israel
is brought back and dwelling in peace.

The beast and the false prophet, these delegates of Satan, the active
enemies of the Lamb, were finally judged: but

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

it does not appear that the deceiving of the nations by Satan thereupon
ceases, because he is not yet bound. Still, he cannot now reproduce
anything that had before flowed from his place in heaven. On his casting
down, his place became, as we have seen, that of *open* opposition to
the Lamb. This is the character of the action of the nations ever
afterwards under his influence: nothing like the great previous system.
So, even after the thousand years, all is on earth and of this
character. He never regained heaven again at all. The beast and the
false prophet, the resulting form of the apostasy while Satan was god of
this world, never re-appeared either. He established himself
evidentially prince of this world by what led to the cross, that being
the climax of it. When that was departed from, the Church only became
the instrument of his power; sin and the world resuming their dominion
under her name. This was maintained in active apostasy by the use of a
corrupt church, still on the earth as to means; and, when he was cast
down from heaven, it could then only be by open war, as we have seen,
against Him who came in His royalty to claim His inheritance. I believe
it will be found that the early commerce and colonization of the earth
were most intimately connected with idolatry--the children of apostate
though once rescued Ham. His first act was casting off or degrading
authority as of God; and ere long we find, at the river of Cush, <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) idolatry in practice, and extending even
to the Shemitic race, whence Abraham was thence called out.

The *former* state (*i.e.*, confederacy, trading, false religion)

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

is spoken of as a woman: <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) this may,
as to part of the ideas, be subjected to Christ. Nebuchadnezzar may rule
Babylon (the city of confusion); so the Lord Christ "the city of the
great King," where God is well known; and Jerusalem may be the queen in
gold of Ophir. The *latter* state of earthly opposition is, either the
beast, once subject to the former, and it is by the will of the kings,
or in the hands of the wilful king, the fallen and hostile carnal man
rising up against the Lord. The former point much explains to me the
prince of Tyre in the prophet Ezekiel.

We have, accordingly, to remark that Satan is not bound by him that sat
on the horse; but an angel comes down from heaven. It is not the
immediate judgment here on Satan by *Christ*, but the divine power, and
providence, and intervention of *God*, which sets Satan aside and
incapacitates him from any further deceiving of the Gentiles till he be
let loose.

In verse 4 we begin a new scene--the thrones. It is not judging and
making war here, but sitting in royal judgment on thrones. This passage,
it seems to me, alludes to the thrones being set (so admitted to mean, I
believe, as in Septuagint) in Daniel vii. 9; in the interpretation of
which, in verse 22, we read, "judgment was given to the saints of the
most High," or of the heavenly places. Here, not only are the thrones
set, but he sees people sitting on them: the thrones were filled. This
Daniel did not see--it was a *period* with him: with us it is *our
glory* with Christ. These thrones were set before even the King and His
armies came forth; but they formed no part of the actual visible earthly
scene (nothing yet of the connection of heaven with the earth); and
therefore they are not mentioned. The thrones were set

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

before the judgment of the beast in Daniel; and those who come forth
with the Lamb are sitters on the thrones. But, I repeat, though filled,
they are not brought into the scene till they form properly part of it.
"When the Son of man shall cone in His glory . . . . then shall He sit
on the throne of His glory." They do not take this place properly till
He takes it openly (the power being given to Him as Son of man, which is
connected with earth): and so these thrones, though seated in heaven.
As, in Daniel, "the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the
saints of the most High," so this is consequent upon His taking His
power and reigning. They reign with Him the thousand years. What follows
in the verse is an additional intimation that the others had lost
nothing but the enmity of the world, <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) and of Satan even to death, or by their
refusal to worship the beast. Their souls were seen. There might have
been power to kill the body, but they had never died to God, and now
they enjoyed the fruit of it--"they reign in life by one."

The reigning on the thrones *actually* is consequent upon the removal of
the deceiving power of Satan: and so with Christ. He comes first, and
then actually takes the throne of the world: His companions have been
hidden with Him meanwhile; and though glorified (so I speak of them
now), the thrones were not seen till the war ended. The title was full,
they were gone to Him. But they did not,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

before that, actually possess the kingdom; nor did He Himself. The horse
and the throne are distinct things--imperial, active, subduing power;
and full, peaceable, judicial power as king. For Christ's act so coming
is not a mere passing act. The throne of His glory continues till, as a
mediatorial king, He gives it up. On this throne of the Son of man the
saints will sit, occupying thrones with Him and judging the world: and
this is a reign of peace, but of righteousness withal (this latter
Jewish properly): for heaven and earth meet in peace now--peace on
earth; because the face of heaven, in its own character through Christ
the mediator, and the saints with Him, shines on it now.

In this part there is little mention of the nations, though it be left
general; because Christ deals with the nations as identified with
earthly Jerusalem: whereas here He is looked upon as coming from heaven
to act upon the main scene and agent of Satan's hostile power--the beast
and his followers. The nations at this time are more the subjects of Old
Testament prophecy; which, while it recognizes the fact of the Lord's
coming from heaven with all His saints, occupies itself with the earthly
Jerusalem and what passes there. Here we have the display of the first
resurrection,--the main subject. Blessed and holy are they! they shall
be priests of God and of Christ: there is their highest place, as seen
in this book; and they shall reign with Him a thousand years, for He is
a priest on His throne. It would be hard to make priests of principles,
though, by a figure, we might say principles reign.

After this when the nations form the body of hostile agents, we have
Satan's actings in them; but it is no revival of the beast, nor anything
in that character. Blessed be God, there was a final ending of that dark
and subtle apostasy which resulted from Satan's being in

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

heaven; but this is a mere exhibition of open, hostile enmity in those
whom he has been able to deceive here. We must on no account, therefore,
lose sight of this character of present evil and rebellion and apostasy,
that it flows from Satan's being in heavenly places (though the Church,
in the knowledge of Christ's exaltation, may know His and its entire
victory over him). The wrestling, however, is not now with flesh and
blood, but with principalities and powers, with spiritual wickedness in
heavenly places. In chapter xii. Satan is cast down from heaven; but
here, what he raises on earth against the Lamb is cast into the lake of
fire and Satan himself is bound in the bottomless pit, the history of
the earth not being yet finished. The coming of Jesus, whose judgment
acts on the beast and false prophet, is not the same as the angel of
God's providence and power casting Satan into the pit.

The glory and reigning of the Son of man seems to vindicate God as
regards the failure of the Noah world. The blessing of the Second Adam,
as the Head of a re-deemed race, takes the place of antediluvian evil
and wretchedness, in which the children of fallen Adam displayed their
character: *this* closed by the judgment of water, *that* commenced by
that of fire. In the reign of the Son of man with His saints, "a King
shall reign in righteousness." In the blessedness of the Second Adam, as
Head of the new race when God's tabernacle is with men, therein
"*dwelleth* righteousness," its peaceful and constant habitation without
force maintaining it. Partially the principles of these two states
mingle, by virtue of the power and influence of the heavenly Jerusalem
and its great Bridegroom (and so we have Psalm lxxxv. accomplished):
still are they different.

Upon the close of the thousand years, Satan is let loose--deceives

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the nations--a separation takes place; and he brings up the deceived
against the camp of the saints and the beloved city, to wit, the earthly
Jerusalem. Then the devil is cast into the lake of fire, where the beast
and the false prophet are already, and shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever.

The judgment of the beast and his armies, it appears to me, is not the
judgment of Matthew xxv., nor is Matthew xxv. the judgment of the great
white throne. That judgment in Matthew appears to me to be the judgment
of the nations at large, when Christ is not making war, either as coming
from heaven, or as going forth in connection with Jerusalem; but when he
is sitting on His throne, having come, and judging the nations for the
manner in which they have treated the preachers of the gospel of the
kingdom in that going forth which shall specially take place at the
close. It is not, "He shall send forth his armies," but the calm and
solemn session of the throne on those who have despised Him in His
messengers.

Although the fact of the resurrection of the just is mentioned here to
separate them out of the judgment, the millennial state itself is little
dwelt upon (the chapter being properly the account of the session of
judgment). From this we see the partakers of the first resurrection
entirely exempt. Then Satan's actings, as introducing the millennial
judgments are mentioned, and that judgment <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) itself. On the great white throne (for
there were no thrones now) sat One from whose face heaven and earth fled
away.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

\[paragraph continues\] This, therefore, was not coming at all--no
judgment τῆς οἰκουμένης, of the habitable world as a scene, nor a
judgment of the quick. The dead, small and great, stand before God; and
they are judged out of the books, according to their works. We have
therewith, a general statement of the portion of those not written in
the book of life. Whatever differences there may have been in measure,
they were all cast into the lake of fire. This was not now a place
merely prepared for the devil and his angels. The devil was there. The
false prophet and the beast had been there long before: now, all those
who were not written in the book of life.

There was now not merely an economic change. The great white throne had
no reference to any dispensation, but to the dead. There was an actual
physical change--a new heaven and a new earth, and no more sea. And here
John sees a new object, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
heaven. This general fact, I conceive, is presented here to give the
object. Its bearings are taken up apart: and first the historical
progress or result is stated; and we find the tabernacle of God, not the
throne or heavenly dwelling of God and the Lamb, but God all in all--the
tabernacle of God with men. The race, man, now are blessed with God's
presence; and grace had provided a way in the which (with no desolating
enquiry of "Where art thou?") God could visit, yea, have His tabernacle
among men, now headed up in the blessed last Adam--the risen and
glorified Man, not in the first fallen one. The millennium, as we have
said, is the contrast to Noachic failure, when Satan is cast out of the
heavens, and government comes in, righteous and effectual for blessing
and peace. To man's fall, the ruin of the first Adam, is here contrasted
the perfect, unfailing, and new and durable blessing of the second--all
things made new--no

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

more death--all evil put in the lake of fire. Chapter xix. 9 is the
special recorded blessing of the former state, the marriage of the Lamb:
xxi. 5, the blessing of this.

The condition of the earth during the millennium is more properly the
subject of the Old Testament prophets--the restitution of all things
spoken of by them. The connection of the heavenly blessings with it,
during the millennium, is, however, taken up in what follows, to
complete the picture, and give the saints the joy of their own portion
in it, which, in its own proper and intrinsic character, moreover is
eternal. This account is from xxi. 9 to xxii. 5, 6. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) On this I have but few remarks to make,
having so far prolonged this. It is not here the children in the
Father's house; it is not dwelling in God as love (and thus, through
Jesus, in whom all fulness dwells, filled with His fulness, we in Him,
and He in the Father), but the glory of God, the order of all
dispensation. Glory is taken up in it (*i.e.*, that which constitutes
the glory of each), as displaying the character, foundation, and ways of
God, the excellency of mediation, and the basis of righteousness and
true holiness, firmly established as the very streets of the city. These
constituted the characteristics of the city.

But there is another very interesting point in this character of the
heavenly Jerusalem, the Lamb's bride, the perfection and blessedness of
mediatorial glory. First, God and the Lamb are the light of it: they
enjoy the light of glory; the nations of the spared ones walk in the
light of it (*i.e.*, of the heavenly Jerusalem, the Lamb's wife, the
glorified saints). It is not merely "nations shall come to the
brightness of its rising"--the acknowledgment

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

of a new and dominant power owned of God and glorified in the earth; it
is proper blessing, "they walk in the light of it." And yet more
distinctly does it preserve its character of grace, and the immense
privilege of grace; and what it possesses in common, it has on
incomparably higher ground than even Paradise of old. The Tree of Life
has healing in it now. Not merely can the innocent eat and live, but
there is remedial blessing in it for those on earth. They worse perhaps
in some sort than Adam, but far more glory, and blessing displayed even
in glory. The Lamb's bride, answering as a help-meet to the Lamb's heart
of love, is minister of blessing to them that need. It is now full
blessing, and we ministers of it, "for His servants shall serve Him . .
. His name shall be on their foreheads." Far other is the minister of
strict earthly righteousness, the earthly Jerusalem--"the people and
nations that will not serve thee shall utterly perish." Now this
heavenly rule, withal, is recognized as the source of power. The kings
of the earth bring their glory to it (not to corrupt Babylon, to their
disgrace and ruin). None enter this that defile, but those written in
the Lamb's book of life. It is not now merely "the Lord shall reign for
ever and ever," but "*they* shall reign for ever and ever."

From the time of the exaltation of Jesus to the right hand of God, and
the association of the Church with Him, Christ has been ready to judge.
There were many antichrists, whereby it was known that it was the last
time, as this same apostle teaches us. And now, in the manifested
failure of the Church on earth unfolded in the first chapters, though
the Bridegroom might tarry, the Church, knowing His mind, had but one
cry, "Come quickly!" In this position, therefore, the Church is
practically set.

From the time the prophecy took its course, all was

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

remediless. When it took it absolutely and definitely in the crisis, it
became absolutely and definitely so as to individuals, as regarded the
dispensation of judgment--"the door was shut." The Lord declares He has
sent His angel to testify *these things in the churches*. Here we are
brought back to what went before the prophetic sayings (the churches
being thus made cognizant of the prophetic sayings). The Lord presents
Himself to them, as the root indeed, but as the offspring of David,
ready to inherit his throne; and the bright and blessed witness of
millennial day, and, in one sense, eternal day to the Church. This was
the next thought to the Church on this failure. Accordingly, knowing it,
the Church is only lifted up into better hopes, and the Spirit, <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) which, as Comforter, abides for ever,
takes the lead; and, in its character of Bride, abstracting itself from
circumstances and earthly progress and associations, the Church joins
its guiding Spirit and says, Come--calls on all who hear, whose ear is
open to divine truth, to join in this as its cry, its first utterance,
now born into a world of' sorrow even for the Church, which sees its
desolation (still, however, maintaining its character of grace,
ministerial grace, to the world): "And let him that is athirst come: and
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." While the Holy
Ghost remains filling the Church, no change of circumstances can prevent
it or us from being the ministers of this calling-grace in the midst of
a ruined world.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

Strictly speaking, then, verse 17 returns to the things that are; verses
10, 11 to the prophetic period, which has closed the hope and testimony
of grace, and assumed the testimony of judgment, either preparatory or
final. Verse 20 gives the individual seal, as it were, of the apostle's
faith to the personal application of the book by the Lord.

As the Church instantly broke forth in answer on the church revelation
of Jesus, in exactly corresponding praises to His then revealed
character, so now, on the revelation of His millennial and glorified
character, it breaks forth by the Spirit, which never leaves it let it
be ever so desolate, but rather inspires it with hope in the answering
and suitable cry of "Come!" and then looks round, in the sense of this,
to renew its service of grace to the world.

In chapter xxi. 9, we have Jehovah sitting on the throne, declaring
Himself as Alpha and Omega; here, in chapter xxii. 12, 13, we have Jesus
doing so (there *closing* the millennium--here *introducing* the
millennial times)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[103:1](nbr05.htm#fr_115) Fornication seems to
consist in living in wealth and luxuries, through intercourse with
others, not the cultivation of her own resources; therefore it is
referred to union with, and dependence on, the world in the case of the
Church, and to enriching commerce with other nations in the case of a
city, as Tyre. Jerusalem is termed "adulteress," not whore, because she
was married to the Lord; but in all these cases there will be found, I
conceive, a worshipping of Satan, in this world, as its god, a seeking
the power τοῦ αἰῶνος τοῦ κόσμου τούτου. Power national or imperial is a
distinct thing, though it may be abused: it is given of God, though it
may end in open rebellion.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[103:2](nbr05.htm#fr_116) The prince and king
of Tyre are, however, different. It is the king of whom the position is
so astonishingly traced by the Divine hand.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[108:1](nbr05.htm#fr_117) I feel that probably
this has passed, if we take the protracted course, in Charlemagne; if
the closing scene, in Buonaparte, because the Roman empire had been
destroyed in its full character before Charlemagne; and his was a
renewal of what was not. Nominally it continued until Buonaparte, who,
as the agent of the French republic, broke it to pieces and renewed the
imperial power for a little season.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[109:1](nbr05.htm#fr_118) \[It may have that
force as to the last form of the beast out of the abyss.\]

<span id="fn_119"></span>[110:1](nbr05.htm#fr_119) \[The better reading,
however, adds 'the beast.'\]

<span id="fn_120"></span>[110:2](nbr05.htm#fr_120) Such as Rome, for
example, before even imperial times.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[110:3](nbr05.htm#fr_121) I know that many take
Babylon as merely a great worldly system. That it is a great worldly
system is freely admitted. But the exclusion of the ecclesiastical
character in this place seems to me a great error: it is the virus of
her active will in this place, though clothed with the world. She is not
viewed here as the city of the apostate king at all, though, in the
worldly sense, she may be the beginning of his kingdom. He comes in
here, as the eighth head of the beast, supplanting the woman. The kings
lay her waste to give their power to him; for power, not wealth, is the
last form of evil presented, and that against the Lamb, which is true,
active rebellion, and more than mere apostasy. God therefore judges
Babylon; and the destroyers of her wealth and importance are those who
give their kingdom to the beast: thereupon and then the war against the
Lamb comes. I have no doubt the principles of Babylon were manifested in
her--not royal power. Though Babylon was the beginning of his power in
whom royal power was first displayed, yet it was specially what the
confederate <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> will of man had done; its
first form was confederate will in independence of God. This is shewn in
the character which constituted the whore, yet had its development by
her corruption and fornication: and the effects of this are supplanted
by another confederacy, which is not only apostasy, as all human will
apart from God is, but active war against God's King, the Lamb.

As to the ten kings, I would here also notice, what, not being the
direct subject of the book, I have not noticed hitherto. It appears to
me a mistake to include the Grecian or eastern part of the Roman empire
in the ten kings or direct power of the beast, though he may seek to
possess himself of it as his dominion, and in a measure may do so. The
little book of the eleventh chapter takes up the beast in his last
Satanic character, in order to complete the scene of the final
catastrophe and woe; but the first two woes seem to me to embrace the
eastern or Grecian part of the great scene of the prophetic earth. When
we come to the geographical divisions and actings at the close (for all
are aware that the catastrophe of all the powers of the earth is in the
east, in Judea), then the king of the north and the king of the south
seem to me to occupy the Grecian part, not the ten kings, though the
beast may be seeking to possess himself, as of old, of their territory,
and may in part succeed. I allude here to Daniel xi., as may readily be
seen.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[112:1](nbr05.htm#fr_122) The full judgment
comes after God's people are come out of her. Her fall is a warning to
them, these are rapidly brought together here at her judgment. \[I have
left this statement as it is, though its full force may be questioned,
because it is a very nice point of interpretation, and it was no harm to
have this view before us.\]

<span id="fn_123"></span>[113:1](nbr05.htm#fr_123) See Ezekiel xxvii.
35, 36, and the previous verses. The prince of Tyre sits in the midst of
the seas.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[114:1](nbr05.htm#fr_124) There seems to me, an
intimate connection between the continuance of Babylon and the serpent
being in heavenly places. He exercises his power thus as influence,
secretly, as false worship. He is the object of false worship; and
hence, in this dispensation, he works by the corruption of christian
profession; and yet this still as the god of this world, which title he
cannot lose, for it is all he has:--"the course of this world . . . .
the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the
children of disobedience." This is said of him as still is ἐν τοῖς
ἐπουρανίοις, in the heavenlies.

False worship, as the source of power, would be its heathen character;
false worship, as the source or means of fellowship, its Babylonish
character in the christian dispensation. In a word, this is rather his
anti-priestly character and spiritual influence: the man of sin, or
lawless one, is not revealed. Power continues outwardly owned of God,
and the letter \[he that letteth\] remains. When he is cast down, he
loses this character, which is opposed to Christ as Priest, and to Him
as acting by His Spirit in maintaining the holy communion of His saints
and washing their feet. He then raises power as of earth (the king doing
according to his will) against the heavens, for he has no place in then
even falsely. He could render his influence as anti-priest paramount to
supreme civil authority, which is of God, using the name of God falsely
in religion; but he cannot, save in open rebellion when cast down, bring
power against God. \[The substance of this note is of great importance:
only it must not be supposed that the first sentence is to be taken
strictly as the existence of Babylon. But I apprehend there will be a
total change when Satan is cast down, perhaps practically prepared
before. The principles, I have no doubt, are already at work.\]

<span id="fn_125"></span>[115:1](nbr05.htm#fr_125) The character of
Babylon as whore seems lost by the enmity of the ten horns, because she
cannot help it. The religious mischief is, after this, done by the false
prophet, the other form of the two-horned beast. Thereon the character
of Babylon becomes more purely secular; but the devil dwells there, or
it is the habitation of demons, and not therefore simply worldly
interests.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[116:1](nbr05.htm#fr_126) \[I have still left
this, though it may be too precise as a system. Still both are spoken
of. There is an excessive degradation; the fair form of ecclesiastical
character is gone, and it is thorough demon wickedness. In this case,
xviii. 4-8, and as above 21, would seem to coalesce with xvi. 19.\]

<span id="fn_127"></span>[117:1](nbr05.htm#fr_127) When God takes to
Himself His power and reigns, and the worldly kingdom of our Lord and
His anointed is come. It is taken up here on the actual judgment and
removal out of the way of Babylon, as the earthly mystery opposed to the
heavenly bride of Christ: so that, as the Lord God Omnipotent takes His
power, the Lamb thereupon takes His bride. Her fall, which seems more
connected with the fall of Satan from heaven, is a previous thing.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[118:1](nbr05.htm#fr_128) The marriage of the
Lamb was not before the world; though, having espoused her in the
heavens, He may then in the gladness of His heart bring her forth in
glory.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[118:2](nbr05.htm#fr_129) Note, sonship is not
the point of this book, but dealings on earth: therefore the angel says,
"fellow servant" to those who, in their higher character, are really
sons and joint heirs.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[119:1](nbr05.htm#fr_130) I have long felt, and
it is clear from this passage, that the Church is actually with Christ
in heavenly places before this; for they come forth with Him. \[See
Colossians iii. 1-4.\]

<span id="fn_131"></span>[119:2](nbr05.htm#fr_131) "Judgment shall
return to righteousness; and all the upright in heart shall follow it."
Psalm xciv. 15.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[120:1](nbr05.htm#fr_132) \[Only that the kings
of the earth compose the ideal completeness of the earth under the
beast.\]

<span id="fn_133"></span>[121:1](nbr05.htm#fr_133) Of this idolatrous
and worldly power, Egypt, Babylon, and Tyre (from which last the worldly
and apostate character is specially drawn) were the great centres
mentioned in scripture. The last committed fornication with all the
kingdoms of the earth (this in connection with her trade, &c.).

<span id="fn_134"></span>[122:1](nbr05.htm#fr_134) As Babylon, or the
great city, Tyre: adulterous Israel and idolatry.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[123:1](nbr05.htm#fr_135) I think I see here an
assertion of threefold presentation of those who shall occupy the
thrones, or at least live and reign with Christ a thousand years. First,
the general body of the saints of the heavenlies, including the
Church,--they sat on thrones; next, those beheaded for the testimony of
Jesus and the word of God; thirdly, those who had not worshipped the
beast. This is important as shewing the place of all these classes.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[126:1](nbr05.htm#fr_136) If any ask what comes
of the living saints as to their change at the close of the millennium,
the answer is--scripture says nothing, save that from other passages we
know, on principle, they will have incorruptible natures in that scene
when all things are made new.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[128:1](nbr05.htm#fr_137) Chapter xxi. 8,
closes the historical statement: what follows is description, and that
of the millennial effect of the city as well as of the city itself.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[130:1](nbr05.htm#fr_138) The Spirit saying it
slimed that it was not merely a holy though untaught desire, but the
mind of the Spirit itself, in and to the Church, who, what He hears,
speaks. It was the divine mind, but, so taught, all the bride's
affections, separated in heart and spirit to Christ, centre and express
themselves in this desire. "He that heareth" is he whose heart is opened
to the truth, but has not learnt the separated bridal state of the
Church, espoused as a chaste virgin unto Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Charts](nbr06)
