[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__002"></span>

The following advertisements appeared on three unnumbered pages at the
end of the original publication. They are included for completeness.—JBH

**THE TRUTH ABOUT MARS**

By Dr. Ernest L. Norman

While our materialistic scientists are still arguing about the
possibility of life on Mars, psychics and clairvoyants are seeing
remarkable visions of its advanced civilization. Dr. Norman, an
electronics engineer and natural clairvoyant reports what he sees. Other
clairvoyants have "seen" similar things, but the world was not
interested. Clairvoyants, like inventors, are often ahead of their time,
but their findings are usually correct. Dr. Norman explains the
so-called "canals" on Mars—which are not really canals; brings out
details of social and economic life. Beautifully illustrated by a great
artist.

Price $1.50

**THE BEGINNING OF THE NEW AGE**

Excerpts from "The Coming of the Golden Age" compiled by Dr. F. W.
Sumner. Prophetic, inspiring messages concerning the new Golden Age.

Mimeographed. Price 50 cents.

**LIFE ON OTHER PLANETS**

As Revealed by the great German Seer and Mystic Jacob Lorber and others.
Translations and commentaries by Dorothy Thomas.

If you are interested in the deeper mysteries of life and the universe
as revealed by inner revelation; if you love the beautiful, the good,
the strange and the otherworldly; if you want to learn of distant worlds
as seen by the great mystics of the past and present, and look to the
stars for inspiration, then subscribe to

LIFE ON OTHER PLANETS

2 issues $1.00.              (mimeo)              4 issues $2.00

**NEW AGE PUBLISHING CO.  
1542 Glendale Boulevard           Los Angeles 26, Calif.**

<span id="page__003"></span>

**OTHER NEW AGE BOOKS**

KEY TO SPIRITUAL MAGIC

By Dorothy Thomas $2.00

A dynamic and dramatic life story of the author up to a certain soul
crisis and its amazing results. Describing the change in consciousness
from old time thinking and concepts to a new world of beauty and power.
Many who are now faced with making inner adjustments to this changing
world of ours find this book a source of true inspiration. Read the
story of how a strange transformation in consciousness came about
through the power of a new idea, rhythm and music.

Since then the author has been highly active in New Age work. The book
has given new hope and courage to many.

12 LESSONS IN SPIRITUAL PSYCHOLOGY AND HEALING $10.00

Details upon request

CALL OF THE PHOENIX

By Dorothy Thomas $3.00

Based on the inner experiences as recounted in THE KEY TO SPIRITUAL
MAGIC and those of others. This book tells in greater detail—in
colourful and dramatic story form—of the Path of the soul to God and the
Way of Attainment. It reveals the Ancient Wisdom and the New Age of
Glory. It sheds light on the requirements of an initiate, the type of
powers and studies necessary for attainment, the great crises of the
soul, mysteries of Ancient Egypt, secrets of the Great Pyramid and the
hidden teachings of Christianity.

Acclaimed as one of the truly great occult novels, filled with the
wisdom of the ages.

**NEW AGE PUBLISHING CO.  
1542 Glendale Boulevard           Los Angeles 26, Calif.**

<span id="page__004"></span>

**THE COMING OF THE GREAT WHITE CHIEF**

By DOROTHY THOMAS

"The Coming of the Great White Chief" is one of the strangest stories
ever told—the story of the mysterious White Indians, hidden away behind
high mountains in a beautiful walled city in southern Mexico.

Recently further details have been revealed to us by a close friend of a
man who actually lived in this strange Shangri-La of the West. These
people are preparing white building blocks for the erection of a great
White Temple and a great city. The building blocks are to be shipped to
a secret destination at the appointed time. These 'White Indians are
dedicated to a great cause. What are they preparing for? Where are they
going to build? Read this most amazing story and you will realize that
you are living in truly momentous times, for this is a true story.

*Watch for the Sign in the Heavens which heralds the Coming of the Great
White Chief!*

Price 50 cents per copy, postpaid.

**THE VENUSIANS**

By LEE CRANDALL

Describes a most astounding experience. Author claims that Venusian
people are here among us and that he has been taken to Venus. Contains
photographs of Venusian spaceman, his handprints, footprints,
distinguishing anatomical features, drawings of space ship and the
Temple, together with the story of how it all came about. Printed in two
colors illustrated with an unfolding rose. A most amazing and unusual
kind of book. Price $2.00.

**NEW AGE PUBLISHING CO.  
1542 Glendale Boulevard           Los Angeles 26, Calif.**

 

 

 
