[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc15)  [Next](idtc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

Were it possible for thee to see with thy physical eyes (or to retain in
thy physical brain the memory of) scenes at this moment taking place on
astral planes in close proximity to the earth plane, then would ye be
relieved of much of thy burden of anxiety concerning the outcome of
violent clashes now occurring within sight and sound of thine eyes and
ears, as of thy conscious knowledge.

Soon thy superconscious mind will release to thee faint glimmerings of
changes even now in preparation on the earth. Yea of a truth, they come
into manifestation first upon the astral planes before materializing in
earthly form through strange diversities of circumstance. Those most
strenuously opposing their advent, do frequently act (quite unwittingly)
as their strongest proponents. Seeing the frightful ravages wrought by
devotees of diabolical dogmas, many turn away and apply themselves to
plans for their eradication. In this effort they will receive superhuman
assistance.

Following the [demolition](errata.htm#15) of destructive agencies,
animate and inanimate, ye will concede the obvious

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

need for a well implemented program devised to fire the imagination and
arouse the aspirations of every member of the human family, in accord
with their own individual ability to contribute to the Over-all Plan!
Every faculty possessed by mortals may be fitted into the mosaic of New
Age activities. In this way those formerly suffering frustration and
defeat will feel a new surge of confidence in their competence to follow
their clearly indicated aptitude for certain types of service in
research, invention, mechanical skill, or whatever their talent may be,
to a successful conclusion.

To this end hath it been ordained that many doors to knowledge hitherto
barred to mortals, will be opened to those who through trials oft
accounted unjust (and rightly so!) have, nevertheless, proven themselves
to be worthy to receive the boon they long have sought. To them will be
given the keys to mysteries long veiled from mortal eyes, awaiting the
propitious time for their revealing.

Devious methods will be employed for the transmission of what be to many
startling new facts regarding invisible forces, extremely powerful and
yet (how wisely!) impossible to contact, or even apprehend from an
intellectual standpoint, save by one elevated to a high level of
spiritual awareness of the inviolable sanctity of any knowledge touching
on energies [emanating](errata.htm#16) from Divinity Itself!

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Not in any promiscuous and haphazard fashion will the requisite aids to
the acquisition of such supernal knowledge be provided. Many factors
will enter into the bestowal of such gifts, chief of which will be the
*character* of the one in quest of any particular type of information,
and his purpose. These qualifications may best be ascertained by a
survey of his objectives and achievements in past incarnations. Such an
inspection would necessarily be done by a very advanced mentor or
specialist appointed for the task. The person whose past record be
subjected to such scrutiny be not consulted or conscious of the
procedure. We might interject the comment that many
[highly](errata.htm#17) evolved men and women now on earth have
undergone such an investigation and have been approved for admittance to
the tutelage of adepts, awaiting only the moment of the world's
emancipation from the domination of destructive forces to begin their
collaborative work with their students. This active partnership between
one in close touch with the material world and one in direct contact
with supernal knowledge will be one of the major marvels of the New Age.
The person privileged to enjoy such a partnership may not be conscious
of such assistance but may attribute the sudden flashes of "inspiration"
to intuition but will surely recognize it as coming from a source higher
than their own mind.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

However, it may be said in passing, that in almost every instance there
will eventually evolve so close a companionship that it will be possible
for the two co-workers to "visit" back and forth, from the Fourth to the
Third Dimension at will, much to their mutual advantage and enjoyment!

AMEN! SO BE IT!      

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

*A FRIENDLY MESSAGE FROM ASHTAR*

Another link has been forged between those residing upon your planet
Shan and the galaxy of shining orbs (as you see them!) which compose the
glittering firmament you see "above you." Actually, of course, it
completely surrounds the globe whereon dwell those looking skyward at
night-time from their particular section of the earth.

Oh, that all peoples could but realize how the encirclement by these
illumined "stars" (no matter how far distant they may be as of earthly
computation) provides the ultimate evidence that this "dark planet" may
in time reach a similar stage of evolution, unless man himself decrees
otherwise!

Could this fact be brought home to them, then would they accept a kindly
word of counsel from the inhabitants of these and other progressed
spheres and greatly profit by their proven knowledge of the beneficent
action of universal Cosmic Laws, when correctly employed in a
constructive manner.

Much has been written of late concerning certain visible contacts made
by Space Men, or "Etherians," with inhabitants of Shan (the earth)
residing in different areas of the planet. Their conversation is

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

often alluded to as being carried on by "thought transference" or
through the use of telepathy.

This brings to light a possibility given little consideration by those
in quest of further information regarding any who have observed flying
"unidentified objects" at incredible rates of speed. So impregnated have
their minds become with thoughts of invasion by *enemy* forces (seen or
unseen) that they reject the idea of a *peaceful* "invasion" or
visitation by friendly neighbors wishing to courteously welcome them
into the cooperative fraternity of constellations of celestial bodies
peopled by those enjoying a type of intensely interesting existence
impossible of attainment save by those who live in accord with Cosmic
Law.

It is our desire to attract your attention and invite your confidence
through visible manifestations of various kinds. However, do not for one
moment conclude that this is our chief objective. God forbid!

Our revered and Beloved Jesus. the Christ, did "many mighty works" when
He lived as a man among mortals, yet His real mission was to teach men
the meaning of Life, both here and hereafter.

And so we rejoice that our vital mission to Shan is being recognized by
many who meet and talk with us during the hours when their physical
bodies are wrapped in slumber. The ideas, the truths, disclosed in these
nocturnal conferences are stored in their.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

superconscious minds and our new friends later work them into the
patterns of their daily lives.

As a matter of fact, it is of far more *practical* assistance in
hastening the planet's delayed illumination, to change the
"thought-currents" into the right channels, than it is for us to
transmit knowledge of a scientific nature. Science perverted to
*destructive* purposes, acts as a deadly menace!

Science directed into channels of dynamic activity which will lift the
human race to a new, a higher type of existence in accord with its
God-designed destiny, will bring into reality that Golden Age now
dawning on the consciousness of all awakened souls. Our newly
consummated contact with such souls is of profound significance to us
and promises to play a major role in the emancipation of Shan from the
domination of utterly subversive forces whether visible or invisible!

We pledge you our whole-hearted support in each and every constructive
effort in every field of endeavor looking toward the illumination of
your spirits, minds . . . yes, and the very earth on which your feet
tread!

May our mission to Shan be blessed with a speedy success by the Father
of us all and His Beloved Son, Jesus the Christ!

My love

ASHTAR

—speaking for a mighty army of Space Men now in active service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](idtc17)
