[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc10)  [Next](idtc12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### CHAPTER IX

Ere we proceed with other aspects of New Age Progress, we will spend a
little time considering the necessary changes to be made in the habits
of a majority of mortals, so that they may make the best possible use of
new forces released for their benefit.

We will liken the physical body of Man to a plant which doth draw to
itself and absorb into its growing organism the precise elements vital
to its expanding life principle. If it doth fail to contact what it
needeth in its quest for self-expression, it doth soon sicken and die.

As of the time of this writing ( January, 1955) earth's atmospheric
envelope be impregnated with many deleterious elements inimical to the
health and development of any human body, particularly one delicately
attuned to high vibrational frequencies. Such an one must be constantly
safe-guarded against these infringing constituents of the very air they
must breathe to sustain life. Not alone the air but the seldom
recognized subversive thought streams, betimes
[well-nigh](errata.htm#11) flood the mental atmosphere and drown out the
more sensitive upward-reaching ten-drills of hope and faith.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

To counteract these and other dangerous deterrents to Man's wholesome
life both physical and spiritual, certain purifying processes be
constantly employed by the Invisible Guardians of the planet, else would
ye perish. Ye have observed what ye call an "electric storm" with its
pyrotechnical display of lightning, and have noted the ensuing
freshening of the atmosphere, making it a pleasure to draw in deep
draughts of purified air. This be but one of countless artifices
contrived to lessen the dangers lurking in the ether about thee. Other
threats to thy health of body and mind (for they be woven together like
the woof and warp of a fabric) be not so easily apprehended.

But this we would indelibly impress upon thy minds! A perfect provision
hath been made for thine every need under any and ail circumstances.
Even in this transition period when ye do encounter many unaccustomed
difficulties, ye have but to ask for Divine assistance to do the will of
the Heavenly Father and, often in strange and unexpected ways, help will
come.

Refuse to accept the ultimatum of Discouragement and defeat urged upon
thee by evil forces rampant at this time. Pin thy faith to the
redemptive forces sent of thy Heavenly Father to rescue thee from thy
perilous position. As an airplane doth utilize the "fuel" provided to
furnish the power it

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

must have, that it may soar far above the sordid environment of a
material world, so do thou avail thyself of the means provided for thy
flight into the pure atmosphere of Divine replenishment.

Once thou hast contacted these currents of Cosmic Energy penetrating
with ever increasing potency the finer, etheric Life Force all about
thee, no heavy, clogging earth vibrations can hold thee in thralldom to
disease of body, mind or spirit.

Until the Day of the Great Illumination, there will unavoidably be a
struggle to attain and maintain at all times content and perfect
attunement with this Divine Source of Life and Love Triumphant! Yet,
herein doth lie thy freedom from the fretting exigencies arising from
incessant friction twixt the fast receding customs and systems of a
decadent and expiring age and that glorious New Age of unexplored
marvels along every line of constructive and progressive effort.

Entirely new and fascinating possibilities beckon the dauntless explorer
qualified to be the recipient of astounding new inspirations and powers
ready and waiting to be bestowed upon him, after the necessary cleansing
of thy planet be concluded, permitting the full influx of marvelous
dynamics hitherto undreamed-of by the most imaginative of scientists.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

*GREETINGS FROM OUTER SPACE*

A further word of information for those eager to hear of a state of
development not yet reached by your most venturesome and fearless
explorers into the vast universe of inexhaustible possibilities along
every line of progressive evolution.

We would make it clear at the outset that we are not seeking to
"convert" you to any formula of religious concept, other than the
simplest precepts laid down by the Divine Master, the Christ of God.
Many of these same principles were enunciated by inspired men, saints
and seers, sent of God down through the ages. When the people of Shan
refused to accept their teachings and put them into practice, they left
your earth and transferred their efforts to more receptive minds and
hearts on other planes and planets.

Whether you choose to accept my statement or not, it is a fact that
there are no "closed doors" between those who temporarily reside on any
plane or planet, unless through sheer stupidity, ignorance or absurd and
unfounded *fear* you yourselves close and lock the door. Quite true, the
"open doorway" must always be guarded by strong forces to prevent the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

entrance of unwelcome visitors. As you know, these guards are provided
on request.

But to return to the more "practical" aspects of progressed living
conditions as enjoyed by the citizens of Venus, and similarly
enlightened planets:

As the entire environment and the atmosphere itself has become saturated
with thoughts and emotional vibrations conducive to clear mental
concepts and high ideals, you can easily understand that our problems of
behavior are practically non-existent or, at least, reduced to a
minimum. No one on any level of mortal existence (and we are mortals in
a very real sense) enjoys being looked down upon by his fellows. Even a
criminal aspires to be a sort of "*super*-criminal."

Thus it is that having established certain "codes of honor" in our
everyday living and finding it a definitely *enjoyable* way of life, it
seldom occurs to the youth of our planet to look for their pleasure in
unprofitable pursuits. Actually they are too busy seeking to excel in
their own chosen profession or avocation! Frequent "tests" are held . .
. you would, perhaps, call them "Fairs" . . . where many exhibits are on
display and trophies awarded for unusual skill, originality and
dexterity gas demonstrated mechanically, artistically, mentally or along
any line of constructive effort to reach a high and ever higher

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

goal of perfection, with suitable recognition of each evidence of
progress made, often works wonders with those inclined to lag behind. We
keep a personal televised record of the progress of every student
enrolled in our schools. Thus, they compete with their *own* past
achievements, as well as with others in approximately the same category.

With what you term "The younger generation" reared in this manner, you
will readily comprehend the way in which they are enabled to apply the
principles and utilize the essential etheric properties contained in the
super-charged magnetic orbit which surrounds our home planet. An absurd
theory exists in the minds of some earth people we have observed that
the type of existence we have attained must be slightly insipid and
[monotonous](errata.htm#12). Nothing could be farther from the truth!
Our lives are fairly teeming with ever-expanding interest and
activities! You have a trifling example of my meaning in the constant
improvements made in your automobiles and household appliances. Even
their method of propulsion is constantly subject to revision. Then, why
doubt or wonder that, on a planet where war has long since been
abolished and all diabolically destructive practices are unknown, we
have evolved a system of Self-government which fosters individual
initiative contributing to an Over-all Plan whereby each community forms
a perfectly coordinating unit in an

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

ever progressing planet of magnificent achievement and surpassing
beauty. Our knowledge, our skill, our equipment and power to use it, all
are at your service as you prove yourselves willing to learn and abide
by Cosmic Laws which we obey.

In the Name of our beloved Commander-in-Chief, Jesus Christ, we bless
you and give you our love!

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>A S H T A R</p>
<p>And His Men of Might!</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](idtc12)
