<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml05)  [Next](eml07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

# CHAPTER III

### Dawn of Civilization

Early Peoples--The Mediterranean Race--Blonde Peoples of Morocco and
Southern Palestine--Fair Types in Egypt--Migrations of Mediterraneans
--They reach Britain--Early Nilotic Civilizations--Burial
Customs--Osiris Invasion--The Set Conquest--Sun Worshippers from
Babylonia--Settlement in North--Coming of Dynastic Egyptians--The Two
Kingdoms--United by Mena--The Mathematicians of the Delta--Introduction
of Calendar--Progressive Pharaohs--Early Irrigation Schemes.

IN the remote ages, ere the ice cap had melted in northern Europe, the
Nile valley was a swamp, with growth of jungle like the Delta. Rain fell
in season, so that streams flowed from the hills, and slopes which are
now barren wastes were green and pleasant grassland. Tribes of Early
Stone Age savages hunted and herded there, and the flints they chipped
and splintered so rudely are still found in mountain caves, on the
surface of the desert, and embedded in mud washed down from the hills.

Other peoples of higher development appeared in time <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) and after many centuries elapsed they
divided the valley between them, increasing in numbers and breaking off
in tribes. Several small independent kingdoms were thus formed. When
government was ultimately centralized after conquest, these kingdoms
became provinces,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

called nomes, <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) and each had its
capital, with its ruling god and local theological system. The fusion of
peoples which resulted caused a fusion of religious beliefs, and one god
acquired the attributes of another without complete loss of identity.

The early settlers came from North Africa, which was possessed by tribes
of the Mediterranean race. They were light-skinned "long heads" of short
stature, with slender bodies, aquiline noses, and black hair and eyes.
In the eastern Delta they were the Archaic Egyptians; in the western
Delta and along the coast, which suffered from great subsidences in
later times, they were known as the Libyans. Tribes of the latter appear
to have mingled with a blonde and taller stock. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40.md) On the northern slopes of the Atlas
Mountains this type has still survival; a similar people occupied
southern Palestine in pre-Semitic times. Blue-eyed and light-haired
individuals thus made appearance in the Nile valley at an early period.
They were depicted in tomb paintings, and, although never numerous, were
occasionally influential. There are fair types among modern-day Berbers.
The idea that these are descendants of Celts or Goths no longer obtains.

As they multiplied and prospered, the Mediterranean peoples spread far
from their North African area of characterization. Their migration
southward was arrested in Nubia, where the exploring tribes met in
conflict hordes of dusky Bushmen, with whom they ultimately blended.
Fusion with taller negroes followed in later times. Thus had origin the
virile Nubian people, who were ever a menace to the Dynastic Pharaohs.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

But the drift of surplus Mediterranean stock appears to have been
greater towards the north than the south. Branching eastward, they
poured into Palestine and Asia Minor. They were the primitive Phœnicians
who ultimately fused with Semites, and they were the Hittites who
blended with Mongols and Alpine (or Armenoid) "broad heads". Possessing
themselves of large tracts of Italy and Greece, they became known to
history as the Italici, Ligurians, Pelasgians, &c., and they founded a
great civilization in Crete, where evidences have been forthcoming of
their settlement as early as 10,000 B.C.

The western migration towards Morocco probably resulted in periodic
fusions with blonde mountain tribes, so that the stock which entered
Spain across the Straits of Gibraltar may have been more akin in
physical type to the Libyans than to the Archaic Egyptians. The early
settlers spread through western Europe, and are known to history as the
Iberians. They also met and mingled with the tribes branching along the
seacoast from Greece. Moving northward through the river valleys of
France, the Iberians crossed over to Britain, absorbing everywhere, it
would appear, the earlier inhabitants who survived the clash of
conflict. These were the men of the Late Stone Age, which continued
through vast intervals of time.

A glimpse of the early Mediterranean civilization is obtained in the
Delta region. The dwellings of the Archaic Egyptians were of
mud-plastered wickerwork, and were grouped in villages, round which they
constructed strong stockades to ward off the attacks of desert lions and
leopards, and afford protection for their herds of antelopes, goats, and
ostriches. The cat and the dog were already domesticated. Men tattooed
their bodies and painted their faces; they wore slight garments of

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

goatskin, and adorned their heads with ostrich feathers. The women) who
affected similar habits, but had fuller attire, set decorated combs in
their hair., and they wore armlets and necklets of shells, painted
pebbles, and animals' teeth which were probably charms against
witchcraft.

These early settlers were herdsmen and hunters and fishermen, and among
them were artisans of great skill, who chipped from splintered flint
sharp lances and knives and keen arrowheads, while they also fashioned
artistic pottery and hollowed out shapely stone jars. In their small
boats they sailed and rowed upon the Nile; they caught fish with bone
hooks, and snared birds in the Delta swamps. Their traders bartered
goods constantly among the tribes who dwelt on the river banks. They
were withal fierce and brave warriors, as fearless in the chase as in
battle, for they not only slew the wild ox, but made attack with lance
and bow upon the crocodile and hippopotamus, and hunted the wild boar
and desert lion in moonlight.

As day followed night, so they believed that life came after death. They
buried their dead in shallow graves, clad in goatskin, crouched up as if
taking rest before setting forth on a journey, while beside them were
placed their little palettes of slate for grinding face paint, their
staffs and flint weapons and vessels of pottery filled with food for
sustenance and drink for refreshment.

Long centuries went past, and a new civilization appeared in Lower
Egypt. Tribes from the east settled there and effected conquests,
introducing new arts and manners of life and new beliefs. The people
began to till the soil after the Nile flood subsided, and they raised
harvests of barley and wheat. It was the age of Osiris and Isis.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Each king was an Osiris, and his symbols of power were the shepherd's
staff and the flail. The people worshipped their king as a god, and,
after thirty years' reign, devoured him at their Sed festival <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) with cannibalistic ceremonial, so that his
spirit might enter his successor and the land and the people have
prosperity. The gnawed bones of monarchs have been found in tombs. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42.md)

Laws, which were stern and inexorable as those of Nature, disciplined
the people and promoted their welfare. Social life was organized under a
strict system of government. Industries were fostered and commerce
flourished. Traders went farther afield as the needs of the age
increased, and procured ivory from Nubia, silver from Asia, and from
Araby its sweet perfumes and precious stones, and for these they
bartered corn and linen and oil; there was also constant exchange of
pottery and weapons and ornaments. Centuries went past, and this
civilization at length suffered gradual decline, owing, probably, to the
weakening of the central power.

Then followed a period of anarchy, when the kingdom, attracting
plunderers, sustained the shock of invasion. Hordes of Semites, mingled
probably with northern mountaineers, poured in from Syria and the
Arabian steppes, and overthrew the power of the Osirian ruler. They were
worshippers of Set (Sutekh), and they plundered and oppressed the
people. Their sway, however, was but slight in the region of the western
Delta, where frequent risings occurred and rebellion was ever fostered.
Warfare disorganized commerce and impoverished the land. Art declined
and an obscure period ensued.

But the needs of a country prevail in the end, and

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

the north flourished once again with growing commerce and revived
industries. On their pottery the skilled artisans painted scenes of
daily life. Men and women were, it appears, clad in garments of white
linen, and the rich had belts and pouches of decorated leather and
ornaments of silver and gold set with precious stones. Tools and weapons
of copper had come into use, but flint was also worked with consummate
skill unsurpassed by an), other people.

The land was a veritable hive of industry. Food was plentiful, for the
harvests yielded corn, and huntsmen found wild animals more numerous as
beasts of prey were driven from their lairs and lessened in number.
Great galleys were built to trade in the Mediterranean, and each was
propelled by sixty oarsmen. The ships of other peoples also visited the
ports of Egypt, probably from Crete and the Syrian coast, and caravans
crossed the frontier going eastward and north, while alien traders
entered the land and abode in it. Battle conflicts with men of various
races were also depicted on the pottery, for there was much warfare from
time to time.

Growing communities with Babylonian beliefs effected settlements in the
north. These were the sun worshippers whose religion ultimately gained
ascendancy all over Egypt. From primitive Pithom (house of Tum) they may
have passed to On (Heliopolis), which became sacred to Ra-Tum and was
the capital of a province and probably, for a period, of the kingdom of
Lower Egypt.

A. masterful people also appeared in Upper Egypt. They came from or
through Arabia, and had absorbed a culture from a remote civilization,
which cannot be located, in common with the early Babylonians. Crossing
the lower end of the Red Sea, they entered the verdurous valley of the
Nile over a direct desert route, or through

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the highlands of Abyssinia. They were armed with weapons of copper, and
effected their earliest settlement, it would appear, at Edfu. Then by
gradual conquest they welded together the various tribes, extending
their sway over an ever-increasing area. New and improved methods of
agriculture were introduced. Canals were constructed for purposes of
irrigation. The people increased in number and prosperity, and law and
order was firmly established in the land.

These invaders were sun worshippers of the Horus-hawk cult, but they
also embraced the religious beliefs of the people with whom they
mingled, including the worship of the corn god Osiris. From Edfu and
Hierakonpolis they pressed northward to sacred Abydos, the burial place
of kings, and to Thinis, the capital of four united provinces. Several
monarchs, who wore with dignity the white crown of Upper Egypt, reigned
and "abode their destined hour". Then arose a great conqueror who was
named Zaru, "The Scorpion". He led his victorious army down the Nile
valley, extending his kingdom as he went, until he reached the frontier
of the Fayum province, which was then a great swamp. There his progress
was arrested. But a new era had dawned in Egypt, for there then remained
but two kingdoms--the Upper and the Lower.

King Zaru was not slain at the Sed festival in accordance with the
suggested ancient custom. He impersonated Osiris, throned in solitary
dignity and wearing his crown, within a small curtained enclosure which
opened at the front, and he held the crook in one hand and the flail in
the other. The people made obeisance before him. It is not possible to
follow the details of the ceremony, but from pictorial records it
appears that large numbers of captives and oxen and cattle were offered
up in sacrifice,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

so that slaughter might be averted by slaughter. The monarch was
believed to have died a ceremonial death and to have come to life again
with renewed energy which prolonged his years. An Abydos inscription
declares of an Osiris ruler in this connection: "Thou dost begin thy
days anew; like the holy moon child thou art permitted to prosper . . .
thou hast grown young and thou art born to life again." <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) An important event at the festival was the
appearance before the Pharaoh of his chosen successor, who performed a
religious dance; and he was afterwards given for wife a princess of the
royal line, so that his right to the throne might be secured.

The closing years of Zaru's reign were apparently occupied in organizing
and improving the conquered territory. As befitted an Osirian king, he
de-voted much attention to agriculture, and land was reclaimed by
irrigation. An artist depicted him in the act of digging on the river
bank with a hoe, as if performing the ceremony of "cutting the first
sod" of a new canal. The people are shown to have had circular
dwellings, with fruit trees protected by enclosures. Their square fields
were surrounded by irrigating ditches.

When the king died he was buried at Abydos, like other rulers of his
line, in one of the brick tombs of the time. The investigation of these
by Flinders Petrie has made possible the reconstruction in outline of
the history of Egypt immediately prior to the founding of the First
Dynasty. It is significant to note that the dead were buried at full
length instead of in contracted posture as in Lower Egypt.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

The next great monarch was Narmer, who is believed by certain
authorities to have been Mena. Petrie, however, holds that they were
separate personalities. Another view is that the deeds of two or three
monarchs were attributed to Mena, as in the case of the Sesostris of the
Greeks. Evidently many myths attached to the memory of the heroic figure
who accomplished the conquest of the northern kingdom and founded the
First Dynasty of united Egypt. Mena was represented, for instance) as
the monarch who taught the people how to gorge luxuriously while he lay
upon a couch and slaves massaged his stomach, and tradition asserted
that he met his death, apparently while intoxicated, by falling into the
Nile, in which he was devoured by a hippopotamus. But these folk tales
hardly accord with the character of a conqueror of tireless energy, who
must have been kept fully occupied in organizing his new territory and
stamping out the smouldering fires of rebellion.

The initial triumph of the traditional Mena, in his Narmer character,
was achieved in the swampy Fayum, the buffer state between Upper and
Lower Egypt. It had long resisted invasion, but in the end the southern
forces achieved a great victory. The broad Delta region then lay open
before them, and their ultimate success was assured. King Narmer is
shown on a slate palette clutching with one hand the headlocks of the
Fayum chief-who kneels in helpless posture-while with the other he
swings high a mace to smite the final blow. A composed body servant
waits upon the conquering monarch, carrying the royal sandals and a
water jar. The ha-wk symbol is also depicted to signify that victory was
attributed to Horus, the tribal god. Two enemies take flight beneath,
and above the combatants are two cow heads of the pastoral and sky
goddess Hathor.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

This great scene was imitated, in the true conservative spirit of the
ancient Egyptians, on the occasion of similar acts of conquest in after
time. Indeed, for a period of 3000 years each succeeding Pharaoh who
achieved victory in battle was depicted, like Narmer, smiting his
humbled foeman, and his importance was ever emphasized by his gigantic
stature. It was an artistic convention in those ancient days to
represent an Egyptian monarch among his enemies or subjects like a
Gulliver surrounded by Lilliputians.

After the conquest of the Fayum, the Libyans appear to have been the
dominating people in Lower Egypt. Their capital was at Sais, the seat of
their goddess Neith. The attributes of this deity reflect the character
of the civilization of her worshippers. Her symbol was a shield and two
arrows. She was depicted with green hands and face, for she was an earth
spirit who provided verdure for the flocks of a pastoral people. A
weaver's shuttle was tattooed upon her body, to indicate apparently that
she imparted to women their skill at the loom.

Mena conquered the Libyans in battle, and many thousands were slain, and
he extended his kingdom to the shores of the Mediterranean. Then he
assumed, in presence of his assembled army, the red crown of Lower
Egypt. He appears also to have legitimatized the succession by taking
for wife Neithhotep, "Neith rests", a princess of the royal house of
Sais.

So was the Horus tribe united with the Libyans who worshipped a goddess.
In aftertime the triad of Sais was composed of Osiris, Neith, and Horus.
Neith was identified with Isis.

The race memory of the conquest of Lower Egypt is believed to be
reflected in the mythical tale of Horus overcoming Set. The
turning-point in the campaign

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

was the Fayum conflict where the animal gods of Set were slain. Petrie
urges with much circumstantial detail the striking view that the
expulsion of Set from Egypt signifies the defeat of the military
aristocracy of "Semites " <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) by the
Horus people, who, having espoused the religion of Osiris, also espoused
the cause of the tribe which introduced his worship into the land. It is
evident, from an inscription on a temple of southern Edfu, that many
conquests were effected in the Delta region ere the union was
accomplished. One version of the great folk tale states that when Horus
overcame Set he handed him over to Isis bound in chains. She failed,
however, to avenge her husband's death, and set her oppressor at liberty
again. In his great wrath Horus then tore the crown from her head. This
may refer particularly to the circumstances which led to the Libyan
conquest. "We can hardly avoid", says Petrie, "reading the history of
the animosities of the gods as being the struggles of their
worshippers."

The Libyans were ever a troublesome people to the Pharaohs, whose hold
on the western district of the Delta was never certain. Mena apparently
endeavoured to break their power by taking captive no fewer than 120,000
prisoners. His spoils included also 100,000 oxen and 1,420,000 goats.

This displacement of so large a proportion of the inhabitants of the
north was not without its effect in the physical character of the
Nile-valley peoples. The differences of blend between north and south
were well marked prior to the conquest. After the union of the two
kingdoms the ruling classes of Upper Egypt approximated closely to the
Delta type. It is evident that the great

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

native civilization which flourished in the Nile valley for over forty
centuries owed much to the virility and genius of the Mediterranean
race, which promoted culture wherever its people effected settlements.
One is struck, indeed, to note in this connection that the facial
characteristics of not a few Pharaohs resemble those of certain great
leaders of men who have achieved distinction among the nations of
Europe.

The culture of the Horite conquerors was evidently well adapted for the
Nile valley. It developed there rapidly during the three centuries which
elapsed before the Delta was invaded, and assumed a purely Egyptian
character. Hieroglyphics were in use from the beginning, copper was
worked by "the smiths", and superior wheel-turned pottery made its
appearance. But the greatest service rendered to ancient Egypt by the
Horites was the ultimate establishment of settled conditions over the
entire land in the interests of individual welfare and national
progress.

The contribution of the north to Dynastic culture was not
inconsiderable. In fact, it cannot really be overestimated. The Delta
civilization was already well developed prior to the conquest. There was
in use among the people a linear script which resembled closely the
systems of Crete and the Ægean and those also that appeared later in
Karia and Spain. Its early beginnings may be traced, perhaps, in those
rude signs which the pioneers of the Late Stone Age in western Europe
scratched upon the French dolmens. Archaic Phœnician letters show that
the great sea traders in after time simplified the system and diffused
it far and wide. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) Our alphabet is
thus remotely North African in origin.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

It was in the Delta also that the Calendar was invented by great
mathematicians of the Late Stone Age, over sixty centuries ago, who
recognized that an artificial division of time was necessary for
purposes of accurate record and calculation. They began their year with
the rising of the star Sirius (Sothos) at the height of the Nile
inundation. and it was divided into twelve months of thirty days each,
five extra days being added for religious festivals associated with
agricultural rites. This Calendar was ultimately imported and adjusted
by the Romans, and it continues in use, with subsequent refinements, all
over the world until the present day. Under Mena's rule there are
evidences of the progress which is ever fostered when ideas are freely
exchanged and a stimulating rivalry is promoted among the people. The
inventive mind was busily at work. Pottery improved in texture and
construction, and was glazed in colours. Jewellery of great beauty was
also produced, and weapons and tools were fashioned with artistic
design. Draughtboards and sets of "ninepins" were evidently in demand
among all classes for recreation in moments of leisure.

Meanwhile the administration of the united kingdom was thoroughly
organized. Officials were numerous and their duties were strictly
defined. Various strategic centres were garrisoned so as to prevent
outbreaks and to secure protection for every industrious and law-abiding
citizen. Memphis became an important city. According to tradition it was
built by Mena, but the local theological system suggests that it existed
prior to his day. It is probable that he erected buildings there,
including a fortification, and made it a centre of administration for
the northern part of his kingdom.

When Mena died he was buried at Abydos, and he was succeeded by his son
Aha, "the fighter". Under

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the new monarch a vigorous military campaign was conducted in the south,
and another province was placed under the sway of the central
government. The peaceful condition of the north is emphasized by his
recorded visit to Sais, where he made offerings at the shrine of Neith,
the goddess of his mother's people.

Meanwhile the natural resources of the Nile valley were systematically
developed. Irrigation works were undertaken everywhere, jungle was
cleared away, and large tracts of land were reclaimed by industrious
toilers. These activities were promoted and controlled by royal
officials. King Den, a wise and progressive monarch, inaugurated the
great scheme of clearing and draining the Fayum, which was to become in
after time a fertile and populous province. The surveyors set to work
and planned the construction of a canal, and the scheme was developed
and continued by the monarchs who followed. It was as shrewdly
recognized in the time of the First Dynasty as it is in our own day,
that the progress and welfare of the Nile-valley people must ever depend
upon the development of the agricultural resources of the country. The
wealth of Egypt is drawn from the soil. All the glory and achievements
of the Dynasties were made possible by the systems of government which
afforded facilities and protection for the men who "cast their bread
upon the waters" so that abundant return might be secured "after many
days". When we are afforded, therefore, a glimpse of daily life on the
land, as is given in the ancient and treasured folk tale which
follows, <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md) we are brought into closer
touch with the people who toiled in contentment many thousands of years
ago in the land of Egypt than is possible when we contemplate

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

with wonder their exquisite works of art or great architectural
triumphs. The spirit which pervaded the ancient peasantry of the Nile
valley is reflected in the faithful and gentle service and the winning
qualities of poor Bata, the younger brother. It gives us pause to
reflect that the story of his injured honour and tragic fate moved to
tears those high-born dames whose swaddled mummies now lie in our
museums to be stared at by holidaymakers who wonder how they lived and
what scenes surrounded their daily lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[30:1](eml06.htm#fr_38.md) The early Palæolithic
men were probably of Bushman type and the later of Mediterranean.
Evidences of development from the Palæolithic to the Neolithic Age have
been forthcoming

<span id="fn_39"></span>[31:1](eml06.htm#fr_39.md) The Greek name; the old
Egyptian name was "hesp".

<span id="fn_40"></span>[31:2](eml06.htm#fr_40.md) There were Libyans in
the western Delta; on its borders were the "Tehenu", and beyond these
the "Lebu", and still farther west were the "Meshwesh", the Maxyes of
the Greeks. All were referred to as Libyans.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[34:1](eml06.htm#fr_41.md) Petrie's view. See
Researches in Sinai, p. 185.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[34:2](eml06.htm#fr_42.md) Maspero. This opinion,
however, has been sharply challenged.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[37:1](eml06.htm#fr_43.md) The Horus worshippers
had evidently absorbed the beliefs of the Nilotic moon cult. Some
authorities credit the Dynastic Egyptians with the introduction of
Osiris worship. The close resemblance of Osiris to similar deities in
Asia Minor and Europe favours the view that Osiris first entered Lower
Egypt. See *Golden Bough*--Adonis, Attis, Osiris volume. The Osiran
heaven was of Delta character.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[40:1](eml06.htm#fr_44.md) It is possible that Set
(Sutekh) was the god of a pre-Semitic people whose beliefs were embraced
by certain Semitic tribes.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[41:1](eml06.htm#fr_45.md) Professor Macalister is
inclined to credit the Philistines instead of the Phoenicians with the
work of systematizing the script.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[43:1](eml06.htm#fr_46.md) It assumed its final
form in the Empire period, and is evidently of remote antiquity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The Peasant who became King](eml07.md)

</div>
