<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml07)  [Next](eml09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

# CHAPTER V

### Racial Myths in Egypt and Europe

Worship of Animals--Possessed by Spirits of Good and Evil--Reptiles as
Destroyers and Protectors----Pigs of Set and Osiris--The Moon
Eater--Horus Solar and Storm Myth--The Devil Pig in Egypt and
Scotland--Contrast with Gaulish, Irish, and Norse Beliefs--Animal
Conflicts for Mastery of Herd--Love God a Pig--Why Eels were not
eaten--The Sacred Bull--Irish and Egyptian Myths--Corn Spirits--The
Goose Festival in Europe--The Chaos Egg--Giant's Soul Myth--Nilotic and
other Versions--Wild Ass as Symbol of Good and Evil.

ONE of the most interesting phases of Nilotic religion was the worship
of animals. Juvenal ridiculed the Egyptians for this particular practice
in one of his satires, and the early fathers of the Church regarded it
as proof of the folly of pagan religious ideas. Some modern-day
apologists, on the other hand, have leapt to the other extreme by
suggesting that the ancient philosophers were imbued with a religious
respect for life in every form, and professed a pantheistic creed. Our
task here, however, is to investigate rather than to justify or condemn
ancient Egyptian beliefs. We desire to get, if possible, at the Egyptian
point of view. That being so, we must recognize at the outset that we
are dealing with a confused mass of religious practices and conceptions
of Egyptian and non-Egyptian origin, which accumulated during a vast
period of time and were perpetuated as much by custom as by conviction.
The average Egyptian of the later Dynasties might have been as little
able to account for his superstitious regard for the crocodile or the
serpent

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

as is the society lady of to-day to explain her dread of being one of a
dinner party of thirteen, or of spilling salt at table; he worshipped
animals because they had always been worshipped, and, although
originally only certain representatives of a species were held to be
sacred, he was not unwilling to show reverence for the species as a
whole.

We obtain a clue which helps to explain the origin of animal worship in
Egypt in an interesting Nineteenth-Dynasty papyrus preserved in the
British Museum. This document contains a calendar in which lucky and
unlucky days are detailed in accordance with the ideas of ancient seers.
Good luck, we gather, comes from the beneficent deities, and bad luck is
caused by the operations of evil spirits. On a particular date demons
are let loose, and the peasant is warned not to lead an ox with a rope
at any time during the day, lest one of them should enter the animal and
cause it to gore him. An animal, therefore, was not feared or worshipped
for its own sake, but because it was liable to be possessed by a good or
evil spirit.

The difference between good and evil spirits was that the former could
be propitiated or bargained with, so that benefits might be obtained,
while the latter ever remained insatiable and unwilling to be
reconciled. This primitive conception is clearly set forth by Isocrates,
the Greek orator, who said: "Those of the gods who are the sources to us
of good things have the title of Olympians; those whose department is
that of calamities and punishments have harsher titles. To the first
class both private persons and states erect altars and temples; the
second is not worshipped either with prayers or burnt sacrifices, but in
their case we perform ceremonies of riddance".

"Ceremonies" of riddance are, of course, magical

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

ceremonies. It was by magic that the Egyptians warded off the attacks of
evil spirits. Ra's journey in the sun bark through the perilous
hour-divisions of night was accomplished by the aid of spells which
thwarted the demons of evil and darkness in animal or reptile form.

In Egypt both gods and demons might possess the same species of animals
or reptiles. The ox might be an incarnation of the friendly Isis, or of
the demon which gored the peasant. Serpents and crocodiles were at once
the protectors and the enemies of mankind. The dreaded Apep serpent
symbolized everything that was evil and antagonistic to human welfare;
but the beneficent mother goddess Uazit of Buto, who shielded Horus, was
also a serpent, and serpents were worshipped as defenders of households;
images of them were hung up for "luck" or protection, as horseshoes are
in our own country even at the present day; the serpent amulet was
likewise a protective agency., like the serpent stone of the Gauls and
the familiar "lucky pig" which is still worn as a charm.

In certain parts of Egypt the crocodile was also worshipped, and was
immune from attack; <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) in others it was
ruthlessly hunted down. As late as Roman times the people of one nome
waged war against those of another because their sacred animals were
being slain by the rival religious organization.

Here we touch upon the tribal aspect of animal worship. Certain animals
or reptiles were regarded as the protectors of certain districts. A
particular animal might be looked upon by one tribe as an incarnation of
their deity, and by another as the incarnation of their Satan. The black
pig, for instance, was associated by the Egyptians with Set, who was the
god of a people who conquered

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and oppressed them in pre-Dynastic times. Horus is depicted standing on
the back of the pig and piercing its head with a lance; its legs and
jaws are fettered with chains. But the pig was also a form of Osiris,
"the good god".

Set was identified with the Apep serpent of night and storm, and in
certain myths the pig takes the place of the serpent. It was the Set
pig, for instance, that fed upon the waning moon, which was the left eye
of Horus. How his right eye, the sun, was once blinded is related in a
Heliopolitan myth. Horus sought, it appears, to equal Ra, and desired to
see all things that had been created. Ra delivered him a salutory lesson
by saying: "Behold the black pig". Horus looked, and immediately one of
his eyes (the sun) was destroyed by a whirlwind of fire. Ra said to the
other gods: "The pig will be abominable to Horus". For that reason pigs
were never sacrificed to him. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) Ra
restored the injured eye, and created for Horus two horizon brethren who
would guard him against thunderstorms and rain.

The Egyptians regarded the pig as an unclean animal. Herodotus relates
that if they touched it casually, they at once plunged into water to
purify themselves. <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64) Swineherds lost
caste, and were not admitted to the temples. Pork was never included
among the meat offerings to the dead. In Syria the pig was also "taboo".
In the Highlands, even in our own day, there survives a strong prejudice
against pork, and the black pig is identified with the devil.

On the other hand, the Gauls, who regarded the pig

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

as sacred, did not abstain from pork. Like their kinsmen, the Achæans,
too, they regarded swineherds as important personages; these could even
become kings. The Scandinavian heroes in Valhal feast upon swine's
flesh, and the boar was identified with Frey, the corn god. In the
Celtic (Irish) Elysium presided over by Dagda, the corn god, as the
Egyptian Paradise was presided over by Osiris, there was always "one pig
alive and another ready roasted". <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)
Dagda's son, Angus, the love god, the Celtic Khonsu, had a herd of
swine, and their chief was the inevitable black pig.

In *The Golden Bough*, Professor Frazer shows that the pig was tabooed
because it was at one time a sacred animal identified with Osiris. Once
a year, according to Herodotus, pigs were sacrificed in Egypt to the
moon and to Osiris. The moon pig was eaten, but the pigs offered to
Osiris were slain in front of house doors and given back to the
swineherds from whom they were purchased.

Like the serpent and the crocodile, the pig might be either the friend
or the enemy of the corn god. At sowing time it rendered service by
clearing the soil of obnoxious roots and weeds which retard the growth
of crops. When, however, the agriculturists found the--

Snouted wild boar routing tender corn,

they apparently identified it with the enemy of Osiris--it slew the corn
god. The boar hunt then ensued as a matter of course. We can understand,
therefore, why the Egyptians sacrificed swine to Osiris because, as
Plutarch says, "not that which is dear to the gods but that which

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

is contrary is fit to be sacrificed". The solution of the problem may be
that at sowing time the spirit of Osiris entered the boar, and that at
harvest the animal was possessed by the spirit of Set.

This conclusion leads us back to the primitive conception of the Great
Mother Deity. In the archaic Scottish folk tale, which is summarized in
our Introduction, she is the enemy of mankind. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) But her son, the lover of the spirit of
summer--he is evidently the prototype of the later love god--is a
beneficent giant; he fights against his mother, who separated him from
his bride and sought to destroy all life. Ra similarly desired to slay
"his enemies", because he created evil as well as good. Seb, the
Egyptian earth god, was the father of Osiris, "the good god", and of
Set, the devil; they were "brothers". Osiris was a boar, and Set was a
boar. The original "battle of the gods" may, therefore, have been the
conflict between the two boars for the mastery of the herd--a conflict
which also symbolized the warfare between evil and good, winter and
summer. Were not the rival forces of Nature created together at the
beginning? The progeny of the Great Father, or the Great Mother,
included evil demons as well as good gods.

The Greek Adonis was slain by a boar; Osiris was slain by Set, the black
boar; the Celtic Diarmid was slain by a boar which was protected by a
Hag who appears to be identical with the vengeful and stormy Scottish
Earth Mother. The boar was "taboo" to the worshippers of Adonis and
Osiris; in Celtic folklore "bonds" are put upon Diarmid not to hunt the
boar. Evidently Adonis, Osiris, and Diarmid represented the "good"
boars.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

These three deities were love gods; the love god was identified with the
moon, and the primitive moon spirit was the son of the Great Mother; the
Theban Khonsu was the son of Mut; the Nubian Thoth was the son of
Tefnut. Now Set, the black boar of evil, devoured the waning moon, and
in doing so he devoured his brother Osiris. When the Egyptians,
therefore, sacrificed a pig to the moon, and feasted upon it like Set,
they ate the god. They did not eat the pig sacrificed to Osiris, because
apparently it represented the enemy of the god; they simply slew it, and
thus slew Set.

It would appear that there were originally two moon pigs--the "lucky
pig" of the waxing moon and the black pig of the waning moon. These were
the animal forms of the moon god and of the demon who devoured the
moon--the animal form of the love god and the thwarted rebel god; they
also symbolized growth and decay--Osiris was growth, and Set symbolized
the slaughter of growth: he killed the corn god.

The primitive lunar myth is symbolized in the legend which tells that
Set hunted the boar in the Delta marshes. He set out at full moon, just
when the conflict between the demon and the lunar deity might be
expected to begin, and he found the body of Osiris, which he broke up
into fourteen parts--a suggestion of the fourteen phases of lunar
decline. We know that Set was the moon-eating pig. The black boar of
night therefore hunts, slays, and devours the white boar of the moon.
But the generative organ of Osiris is thrown into the river, and is
swallowed by a fish: similarly Set flings the wrenched-out "eye" of
Horus into the Nile.

Now the fish was sacred in Egypt. It had a symbolic significance; it was
a phallic symbol. The Great Mother of Mendes, another form of Isis, is
depicted with a fish

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

upon her head. Priests were not permitted to eat fish, and the food
which was "taboo" to the priests was originally "taboo" to all the
Egyptians. In fact, certain fish were not eaten during the Eighteenth
Dynasty and later, and fish were embalmed. Those fish which were
included among articles of dietary were brought to the table with fins
and tails removed. The pig which was eaten sacrificially once a year had
similarly its tall cut off. Once a year, on the ninth day of the month
of Thoth, the Egyptians ate fried fish at their house doors: the priests
offered up their share by burning them. Certain fish were not eaten by
the ancient Britons. The eel is still abhorred in Scotland: it was
sacred and tabooed in Egypt also. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67)

Osiris was worshipped at Memphis in the form of the bull Apis, Egyptian
*Hapi*, which was known to the Greeks as "Serapis", their rendering of
*Asar-Hapi* (Osiris-Apis). This sacred animal was reputed to be of
miraculous birth, like the son of the Great Mother deity. "It was
begotten", Plutarch was informed, "by a ray of generative light flowing
from the moon." "Apis", said Herodotus, "was a young black bull whose
mother can have no other offspring." It was known by its marks; it had
"on its forehead a white triangular spot, on its back an eagle, a beetle
lump under its tongue, while the hair of its tail was double". Plutarch
said that "on account of the great resemblance which the Egyptians
imagine between Osiris and the moon, its more bright and shining parts
being shadowed and obscured by those that are of darker hue, they call
the Apis the living image of Osiris". The bull, Herodotus says, was "a
fair and beautiful image of the soul of Osiris". Diodorus similarly
states that Osiris manifested

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

himself to men through successive ages as Apis. "The soul of Osiris
migrated into this animal", he explains.

That this bull represented the animal which obtained mastery of the herd
is suggested by the popularity of bull fights at the ancient sports;
there are several representations on the ancient tombs of Egyptian
peasants, carrying staves, urging bulls to battle one against another.
Worshippers appear to have perpetuated the observance of the conflict
between the male animals in the mock fights at temples. Herodotus
relates that when the votaries of the deity presented themselves at the
temple entrance they were armed with staves. Men with staves endeavoured
to prevent their admission, and a combat ensued between the two parties,
"in which many heads were broken, and, I should suppose," adds
Herodotus, "many lives lost, although this the Egyptians positively
deny". Apparently Set was the thwarted male animal--that is, the demon
with whom the Egyptianized Set (Sutekh) was identified.

The sacred Apis bull might either be allowed to die a natural death, or
it was drowned when its age was twenty-eight years--a suggestion of the
twenty-eight phases of the moon and the violent death of Osiris. The
whole nation mourned for the sacred animal; its body was mummified and
laid in a tomb with much ceremony. Mariette, the French archæologist,
discovered the Eighteenth-Dynasty tombs of the Memphite bulls in 1851.
The sarcophagi which enclosed the bodies weighed about 58 tons each. One
tomb which he opened had been undisturbed since the time of the burial,
and the footprints of the mourners were discoverable after a lapse of
3000 years. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68)

<span id="img_07000"></span> ![](img/07000.jpg)

SACRED ANIMALS

top: left to right: Cat (Bast); Uræus, with horns; Shrine with Sokar
Hawk; Ape (Thoth); Ibis (Thoth).  
bottom, left to right: Apis Bull; Fish (Lepidotus); Jackal (Anubis);
Snake (form of Uazit); Cat with Kittens (Bast).

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span id="img_07100"></span> ![](img/07100.jpg)

FIGURE OF THE APIS BULL, WITH A KING MAKING OFFERINGS  
(British Museum)

After the burial the priests set out to search for the successor of the
old bull, and there was great rejoicing when one was found; its owner
was compensated with generous gifts of gold. In the Anpu-Bata story,
which is evidently a version of the Osiris myth, the elder brother is
honoured and becomes rich after he delivers the Bata bull to the
Pharaoh. It will be noted that the Osiris soul was believed to be in the
animal's liver, which was eaten--here we have again the ceremony of
eating the god. Before the bull was transferred to its temple it was
isolated for forty days, and was seen during that period by women only.

At Heliopolis the soul of Osiris entered the Mnevis bull. This sacred
animal was evidently a rival to Apis. Ammianus Marcellinus says that
Apis was dedicated to the moon and Mnevis to the sun.

In Upper Egypt the sacred bull was Bakh (Bacis) a form of Mentu; it was
ultimately identified with Ra.

The worship of Apis ultimately triumphed, and in Roman times became
general all over Egypt.

Like the Osiris boar, the Osiris bull was identified with the corn
spirit. But its significance in this regard is not emphasized in the
Egyptian texts. That may have been because different tribes regarded
different animals as harvest deities. The association of Apis with Ptah
is therefore of interest. We have suggested that Ptah was originally
worshipped by a people of mountain origin. In the great caves of
southern Palestine there survive rude scratchings of cows and bulls,
suggesting that this pastoral people venerated their domesticated
animals. In Europe the corn spirit was identified with the bull and cow
principally by the Hungarians, the Swiss, and the Prussians, and by some
of the French, for the "corn bull" was slain at Bordeaux. On the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

other hand, it may be that in the Irish legend regarding the conflict
between the Brown Bull of Ulster and the White-horned Bull of Connaught
we have a version of a very ancient myth which was connected with Osiris
in Egypt. Both Irish animals were of miraculous birth; their mothers
were fairy cows.

Like the Egyptian Anpu-Bata story, the Irish legend is characterized by
belief in the transmigration of souls. It relates that the rival bulls
were originally swineherds. One served Bodb, the fairy king of Munster,
who was a son of Dagda, the Danann corn god; the other served Ochall
Ochne, the fairy king of Connaught, the province occupied by the enemies
of the beneficent Danann deities. The two herds fought one against
another. "Then, the better to carry on their quarrel, they changed
themselves into two ravens and fought for a year; next they turned into
water monsters, which tore one another for a year in the Suir and a year
in the Shannon; then they became human again, and fought as champions;
and ended by changing into eels. One of these eels went into the River
Cruind in Cualgne in Ulster, where it was swallowed by a cow belonging
to Daire of Cualgne; and the other into the spring of Uaran Garad, in
Connaught, where it passed into the belly of a cow of Queen Medb's. Thus
were born those two famous beasts, the Brown Bull of Ulster and the
White-horned Bull of Connaught." <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) The
brown bull was victorious in the final conflict; it afterwards went mad,
burst its heart with bellowing, and fell dead. In this myth we have the
conflict between rival males, suggested in the Osiris-Set boar legend
and the mock fights at the Egyptian bull temple.

The sacred cow was identified with Isis, Nepthys, Hathor, and Nut. Isis
was also fused with Taurt, the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

female hippopotamus, who was goddess of maternity and was reputed to be
the mother of Osiris. Even the crocodile was associated with the worship
of the corn god; in one of the myths this reptile recovers the body of
Osiris from the Nile.

Bast, another Great Mother who was regarded as a form of Isis, was
identified with the cat, an animal which was extremely popular as a
household pet in Egypt. Herodotus relates that when a house went on fire
the Egyptians appeared to be occupied with no thought but that of
preserving their cats. These animals were prone to leap into the flames,
and when a family lost a cat in such circumstances there was universal
sorrow. A Roman soldier was once mobbed and slain because he killed a
household cat. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) The cat was
identified in France with the corn spirit: the last portion of grain
which was reaped was called "the cat's tail". <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71)

We have referred in the Introduction to the goose which laid the sun
egg. Apparently this bird was at one time sacred. Although it was a
popular article of diet in ancient Egypt, and was favoured especially by
the priests, it was probably eaten chiefly in the winter season. The
goose and the duck were sacred in Abyssinia, where the Mediterranean
type has been identified in fusion with Semitic, Negroid, and other
types. In the Highlands of Scotland the goose was eaten, until recently,
on Christmas Day only. Throughout England it was associated with
Michaelmas. "If you eat goose at Michaelmas", runs an old saying, "you
will never want money all the year round." The bird was evidently
identified with the corn spirit. In Shropshire the shearing of the last
portion of

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

grain was referred to as "cutting the gander's neck". When all the corn
was gathered into a stackyard in Yorkshire an entertainment was given
which was called "The Inning Goose". During the reign of Henry IV the
French subjects of the English king called the harvest festival the
"Harvest Gosling". The Danes had also a goose for supper after harvest.

The sun god Ra, of Egypt, was supposed to have been hatched from the egg
which rose from the primordial deep. This belief is reminiscent of the
folk tale of the European giant who hid his soul in an egg, as Anpu hid
his soul in the blossom of the acacia.

In one Scottish version of the ancient mythical story the giant's soul
is in a stump of a tree, a hare, a salmon, a duck, and an egg; in
another it is in a bull, a ram, a goose, and an egg. Ptah was credited
with making the sun egg which concealed his own soul, or the soul of Ra.
So was Khnûmû. These artisan gods appear to be of common origin (see
Chapter XIV); they became giants in their fusion with the primitive
earth god, who was symbolized as a gander, while they were also
identified with the ram and the bull. Khnûmû received offerings of fish,
so that a sacred fish may be added. Anpu's soul passed from the blossom
to a bull, and then to a tree. It may be that in these folk tales we
have renderings of the primitive myth of a pastoral people which gave
origin to the Egyptian belief in the egg associated with Ra, Ptah, and
Khnûmû. In the *Book of the Dead* reference is made to the enemies of
Ra, "who have cursed that which is in the egg". The pious were wont to
declare: "I keep watch over the egg of the Great Cackler" (the chaos
goose), or, according to another reading: "I am the egg which is in the
Great Cackler" (Budge). Set, the earth deity, was believed to have flown
through the air at the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

beginning in the form of the chaos goose. The Celtic deities likewise
appeared to mankind as birds.

The hare was identified with a god of the underworld. Doves and pigeons
were sacred; the ibis was an incarnation of Thoth, the hawk of Horus,
and the swallow of Isis. The mythical phœnix, with wings partly of gold
and partly of crimson, was supposed to fly from Arabia to Heliopolis
once every five hundred years. It was reputed to spring from the ashes
of the parent bird, which thus renewed its youth.

The frog was sacred, and the frog goddess Hekt was a goddess of
maternity. Among the gods identified with the ram were Amon and Min and
the group of deities resembling Ptah. Anubis was the jackal. Mut, the
Theban Great Mother, and the primitive goddess Nekhebat were represented
by the vulture. The shrew mouse was sacred to Uazit, who escaped from
Set in this form when she was the protector of Horus, son of Isis. The
dog-faced ape was a form of Thoth; the lion was a form of Aker, an old,
or imported, earth god.

There were two wild asses in Egyptian mythology, and they represented
the good and evil principles. One was Set, and the other the sun ass,
which was chased by the night serpent. Although the souls of the
departed, according to the Book of the Dead, boasted that they drove
back the "Eater of the Ass" (the serpent which devoured the sun); they
also prayed that they would "smite the ass" (the devil ass) "and crush
the serpent". When Set was driven out of Egypt he took flight on the
back of the night ass, which was another form of the night serpent. Set
was also the Apep serpent and the "roaring serpent", which symbolized
the tempest.

Herodotus has recorded that although the number of beasts in ancient
Egypt was comparatively small, both

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

those which were wild and those which were tame were regarded as sacred.
They were fed upon fish, and ministered to by hereditary lay priests and
priestesses. "In the presence of the animals", the Greek historian
wrote, "the inhabitants of the cities perform their vows. They address
themselves as supplicants to the deity who is believed to be manifested
by the animal in whose presence they are. . . . It is a capital offence
to kill one of these animals."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[64:1](eml08.htm#fr_62) Snake worshippers in
India are careful not to injure or offend a serpent, and believe that
"the faithful" are never stung.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[65:1](eml08.htm#fr_63) Evidently because the
sun cult was opposed to lunar rites which included the sacrifice of
pigs.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65:2](eml08.htm#fr_64) Before the Greeks
sacrificed a young pig, in connection with the mysteries of Demeter and
Dionysos, they washed it and themselves in the sea. Plutarch: *Vit.
Phoc.* xxviii.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66:1](eml08.htm#fr_65) *Celtic Myth and
Legend*, p. 136. This is a tribal phase of pig worship, apparently, of
different character to that which obtained in Egypt. It may be that the
reverence for the good pig was greater than the hatred of the black and
evil pig.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67:1](eml08.htm#fr_66) Ghosts also were
enemies. A dead wife might cause her husband to be stricken with
disease. Budge's *Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection*, vol. ii, p.
211.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[69:1](eml08.htm#fr_67) The Egyptian sacred fish
were the Oxyrhinchus, Lepidotus, Latus, and Phagrus.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[70:1](eml08.htm#fr_68) Apis worship was of
great antiquity. Reference is made to the Apis priests in the Fourth
Dynasty.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[72:1](eml08.htm#fr_69) *Celtic Myth and
Legend*, pp. 164-5.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[73:1](eml08.htm#fr_70) Similarly British
soldiers got into trouble recently for shooting sacred pigeons.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[73:2](eml08.htm#fr_71) In Ireland the cat deity
was the god Cairbre *cinn cait*, "of the cat's head". He was a god of
the Fir Bolg, the enemies of the Gaulish Danann people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: The City of the Elf God](eml09)

</div>
