<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml08)  [Next](eml10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### The City of the Elf God

The London of Ancient Egypt--Ptah Chief of Nine Earth Spirits--God of a
Military Aristocracy--Palestine Cave--dwellers and Alpine "Broad
Heads"--Creation Artificers of Egyptians, Europeans, Indians, and
Chinese--Sun Egg and Moon Egg--The Later Ptah--Neith as a
Banshee--Sokar, God of the Dead--Earliest Memphite Deity--Ptah and
Osiris----Manetho's Folk Tales--A Famous Queen--The First Pyramid.

Now, when there was corn in Egypt "as the sand of the sea", traders from
foreign countries crossed the parched deserts and the perilous deep,
instructed, like the sons of Jacob, to "get you down thither and buy for
us from thence". So wealth and commerce increased in the Nile valley. A
high civilization was fostered, and the growing needs of the age caused
many industries to flourish.

The business of the country was controlled by the cities which were
nursed into prosperity by the wise policy of the Pharaohs. Among these
Memphis looms prominently in the history of the early Dynasties. Its
ruling deity was, appropriately enough, the artificer god Ptah, for it
was not only a commercial but also an important industrial centre;
indeed it was the home of the great architects and stone builders whose
activities culminated in the erection of the Pyramids, the most sublime
achievements in masonry ever accomplished by man.

To-day the ruins of Old Memphis lie buried deep in the sand. The fellah
tills the soil and reaps the harvest in season above its once busy
streets and stately temples,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

its clinking workshops and noisy markets. "I have heard the words of its
teachers whose sayings are on the lips of men. But where are their
dwelling places? Their walls have been cast down and their homes are
not, even as though they had never been." Yet the area of this ancient
city was equal to that of modern London from Bow to Chelsea and the
Thames to Hampstead, and it had a teeming population.

O mighty Memphis, city of "White Walls",  
The habitation of eternal Ptah,  
Cradle of kings . . . on thee the awful hand  
Of Vengeance hath descended. . . . Nevermore  
Can bard acclaim thy glory; nevermore  
Shall harp, nor flute, nor timbrel, nor the song  
Of maids resound within thy ruined halls,  
Nor shouts of merriment in thee be heard,  
Nor hum of traffic, nor the eager cries  
Of merchants in thy markets murmurous;  
The silence of the tomb hath fallen on thee,  
And thou art faded like a lovely queen,  
Whom loveless death hath stricken in the night,  
Whose robe is rent, whose beauty is decayed--  
And nevermore shall princes from afar  
Pay homage to thy greatness, and proclaim  
Thy wonders, nor in reverence behold  
Thy sanctuary glories . . .

                            Are thy halls  
All empty, and thy streets laid bare  
And silent as the soundless wilderness?  
O Memphis, mighty Memphis, hath the morn  
Broken to find thee not?

Memphis was named after King Pepi, <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md)
and is called Noph in the Old Testament. Its early Dynastic name

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

was "White Walls", the reference being probably to the fortress erected
there soon after the Conquest. Of its royal builder we know little, but
his mother, Queen Shesh, enjoyed considerable repute for many centuries
afterwards as the inventor of a popular hair wash which is referred to
in a surviving medical papyrus.

After Egypt was united under the double crown of the Upper and the Lower
Kingdoms, and the Pharaoh became "Lord of the Two Lands", the seat of
government remained for a long period at Thinis, in the south. The
various nomes, like the present-day states of North America, had each
their centres of local administration. Pharaoh's deputies were nobles
who owed him allegiance, collected the Imperial taxes, supplied workmen
or warriors as desired, and carried out the orders of the Court
officials regarding the construction and control of canals. The temple
of the nome god adorned the provincial capital.

Ptah, the deity of Memphis, is presented in sharp contrast to the sun
god Ra, who was of Asiatic origin, and the deified King Osiris, whose
worship was associated with agricultural rites. He was an earth spirit,
resembling closely the European elf. The conception was evidently not
indigenous, because the god had also a giant form, like the hilltop
deities of the mountain peoples (see Chapter XII). He was probably
imported by the invaders who constituted the military aristocracy at
Memphis in pre-Dynastic times. These may have been the cave-dwellers of
Southern Palestine, or tall and muscular "broad heads" of Alpine or
Armenoid type who prior to the Conquest appear to have pressed southward
from Asia Minor through the highlands of Palestine, and, after
settlement, altered somewhat the physical character of the "long heads"
of the eastern Delta.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Allowance has to
be made for such an infusion in accounting for the new Dynastic type as
well as for the influence exercised by the displacement of a great
proportion of the mingled tribes of Libyans. The Palestine cave-dwellers
may have been partly of Alpine origin.

A people seldom remember their early history, but they rarely forget
their tribal beliefs. That being so, the god Ptah is of special interest
in dealing with the tribal aspect of mythology. Among all the gods of
Egypt his individuality is perhaps the most pronounced. Others became
shadowy and vague, as beliefs were fused and new and greater conceptions
evolved in the process of time. But Ptah never lost his elfin character,
even after he was merged with deities of divergent origin. He was the
chief of nine earth spirits (that is, eight and himself added) called
Khnûmû, the modellers. Statuettes of these represent them as dwarfs,
with muscular bodies, bent legs, long arms, big broad heads, and faces
of intelligent and even benign expression. Some wear long
moustaches, <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) so unlike the shaven or
glabrous Egyptians.

At the beginning, according to Memphite belief, Ptah shaped the world
and the heavens, assisted by his eight workmen, the dwarfish Khnûmû. He
was also the creator of mankind, and in Egyptian tombs are found
numerous earthenware models of these "elves". who were believed to have
had power to reconstruct the decaying bodies of the dead. As their
dwellings were underground, they may have also been "artisans of
vegetation", like the spirits associated with Tvashtar, the "master
workman" of the Rig-Veda hymns and the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

"black dwarfs" of Teutonic mythology. A particular statuette of Ptah,
wearing a tight-fitting cap, suggests the familiar "wonder smith" <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) of the Alpine "broad heads" who were
distributed along Asiatic and European mountain ranges from Hindu Kush
to Brittany and the British isles and mingled with the archaic Hittites
in Asia Minor. The Phœnician sailors carried figures of dwarfs in their
ships, and worshipped them. They were called "pataikoi". In the Far East
a creation artificer who resembles Ptah is Pan Ku, the first Chinese
deity, who emerged from a cosmic egg.

Like Ra, Ptah was also believed to have first appeared as an egg, which,
according to one of the many folk beliefs of Egypt, was laid by the
chaos goose which came to be identified with Seb, the earth god, and
afterwards with the combined deities Amon-Ra. Ptah, as the primeval
"artificer god", was credited with making "the sun egg" and also "the
moon egg", and a bas-relief at Philæ shows him actively engaged at the
work, using his potter's wheel.

A higher and later conception of Ptah <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md) represents him as a sublime creator god
who has power to call into existence each thing he names. He is the
embodiment of mind from which all things emerge, and his ideas take
material shape when he gives them expression. In a philosophic poem a
Memphite priest eulogizes the great deity as "the mind <span
id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76.md) and tongue of the gods", and even as the
creator of other gods as well as of "all people, cattle, and reptiles",
the sun, and the habitable world.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thoth is also
credited with similar power, and it is possible that in this connection
both these deities were imparted with the attributes of Ra, the sun god.

According to the tradition perpetuated by Manetho, the first temple in
Egypt was erected at Memphis, that city of great builders, to the god
Ptah at the command of King Mena. It is thus suggested that the town and
the god of the ruling caste existed when the Horite sun worshippers
moved northward on their campaign of conquest. As has been shown, Mena
also gave diplomatic recognition to Neith, the earth goddess of the
Libyans, "the green lady" of Egypt, who resembles somewhat the fairy,
and especially the banshee, of the Iberians and their Celtic conquerors.

The Ptah worshippers were probably not the founders of Memphis. An
earlier deity associated with the city is the dreaded Sokar (Seker). He
was a god of the dead, and in the complex mythology of later times his
habitation was located in the fifth hour-division of night. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) When sun worship became general in the
Nile valley Sokar was identified with the small winter sun, as Horus was
with the large sun of summer. But the winged and three-headed monster
god, with serpent body, suffers complete loss of physical identity when
merged with the elfin deity of Memphis. Ptah-Sokar is depicted as a
dwarf and one of the Khnûmû. Another form of Sokar is a hawk, of
different aspect to the Horus hawk, which appears perched on the Ra boat
at night with a sun disk upon its head. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md)

Ptah-Sokar was in time merged with the agricultural

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Osiris whose
spirit passed from Pharaoh to Pharaoh. Ptah-Osiris was depicted as a
human-sized mummy, swathed and mute, holding firmly in his hands before
him the Osirian dadu (pillar) symbol. The triad, Ptah-Sokar-Osiris,
gives us a combined deity who is a creator, a judge of the dead, and a
traditional king of Egypt. The influence of the sun cult prevailed when
Sokar and Osiris were associated with the worship of Ra.

Memphis, the city of Ptah, ultimately became the capital of United
Egypt. It was then at the height of its glory; a great civilization had
evolved. Unfortunately, however, we are unable to trace its progress,
because the records are exceedingly scanty. Fine workmanship in stone,
exquisite pottery, &c., indicate the advanced character of the times,
but it is impossible to construct from these alone an orderly historical
narrative. We have also the traditions preserved by Manetho. Much of
what he tells us, however, belongs to the domain of folklore. We learn,
for instance, that for nearly a fortnight the Nile ran with honey, and
that one of the Pharaohs, who was a giant about 9 feet high, was "a most
dangerous man". It is impossible to confirm whether a great earthquake
occurred in the Delta region, where the ground is said to have yawned
and swallowed many of the people, or whether a famine occurred in the
reign of one pharaoh and a great plague in that of another, and if King
Aha really engaged his leisure moments compiling works on anatomy. The
story of a Libyan revolt at a later period may have had foundation in
fact, but the explanation that the rebels broke into flight because the
moon suddenly attained enormous dimensions shows how myth and history
were inextricably intertwined.

Yet Manetho's history contains important material.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His list of early
kings is not imaginative, as was once supposed, although there may be
occasional inaccuracies. The Palermo Stone, so called because it was
carried to the Sicilian town of that name by some unknown curio
collector, has inscribed upon it in hieroglyphics the names of several
of the early kings and references to notable events which occurred
during their reigns. It is one of the little registers which were kept
in temples. Many of these, no doubt, existed, and some may yet he
brought to light.

Four centuries elapsed after the Conquest ere Memphis became the royal
city. We know little, however, regarding the first three hundred years.
Two dynasties of Thinite kings ruled over the land. There was a royal
residence at Memphis, which was the commercial capital of the
country--the marketplace of the northern and southern peoples. Trade
flourished and brought the city into contact with foreign commercial
centres. It had a growing and cosmopolitan population, and its arts and
industries attained a high level of excellence.

The Third Dynasty opens with King Zoser, who reigned at Memphis. He was
the monarch for whom the first pyramid was erected. It is situated at
Sakkara, in the vicinity of his capital. The kings who reigned prior to
him had been entombed at Abydos, and the new departure indicates that
the supremacy of Memphis was made complete. The administrative,
industrial, and religious life of the country was for the time centred
there.

Zoser's preference for Memphis had, perhaps, a political bearing. His
mother, the wife of Khasekhemui, <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) the
last of the Thinite kings, was probably a daughter of

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the ruling noble of "White Walls". It was the custom of monarchs to
marry the daughters of nome governors, and to give their sons his
daughters in marriage also. The aristocracy was thus closely connected
with the royal house; indeed the relations between the Pharaoh and his
noblemen appear to have been intimate and cordial.

The political marriages, however, were the cause of much jealous
rivalry. As the Pharaoh had more than one wife, and princes were
numerous, the choice of an heir to the crown was a matter of great
political importance. The king named his successor, and in the royal
harem there were occasionally plots and counterplots to secure the
precedence of one particular prince or another. Sometimes methods of
coercion were adopted with the aid of interested noblemen whose prestige
would be increased by the selection of a near relative--the son,
perhaps, of the princess of their nome. In one interesting papyrus roll
which survives there is a record of an abortive plot to secure the
succession of a rival to the Pharaoh's favourite son. The ambitious
prince was afterwards disposed of. In all probability he was executed
along with those concerned in the household rebellion. Addressing his
chosen heir, the monarch remarks that "he fought the one he knew,
because it was unwise that he should be beside thy majesty".

It may be that these revolts explain the divisions of the lines of early
kings into Dynasties. Zoser's personality stands out so strongly that it
is evident he was a prince who would brook no rival to the throne. His
transference of the seat of power to the city of Ptah suggests, too,
that he found his chief support there.

With the political ascendancy of Memphis begins the great Pyramid Age;
but ere we make acquaintance with

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the industrial and commercial life in the city, and survey the great
achievements of its architects and builders, we shall deal with the
religious conceptions of the people, so that it may be understood why
the activities of the age were directed to make such elaborate provision
for the protection of the bodies of dead monarchs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[78:1](eml09.htm#fr_72.md) The Greek rendering of
"Men-nofer", the name of Pepi's pyramid. Another Egyptian name was
Hiku-ptah, or, according to Budge, "Het-Ka-Ptah, 'House of the Double of
Ptah', from which the Greek name of Egypt is derived".

<span id="fn_73"></span>[80:1](eml09.htm#fr_73.md) The suggestion that
these represented serpents is not supported by anything we know about
Ptah worship. There was a winged serpent goddess in the Delta named
Uazit. The Greeks called her Buto, and identified her with their Leto.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[81:1](eml09.htm#fr_74.md) Ptah has been compared
to the Greek Hephæstos (Vulcan). He was not a fire god. His consort
Sekhet symbolized fire and sun heat, but his association with her was
arbitrary.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[81:2](eml09.htm#fr_75.md) Eighteenth Dynasty.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[81:3](eml09.htm#fr_76.md) The poet says "heart",
which was believed by the Egyptians to be the seat of intelligence. At
the judgment of the dead the heart is weighed in the balance.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[82:1](eml09.htm#fr_77.md) See Chapter I.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[82:2](eml09.htm#fr_78.md) Osiris-Sokar is "the
brilliant one", "lord of great fear and trembling", "the mysterious one,
he who is unknown to mankind", and "enlightener of those who are in the
underworld".--*The Burden of Isis*, Dennis, p. 52-54 (Hymn to
Osiris-Sokar).

<span id="fn_79"></span>[84:1](eml09.htm#fr_79.md) This king's brick tomb
at Abydos contains a limestone chamber, which suggests the employment of
the Memphite artisans.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Death and the Judgment](eml10.md)

</div>
