<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml10)  [Next](eml12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

### The Religion of the Stone Workers

Memphite Religion--The Cult of Ptah--Ethical Beliefs----Pharaoh
worshipped as a God--"Husband of his Mother"--Magical
Incantations--"Mesmerizing the Gods"--The Earliest Mastabas--Endowment
of Tomb Chapels--The Servants of the Dead--Scenes of Everyday
Life--Zoser's Two Tombs--The First Pyramid--An Architect who became a
God--Inspiration of Egyptian Religion--How it promoted
Civilization--Mythology of the Stone Builders----Ptah and Khnûmû--The
Frog Goddess--A Prototype of Isis--A Negroid Deity--Khnûmû associated
with Khufu (Cheops).

WHEN Old Memphis became the leading city of United Egypt the religious
beliefs of the mingled peoples were in process of fusion and
development. Commerce was flourishing, and ideas were being exchanged as
freely as commodities. In the growing towns men of many creeds and
different nationalities were brought into close personal contact, and
thought was stimulated by the constant clash of opinions. It was an age
of change and marked progress. Knowledge was being rapidly accumulated
and more widely diffused. Society had become highly organized, and
archaic tribal beliefs could no longer be given practical application
under the new conditions that obtained throughout the land. A new
religion became a necessity-at any rate existing beliefs had to be
unified and systematized in the interests of peace and order, especially
in a city like Memphis with its large and cosmopolitan population.

The cult which began to mummify the dead had evidently formulated a
creed which appealed to the intellectual

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

classes. Beliefs regarding the after-life took definite shape. The "land
of shades" was organized like the land of Egypt. Ideas of right living
and good government prevailed, and the growth of ethical thought was
reflected in the conception of a Judge of the Dead who justified or
condemned men after consideration of their actions during life. The
attributes of the principal gods were defined; their powers and their
places were adjusted; they were grouped in triads and families; and from
the mass of divergent beliefs was evolving a complex mythology which was
intended not only to instruct but to unite the rival beliefs prevailing
in a community.

Egyptian religion as a whole, however, was never completely systematized
at this or any subsequent period. Each locality had its own theological
system. The old tribal gods remained supreme in their nomes, and when
they were grouped with others; the influence at work was more political
than intellectual in character. The growth of culture did not permeate
all classes of society, and the common people, especially in rural
districts, clung to the folk beliefs and practices of their ancestors. A
provincial nobleman, supported by the priests, secured the loyalty of
his followers therefore by upholding the prestige of their ancient god,
who could be linked, if needs be, with the deity of another tribe with
whom a union had been effected. If the doctrines of a rival creed
influenced the beliefs of the people of a particular district the
attributes of the rival god were then attached to their own. When Ptah,
for instance, ceased to make intellectual appeal as a creation artificer
he was exalted above Ra and the other gods, whom he was supposed to have
called into existence by uttering magical words.

Ptah, as we have seen, was linked with Osiris. The combined deity was at
once the god of the industrial and

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

agricultural classes, and the Judge of the Dead. He was the chief deity
of the new religion which controlled the everyday life of the people. He
was the Revealer who made city life possible by promoting law and order
as a religious necessity, and by instructing the people how to live
honourably and well. He ordained the fate of all men; he rewarded the
virtuous and punished the sinners. Masters were required to deal
humanely with their servants, and servants to perform their duties with
diligence and obedience. Children were counselled to honour their
parents lest they might complain to the god and he should hear them.

The supremacy of Ptah was not yet seriously threatened by the sun god
Ra, whose cult was gathering strength at Heliopolis. For a full century
the ascendancy of the Memphite cult was complete and unassailable. The
influence of the north was thus predominant. The Horite religion, which
was a form of sun worship, had been displaced; it was overshadowed by
the Ptah Osiris creed. Apparently the people of Lower Egypt had achieved
an intellectual conquest of their conquerors. The Osirian Paradise was a
duplicate of the Delta region, and the new creed was strongly influenced
by Osirian beliefs which had prevailed before Mena's day.

Although great rivalry existed between the various cults throughout the
land, the people were united in reverencing the Pharaoh. He was exalted
as a god; indeed he was regarded as an incarnation of the ruling deity.
Until the Fourth Dynasty the monarch was the living Osiris; then he
became the earthly manifestation of Ra, the sun god. The people believed
that a deity must needs take human form to associate with mankind. His
Ka, therefore, entered the king's body as the king's Ka entered his
statue. In temple scenes we find the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

people engaged in worshipping Pharaoh; in fact, the Pharaoh might
worship himself--he made offerings to his Ka, which was the Ka of a god.

The idea of the divinity of kings was, no doubt, a survival of ancestor
worship. Families worshipped the spirit of their dead sire, and tribes
that of their departed leader. But the Pharaoh was not like other men,
who became divine after death; he was divine from birth. His father had
been the ruling god and his mother the god's wife. On the walls of
temples elaborate scenes were carved to remind the people of the divine
origin of their ruler. At the marriage ceremony the king impersonated
the god, and he was accompanied by his divine attendants. As Ptah Tanen
he wore "the high feathers" and two ram's horns, and carried the holy
symbols; as Osiris he appeared with crook and flail.; as Ra he was
crowned with the sun disk. The queen was thus married to the god within
his temple. In sculptured scenes depicting royal births we see goddesses
in attendance as midwives, nurses, and foster mothers. This close
association with deities was supposed to continue throughout the
Pharaoh's life; he was frequently shown in company of gods and
goddesses.

When the king died, the spirit of the god passed to his successor. The
son, therefore, according to Egyptian reasoning, became his own father,
and, in the theological Sense, "husband of his mother". Horus, who was
born after Osiris was slain, was "the purified image of his sire". In
one of the religious chants the same idea is given expression when it is
declared that "the god Seb was before his mother". The new Pharaoh, on
ascending the throne, became doubly divine, because both ideas regarding
the divinity of kings were perpetuated at the same time.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

The worship of a particular Pharaoh did not cease when he died. Like
other departed souls he required the service of the living. His priests
must assist him to reach the Osirian Paradise of Aalu, or the sun bark
of Ra. Even Ra had to be assisted to pass through the perilous
hour-divisions of the night. Indeed all the good forces of Nature had to
be continually prompted by men who desired to be benefited by them;
similarly the evil forces had to be thwarted by the performance of
magical ceremonies and the repetition of' magical formulæ. Egyptian
religion was based upon belief in magic.

Pharaoh's body was therefore mummified, so that his soul might continue
to exist and be able to return to reanimate the bandaged form. Food
offerings were given regularly for the sustenance of the Ka. Magical
ceremonies, which were religious ceremonies, were performed to cause the
gods to act and to speak as was desired--to imitate those who
impersonated them upon earth. The priests were supposed, as it were, to
mesmerize the gods when they went through their elaborate ceremonies of
compulsion and their ceremonies of riddance.

It was considered necessary to afford secure protection for the
Pharaoh's mummy; his enemies might seek to dismember it with purpose to
terminate the life of the soul. Substantial tombs were therefore
erected, and the old brick and wood erections which were constructed for
the kings at Abydos went out of fashion.

A tomb chamber was hewed out of solid rock, and over it was built an
oblong platform structure of limestone called a mastaba. The mummy was
lowered down the shaft. which was afterwards filled up with sand and
gravel and closed with masonry. This low and flat-roofed

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

building was large enough to accommodate at least a hundred bodies) but
it was made solid throughout with the exception of the secret shaft.
Robbers would have to wreck it completely before the hiding place of the
body could be discovered. On the east side there was a false door
through which the Ka could pass when it came from) or departed towards,
the western land of shades. In time a little chapel was provided, and
the false door was placed at the end of it. This apartment was used for
the performance of the ceremonies associated with the worship of the
dead; mourners came with offerings, and met in presence of the invisible
Ka.

The statue was concealed in an inner chamber, which was built up, but
occasionally narrow apertures were constructed through which food and
drink were given to the Ka. But only to kings and rich men could this
service be rendered for a prolonged period, so the practice ultimately
evolved of providing the dead with models of offerings which by a
magical process gave sustenance to the hungry spirit.

Mortuary chapels were endowed as early as the First Dynasty. Priests
were regularly engaged in worshipping dead kings and princes who had
made provision in their wills for the necessary expenses. The son of one
monarch in the Fourth Dynasty devoted the revenues of a dozen towns to
maintain the priesthood attached to his tomb. This custom created grave
financial problems.

In a few generations the whole land might be mortgaged to maintain
mortuary chapels, with the result that a revolution involving a change
of dynasty became an economic necessity.

Hearken! ye kings, while horror stalks the land,  
Lo! your poor people fall a ready prey  
Made weak by your oppression, even in death--<span id="page_108">p.
108</span>  
Burdened and bruised and terrorized; their lands  
Tax ridden for these temples ye endowed,  
That fawning priests might meek obeisance make  
And render ceaseless homage to your shades.

The walls of the chapel were either sculptured in low relief or painted
with scenes of daily life, and from these we gather much of what we know
regarding the manners and customs of the ancient people. But such works
of art were not intended merely to be decorative or to perpetuate the
fame of the dead. It was desired that those scenes should be duplicated
in Paradise. The figures of farm servants sowing and reaping corn, of
artisans erecting houses, and cooks preparing meals, were expected to
render similar services to the departed soul. Magical texts were
inscribed with purpose to ensure this happy condition of affairs; others
called down curses on the heads of tomb robbers.

Kings and nobles had no pleasure in the prospect that they would have to
perform humble tasks in the Nether World. They desired to occupy there
the exalted stations which they enjoyed upon earth. It was necessary,
therefore, to have numerous employees so that their mansions might be
erected, their fields cultivated, and their luxuries provided as of old.

The custom at first obtained of slaying a number of servants to
accompany the great dignitary to Paradise. These poor victims were
supposed to be grateful, because they were to be rewarded with assured
immortality. But the shedding of blood was rendered unnecessary when the
doctrine obtained that substitutes could be provided by sculptors and
painters.

Another mortuary custom was to provide little figures, called Ushebtiu,
"the answerers", inscribed with magical formulæ, which would obey the
dead and perform

<span id="img_10800"></span> ![](img/10800.jpg)

SERVITORS BRINGING THEIR OFFERINGS

From the bas-relief in the Mastaba of Ti, Sakhara

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span id="img_10900"></span> ![](img/10900.jpg)

"USHEBTIU" FIGURES OF VARIOUS PERIODS

1\. Limestone: made for Ahmes I (XVIII Dynasty). 2. Limestone (XII
Dynasty). 3. Painted alabaster: about 1100 B.C. 4. Porcelain, inscribed
for an official (XXVI Dynasty). 5. Zoned alabaster, probably made for a
king: about 1200 B.C. 6. Limestone: about 800 B.C. 7. Painted limestone:
about 550 B.C.

(*British Museum*)

whatever duties he desired of them in Paradise. These were ultimately
shaped in mummy form, and in the later Dynasties were made of glazed
ware, because wooden figures suffered from the ravages of the white ant.

Many toy-like figures of servants are found in early tombs. Here we
discover, perchance, the model of a nobleman's dwelling. An ox is being
slain in the backyard. In the kitchen the staff is engaged cooking an
elaborate repast; a little fellow devotes himself entirely to a goose
which he turns on a spit before the fire. We have a glimpse of high life
in another scene. The nobleman has feasted, and he sits at ease in a
large apartment listening to singers and harpers. A dancing girl comes
out to whirl before him, while her companions keep time to the music by
clapping their hands. Meanwhile artisans are busy in their workshops. We
see a potter moulding a vessel of exquisite shape, while near at hand a
carpenter saws wood with which he intends to construct an elaborate
article of furniture. Boats are rocking at a pier, for the soul may
desire to sail down the Nile of the Nether World. Here. in fact, is a
boat pursuing its way; a dozen strenuous oarsmen occupy the benches,
while the steersman stands erect at the helm with the guiding rope in
his hands; armed men are on guard, and the nobleman sits with a friend
below an awning on a small deck in the centre of the boat, calmly
engaged playing a game of draughts.

King Zoser had two tombs erected for himself. One is a great brick
mastaba at Abydos, which may have been a "soul house" in the chapel of
which his "double" was worshipped; the other, which is constructed of
limestone, is situated on the desert behind Memphis. The latter is of
particular interest to students of Egyptian history.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is a terraced
structure nearly 200 feet in height, formed by a series of mastabas of
decreasing size superimposed one above another. This wonderful building
has been called "the step pyramid of Sakkara"; it is not only the first
pyramid which was erected in Egypt, but the earliest great stone
structure in the world.

So much attention is paid to the three sublime pyramids at Gizeh that
Zoser's limestone tomb is apt to be overlooked. Yet it is of marked
importance in the history of the country. It was constructed nearly a
hundred years before Khufu (Cheops) ascended the throne, and the
experience gained in undertaking a work of such vast dimensions made
possible the achievements of later times. The architect was the renowned
Imhotep, one of the world's great men. His fame was perpetuated in Egypt
until the Saite or Restoration period, when he was worshipped as the god
called by the Greeks "Imuthes". He was an inventive and organizing
genius, and a statesman who exercised much influence at the Court of
King Zoser. Like Solomon, he was reputed to be the wisest man of his
Age. He was the author of a medical treatise, and he left behind him a
collection of proverbs which endured as long as the old Egyptian
language. As a patron of learning his memory was revered by the scribes
for over two thousand years, and it was their custom before beginning
work to pour out from their jars a libation to his spirit.

The step pyramid was Imhotep's conception. He prepared the plans and
overlooked the work of construction. No doubt, too, he was responsible
for the organization of the army of labourers and artisans who were
employed for a prolonged period in erecting this enduring memorial of a
great monarch.

Such a vast undertaking is a sure indication of the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

advanced character of the civilization of the times. Much wealth must
have accumulated in the royal exchequer. The country was in a settled
and prosperous condition., owing to the excellent system of government
and the activity of administrators. It was no small task to bring
together thousands of workmen, who had to be housed and fed and kept
under control. Skilled tradesmen were employed, who had been trained in
quarrying and dressing stone. Evidently masonry had flourished in
Memphis for a considerable period. There were hundreds of overseers
experienced in the organization of labour, and large numbers of educated
scribes conversant with the exact keeping of accounts.

Education was no longer confined to the ruling classes. We know that
there were schools in Memphis. Boys were instructed in "the three R's",
and in a papyrus of maxims it was quaintly remarked that they could
"hear with their backs", an indication as to the manner in which
corporal punishment was inflicted. The system of writing was the cursive
style called "hieratic", which originated in pre-Dynastic times as a
rough imitation in outline of hieroglyphics. A knowledge of elementary
arithmetic was required in the ordinary transactions of business. Some
corrected exercises have survived. Advanced pupils were instructed in
geometry--which had its origin in Egypt--in mensuration, and in the
simpler problems of algebra.

As the Egyptians were an intensely practical people, school studies were
specialized. Boys were trained for the particular profession in which
they were to be employed. If they were to become business men they
attended commercial classes. The number of "trial pieces" which have
been found show that young sculptors attended technical schools, as did
also artists and

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

metal workers. In the temple colleges the future officials and lawyers
and doctors were made conversant with the accumulated knowledge and
wisdom of the age. Education was evidently controlled by the priests.

Memphis was a hive of organized industry. The discipline of business
pervaded all classes, and everywhere law and order were promoted.
Pharaoh was no idler. His day was fully occupied in the transaction of
public business, and to every prince was allotted a responsible post,
and his duties had to be efficiently performed. The nation was in its
young manhood; the foundations had been securely established of a great
civilization, which was to endure for some thirty centuries.

It may be said that the royal house of the Old Kingdom was established
upon a rock. When the Pharaoh's builders discarded brick, and began to
quarry and hew stones, Egyptian civilization made rapid progress. It had
had its beginnings in the struggle with Nature in the Nile valley. An
increasing population was maintained under peaceful conditions when the
problem of water distribution was solved by the construction of canals.
These had to be controlled, and the responsibility of a regulated flow
was imposed upon the Pharaoh. Good government, therefore, became a
necessity; a failure of water caused famine and insurrection. To those
who toiled and those who protected the toiler Nature gave a bountiful
reward. More food was produced than was required for home consumption.
The surplus yield of corn was, as we have seen, the means of promoting
trade, which made Egypt a wealthy country. As capital accumulated, the
progress of knowledge was assured, and men entered upon those higher
pursuits which promote moral and intellectual advancement.

Egypt might have continued happily on the even

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

tenor of its way as an agricultural and trading country, but its
civilization could never have attained so high a degree of perfection if
its arts and industries had not been fostered and developed. We may riot
think highly of Egyptian religion, of which, after all, we have but
imperfect knowledge, but we must recognize that it was the inspiration
of the architects and craftsmen whose sublime achievements we regard
with wonder and admiration after the lapse of thousands of years. It was
undoubtedly a civilizing agency; it promoted culture and refinement, and
elevated mankind to love beauty for its own sake. Egyptian art
flourished because it was appreciated and was in demand.

The surplus wealth of Egypt was expended largely for religious purposes.
Temple building kept those wonderful old architects and sculptors
constantly engaged. an ever-increasing class of skilled workers had also
to be trained, disciplined, and organized. Men of ability were brought
to the front and were judged on their own merits. There is no place for
pretenders in the world of Art. When the Pharaohs, therefore, undertook
the erection of temples and tombs they not only ensured regularity of
labour, but also stimulated intellectual effort, with results that could
not have been otherwise than beneficial to society at large.

We may well regard the conquest of stone as one of the greatest
conquests which the Egyptians achieved. In our Introduction we have
suggested that the new industry may have been introduced by the
cave-hewing pre-Semitic inhabitants of southern Palestine. The
remarkable skill manifested by the earliest stone workers of Egypt with
almost dramatic suddenness was evidently the result of long experience.
Deft workmanship was accomplished from the outset; stones were measured
and dressed with

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

wonderful accuracy and skill. The changes which took place in the burial
customs during the early Dynasties also suggest that influences from
without were being felt in the ancient kingdom.

Whatever the origin of the stone workers may have been, it is evident
that they were closely associated with Memphis at a very early period.
As we have seen, the art of stone working and stone building on a
sublime scale was first displayed by the worshippers of Ptah, the
artificer god. It is of special interest to find, therefore, that
Manetho has preserved those persistent Egyptian traditions which connect
Memphis with the new industry. He credited Zoser, the builder of the
step pyramid at Sakkara, with the introduction of stonework; he also
recorded that the first temple in Egypt was erected at Memphis to Ptah
by King Mena. The city's name of "White Walls" suggests that the
fortress was constructed of limestone.

We know now that stone was used at Abydos before Zoser's day--not,
however, until after the conquest of the north--but the traditional
association of Memphis with the new industry is none the less
significant. The probability that a colony of Memphite artisans settled
in the vicinity of the Assouan quarries, and introduced stone working
into Upper Egypt, is emphasized by the worship of Khnûmû, the god of the
First Cataract, who bears so striking a resembling to Ptah. He was
similarly regarded as the modeller of the world. Like Ptah, he was
associated with the chaos egg, and he is depicted shaping the first man
upon his potter's wheel.

Khnûmû was merged at an early date with the ram god Min, for he is
invariably shown with ram's horns or a ram's head. He was a Great
Father, and represented the male principle. His consort is Hekt, the
frog-headed

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

goddess, who is evidently of great antiquity. The Egyptians believed
that frogs were generated spontaneously from Nile-fertilized mud, and
they associated Hekt with the origin of life. This quaint goddess was
one of the "mothers" who was supposed to preside at birth, and so
persistent was the reverence shown her by the great mass of the people
that she was ultimately fused with Hathor. In Coptic times Hekt was a
symbol of the resurrection.

Another goddess associated with Khnûmû was named Sati. Her title "Lady
of the Heavens" links her with Nut and Hathor. She is usually depicted
as a stately woman wearing a cow's horns and the crown of Upper Egypt;
she is "the queen of the gods".

An island goddess, called Anukt, belongs to the same group. She has
negroid attributes and wears a crown of feathers.

It is apparent that this arbitrary grouping of deities at the First
Cataract was the direct result of the mingling of peoples of different
origin. Hekt represents a purely Egyptian cult, while Sati is evidently
one of the forms of the Great Mother deity of the earliest civilized
people in the Nile valley; she resembles closely the historic Isis.
Anukt, on the other hand, was probably of Nubian origin, and may have
been introduced by those dusky settlers from the south whose aggressive
tendencies caused so much concern at the royal Court from time to time.
The theory that Khnûmû was the god of the quarries, and builders
especially, is supported not only by his resemblance to Ptah, but also
by the fact that the Pharaoh who erected the greatest pyramid at Gizeh
was called Khnûmû Khufu; this is the monarch whom the Greeks called
Cheops.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: A Day in Old Memphis](eml12.md)

</div>
