<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml13)  [Next](eml15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

# CHAPTER XI

### Folk Tales of Fifty Centuries

A Faithless Lady--The Wax Crocodile--Pharaoh's Decree--Story of the
Green Jewel--A Sad-hearted King--Boating on the Lake--How the Waters
were divided--Dedi the Magician--His Magical Feats--A Prophecy --Khufu's
Line must fall--Birth of the Future Kings--Goddesses as Dancing
Girls--Ghostly Music and Song--Tale of a King's Treasure--Fearless
Thieves--A Brother's Bravery--Pharaoh's Soldiers are tricked--How a
Robber became a Prince--King visits the Underworld.

KING KHUFU sat to hear tales told by his sons regarding the wonders of
other days and the doings of magicians. The Prince Khafra stood before
him and related the ancient story of the wax crocodile.

Once upon a time a Pharaoh went towards the temple of the god Ptah. His
counsellers and servants accompanied him. It chanced that he paid a
visit to the villa of the chief scribe, behind which there was a garden
with a stately summer house and a broad artificial lake. Among those who
followed Pharaoh was a handsome youth, and the scribe's wife beheld him
with love. Soon afterwards she sent gifts unto him, and they had secret
meetings. They spent a day in the summer house, and feasted there, and
in the evening the youth bathed in the lake. The chief butler then went
to his master and informed him what had come to pass.

The scribe bade the servant to bring a certain magic box, and when he
received it he made a small wax crocodile, over which he muttered a
spell. He placed

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

it in the hands of the butler, saying: "Cast this image into the lake
behind the youth when next he bathes himself "

On another day, when the scribe dwelt with Pharaoh, the lovers were
together in the summer house, and at eventide the youth went into the
lake. The butler stole through the garden, and stealthily he cast into
the water the wax image, which was immediately given life. It became a
great crocodile that seized the youth suddenly and took him away.

Seven days passed, and then the scribe spoke to the Pharaoh regarding
the wonder which had been done, and made request that His Majesty should
accompany him to his villa. The Pharaoh did so, and when they both stood
beside the lake in the garden the scribe spoke magic words, bidding the
crocodile to appear. As he commanded, so did it do. The great reptile
came out of the water carrying the youth in its jaws.

The scribe said: "Lo! it shall do whatever I command to be done."

Said the Pharaoh: "Bid the crocodile to return at once to the lake."

Ere he did that, the scribe touched it, and immediately it became a
small image of wax again. The Pharaoh was filled with wonder, and the
scribe related unto him all that had happened, while the youth stood
waiting.

Said His Majesty unto the crocodile: "Seize the wrongdoer." The wax
image was again given life, and, clutching the youth, leaped into the
lake and disappeared. Nor was it ever seen after that.

Then Pharaoh gave command that the wife of the scribe should be seized.
On the north side of the house she was bound to a stake and burned
alive, and what remained of her was thrown into the Nile.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

Such was the tale told by Khafra. Khufu was well pleased, and caused
offerings of food and refreshment to be placed in the tombs of the
Pharaoh and his wise servant.

Prince Khafra stood before His Majesty, and said: "I will relate a
marvel which happened in the days of King Sneferu, thy father." Then he
told the story of the green jewel.

Sneferu was one day disconsolate and weary. He wandered about the palace
with desire to be cheered, nor was there aught to take the gloom from
his mind. He caused his chief scribe to be brought before him, and said:
"I would fain have entertainment, but cannot find any in this place."

The scribe said: "Thy Majesty should go boating on the lake, and let the
rowers be the prettiest girls in your harem. It will delight your heart
to see them splashing the water where the birds dive and to gaze upon
the green shores and the flowers and trees. I myself will go with you."

The king consented, and twenty virgins who were fair to behold went into
the boat, and they rowed with oars of ebony which were decorated with
gold. His Majesty took pleasure in the outing, and the gloom passed from
his heart as the boat went hither and thither, and the girls sang
together with sweet voices.

It chanced, as they were turning round, an oar handle brushed against
the hair of the girl who was steering, and shook from it a green jewel,
which fell into the water. She lifted up her oar and stopped singing,
and the others grew silent and ceased rowing.

Said Sneferu: "Do not pause; let us go on still farther."

The girls said: "She who steers has lifted her oar."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Said Sneferu to her: "Why have you lifted your oar?"

"Alas, I have lost my green jewel she said it has fallen into the lake."

Sneferu said: "I will give you another; let us go on."

The girl pouted and made answer: "I would rather have my own green jewel
again than any other."

His Majesty said to the chief scribe: "I am given great enjoyment by
this novelty; indeed my mind is much refreshed as the girls row me up
and down the lake. Now one of them has lost her green jewel, which has
dropped into the water, and she wants it back again and will not have
another to replace it."

The chief scribe at once muttered a spell. Then by reason of his magic
words the waters of the lake were divided like a lane. He went down and
found the green jewel which the girl had lost, and came back with it to
her. When he did that, he again uttered words of power, and the waters
came together as they were before.

The king was well pleased, and when he had full enjoyment with the
rowing upon the lake he returned to the palace. He gave gifts to the
chief scribe, and everyone wondered at the marvel which he had
accomplished.

Such was Khafra's tale of the green jewel, and King Khufu commanded that
offerings should be laid in the tombs of Sneferu and his chief scribe,
who was a great magician.

Next Prince Hordadef stood before the king, and he said: "Your Majesty
has heard tales regarding the wonders performed by magicians in other
days, but I can bring forth a worker of marvels who now lives in the
kingdom."

King Khufu said: "And who is he, my son?"

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

"His name is Dedi," answered Prince Hordadef. "He is a very old man, for
his years are a hundred and ten. Each day he eats a joint of beef and
five hundred loaves of bread, and drinks a hundred jugs of beer. He can
smite off the head of a living creature and restore it again; he can
make a lion follow him; and he knows the secrets of the habitation of
the god Thoth, which Your Majesty has desired to know so that you may
design the chambers of your pyramid."

King Khufu said: "Go now and find this man for me, Hordadef."

The prince went down to the Nile, boarded a boat, and sailed southward
until he reached the town called Dedsnefru, where Dedi had his dwelling.
He went ashore, and was carried in his chair of state towards the
magician, who was found lying at his door. When Dedi was awakened, the
king's son saluted him and bade him not to rise up because of his years.
The prince said: "My royal father desires to honour you, and will
provide for you a tomb among your people."

Dedi blessed the prince and the king with thankfulness, and he said to
Hordadef: "Greatness be thine; may your Ka have victory over the powers
of evil, and may your Khu follow the path which leads to Paradise."

Hordadef assisted Dedi to rise up, and took his arm to help him towards
the ship. He sailed away with the prince, and in another ship were his
assistants and his magic books.

"Health and strength and plenty be thine," said Hordadef, when he again
stood before his royal father King Khufu. "I have come down stream with
Dedi, the great magician."

His Majesty was well pleased, and said: "Let the man be brought into my
presence."

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

Dedi came and saluted the king, who said: "Why have I not seen you
before?"

"He that is called cometh," answered the old man; "you have sent for me
and I am here."

"It is told," King Khufu said, "that you can restore the head that is
taken from a live creature." <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)

"I can indeed, Your Majesty," answered Dedi.

The king said: "Then let a prisoner be brought forth and decapitated."

"I would rather it were not a man," said Dedi; "I do not deal even with
cattle in such a manner."

A duck was brought forth and its head was cut off, and the head was
thrown to the right and the body to the left. Dedi spoke magic words.
Then the head and the body came together, and the duck rose up and
quacked loudly. The same was done with a goose.

King Khufu then caused a cow to be brought in, and its head was cut off.
Dedi restored the animal to life again, and caused it to follow him.

His Majesty then spoke to the magician and said: "It is told that you
possess the secrets of the dwelling of the god Thoth."

Dedi answered: "I do not possess them, but I know where they are
concealed, and that is within a temple chamber at Heliopolis. There the
plans are kept in a box, but it is no insignificant person who shall
bring them to Your Majesty."

"I would fain know who will deliver them unto me," King Khufu said.

Dedi prophesied that three sons would be born to Rud-dedit, wife of the
chief priest of Ra. The eldest would become chief priest at Heliopolis
and would

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

possess the plans. He and his brothers would one day sit upon the throne
and rule over all the land.

King Khufu's heart was filled with gloom and alarm when he heard the
prophetic words of the great magician.

Dedi then said: "What are your thoughts, O King? Behold your son will
reign after you, and then his son. But next one of these children will
follow."

King Khufu was silent. Then he spoke and asked: "When shall these
children be born?"

Dedi informed His Majesty, who said: "I will visit the temple of Ra at
that time."

Dedi was honoured by His Majesty, and thereafterwards dwelt in the house
of the Prince Hordadef. He was given daily for his portion an ox, a
thousand loaves of bread, a hundred jugs of beer, and a hundred bunches
of onions.

The day came when the sons of the woman Rud-dedit were to be born. Then
the high priest of Ra, her husband, prayed unto the goddess Isis and her
sister Nepthys; to Meskhent, goddess of birth; and to the frog goddess
Hekt; and to the creator god Khnûmû, who gives the breath of life. These
he entreated to have care of the three babes who were to become three
kings of Egypt, one after the other.

The deities heard him. Then came the goddesses as dancing girls, who
went about the land, and the god Khnûmû followed them as their burden
bearer. When they reached the door of the high priest's dwelling they
danced before him. He entreated them to enter, and they did according to
his desire, and shut themselves in the room with the woman Rud-dedit.

Isis called the first child who was born Userkaf, and said: "Let no evil
be done by him". The goddess Meskhent prophesied that he would become
King of

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Egypt. Khnûmû, the creator god, gave the child strength.

The second babe was named Sahura by the goddess Isis. Meskhent
prophesied that he also would become a king. Khnûmû gave him his
strength.

The third was called Kaka. Meskhent said: "He shall also be a king", and
Khnûmû gave him strength.

Ere the dancing girls took their departure the high priest gave a
measure of barley to their burden bearer, and Khnûmû carried it away
upon his shoulders.

They all went upon their way, and Isis said: "Now let us work a wonder
on behalf of these children, so that their father may know who hath sent
us unto his house.

Royal crowns were fashioned and concealed in the measure of barley which
had been given them. Then the deities caused a great storm to arise, and
in the midst of it they returned to the dwelling of the high priest, and
they put the barley in a cellar, and sealed it, saying they would return
again and take it away.

It came to pass that after fourteen days Rud-dedit bade her servant to
bring barley from the cellar so that beer might be made.

The girl said: "There is none left save the measure which was given unto
the dancing girls."

"Bring that then," said Rud-dedit, "and when the dancing girls return I
will give them its value."

When the servant entered the cellar she heard the low sounds of sweet
music and dancing and song. She went and told her mistress of this
wonder, and Rud-dedit entered the cellar, and at first could not
discover whence the mysterious sounds issued forth. At length she placed
her ear against the sack which contained the barley given to the dancing
girls, and found that the music was within it. She at once placed the
sack in a

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

chest and locked it, and then told her husband, and they rejoiced
together.

Now it happened that one day Rud-dedit was angry with her servant, and
smote her heavily. The girl vowed that she would be avenged and said:
"Her three children will become kings. I will inform King Khufu of this
matter."

So the servant went away and visited her uncle, who was her mother's
eldest brother. Unto him she told all that had happened and all she knew
regarding the children of her mistress.

He was angry with her and spoke, saying: "Why come to me with this
secret? I cannot consent to make it known as you desire."

Then he struck the girl, who went afterwards to draw water from the
Nile. On the bank a crocodile seized her, and she was devoured.

The man then went towards the dwelling of Rud-dedit and he found her
mourning with her head upon her knees. He spoke, saying: "Why is your
heart full of gloom?"

Rud-dedit answered him: "Because my servant girl went away to reveal my
secret."

The man bowed and said: "Behold! she came unto me and told me all
things. But I struck her, and she went towards the river and was seized
by a crocodile." <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)

So was the danger averted. Nor did King Khufu ever discover the babes
regarding whom Dedi had prophesied. In time they sat upon the throne of
Egypt.

A folk tale regarding the king who reigned in Egypt

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

before Khufu was related by a priest to Herodotus, the Greek historian.

The monarch was called Rhampsinitus. He built the western portion of the
temple of Ptah. He also erected two statues--one to Summer, which faced
the north, and was worshipped; and the other to Winter, which faced the
south, but was never honoured. The king possessed great wealth, and he
caused to be constructed beside the palace a strong stone chamber in
which he kept his riches. One of the builders, however, contrived to
place a stone in such a manner that it could be removed from the
outside.

It chanced that, after the king had deposited his treasure in the
chamber, this builder was stricken with illness and knew his end was
nigh. He had two sons, and he told them his secret regarding the stone,
and gave them the measurements, so that they might locate it.

After the man died the sons went forth in the darkness of night, and
when they found the stone they removed it. Then they entered the
chamber, and carried away much treasure, and ere they departed they
closed up the wall again.

The king marvelled greatly when he discovered that his riches had been
plundered, for the seals of the door were unbroken, and he knew not whom
to suspect. Again and again the robbers returned, and the treasure
diminished greatly. At length the king caused traps to be laid in the
chamber, for his guards, who kept watch at the entrances, were unable to
prevent the mysterious robberies.

Soon after the brothers returned. They removed the stone, and one of
them entered stealthily. He went towards the treasure, as was his
custom, but was suddenly caught in a trap. In a moment he realized that
escape

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

was impossible, and he reflected that he would be put to death on the
morrow, while his brother would be seized and similarly punished. So he
said to himself: "I alone will die."

When he had thus resolved to save his brother, he called to him softly
in the darkness, bidding him to enter cautiously. He made known his
great misfortune, and said: "I cannot escape, nor dare you tarry long
lest you be discovered, When they find me here I will be recognized, and
they will seize you and put you to death. Cut off my head at once, so
that they may not know who I am, and thus save your own life."

With a sad heart the brother did as he was desired, and carried away the
head. Ere he escaped in the darkness he replaced the stone, and no man
saw him.

When morning came the king was more astounded than ever to find a
headless body entrapped in the treasure chamber, for the door had not
been opened, and yet two men had entered and one had escaped. He
commanded that the corpse should be hung on the palace wall, and
stationed guards at the place, bidding them to keep strict watch, so
that they might discover if anyone came to sorrow for the dead man. But
no one came nigh.

Meanwhile the mother grieved in secret. Her heart was filled with anger
because the body was exposed in such a manner, and she threatened to
inform the king regarding all that had happened if her other son would
not contrive to carry away the corpse. The young man attempted to
dissuade her, but she only repeated her threat, and that firmly. He
therefore made preparations to obtain possession of the corpse.

He hired several asses, and on their backs he put many skins of wine. In
the evening he drove them towards the palace. When he drew near to the
guards

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

who kept watch over his brother's body he removed the stoppers of some
of the skins. The wine ran forth upon the highway, and he began to
lament aloud, and beat his head as if he were in sore distress. The
soldiers ran towards the asses and seized them, and caught the wine in
vessels, claiming it for themselves. At first the brother pretended to
be angry, and abused the men; but when they had pacified him, as they
thought, he spoke to them pleasantly and began to make secure the
stoppers of all the skins.

In a short time he was chatting with the guards, and pretended to be
much amused when they bantered him over the accident. Then he invited
them to drink, and they filled their flasks readily. So they began, and
the young man poured out wine until they were all made very drunk. When
they fell asleep, the cunning fellow took down his brother's body, and
laid it upon the back of one of the asses. Ere he went away he shaved
the right cheeks of the soldiers. His mother welcomed him on his return
in the darkness and was well pleased.

The king was very angry when he discovered how the robber had tricked
the guards, but he was still determined to have him taken. He sent forth
his daughter in disguise, and she waited for the criminal. She spoke to
several men, and at length she found him, because he came to know that
he was sought and desired to deal cunningly with her. So he addressed
her, and she offered to be his bride if he would tell her the most
artful thing and also the most wicked thing he had ever done.

He answered readily: "The most wicked thing I ever did was to cut off my
brother's head when he was caught in a trap in the royal treasure
chamber, and the most artful was to deceive the king's guards and carry
away the body."

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

The princess tried to seize him, but he thrust forth his brother's arm,
which he carried under his robe, and when she clutched it he made speedy
escape.

Great was then the astonishment of the king at the cunning and daring of
the robber. He caused a proclamation to be made, offering him a free
pardon and a generous reward if he would appear at the palace before
him. The man went readily, and His Majesty was so delighted with his
speeches and great ingenuity that he gave him his daughter in marriage.
There is no more artful people than the Egyptians, but this man had not
his equal in the land.

It was told that this same king journeyed to the land of Death, where he
played dice with the goddess Isis <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md)
and now won and now lost. She gave to him a napkin embroidered with
gold, and on his return a great festival was held, and it was repeated
every year thereafter. On such occasions it was customary to blindfold a
priest and lead him to the temple of Isis, where he was left alone. It
was believed that two wolves met him and conducted him back to the spot
where he was found. The Egyptians esteemed Isis and Osiris <span
id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86.md) as the greatest deities of the underworld.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[147:1](eml14.htm#fr_83.md) This trick is still
performed by Egyptian conjurors.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[150:1](eml14.htm#fr_84.md) The manuscript, which
is part of the "Westcar Papyrus", ends here. It was purchased in Egypt
by a Miss Westcar, and is now preserved in the Berlin museum. The
beginning and end had been torn off. The children referred to became the
first three kings of the Fifth Dynasty, which marks the political
ascendancy of the Ra cult.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[154:1](eml14.htm#fr_85.md) Herodotus gives Demeter
(Ceres).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[154:2](eml14.htm#fr_86.md) Ceres and Bacchus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: Triumph of the Sun God](eml15.md)

</div>
