<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml25)  [Next](eml27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

# CHAPTER XV

### The Rise of Amon

The Theban Rulers--Need for Centralized Government--Temple Building--The
first Amon King--Various Forms of Amon--The Oracle--Mentu the War
God--Mut, Queen of the Gods--The Egyptian Cupid--Story of the Possessed
Princess--God casts out an Evil Spirit--A Prince's Dream--The God of
Spring--Amenemhet's Achievements--Feudal Lords held in Check--The
Kingdom United--A Palace Conspiracy--Selection of Senusert--The first
Personality in History.

ANTEF, the feudal lord of the valley of Thebes, was the next Pharaoh of
Egypt. With him begins the Eleventh Dynasty, which covers a period of
over a century and a half. His power was confined chiefly to the south,
but he exercised considerable influence over the whole land by gaining
possession of sacred Abydos. The custodians of the "holy sepulchre" were
assured of the allegiance of the great mass of the people at this period
of transition and unrest.

The new royal line included several King Antefs and King Mentuhoteps,
but little is known regarding the majority of them. Antef I, who was
descended from a superintendent of the frontier, had probably royal
blood in his veins, and a remote claim to the throne. He reigned for
fifty years, and appears to have consolidated the power of his house.
Mentuhotep II, the fifth king, was able to impose his will upon the
various feudal lords, and secured their allegiance partly, no doubt, by
force of arms, but mainly, it would appear, because the prosperity

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

of the country depended upon the establishment of a strong central
government, which would secure the distribution of water for
agricultural purposes. Famine may have accomplished what the sword was
unable to do. Besides, the road to sacred Abydos had to be kept open.
The political influence of the Osirian cult must therefore have been
pronounced for a considerable time.

Under Mentuhotep II the country was so well settled that a military
expedition was dispatched to quell the Nubian warriors. Commerce had
revived, and the arts and industries had begun to flourish again.
Temples were built under this and the two succeeding monarchs of the
line. The last Mentuhotep was able to organize a quarrying expedition of
ten thousand men.

Meantime the power of the ruling house was being securely established
throughout the land. The Pharaoh's vizier was Amenemhet, and he made
vigorous attacks upon the feudal lords who pursued a policy of
aggression against their neighbours. Some were deposed, and their places
were filled by loyal supporters of the Pharaoh. After a long struggle
between the petty "kings" of the nomes and the royal house, Amenemhet I
founded the Twelfth Dynasty, under which Egypt became once again a
powerful and united kingdom. He was probably a grandson of the vizier of
the same name.

A new god--the chief god of Thebes--has now risen into prominence. His
name is Amon, or Amen. The earliest reference to him appears in the
Pyramid of the famous King Unas of the Fifth Dynasty, where he and his
consort are included among the primeval gods associated with Nu--"the
fathers and mothers" who were in "the deep" at the beginning. We cannot,
however, attach much importance to the theorizing of the priests of
Unas's time, for they were busily engaged in absorbing

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

every religious myth in the land. Amon is evidently a strictly local
god, who passed through so many stages of development that it is
impossible to grasp the original tribal conception, which may, perhaps,
have been crude and vague enough. His name is believed to signify "The
Hidden One"--he concealed his "soul" and his "name", like the giant who
hid his soul in an egg. <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) Sokar of
Memphis was also a "hidden" god, and was associated with the land of the
dead. Amon may have been likewise a deity of Hades, for he links with
Osiris as a lunar deity (Chapter XXII). In fact, as Amon Ra he displaced
Osiris for a time as judge of the dead.

Amon is represented in various forms: (1) As an ape; <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) (2) as a lion resting with head erect,
like the primitive earth lion Aker; (3) as a frog-headed man accompanied
by Ament, his serpent-headed female counterpart; (4) as a serpent-headed
man, while his consort is cat-headed; <span
id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111) (5) as a man god with the royal sceptre
in one hand and the symbol of life (*ankh*) in the other; (6) as a
ram-headed man.

In the Twelfth Dynasty a small temple was erected to Amon in the
northern part of the city which was called Apet, after the mother
goddess of that name who ultimately was fused with Hathor. "Thebes" is
believed to have been derived from her name, the female article "T",
being placed before "Ape"; Tap or Tape was pronounced Thebai by the
Greeks, who had a town of that name. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_112) The sacred name of the city was Nu or
Nu-Amon. "Art thou better than populous No?" cried

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

the Hebrew prophet, denouncing Nineveh; "Ethiopia and Egypt were her
strength and it was infinite."

Amon, the ram god, was the most famous oracle in Egypt. Other oracles
included the Apis bull; Sebek, the crocodile; Uazit, the serpent goddess
of Buto; and Bes, the grotesque god who comes into prominence later.
Revelations were made by oracles in dreams, and when Thutmose IV slept
in the shadow of the Sphinx it expressed its desire to him that the sand
should be cleared from about its body. Worshippers in a state of
religious ecstasy were also given power to prophesy.

The oracle of Amon achieved great renown. The god was consulted by
warriors, who were duly promised victory and great spoils. Wrongdoers
were identified by the god, and he was even consulted regarding the
affairs of State. Ultimately his priests achieved great influence owing
to their reputation as foretellers of future events, who made known the
will of the god. A good deal of trickery was evidently indulged in, for
we gather that the god signified his assent to an expressed wish by
nodding his head, or selected a suitable leader of men by extending his
arm.

Amon was fused with several deities as his various animal forms
indicate. The ram's head comes, of course, from Min, and it is possible
that the frog's head was from Hekt. His cult also appropriated the war
god Mentu, who is depicted as a bull. Mentu, however, continued to have
a separate existence, owing to his fusion with Horus. He appears in
human form wearing a bull's tall with the head of a hawk, which is
surmounted by a sun disk between Amon's double plumes; he is also
depicted as a hawk-headed sphinx. As a bull-headed man he carries bow
and arrows, a club, and a knife.

In his Horus form Mentu stands on the prow of

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the sun bark on the nightly journey through Duat, and slays the demons
with his lance. He was appropriated, of course, by the priests of
Heliopolis, and became the "soul of Ra" and "Bull of Heaven". A temple
was erected to him near Karnak, and in late times he overshadowed Amon
as Mentu-ra.

Amon was linked with the great sun god in the Eleventh Dynasty, and as
Amon-ra he ultimately rose to the supreme position of national god,
while his cult became the most powerful in Egypt. In this form he will
be dealt with in a later chapter.

Amon's wife was Mut, whose name signifies "the mother", and she may be
identical with Apet. She was "queen of the gods" and "lady of the sky".
Like Nut, Isis, Neith, and others, she was the "Great Mother" who gave
birth to all that exists. She is represented as a vulture and also as a
lioness. The vulture is Nekhebet, "the mother", and the lioness, like
the cat, symbolizes maternity. Mut wears the double crown of Egypt,
which indicates that she absorbed all the "Great Mother" goddesses in
the land. Her name, in fact, is linked with Isis, with the female Tum,
with Hathor, the Buto serpent, &c. In the *Book of the Dead* she is
associated with a pair of dwarfs who have each the face of a hawk and
the face of a man. It was to Mut that Amenhotep III, the father of
Akenaton, erected the magnificent temple at Karnak with its great avenue
of ram-headed sphinxes. Queen Tiy's lake in its vicinity was associated
with the worship of this "Great Mother".

The moon god Khonsu was at Thebes regarded as the son of Amon and Mut.
At Hermopolis and Edfu he was linked with Thoth. In the Unas hymn he is
sent forth by Orion to drive in and slaughter the souls of gods and
men--a myth which explains why

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

stars vanish before the moon. His name means "the traveller".

As a lunar deity Khonsu caused the crops to spring up and ripen. He was
also the Egyptian Cupid, who touched the hearts of lads and girls with
love. The Oracle of Khonsu was consulted by those who prayed for
offspring. Agriculturists lauded the deity for increasing their flocks
and herds.

This popular god also gave "the air of life" to the newly born, arid was
thus a wind god like Her-shef and Khnûmû. As ward of the atmosphere he
exercised control over the evil spirits which caused the various
diseases and took possession of human beings, rendering them epileptic
or insane. Patients were cured by Khonsu, "giver of oracles", whose fame
extended beyond the bounds of Egypt.

An interesting papyrus of the Ramessid period relates the story of a
wonderful cure effected by Khonsu. It happened that the Pharaoh, "the
Horus, he who resembles Tum, the son of the sun, the mighty with
scimitars, the smiter of the nine-bow barbarians", &c., was collecting
the annual tribute from the subject kings of Syria. The Prince of
Bakhten, <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113) who brought many gifts,
"placed in front of these his eldest daughter". She was very beautiful,
arid the Pharaoh immediately fell in love with her, arid she became his
"royal wife".

Some time afterwards the Prince of Bakhten appeared at Uas (Thebes) with
an envoy. He brought presents to his daughter, and, having prostrated
himself before the "Son of the Sun", announced:

"I have travelled hither to plead with Your Majesty for the sake of
Bent-rash, the younger sister of your royal wife; she is stricken with a
grievous malady which

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

causes her limbs to twitch violently. I entreat Your Majesty to send a
learned magician to see her, so that he may give her aid in her sore
distress."

Pharaoh said: "Let a great magician who is learned in the mysteries be
brought before me."

As he desired, so was it done. A scribe of the House of Life appeared
before him, and His Majesty said: "It is my will that you should travel
to Bakhten to see the younger daughter of the royal wife."

The magician travelled with the envoy, and when he arrived at his
journey's end he saw the Princess Bentrash, whom he found to be
possessed of a hostile demon of great power. But he was unable to draw
it forth.

Then the Prince of Bakhten appeared at Uas a second time, and addressing
the Pharaoh said: "O King, my lord, let a god be sent to cure my
daughter's malady!"

His Majesty was compassionate, and he went to the temple of Khonsu and
said to the god: "Once again I have come on account of the little
daughter of the Prince of Bakhten. Let your image be sent to cure her."

Khonsu, "giver of oracles" and "expeller of evil spirits", nodded his
head, assenting to the prayer of the king, and caused his fourfold
divine nature to be imparted to the image.

So it happened that the statue of Khonsu was placed in an ark, which was
carried on poles by twelve priests while two chanted prayers. When it
was borne from the temple, Pharaoh offered up burning incense, and five
boats set forth with the ark arid the priests, accompanied by soldiers,
a chariot, and two horses.

The Prince of Bakhten came forth from his city to meet the god,
accompanied by many soldiers, and prostrated himself.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

"So you have indeed come," he cried. "You are not hostile to us; the
goodwill of the Pharaoh has caused you to come hither."

Khonsu was then carried into the presence of the Princess Bent-rash, who
was immediately cured of her malady. The evil demon was cast out, and it
stood before the god and said: "Peace be with you, O mighty god. The
land of Bakhten is your possession, and its people are your slaves. I am
your slave also. As you desire, I will return again to the place whence
I came. But first let the Prince of Bakhten hold a great feast that I
may partake thereof."

Khonsu then instructed a priest, saying: "Command the Prince of Bakhten
to offer up a great sacrifice to the evil spirit whom I have expelled
from his daughter."

Great dread fell upon the prince and the army and all the people when
the sacrifice was offered up to the demon by the soldiers. Then amidst
great rejoicings that spirit of evil took its departure and went to the
place whence it came, according to the desire of Khonsu, "the giver of
oracles".

Then the Prince of Bakhten was joyful of heart, and he desired that
Khonsu should remain in the land. As it happened, he kept the image of
the god for over three years.

One day the prince lay asleep upon his couch, and a vision came to him
in a dream. He saw the god rising high in the air like a hawk of gold
and taking flight towards the land of Egypt. He awoke suddenly,
trembling with great fear, and he said: "Surely the god is angry with
us. Let him be placed in the ark and carried back to Uas."

The prince caused many rich presents to be laid in the temple of the god
when his image was returned.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

One of Khonsu's popular names was "The Beautiful One at Rest". He was
depicted, like the Celtic love god Angus, "the ever-young", as a
handsome youth. The upper part of a particularly striking statue of this
comely deity was found in the ruins of his temple at Karnak.

As a nature god Khonsu was a hawk-headed man, crowned with a crescent
moon and the solar disk; he was a sun god in spring. Like Thoth, he was
also an architect, "a deviser of plans", and a "measurer", for he
measured the months. Both the lunar deities are evidently of great
antiquity. The mother-goddess-and-son conception is associated with the
early belief in the female origin of the world and of life. The "Great
Mother" was self-begotten as the "Great Father" was self-begotten, and
the strange Egyptian idea that a god became "husband of his mother"
arose from the fusion of the conflicting ideas regarding creation.

Amenemhet I, the first great ruler who promoted the worship of Amon, was
also assiduous in doing honour to the other influential deities. From
Tanis in the Delta, southward into the heart of Nubia, he has left
traces of his religious fervour, which had, of course, a diplomatic
motive. He erected a red granite altar to Osiris at sacred Abydos, a
temple to Ptah at Memphis; he honoured the goddess Bast with monuments
at Bubastis, and duly adored Amon, of course, at Thebes. His Ka statues
were distributed throughout the land, for he was the "son of Ra", and
had therefore to be worshipped as the god"--the human incarnation of the
solar deity.

Amenemhet was an active military ruler. Not only did he smite the
Syrians and the Nubians, but also punished the rebellious feudal lords
who did not bend to his will. New and far-reaching changes were
introduced

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

into the system of local, as well as central government. The powers of
nome governors were restricted. When one was forcibly deposed an
official took his place, and the appointment of town rulers and headmen
of villages became once again vested in the Crown. This policy was
followed by Amenemhet's successors, until ultimately the feudal system,
which for centuries had been a constant menace to the stability of the
throne, was finally extinguished. The priestly allies of the provincial
nobles were won to the Crown by formal recognition and generous gifts,
and all the chief gods, with the exception of Ptah, were included in the
"family" of Amon-ra.

Amenemhet gathered about him the most capable men in the kingdom. Once
again it was possible for humble officials to rise to the highest rank.
The industries of the country were fostered, and agriculture received
special attention, so that harvests became plentiful again and there was
abundance of food in Egypt.

When the king was growing old he selected his son Senusert to succeed
him. Apparently the choice was not pleasing to some of the influential
members of the royal house. In the "Instruction of Amenemhet", a
metrical version of which is given at the end of the next chapter, we
learn that a harem conspiracy was organized to promote the claims of a
rival to the throne. A band of conspirators gained access to the palace
through a tunnel which had been constructed secretly, and burst upon the
old monarch as he lay resting after he had partaken of his evening meal.
He "showed fight", although unarmed, and in the parley which ensued was
evidently successful. It appears. to have been accepted that the
succession of Senusert was inevitable.

How the conspirators were dealt with we have no

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

means of knowing. It is possible that the majority of them were
pardoned. So long as Amenemhet remained alive they were safe; but they
must have feared the vengeance of Senusert, who was a vigorous and
warlike prince, and eminently worthy to succeed his father. The papyrus
story of "The Flight of Senuhet" is evidently no mere folktale, but a
genuine fragment of history. It is possible that Senuhet was one of the
sons of Amenemhet; at any rate he appears to have been compromised in
the abortive palace conspiracy. When the old king died at Memphis, where
he appears to have resided oftenest, a messenger was hurriedly
dispatched to Senusert, who was engaged leading an army against the
troublesome Libyans. None of the other princes was informed, and
Senuhet, who overheard the messenger informing the new king of his
father's death, immediately fled towards Syria. He found that other
Egyptians had taken refuge there.

After many years had elapsed his whereabouts were revealed to King
Senusert, who was evidently convinced of his innocence. Senuhet was
invited to return to Egypt, and was welcomed at the palace by his royal
kinsman.

The narrative is of homely and graceful character, and affords us more
intimate knowledge of the life of the period than can be obtained from
tomb inscriptions and royal monuments. Senuhet is one of the earliest
personalities in history. We catch but fleeting glimpses of the man
Amenemhet in his half-cynical "Instruction" with its vague references to
a palace revolt. In the simple and direct narrative of the fugitive
prince, however, we are confronted by a human being whose emotions we
share, and with whom we are able to enter into close sympathy. The
latter part of the story has

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

some of the happiest touches. Our old friend rejoices because he is
privileged once again to sleep in a comfortable bed after lying for long
years in the desert sand; he throws away his foul rustic clothing and
attires himself in perfumed linen, and feels young when his beard is
shaved off and his baldness is covered by a wig. He is provided with a
mansion which is decorated anew, but what pleases him most is the
presence of the children who come to visit him. He was fond of children.
. . . Our interest abides with a man who was buried. as he desired to
be, after long years of wandering, in the land of his birth, some forty
centuries ago!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[197:1](eml26.htm#fr_109) Osiris Sokar "dost
hide his essence in the great shrine of Amon".--*The Burden of Isis*, p.
54.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[197:2](eml26.htm#fr_110) Osiris Sokar is
addressed: "Hail, thou who growest like unto the ape of Tehuti" (Thoth).
The Thoth-ape appears to be a dawn god.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[197:3](eml26.htm#fr_111) Seb is depicted with
a serpent's head. The cat goddess is Bast, who links with other Great
Mothers.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[197:4](eml26.htm#fr_112) Budge's *Gods of the
Egyptians*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[200:1](eml26.htm#fr_113) identified with the
King of the Hittites who became the ally of Ramesis II.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Tale of the Fugitive Prince](eml27)

</div>
