<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml32)  [Next](eml34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

# CHAPTER XXII

### Amon, the God of Empire

Lunar Worship--The Great Mother of Darkness.--Anion as a Moon
God--Fusion with Ra--Ptah a Form of the Theban Deity--Fenkhu--"and
"Fenish" Artisans--Osiris and Amon--Veneration of Religious
Pharaohs--Amon's Wife and Concubine--Conquests of Thothmes I--Rival
Claimants to the Throne--Queen Hatshepsut--Her Famous Expedition--Rise
of Thothmes III--A Great Strategist--His Conquests--The Egyptian Empire
--Amon's Poetic Praise--The Emperor's Buildings and Obelisks.

THE moon god Ah comes into prominence during the Egyptian War of
Independence. This ancient deity must have been closely associated with
the Theban religious cult which Ra Apepa, the Hyksos king, singled out
for attack, because the name of the queen mother, Ah-hotep, signifies
"Ah is satisfied", and that of her victorious son Ah-mes, "born of Ah".

It is highly probable that Ah was the son of the great Mother deity
Apet, who was identified with the female hippopotamus Taurt, "the mighty
one", goddess of maternity, and "mother of the gods". At Thebes and
Ombos, Osiris was regarded as the son of the sacred hippopotamus. As we
have seen in the Introduction, he was, like Ah, identified with the moon
spirit, which symbolized the male principle. The Apet hippopotamus was
the animal incarnation of the Great Mother; as a water goddess,
therefore, Apet links with Nut, who rose from the primordial deep and
was "the waters above the firmament".

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

At the beginning there was naught save darkness and water. The spirit of
the night was the Great Mother, and her first-born was the moon child.
Life came from death and light from darkness. Such appears to have been
the conception of the worshippers of the sky-and-water goddess and the
lunar god.

On the other hand, the worshippers of the male earth spirit believed
that the firmament was made of metal which was beaten out by the Great
Father, Ptah, at the beginning. Ere metal came into use it may have been
conceived that the sky was made of stone. Hathor, the sky goddess, was
significantly enough "the lady of turquoise", and Ra, the sun god, was
in the Fifth Dynasty symbolized by an obelisk.

Osiris, the human incarnation of primitive Nilotic deities, absorbed the
attributes of the moon spirit and the male earth spirit. Isis, on the
other hand, apparently absorbed those of Nut, the sky-and-water goddess,
and of Neith, the earth goddess, who symbolized growth.

As moon worship was of greater antiquity in Egypt than sun worship, and
was associated with agricultural rites, the Theban cult must have made
popular appeal, and helped to rally the mass of the people to throw off
the yoke of the Hyksos Ra and Sutekh worshippers. The political
significance of Apepa's order to slay the hippopotami is therefore
apparent.

When the influence of the southern conquerors extended to Hermopolis, Ah
was merged with Thoth, who was originally a lunar deity. In fact, as we
have shown in our Introduction, he was another form of Khonsu. With Mut,
"the mother", who is indistinguishable from Apet, Khonsu and Thoth
formed a Theban triad. In Nubia, where archaic Mediterranean beliefs
appear to have been persistent, Thoth was the son of Tefnut, the

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

lioness-headed goddess, who was given arbitrary association with Shu,
the atmosphere god, by the theorists of Heliopolis. Mut was also
depicted at Thebes with the head of a lioness.

As we have already suggested, it is possible that Amon was originally
the son of Mut-Apet. He may have developed as a symbolized attribute of
Ah. Fragments of old hymns make reference to him as a lunar deity, and
as a "traverser" of space like Khonsu-Thoth. Indeed, even in his
hawk-headed form, he retains his early association with the moon, for he
wears the solar disk with the lunar crescent. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md)

Amon, like the sons of all the Great Mother deities, represented in his
animal forms the "male principle" and the "fighting principle". He
became "the husband of his mother" when the Great Father and Great
Mother conceptions were fused. This process is illustrated in the triad
formed by Ptah, the father, Mut, the mother, and Thoth, the son. Ptah's
wife Sekhet, with the head of a lioness, is indistinguishable from Mut)
Tefnut, and Bast.

As a Great Father deity, Amon, "husband of his mother" became "king of
the gods", <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127.md) and lost his original
lunar character. His fusion with the sun god of Heliopolis, which was
accomplished for political purposes, made the change complete, for he
became Amon-Ra, the great representative deity of Egypt, who combines
the attributes of all other gods.

Amon-Ra was depicted as a great bearded man, clad in a sleeveless tunic
suspended from his shoulders, with the tail of art animal hanging
behind. His headdress of

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

high double plumes, with lunar and solar symbols, was coloured in
sections red and blue, and red and green, as if to signify all
association with the river flowing between its batiks and the growth of
verdure. Sometimes he is shown with Min's ram's horns curving downwards
round his ears, and sometimes with those of Khnûmû spreading
outward. <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) He wore a collar and
armlets and bracelets.

As a god of war he rose into great prominence during the Eighteenth
Dynasty. The victorious kings, who became owners of all the land in
Egypt, and returned with great spoils from many battlefields, were
lavish in their gifts to his temple, and his priests became exceedingly
wealthy and powerful. There never was in Egypt a more influential cult
than that of Amon-Ra.

His solar attributes, however, were not so prominent in the Eighteenth
as in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. The influence of the moon
cult remained for a considerable period. As much is suggested by the
names of the kings. Ah-mes I, "born of Ah", was followed by four rulers
called Amen-hotep, "Amon is satisfied", and four called Thoth-mes, "born
of Thoth".

The influence of the Ra cult at Heliopolis was tempered by that of the
Amon cult at Thebes, with the result that the old Egyptian lunar gods
came into prominence. Nor were Ptah and other kindred deities excluded
from the group of official gods as in the Fifth Dynasty. At Memphis
Amon-Ra was worshipped as Ptah. In a hymn addressed to the great Theban
deity it was declared--

Memphis receives thee in the form of Ptah--  
He who is the first-born of all gods;  
He who was at the beginning.

It would appear that the Memphites had combined

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

with the Thebans to drive the Hyksos out of Egypt. When Ahmes began the
work of reconstructing the temples, the first gods he honoured were Amon
and Ptah. In the limestone quarries near Cairo two tablets record that
stone was excavated for the great temples at Memphis and Thebes. No
reference is made to Heliopolis. It is of special interest to find that
the workmen who were employed were of the Fenkhu, a Syrian tribe. There
can be no doubt these quarriers were foreigners. In an Assouan
inscription of Thothmes II it is stated that the boundary of the
Egyptian empire on the north extended to the Syrian lakes, and that the
Pharaoh's arms were "not repulsed from the land of the Fenkhu". A stele
erected by Thothmes III at Wady Halfa records a victory during a Syrian
campaign over "the Fenkhu". Ahmes must have obtained these skilled
quarriers from the Fenkhu for the purpose of hastening on the work of
restoring the temples in return for some favour conferred, for he did
not wage war against the tribe, which remained powerful at the time of
Thothmes III. It is impossible, however, to identify them with
certainty. To this day the inhabitants of Palestine still credit all the
surviving works of antiquity to the "Fenish", and although the reference
is evidently to the Philistines and Phœnicians, as well as to the hewers
of the great artificial caves, it is possible that the latter, who are
referred to in the Bible as the Rephaim or Anakim, were originally the
"Fenish" and the Egyptian "Fenkhu". Ahmes may have followed the example
of his temple- and pyramid-building predecessors in drawing fresh
supplies of skilled stoneworkers from southern Palestine.

Osiris worship was combined with that of Amon at Thebes, but, as we have
seen, Osiris and Amon had much in common, for both gods had lunar
attributes.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Osiris "hides his
essence in the great shrine of Amon". <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) The Amon ram was an animal incarnation
of the corn spirit. It is significant to find, in this connection, that
the priests of Amon for a long period sought sepulture at sacred Abydos,
which had become closely associated with Osirian worship. But there was
a strange fusion of beliefs regarding the other world. Men died
believing that they would enter the bark of Ra and also reach the
Osirian Paradise. Ultimately the Heliopolitan belief in the efficacy of
magical formulæ impaired the ethical character of the Ptah-Osirian
creed.

Although Ahmes I was the liberator of Egypt, his memory was not revered
so greatly as that of his son and successor Amenhotep I (Amenophis). The
great Pharaohs of the records were the religious Pharaohs; if a monarch
was assiduous in venerating the gods, and especially in erecting and
endowing temples, his fame was assured; the grateful priests "kept his
memory green". Amenhotep I and his wife Aahmes-Nefertari were, after
their death, revered as deities; references are made to them as
protectors and punishers of men in the Nineteenth Dynasty.

Nefertari was during her life "Amon's wife". She slept in the temple,
and her children were reputed to be the sons and daughters of the god.
The high priest's wife was "the concubine of Amon". It was Amenhotep I
who founded the endowments of the Amon cult at Thebes which ultimately
became so wealthy and powerful. He also began the erection of the
magnificent buildings at Karnak, which were added to by his successors.
His reign, which lasted for only about ten years, was

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

occupied chiefly in reorganizing the kingdom and in establishing the new
national religion. Assisted by the veteran military nobles of El Kab, he
waged war against the Libyans on the north and the Nubians on the south.
He appears also to have penetrated Syria, but no records of the campaign
survive. His successors, however, ere he invaded Asia, claimed to hold
sway as far north as the Euphrates.

The next king, Thothmes I, came to the throne as the husband of a
princess of the royal line. He found it necessary to invade Nubia. Ahmes
of Ebana, who accompanied him, records in his tomb that a battle was
fought between the second and third cataract. The Pharaoh slew the
Nubian leader who opposed him, and, on his return, had the body
suspended head downwards at the bow of the royal ship. Thothmes
penetrated Nubia beyond the third cataract, and reached the island of
Arko, where Sebekhotep had undertaken the erection of his great statues.
A fortress was erected and garrisoned on the island of Tombos at the
third cataract. Nubia thus became once again an Egyptian province.

A campaign of conquest was next waged in Syria, where Egyptian dominance
was continually challenged by the rival powers in Asia Minor and
Mesopotamia. "It was probably", write King and Hall, "with the Iranian
kingdom of Mitanni, between Euphrates and Tigris, that the Dynasty
carried on its struggle for Syria." No royal records of the campaign of
Thothmes I survive, but we gather from the tomb inscriptions of Ahmes of
Ebana and Ahmes of El Kab, that a great victory was won in Naharina,
"the land of the rivers", which secured Egyptian supremacy. The king was
afterwards able to boast that the northern boundary of the Empire
extended "as far as the circuit of the sun"--

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

it was believed that: the world's edge was at the source of the
Euphrates on the north and of that of the Nile on the south, and that
both rivers flowed from the ocean, "the great Circle" surrounding the
earth, in which lay the great serpent.

Thothmes I made an addition to the Karnak temple, and erected two great
pylons on the thirtieth anniversary of his reign, when, at the Sed
festival, he appears to have selected his successor. On one of the
pylons he recorded that he had established peace in Egypt, ended
lawlessness, and stamped out impiety, and that he had subdued the rebels
in the Delta region. He also implored Amon to give the throne to his
daughter Hatshepsut.

The closing period of the king's reign is obscure, and there is no
agreement as to the events which occurred in connection with the family
feud which ensued. Thothmes III dated his reign from the year preceding
the death of Thothmes I. but in the interval Thothmes II and Hatshepsut
sat on the throne.

The children of the royal princess who was the wife of Thothmes I
included two sons and two daughters, but they all died young with the
exception of the Princess Hatshepsut. Another wife was the mother of
Thothmes II, while a concubine gave birth to Thothmes III.

Such is Breasted's reading of the problem, which is made difficult on
account of the mutilation of inscriptions by the rival claimants. Other
Egyptologists suggest that Thothmes III was the son of Thothmes II.

Thothmes III was a priest in the temple of Amon. He secured his
succession by marrying either Hatshepsut or her daughter. According to
Breasted, he superseded Thothmes I at a festival at which the Oracle of
Amon proclaimed him as the Pharaoh. Thothmes III then began his reign,
and. the old king lived in retirement.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

After a time the usurping prince had to recognize the co-regency of
Hatshepsut. But, ere long, he was thrust aside, and the queen reigned
alone as "the female Horus". Thothmes II then seized the throne on his
own and his father's behalf, and when Thothmes I died, Thothmes II
allied himself with Thothmes III. When they had reigned about two years
Thothmes II died, but Thothmes III was not able to retain his high
position. Once again Hatshepsut, who had evidently won over a section of
the priesthood, seized the reins of government, and Thothmes III was
once again "relegated to the background". <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130.md) At the festivals he appeared as a
priest.

Hatshepsut must have been a woman of great ability and force of
character to have displaced such a man as Thothmes III. For about
fourteen years she ruled alone, and engaged herself chiefly in restoring
the religious buildings which had either been demolished or had fallen
into disrepair during the Hyksos period. She completed the great
mortuary temple at Der-el-Bahari, which had been begun under Thothmes
II. It was modelled on the smaller temple of Mentuhotep, and is still
magnificent in ruin. Situated against the western cliffs at Thebes, it
was constructed in three terraces with sublime colonnades finely
proportioned and exquisitely wrought. An inner chamber was excavated
from the rock. On the temple walls the mythical scenes in connection
with the birth of the queen were sculptured in low relief, and to get
over the difficulty of being recognized as a "son of the sun",
Hatshepsut was depicted in company of her male "double". On state
occasions she wore a false beard.

The queen's most famous undertaking was to send an

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p><span id="img_28800"></span> <img src="img/28800.jpg" /></p>
<p>Mut<br />
"the Mother"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p><span id="img_28801"></span> <img src="img/28801.jpg" /></p>
<p>Hapi,<br />
God of the Nile</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p><span id="img_28802"></span> <img src="img/28802.jpg" /></p>
<p>Amon-Ra<br />
King of the Gods</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

DEITIES OF THE EMPIRE PERIOD

 

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

<span id="img_28900"></span> ![](img/28900.jpg)

RUINS OF THE TEMPLE OF DER-EL-BAHARI, THEBES

expedition of eight ships to the land of Punt to obtain myrrh trees,
incense, rare woods, and sacred animals for the temple. It was her pious
wish that Amon should have a garden to walk in.

To celebrate her jubilee Hatshepsut had erected two magnificent
obelisks, nearly a hundred feet high, in front of the Karnak temple in
which Thothmes III was a priest. One of these still stands erect, and is
greatly admired by visitors. The obelisks, like the temple, were
designed by the much-favoured architect Senmut, an accomplished artist
and scheming statesman, who was a prominent figure in the party which
supported the queen.

But so deeply was Hatshepsut concerned in devoting the revenues of the
State to religious purposes that the affairs of empire were neglected.
The flame of revolt was spreading through Syria, where the tribal chiefs
scorned to owe allegiance to a woman, especially as she neglected to
enforce her will at the point of the sword. Apparently, too, the Mitanni
power had recovered from the blows dealt by the military Pharaohs of a
previous generation and had again become aggressive. Then Hatshepsut
died. She may have fallen a victim of a palace revolt of which no record
survives. Her mummy has never been discovered. When the deep tunnel
which she had constructed for her tomb was entered, it was found to have
been despoiled. It may be that her body was never deposited there. After
her death no more is heard of her favourite Senmut, or her daughter,
whom she had selected as her successor. Her name was ruthlessly erased
from her monuments. All the indications point to a military revolt,
supported by a section of the priesthood, at a time of national peril.

Thothmes III, who immediately came to the throne, lost no time in
raising an army and pressing northward

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

to subdue the Syrian rebellion. Although he has been referred to as
"this little man with coarse features, as we know from his mummy", it
would be a mistake to retain the impression that he was of repulsive
aspect. He died when he was an old man; his jaw was not tied up before
embalmment, which was not highly successful, for his nose was
disfigured, and has partly crumbled away. The statues of the king
present the striking face of a vigorous and self-contained man; in one
he has a nose which rivals that of Wellington, and an air of dignity and
refinement which accords with what we know of his character; for not
only was he a great leader who, as his grand vizier has informed the
ages, knew all that happened and never failed to carry out a matter he
took in hand, he was also a man of artistic ability, accustomed, as
Breasted informs us, to spend his leisure time "designing exquisite
vases".

The hour had come and the man! With a well-organized army, in which he
had placed the most capable men in command, he swept his victorious way
through Syria and struck terror to the hearts of the rebels. His
name--Manakhpirria (Men-kheper-ra) Thothmes--was dreaded long after his
death, and may have originated the Semitic title "Pharaoh", which was
never used by the native kings of Egypt.

The greatest triumph of the various Syrian campaigns conducted by
Thothmes III was the capture of Megiddo, in the Hebrew tribal area of
Issachar. That fortified stronghold, situated on the plain of Jezreel,
was a point of great strategic importance--"the Key", indeed, of
northern Palestine. It had to be approached over the ridge of Carmel,
and was partly surrounded by the tributary known as "the brook Kina",
which flows into the Kishon River. Two highways leading to Megiddo lay

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

before the Egyptian army, like the legs of inward curving calipers, and
between these a narrow mountain pass cut in an almost straight and
direct line into the town.

The Egyptian generals intended to advance along the northern curving
highway, but Thothmes III was, like Nelson, a great strategist who ever
did the unexpected. He decided to push through the pass, although along
the greater part of it his horsemen would have to advance in Indian
file. To inspire his followers with his own great courage, the fearless
monarch rode in front. His daring manœuvre was a complete success. Ere
it was comprehended by the enemy, his army was pouring down upon the
plain.

He completely upset the plans of the Asiatic allies, who had divided
their forces to await the advance of the Egyptians by the north and the
south, occupying the while, no doubt, strong positions.

The battle took place next day on the river bank. Thothmes led on a
victorious charge, and scattered the enemy so that they retreated in
confusion and took refuge in the city. Had the Egyptians not been too
eager to secure the spoils of victory, they might have captured Megiddo,
as Thothmes informed them afterwards. A long siege followed, but at
length the town was starved into submission, and the princes came forth
to swear allegiance to the Pharaoh. They also made payment of the
tribute which they had withheld during the closing years of Hatshepsut's
reign. Thothmes took the eldest sons of the various revolting princes as
hostages, and deported them to Thebes. The spoils of victory included
over goo chariots and 200 coats of mail and much gold and silver. Ere he
returned home he captured three towns in Lebanon, and reorganized the
administration of northern Palestine.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

Other campaigns followed. On one of these Thothmes made swift attack
upon some revolting princes by crossing the sea and landing on the
Phœnician coast. The Hittites gave trouble on the north, and he pushed
on to Carchemish, their southern capital, and captured it. At Kadesh, on
the Orontes, he also dealt a shattering blow against the Hittites and
their allies from Mitanni. He had previously subdued the Libyans, and
conducted a successful campaign into Nubia. Thus he built up a great
empire, and made Egypt the foremost power in the world. Tribute poured
into the royal exchequer from the various subject states, and peace
offerings were made by the Hittites and even by the rulers of Cyprus and
Crete. Both Assyria and Babylonia cultivated friendly relations with
Thothmes III, who appears to have been as distinguished a diplomatist as
he was a conqueror.

The priests of Amon composed a great hymn in his honour, which, they
pretended, had been recited by their god.

I have come, I have given to thee to smite the land of the Syrians  
Under thy feet they lie through the length and breadth of the god's
land;  
I have made them see thy might like to a star revolving  
When it sheds its burning beams and drops its dew on the meadows.

I have come, I have given to thee to vanquish the Western peoples Crete
is stricken with fear, terror is reigning in Cyprus;  
Like to a great young bull, I have made them behold thy power, Fearless
and quick to strike, none is so bold to resist thee.

I have come, I have given to thee to conquer the folk of the marshes,  
The terror of thee has fallen over the lands of Mitanni; Like to a
crocodile fierce they have beheld thee in glory;  
O monarch of fear at sea, none is so bold to approach thee.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

The chief buildings of Thothmes III were erected to Amon at Thebes, but
he did not fail to honour Ra at Heliopolis, Ptah at Memphis, and Hathor
at Dendera. One of his jubilee obelisks, which he erected at Thebes.,
now stands in Constantinople; another is in Rome; the pair set up at
Heliopolis have been given prominent sites on either side of the
Atlantic Ocean--one in New York and the other on the Thames Embankment,
London. His reign, which he dated from his first accession prior to the
death of Thothmes I, extended over a period of fifty-four years. He died
on 17 March, 1447, B.C., and was buried in the lonely "Valley of Kings'
Tombs".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[282:1](eml33.htm#fr_126.md) In an Amon-Ra hymn
the deity is called "maker of men, former of the flocks, lord of corn"
(*Religion of the Ancient Egyptians*, Wiedemann, p. 116).

<span id="fn_127"></span>[282:2](eml33.htm#fr_127.md) "The gods gather as
dogs round his feet."--*Hymn to Amon-re*.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[283:1](eml33.htm#fr_128.md) "Amon of the two
horns."

<span id="fn_129"></span>[285:1](eml33.htm#fr_129.md) That is, the soul of
Osiris is in Amon, as the soul of the giant is in the egg, the ram, &c.,
"doubly hidden". Amon-Ra is addressed in a temple chant: "Hidden is thy
abode, lord of the gods".

<span id="fn_130"></span>[288:1](eml33.htm#fr_130.md) *A History of Egypt*,
James Henry Breasted, London, 1906.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII: Tale of the Doomed Prince](eml34.md)

</div>
