<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml35)  [Next](eml37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

# CHAPTER XXV

### Amenhotep the Magnificent and Queen Tiy

Prejudice against Thothmes III--Religion of Amenhotep II--Human
Sacrifices in his Tomb--Thothmes IV and the Sphinx--Amenhotep III half a
Foreigner--Queen Tiy's Father and Mother--A Royal Love
Match--Recreations of the King--Tiy's Influence upon Art--A Stately
Palace--The Queen's Pleasure Lake--Royalty no longer exclusive--The
"Vocal Memnon"--King stricken with a Malady--Tiy's Powerful
Influence--Relations with the Priests of Amon--Akhenaton's Boyhood.

FOR some unexplained reason the memory of Thothmes III was not revered
by the priests, although he had once been a priest himself, and never
failed, on returning from his victorious campaigns, to make generous
gifts to Amon's temple at Karnak. No folktales about his tyranny and
impiety survive, as in the case of the great Khufu, the Pyramid builder.
He has suffered more from a conspiracy of silence. The prejudice against
him remained even until Roman times, when an elderly priest translated
to Germanicus the annals of Egypt's greatest emperor and coolly ascribed
them to Rameses II. This intentional confusion of historical events may
have given origin to the legends recorded by Greek writers regarding the
mythical Pharaoh Sesostris, to whom was credited, with exaggerations,
not only the achievements of Thothmes III and Rameses II, but also those
of Senusert III the first Pharaoh who invaded Syria. Herodotus believed
that one of the sculptured representations of the

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

Hittite Great Father deity in Lydia was a memorial of Sesostris.

It may be that Thothmes III and Hatshepsut were supported by rival sects
of the Theban priesthood, and that the disposal of Senmut and his
friends, who were probably executed, was never forgiven. The
obliteration of the great queen's name from the monuments, as we have
suggested, may have been associated with a revolt which was afterwards
regarded as heretical. We know little regarding the religious beliefs of
Thothmes, but those of his son, Amenhotep II, were certainly peculiar,
if not reactionary. He adored, besides Amon, Khnûmû, Ptah, and Osiris,
the crocodile god Sebek, and the voluptuous goddess Astarte (Ashtoreth),
Bast and Sekhet the feline deities, and Uazit the virgin serpent, and
two of the Hathors. In his tomb there are evidences that he revived
human sacrifice, which was associated with sun worship in the Fifth
Dynasty; the body of a man with a cleft in his skull was found bound to
a boat, and the mummies of a woman and child in an inner chamber suggest
that he desired the company in the Osirian Paradise of his favourites in
the royal household. Although he reigned for twenty years we know little
regarding him. Possibly some of his greater monuments were either
destroyed or appropriated by his successors. He conducted a campaign in
Syria soon after he ascended the throne, and returned in triumph with
the bodies of seven revolting princes suspended, heads downward, at the
prow of the royal barge; six of these were afterwards exposed on the
walls of Thebes, and one was sent to Napata in Nubia. He also conducted
a military expedition as far south as Khartoum.

Another mysterious revolt, which may mark the return to power of the
anti-Thothmes party, brought to

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

the throne the next king, the juvenile Thothmes IV, who was not,
apparently, the prince selected as heir by Amenhotep II. The names of
the half-dozen brothers of the new Pharaoh were erased in the tomb of
the royal tutor, and they themselves disappear from history. According
to a folktale, Thothmes IV was the chosen of the sun god--a clear
indication of priestly intervention--who was identified for the first
time, as Ra Harmachis, with the great Sphinx at Gizeh. Thothmes had been
out hunting, and lay to rest at noonday in the shadow of the Sphinx. He
dreamt that the sun god appeared before him and desired that the sand
should be cleared away from about his body. This was done, and a temple
erected between the paws, which was soon afterwards covered over by the
sand drift.

Thothmes IV was evidently favoured by the priests. His distinctly
foreign face indicates that his mother was an Asiatic beauty; it is
handsome but somewhat effeminate. He died when he was about thirty,
after a reign of from eight to ten years. His royal wife was a daughter
of Artatama I, the Aryan king of Mitanni; she was the mother of
Amenhotep III, and grandmother of Akhenaton. The third Amenhotep had a
distinctly non-Egyptian face, but of somewhat different type to that of
his father; the cheeks are long, the nose curves upwards, arid he has
the pointed chin and slim neck which distinguished his favourite wife
Queen Tiy and their son Akenaton.

Much controversy has been waged over the racial origin of Queen Tiy, who
was one of Egypt's most notable women. While some authorities regard her
as an Asiatic--either Semite, Hittite, or Aryan--others believe her to
be either an Egyptian or Libyan. It is impossible to confirm either of
the conflicting views that she was a fair-haired, rosy-cheeked beauty
with blue eyes,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

or that she was dark, with lustrous eyes and a creamy complexion; but
there can be no doubt that she was a lady of great personal charm and
intellectual power. One of her portraits, sculptured in low relief, is a
delicately cut profile. Her expression combines sweetness with strength
of will, and there is a disdainful pout in her refined and sensitive
mouth; her upper lip is short, and her chin is shapely and protruding.
Whether she was born in Egypt or not, there can be little doubt that she
had alien blood in her veins. Her father, Yuaa, appears to have been one
of those Asiatic noblemen who was educated in Egypt and settled there.
He held the honorary, but probably lucrative, position of superintendent
of Amon's sacred cattle. His mummy shows him to have been a handsome,
lofty-browed man with a Tennysonian nose of Armenoid rather than Semitic
type; he had also the short upper lip and chin of his daughter. Tiy's
mother appears to have been an Egyptian lady. The marriage of the King
Amenhotep III to Tiy had no political significance; the boy and
girl--they could not have been much more than sixteen--had evidently
fallen in love with one another. The union proved to be a happy one;
their mutual devotion continued all through life. Tiy was no mere harem
favourite; although not of royal birth she was exalted to the position
of queen consort, and her name was coupled with that of her husband on
official documents.

Amenhotep's reign of thirty-six years (1411 to 1375 B.C.) was peaceful
and brilliant, and he earned his title "The Magnificent" rather by his
wealth and love of splendour than by his qualities as a statesman. The
Asiatic dependencies gave no trouble; the grandsons of the martial
princes whom Thothmes III subdued by force of arms had been educated at
Thebes and thoroughly

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egyptianized.
Amenhotep would have, no doubt, distinguished himself as a warrior had
occasion offered, for on the single campaign of his reign, which he
conducted into Nubia, he displayed the soldierly qualities of his
ancestors. He was a lover of outdoor life and a keen sportsman. During
the first ten years of his life he slew 102 lions, as he has recorded,
and large numbers of wild cattle.

Queen Tiy, on the other hand, was a lady of intellectual attainments and
artistic temperament. No doubt she was strongly influenced by her
father. When we gaze on Yuaa's profound and cultured face we cannot help
concluding that he was "the power behind the throne". The palace
favourites included not only highborn nobles and ladies, but the
scholars and speculative thinkers to whom the crude beliefs and
superstitious conventionalities associated with the worship of Amon and
the practices of the worldly minded priests had become distasteful and
obsolete; architects and artists and musicians also basked in royal
favour. The influence of Queen Tiy on the art of the age was as
pronounced as it was beneficial; she encouraged the artists to shake off
the stiff mannerisms of the schools, to study nature and appreciate its
beauties of form and colour, to draw "with their eyes on the object".
And so Egypt had not only its "revolution of artistic methods", but its
"renascence of wonder". No doubt the movement was stimulated by the
wonderful art which had reached so high a degree of perfection in Crete.
Egypt at the time was the most powerful state in the civilized world,
and was pulsating with foreign influences; the old giant, shackled by
ancient customs and traditions, was aspiring to achieve intellectual
freedom.

The new movement was accompanied by a growing love of luxury and display
of Oriental splendour which

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

appealed to the young king. To please his winsome bride he caused to be
erected a stately palace on the western bank of the Nile at Thebes. It
was constructed of brick and rare woods; the stucco-covered walls and
ceilings of its commodious apartments were decorated with paintings,
which included nature studies, scenes of Egyptian life, and glimpses of
Paradise, exquisitely drawn and vividly coloured; here and there were
suspended those beautiful woven tapestries which were not surpassed by
the finest European productions of later times, and there was a wealth
of beautiful vases in coloured glass, porcelain, and silver and gold.
The throne room, in which Queen Tiy held her brilliant Courts, was 130
feet long and 40 feet wide. Papyri and lotus-bud pillars of haunting
design supported the roof and blossomed against a sky-blue ceiling, with
its flocks of pigeons and golden ravens in flight. The floor was richly
carpeted and painted with marsh and river scenes, snarers capturing the
"birds of Araby", huntsmen slaying wild animals, and fish gaping
wide-eyed in clear waters. Amidst the carved and inlaid furniture in
this scene of beauty the eye was taken by the raised golden thrones of
the king and queen, over which the great gleaming pinions of the royal
vulture were displayed in noble proportions.

A shady balcony protruded from the outer decorated walls; it was radiant
with greenery and brilliant flowers from Asia, covered with coloured
rugs, and provided with cushioned seats. When the invigorating wind from
the north blew cool and dry over the desert, Queen Tiy and her artistic
friends, lingering on the balcony, must have found much inspiration in
the prospect unfolded before them. The grounds within the palace walls,
basking in the warm sunlight, were agleam with Asian and Egyptian trees,
shrubs, and many-coloured flowers. On

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

the west rose in light and shadow the wonderful Theban hills of every
changing hue; eastward between the blue, palm-fringed Nile, with its
green banks and background of purple hills, lay a great mile-long
artificial lake, sparkling in sunshine and surrounded by clumps of trees
and mounds ablaze with strange and splendid blossoms. On this cool
stretch of restful water the king and queen were wont to be rowed in
their gorgeous barge of purple and gold named *Beauties of Aton*, while
girl voices rose bird-like in song, and sweet music came from
many-stringed harps and lyres, and from guitars, and lutes, and warbling
double pipes. On nights of festival, religious mysteries were enacted on
the illuminated waters, which reflected the radiance of many-coloured
lights, the brilliant stars, and the silver crescent of the moon.

In the vicinity of the palace were the luxurious villas and beautiful
gardens, with bathing pools and summer houses, of the brilliant lords
and ladies who attended the state banquets and entertainments organized
by Queen Tiy.

Egypt's king and queen no longer held themselves aloof from the people
with the Chinese-like exclusiveness of the Old and Middle Kingdoms. They
were the leaders of social life; their everyday doings were familiar to
the gossipers. No air of mystery and idolatrous superstition pervaded
the Court; domestic life in its finest aspects was held up as an ideal
to the people. Public functions were invested with great splendour,
royalty drove out in chariots of silver and gold, brilliantly costumed,
and attended by richly attired lords and ladies and royal attendants and
guards. The king was invariably accompanied by the queen.

Amenhotep vied with his predecessors in erecting magnificent temples.
His favourite architect was Amenhotep,

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

son of Hapi, a remarkable man whose memory was long venerated; by the
common people he was regarded as a great magician. It must have been he
who appealed to the vanity of the king by designing the two colossal
royal statues which were erected on the western plain of Thebes; they
were afterwards known as the "vocal Memnon", because they were reputed
to utter sounds at sunrise, caused, no doubt, by some ingenious device.
These representations of Amenhotep III rose to a height of seventy feet,
and still dominate the landscape in mutilated condition; they guarded
the entrance of the royal mortuary temple which was demolished in the
following Dynasty. Amenhotep was worshipped in his temple at Memphis,
while Queen Tiy was similarly honoured in Nubia.

Great wealth accumulated in Egypt during this period. Tushratta, the
subject king of Mitanni, writing to Amenhotep, declared, when he asked
for gold "in great quantity" that "in the land of my brother gold is as
plentiful as dust". The Pharaoh had added to his harem a sister of
Tushratta's, his Asian cousin, named Gilu-khipa, <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md) and she arrived with over three hundred
ladies and attendants, but she did not displace Queen Tiy.

Much light has been thrown on the relations between Egypt and other
countries by the Tell-el-Amarna letters--a number of clay tablets
inscribed in Babylonian script which were discovered a few years ago.
Babylonian was at the time the language of diplomacy. In these we find
rulers writing in affectionate terms to one another and playing the game
of politics with astuteness and Oriental duplicity.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

In the beautiful Theban palace was born to Queen Tiy, in the twentieth
year of her husband's reign, the distinguished Akhenaton, who was to
become the most remarkable Pharaoh who ever sat on the throne of Egypt.
He was the only son; several princesses had preceded him. The young heir
of the favourite wife was called Amenhotep, and when his father died he
ascended the throne as Amenhotep IV. He was then about fourteen years of
age, but had already married Nerfertiti, an Asiatic princess, apparently
a daughter of Tushratta.

The last half-dozen years of the life of Amenhotep III were clouded in
gloom. He was laid aside by some disease--either paralysis or
insanity--which Tushratta of Mitanni sought to cure by sending on two
occasions images of the goddess Ishtar. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141.md) Queen Tiy appears to have governed the
kingdom in the interval, and it is possible that she inaugurated the
religious revolt, which became so closely associated with the name of
her son, to counteract not only the retrogressive tendencies of the
priests of Amon, but also, perhaps, to curb their political power; for,
no doubt, they did their utmost to exercise a direct influence on the
affairs of state. The existence of strained relations between the Amon
temple and the royal palace during the boyhood of the future Pharaoh may
well have infused his mind with that bitterness against the great
religious cult of Thebes which he afterwards did his utmost to give
practical expression to by doctrinal teachings and open persecution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_140"></span>[323:1](eml36.htm#fr_140.md) Her father was King
Sutarna, whose sister was the wife of Thothmes IV. Sutarna's father was
Artatama I, a contemporary of Thothmes III.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[324:1](eml36.htm#fr_141.md) The goddess of
Nineveh. Tushratta must therefore have held sway over part of Assyria.
The Mitanni King Saushatar, great-grandfather of Tushratta, captured and
plundered Ashur.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI: The Religious Revolt of the Poet King](eml37.md)

</div>
