[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc37010)  [Next](cc37012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>Chapter 24

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And after five days the chief priest
Ananias came down with the elders, and one Tertullus, a rhetorician, who
came before the governor against Paul. **2.** And when Paul was called
forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing that we live in
great peace by means of thee, and seeing many things are restored in
this nation by thy providence, **3.** That allow we ever, and in all
places, most noble Felix, with all thanks. **4.** But lest I become
tedious unto thee, I pray thee hear us a little of thy courtesy. **5.**
For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of debate
unto all the Jews throughout the whole world, and an author of the sect
of the Nazarites: **6.** Who did also go about to pollute the temple;
whom when we had taken, we would have judged him according to our law,
**7.** But the chief captain Lysias came upon us, and with great
violence took him from us, **8.** Commanding his accusers to come down
unto thee: of whom thou mayest, if thou wilt inquire, know the certainty
of all these things whereof we accuse him. **9.** And the Jews added,
saying that these things were so.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span><span id="xii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**1.** Seeing Ananias goeth down to Cesarea
to accuse Paul, it maketh the conjecture more probable, which I brought
before touching his priesthood. For it was not meet for the highest
priest to take such a journey. Therefore some other man was highest
priest at that time; and Ananias being one of the chief priests,
forasmuch as he was in great authority, and was withal a stout  <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) man, did take this embassage upon him.
He bringeth with him a train, and that of the worshipful company of
elders, that the governor might be moved with their very pomp to condemn
Paul. But forasmuch as Paul did use no eloquence, they had no need to
hire a rhetorician to contend with him in eloquence. Moreover, they did
exceed both in dignity and also in multitude, so that it was an easy
matter for them to oppress a poor man, and such a one as was destitute
of man’s help. Therefore it was a sign of an evil conscience, in that
seeing they were men of great experience, exercised in public affairs,
and skillful in matters pertaining to courts, they hire a rhetorician.
Eloquence is, I confess, the gift of God; but in this matter they went
about nothing else but to deceive the judge therewith. And Luke
declareth this, therefore, that we may know that the Jews did omit
nothing whereby they might oppress Paul; and that they might not only
prove him guilty,  <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md) but so dash
him out of countenance, that he might not be able to defend himself; and
so let us consider that it came to pass by the wonderful providence of
God, that Paul did so stoutly endure such sore assaults. Wherefore, if
it so fall out at any time that a godly man being alone be beset with a
great number of enemies, let him call to mind this history, and let him
be of good courage. As David doth likewise exhort us by his own example,

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>“If tents were pitched about me, I will not
fear,  
because thou art with me,” (<span id="xii.i-p8.2"></span>[Ps
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003)<span id="xii.i-p8.2"></span>.md).

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span><span id="xii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**2.** *Seeing we live in great peace.*
Tertullus useth a preface nothing appertinent to the matter; because he
commendeth Felix wisdom and virtues that he may purchase favor.
Therefore it is a filthy and flattering *exordium.* Not that I am of
their mind who reprehend Tertullus for speaking the judge fair, and for
seeking to win his favor. For it is not always disagreeing with the
right and lawful form of pleading to commend the judge; and there may
reasons be brought on both sides (as they say) touching this matter. But
I mislike nothing but this which is altogether corrupt. For the
rhetorician doth insinuate himself under false praises, that he may
darken the matter which is called in question. For to what end doth he
speak of peace and a well ordered state, save only that Felix may think
that the safety of Judea consisteth in condemning Paul, and that he may
examine the matter no further? Moreover, it appeareth by Josephus, how
covetously, cruelly, and voluptuously, Felix behaved himself in that
province. The unworthy and tragical murdering of the highest priest,
Jonathas, because he set himself against his dissolute tyranny, was
already past;  <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md) and, finally,
almost at the very same time, Claudius Caesar was enforced with the
complaints of the whole nation, to put Festus in his place, and to call
him to answer for himself.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>Therefore we see how shamefully this orator
did lie. And seeing all Paul’s adversaries sing the same song, we see
that they be blinded with hatred and malice, and that they treacherously
betray the state of their country; neither do they pass what befall them
so Paul may die the death.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>Where Erasmus translateth it, *Many things
are well done,* the old interpreter seemeth to come nearer unto Paul’s
meaning, who saith, that <span id="xii.i-p13.1"></span>κατορθωματα are
wrought, which signifieth as much as *reformations* or *dressings.*
Therefore Tertullus commendeth the industry of Felix, because he had
cleansed Judea from many corruptions, and he restored many things which
would otherwise have decayed;  <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md)
to wit, to the end he may the more greedily seek to purchase the favor
of the nation (which he knew was otherwise offended with him) by the
death of one man.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span><span id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**5.** *For we found this man.* Tertullus
doth aim at a double mark. The first is this, that Paul may be delivered
to the Jews, because they be very skillful in matters which concern the
worship of God and the law of Moses. But and if he deny this, he layeth
to his charge a crime worthy of death, because he procured contention
 <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md) among the people. They knew
that the Romans did hate nothing more, therefore they urge that the
sorest against Paul. This doth Tertullus amplify when he saith, that
Paul had moved the Jews throughout the whole world. But I wonder why he
addeth that he is the author or chief of the sect of the Nazarites,
which we know was rather a praise than a dispraise among the Jews. I
think that they mean not those who, according to the old and lawful
custom of the law, did consecrate themselves to God, but those
troublesome murderers who did also vaunt and boast that they were
zealous men.  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566.md) Some  <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567.md) think that Nazarites are here put for
Christians, which may very well be. But if we like the former exposition
better, he doth craftily lay to Paul’s charge that he was one of that
sect which the Romans did hate. For whereas these zealous men would
above all other have been counted for notable observers of the law, they
advanced a color of zeal as a banner to stir up the minds of the common
people. Nevertheless, these good men, who are so zealous over their
liberty, do not spare the chiefest maintainers thereof, so they may
cause Paul to be hated by means of them. They would have commended the
Nazarites as courageous defenders of the law, if it had not been in this
matter, but now, as if they did infect the whole world, they seek to
bring upon Paul great reproach by saying that he is one of them.
Moreover, they slander Paul impudently, for no man did think that he was
guilty of that crime. Therefore they lay to his charge, no less wickedly
than maliciously, a crime which they take up at their foot,  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568.md) and invent without all color. But such
is the careless security of hypocrites, that they think they may do
whatsoever they will, so they color their doings with zeal.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span><span id="xii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**6.** *Who went about to pollute the
temple.* It was a light and almost a frivolous accusation to lay this to
his charge before the Roman governor, who could have wished that the
temple had been turned topsy-turvy. But because nothing was more fit for
procuring uproars than the polluting of the temple, he doth craftily
accuse Paul thereof, as if he should say, that it was no thanks to him
that Jerusalem was not on an uproar; and that he carried such a
firebrand as might have procured sore hurt if he had not been prevented.
Also he includeth that other thing, that because Paul had offended in
matters of religion, it did belong properly to the Jews to give judgment
in that matter. And here he complaineth also of the chief captain
Lysias, because he robbed them of their right. Therefore his drift is,
to obtain at the hands of the ruler that he will restore to them that
which Lysias had taken from them. This is also not void of subtilty, in
that Tertullus doth discredit the chief captain, because he dealt more
courteously towards Paul than the priests would he should; and
glancingly he bringeth him in suspicion, because he dare not openly
accuse him. But the question is, whether they could hope that the
governor would grant them so much, seeing the Roman magistrates alone
were to sit upon life and death? I answer, that he maketh in this place
some semblance of equity, as if they were purposed to handle him more
gently than he deserved. For though they might not condemn any man to
death, yet they might use some light chastisement as was scourging.
Nevertheless, Tertullus doth not cease to desire before the president to
have him put to death.

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span><span id="xii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**8.** *Having made inquiry.* A good  <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569.md) request, that the governor do not give
sentence before he thoroughly examine and know the matter; and that he
do not condemn Paul before he be lawfully convict. But how dare they put
in these conditions, seeing their own consciences do accuse them of
unjust dealing? I answer, that they had witnesses in readiness; and that
they do not offer themselves to prove the matter until they do call
them;  <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570.md) though there were another
end. For they did hope that Felix would be so persuaded with such
glorious words,  <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571.md) that he would
turn over unto them the man whom they did accuse for a condemned man,
whom they might handle at their pleasure. In sum, the more fierce they
be upon him, and the more they were puffed up with some affiance they
had in themselves, they think they shall get the upper hand by this
means, because the party arraigned shall have no license granted to
defend himself. Thus do false accusers boldly boast that their matter is
plain, that they may blind the eyes of the judges.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
24:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**10.** And Paul answered, after that the
governor had beckoned to him that he should speak, With a better mind do
I speak for myself, forasmuch as I know that thou hast judged this
nation this many years: **11.** Seeing that thou mayest know that there
are yet but twelve days since that I came up to Jerusalem to worship.
**12.** And they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man,
or causing any concourse of people, neither in the synagogues, neither
in the city: **13.** Neither can they prove those things whereof they
accuse me. **14.** But this I confess to thee, that according to the way
which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing
all things which are written in the law and the prophets; **15.** And
have hope toward God, that the same resurrection of the dead which they
wait for, shall be both of the just and unjust. **16.** And herein I
study always to have a clear conscience toward God and toward men.
**17.** And after many years I came and brought alms to my nation, and
offerings. **18.** Wherein they found me purified in the temple, neither
with multitude, neither with unquietness \[tumult\]. **19.** And certain
Jews out of Asia, who ought to have been present here, and to accuse if
they had any thing against me. **20.** Or else let these same here say
if they have found any iniquity in me when I stood (or seeing I stand)
in the council; **21.** Except it be for this one voice, that I cried
standing among them, I am judged of you this day of the resurrection of
the dead.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**10.** *And Paul.* The state of Paul’s
defense is not conversant in the quality; but he denieth the crime that
was laid to his charge; not that he was ashamed of the gospel, or afraid
of the cross, but because that was no place to make any full confession
of faith in. Therefore, omitting the cause of the gospel, which his
accuser had not touched, he answereth simply unto the crimes whereof he
was accused. But before he come thither, he saith that he doth the more
willingly answer for himself before Felix, because he had long time been
governor of Judea; because, peradventure, some new governor  <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572.md) would have been sore moved hearing
such things laid to his charge. He doth not commend the virtues of the
governor, but he saith that he is glad, because he is of great
experience, that he may judge more justly.  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573.md) This is surely a sincere and free
manner of defending, to set matter against words. Yet Paul seemeth to
gather amiss, that Felix can know the time of his coming, because he had
been governor many years. I answer, that this is said therefore, because
it is likely that he will deal more moderately; as if he should say,
Because thou hast been acquainted with their conditions long time, I
have the better hope that they shall not deceive thee. For want of skill
doth make judges too credulous, and doth enforce them to make too much
haste.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**11.** *To worship.* First, it is certain
that he came for other causes, and he will afterward confess that this
was the chief, that he might bring alms for the sustentation of the
brethren. But we may well excuse him, because it was not of necessity
that he should give an account of his coming; only he meant, by the way,
to excuse himself of corrupt religion. Wherefore, though he came to
Jerusalem for some other cause, yet this is always true, that he came
with no other mind, but to profess himself to be a worshipper of God,
and to approve the holiness of the temple by his worshipping. The other
question is more hard, how he saith that he came to worship, seeing the
religion of the temple was already abolished, and all difference of the
temple  <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574.md) taken away? I answer in
this place likewise, that though he do not make his purpose known, yet
he doth not lie or dissemble. For the faithful servants of Christ were
not forbidden to worship in the temple, so they did not tie holiness to
the place, but did lift up pure hands freely without making choice of
places (<span id="xii.ii-p10.2"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="xii.ii-p10.2"></span>.md).
It was lawful for Paul to enter into the temple after he was come to
Jerusalem, that he might make his godliness known, and there to use the
solemn rites of the worship of God, because he was void of superstition;
so he did not offer any propitiatory sacrifices which were contrary to
the gospel. Therefore religion did not compel him to come to Jerusalem
according to the appointment of the law, as if the sanctuary were the
face of God as in times past; yet he doth not abhor the external worship
which was unto men a testimony of godliness.

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**12.** *Disputing with any man.* Paul had
no need to deny any of these things if he had done them; because he
might have answered for himself that it was well done. He had been one
of the scribes which disputed daily; neither were they forbidden either
by the law or by custom, but that they might assemble themselves
together  <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md) to be taught. Yea, to
this end there were in divers places of the city synagogues, wherein
they met together. Moreover, he knew that both Christ and also his
apostles had done the same thing. Also he might easily have turned
\[retorted\] back upon his adversaries the crime which they did object
to him, who did daily use the very same things. But because he aimeth at
no other thing at this present, but to refute the false accusations of
his adversaries, and to prove that importunate men had unadvisedly
molested him for no cause; he intreateth not of the lawfulness of the
fact, (as they say) but only of the fact. And he standeth chiefly upon
this point to refute that slander, because he was burdened to be  <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576.md) a raiser of tumults. Therefore he
concludeth that he was falsely and unjustly accused; because the
adversaries had never proved those things which they had alleged. This
ought to have been sufficient to discharge him, seeing he was thus
burdened with wicked lies, whereas there rested in him not the very
least suspicion that could be devised.

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span><span id="xii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>**14.** *But I confess.* Because they had
laid to Paul’s charge impiety and the polluting of the temple, he
purgeth himself of both now, that Felix may understand that his
adversaries were moved with evil will.  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577.md) For though the religion, which is
pretended, be false and preposterous, yet the study thereof did
oftentimes find favor with men, who took no great heed. Wherefore it was
to be feared lest Felix, if he had conceived any sinister suspicion of
Paul, should not only have pardoned the zeal of the priests, but also
have granted their requests. Wherefore Paul doth also refute this point
of the accusation; and that so, that he doth not touch the faith of the
gospel, because (as we have said) that was no fit place for making
confession thereof. But what is this that he saith, that he worshippeth
God according to the way which they call heresy? Some think that this is
added like to a concession; because the enemies take that in evil part
which ought to be attributed to judgment and right election; as if Paul
had said, that that form of religion which he had followed is, indeed,
called heresy, but unworthily. But seeing that name was not infamous
either among the Jews or Gentiles, it is unlikely that he maketh answer
before a profane man, touching that which they counted everywhere rather
a commendation than any vice. When Christians have conference together,
the Spirit of God commandeth that heretics be counted detestable; and he
teacheth us to beware of heresies, because they bring upon the Church
plague, dissension, and wasteness. Therefore, it is a thing not to be
suffered among the people of God, whose safety consisteth in the unity
of faith. But because the Jews did then openly boast of their sects,
that excuse, whereof we spake of late, was superfluous. Therefore, it
remaineth that he do either mean that he is a Pharisee, or that he call
the Jewish religion or the profession of the gospel (without infamy)
heresy; because they were distinguished from the use and custom of all
nations. Seeing he did before confess himself to be a Pharisee, there
shall no inconvenience ensue, if we say that he doth repeat the same
now; especially seeing he speaketh shortly after of the resurrection of
the dead. But because this first point doth only contain a confession
concerning the worship of the God of the fathers, I think that he doth
rather speak generally of the Jewish religion, or of the Christian faith
which did flow thence. Paul was a citizen of Rome, notwithstanding as he
came of the Jews by his ancestry, he confesseth that he continueth in
the religion which he had learned of the fathers. And to this end doth
the adverb of likeness tend; for it showeth a known thing, namely, the
manner of worship whereunto the Jews were addicted. He maketh express
mention of the God of his fathers, because it was not lawful for a man
that was a Roman to receive the doctrine of the law unless he had come
of the Jews. Also he toucheth his adversaries, which handle him so
cruelly; whereas, notwithstanding, they both worship one God. I (saith
he) worship the same God (according to the manner delivered by mine
ancestors) which they themselves worship, and even as they worship him.
Neither doth that hinder because he was fallen from the ceremonies of
the law, and was content with the spiritual worship of God. For Paul
thinketh it sufficient for him to wipe away that blot of impiety which
his adversaries had falsely cast upon him. Therefore the Papists are
ridiculous, who feign that Paul alloweth \[approveth\] all manner \[of\]
antiquity. We, say they, worship the God of our fathers with Paul, as
the custom was delivered to us from hand to hand; as if (even they
themselves being judges) it were sufficient for the Jews or Turks to
hold up the same buckler against the faith of Christ. But the apostle
meant nothing less than simply to ground religion in the authority of
ancestors, and to defend his godliness with that defense, which might
have been common to all the superstitions of the Gentiles; he meant only
to stop the mouth of his adversaries. Nevertheless, he taketh this for a
plain matter, that the fathers, from whom the Jewish religion came, were
good and sincere worshippers of God; so that the Jews, which were not
degenerate, might well boast, that the God of their fathers whom they
worshipped was the only Creator of heaven and earth; and that the
country gods  <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) of all the rest of
the world were mere and vain inventions.

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>*Believing all things.* A short exposition
of the sentence next going before. For, because he had not simply
affirmed that he worshipped God, but did add this word <span
id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>ουτως, or so: he doth now set down how he
worshippeth God. Whereby it appeareth what great heed he taketh for fear
he entangle himself in those accidental  <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md) superstitions which reigned among the
Jews. As if any of us do at this day answer the Papists, that he
worshippeth the God whom they profess, as we be taught out of the law
and out of the gospel. By this let us learn that God is not rightly
worshipped, so that our obedience can please him, unless it be of faith,
which is the only ground-work of godliness. For he (to the end he may
prove himself to be the servant of God) doth not thrust upon them bare
ceremonies; but he saith flatly that he believeth. Furthermore, this
place containeth a profitable doctrine, that this is the only foundation
of right and true  <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580.md) faith, for a
man to submit himself to the Scripture, and reverently to embrace the
doctrine thereof. Furthermore, Paul doth in this place divide the
Scripture into the law and the prophets, that he may the more plainly
prove that he doth not dissent from the universal consent of the Church.

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span><span id="xii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span>**15.** *Hoping in God.* We must note the
course of his speech. For after that he hath professed that he believeth
the Scripture, he doth now add the hope of the resurrection to come,
that it may appear that it cometh not from the understanding of the
flesh,  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md) or from the decrees of
men, but it is conceived out of the word of God. Thus doth the reverence
of the Scripture go before,  <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md)
that it  <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md) may hold us fast bound,
and it is the beginning of faith. After that the knowledge of those
things which God hath revealed there doth follow, being coupled and
linked with sure hope. And whereas he maketh them his fellows, it is
referred unto the sounder sort. Though it be not to be doubted, but that
he seeketh, by this means and policy, to bring them out of their lurking
places into the clear light, and that before Felix; as it shall again
appear by the conclusion of the defense. But in this place, the general
resurrection is defended \[asserted\] against certain brain-sick
fellows, who restrain the same unto the members of Christ. But as Paul
doth in this place say that all men shall rise again, so by the plain
voice of Christ all are cited;  <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md)
some unto judgment, some unto life (<span id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>[Joh
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>.md).

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span><span id="xii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p29"></span>**16.** *And herein do I study.* There is
no sharper prick to prick men forward, with all desire to lead a godly
and holy life, than the hope of the last resurrection, as the Scripture
teacheth in many places. Therefore, when Paul will effectually exhort
the people anywhere, he calleth them back to remember the same (<span
id="xii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Php
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="xii.ii-p29.1"></span>.md).
Wherefore, it is not without cause that he saith in this place, that
staying himself upon this faith, he hath endeavored to live purely
before God, and righteously among men. And surely an evil conscience is
as good as a thousand witnesses to accuse  <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585.md) men of blockishness, that they may
gather for a certainty that they do not earnestly and thoroughly believe
eternal life, after which they never long. He calleth it a conscience,
<span id="xii.ii-p30.2"></span>απροσκοπον, that is, without offense,
where the servants of God labor to remove all lets which hinder their
course. And he putteth two parts of the conscience. For there is a
certain inward sense or feeling which beholdeth  <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586.md) God alone, and thence cometh
faithfulness and integrity which we use towards men. At length, when he
saith that he hath constantly followed as well godliness in worshipping
God, as just dealing among men, he signifieth unto us that those do
indeed hope for the last resurrection who are never weary of well-doing.
For this word always doth signify perseverance in a straight course.

<span id="xii.ii-p32"></span><span id="xii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p33"></span>**17.** *And after many years.* His meaning
is, that he had not of long time been at Jerusalem, but was conversant
in other countries far distant, and that after long time he came now to
bring alms, and to offer to God the sacrifice of thanks. Whereby doth
also appear their want of good nature and their unthankfulness, because,
seeing he had by all means deserved the goodwill of all the whole
nation, they recompense him so evil. This place doth expound the former,
where mention was made of worshipping. For it is certain that Paul came
not purposely to offer in the temple, because he purposed to do that
after he was come. But he doth only recite what the Jews found in him,
which was of greatest weight for the matter which was now in hand. At
length, when he saith that he was found in the temple doing this, and
that having used first solemn purging, and, secondly, quietly without
raising any tumult, he cleareth himself again of both crimes. For his
purifying did witness that he did not pollute the temple; and, secondly,
forasmuch as he did it quietly without any multitude, there was no
suspicion of tumult.

<span id="xii.ii-p34"></span><span id="xii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p35"></span>**19.** *Certain Jews.* This is an
imperfect speech; yet the sense is plain, that these men of Asia, as it
should seem, had caused a tumult without cause, of whose absence he
complaineth; as if he should say, Ye which lay so many things to my
charge, cannot tell how the matter standeth; but you bring before the
judgment-seat of the governor a tale which was rashly believed. But
those who are to be blamed for the matter, and who were as fans to set
all on fire, appear not. After that Paul hath turned back \[retorted\]
the crime upon others, taking to himself a good courage, he doth now
appeal unto the adversaries which are present, willing them if they know
anything by him freely to utter it; though I dissent from Erasmus and
the old interpreter in the participle <span
id="xii.ii-p35.1"></span>σταντος, for they translate it in the present
tense; and they expound the word <span
id="xii.ii-p35.2"></span>συνεδριον, or *council,* of the sitting of the
governor, which I think is far from Paul’s meaning. For his meaning is,
in my judgment, that he was ready to give an account of all things in
their council. And that they knew nothing then which they can lay to his
charge, because they began to stir only for this one voice, when he said
that he was judged of the resurrection of the dead; that is, that he
suffered all this trouble for no other cause, save only because he did
hope for the resurrection of the dead. Whereby it appeareth that they
now coin a new accusation for no cause, because, if there had been in
him any fault, they would not have concealed it then. It is likely that
they had farther talk, and that they came nearer together,  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587.md) because we shall see elsewhere that
they did contend about Christ; but it was Luke’s drift only to declare
how well Paul had cleared himself of the false accusations of his
accusers.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
24:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**22.** And when Felix heard these things,
he deferred them, certainly knowing those things which did appertain
unto that way, and said, When the chief captain Lysias shall come, 1
will thoroughly know your matter. **23.** And he commanded a centurion
to keep Paul, and that he should suffer him to have ease, and that he
should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister to him, or to come to
him. **24.** And after certain days came Felix with his wife Drusilla,
which was a Jewess, and he called Paul, and heard him concerning the
faith which is in Christ. **25.** And as he disputed of righteousness
and temperance, and of judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered,
For this time go thy way; and when I have convenient time, I will send
for thee. **26.** He hoped also that Paul would have given him money to
loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.
**27.** And when two years were expired, Porcius Festus came into Felix
room: and because Felix would do the Jews a pleasure, he left Paul
bound.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**23.** *When Felix.* It appeareth that
Felix (though he pronounced nothing concerning the matter) did perceive
that Paul was burdened with no fault of his own, but with the malice of
the priests. For when Luke saith that the matter was deferred until the
coming of Lysias, he putteth in this instead of a reason, that the ruler
did perfectly know those things which did appertain unto the way, by
which words, I think, is signified, either that through long experience
he had been acquainted with the conditions of the priests, and knew full
well how they were wont to behave themselves; or else that he saw by
these things which had been spoken on both sides how frivolous the
accusation was, which is confirmed by the courteous and remiss  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588.md) usage of Paul; for he putteth a
centurion in trust with him, that he may have the more liberty. Others
had rather read it in one text in the person of Felix: when Lysias, who
doth better know the truth of this matter, is come, I will then give
judgment. But they let \[draw\] and gather this racked sense from a
reason which is scarce firm. They say that this word *way* is nowhere
taken for the doctrine of the law without some addition. But I do not
interpret it of the law, but of those sects whereof no strangers were
ignorant. No man did doubt but that the Pharisees did hold the
immortality of the soul. Therefore, seeing it was a thing so common, no
marvel if Felix do acquit Paul. Furthermore, it were hard to take *way*
for the knowledge of the fact. And I see not how this can hang together,
that the governor doth confess that Lysias was more expert in the law
than he. But his innocency is made more famous and evident by this,
because a profane man did straightway give such a prejudice  <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589.md) thereof that he did suffer him to be
visited and holpen by his friends, being, as it were, exempted from the
order of prisoners. Also, we gather by this that Paul’s companions and
the residue of the Church had not forsaken him. For to what end had it
been to grant liberty to his friends and acquaintance to have access
unto him unless they had been present, had showed themselves to be
careful for him, and had been desirous to do their duty?  <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590.md) Therefore, let us learn by this
example, that so long as we may, and are able, we must not defraud the
martyrs of Christ of any manner of comfort whilst they labor for the
gospel.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span>**24.** *Felix, with his wife Drusilla.*
We said somewhat already concerning the covetousness and corruptions of
Felix. Now, as touching his wife Drusilla, the readers must understand
that she was daughter to Agrippa the elder, of whose filthy death Luke
spake before, chapter 12, (<span id="xii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ac
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p10.1"></span>). She was betrothed to Epiphanis, the son of
Antiochus. But forasmuch as the young man would not take on him the
rites which the Jews did use, which he promised to do, her brother,
Agrippa the younger, (of whom mention shall be made in the next chapter)
after the death of his father, gave her to wife to Azizus, king of the
Emesenes; from whose company she was enticed by the flattery of Felix.
For Felix being taken with her singular beauty, did persuade one Simon,
a Jew, born in Cyprus, to persuade and allure her to make a new match.
Therefore, it came to pass, that this voluptuous woman, having broken
promise with her former husband, did marry with an uncircumcised man
contrary to the law. But though she had polluted herself with profane
wedlock, yet we may easily conjecture by this place that she had not
quite abandoned that feeling of religion which she had of \[from\] a
child.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span>For Felix would neither have desired to
hear Paul, neither would he have vouchsafed to speak to him, unless it
had been for his wife’s sake. Luke doth not express thus much, but in
that he nameth Drusilla, we may well gather that Paul was called for her
sake, that he might dispute of the gospel; though such revolts
\[apostates\] be rather tickled with curiosity, than moved with a
sincere desire to learn.

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>*He heard him touching the faith.* This
confession of Paul doth witness, that he did not spare to speak of
Christ before, because he was afraid, or because he would escape the
trouble of the cross;  <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591.md) but
because it was not yet time to speak. Seeing he was cited unto the
judgment-seat to answer for himself, it stood him upon to answer
concerning the crimes which were objected to him, that he might
afterward frankly and freely profess the faith of Christ. Therefore,
when he now seeth the gate set open, and opportunity offered for
speaking, he is not afraid to offend the governor, neither is he
terrified with danger, that he doth craftily make as if he were not a
Christian. Therefore, we see that he was as well furnished with
invincible constancy as with wisdom and judgment; neither did he ever of
set purpose suppress the light of the gospel, but did only make choice
of the time.

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>Now, the wonderful counsel of God is worth
the noting in this place, who will have the gospel offered sometimes to
the reprobate; not that they may profit thereby, but rather that they
may be made inexcusable. It had been better for Felix and Drusilla never
to have heard anything concerning Christ; because they did not escape
without punishment for refusing the grace of salvation which was offered
to them, or for neglecting the same with loathsomeness. Furthermore, we
must note this, that certain, by reason of that seed of godliness which
is in them engendered, do desire to hear the gospel preached, which, so
soon as they have heard, they do by and by either loathe, or else they
cannot suffer it. Nevertheless, the preaching of the gospel (what
success soever it have) is a good and sweet savor to God; whether it
quicken or kill men (<span id="xii.iii-p14.1"></span>[2Co
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="xii.iii-p14.1"></span>.md).

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span><span id="xii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span>**25.** *And as he disputed.* Felix hoped
that he should take some delight in Paul’s sermon; as men who are
desirous of new things do willingly feed their ears with subtle
disputations; also he meant to satisfy his wife’s desire without his own
trouble; now, he is enforced to feel that force of the Word of God,
whereof he never thought, which driveth away all his delights. Paul, out
of bonds, disputeth of the judgment of God; he which had power to put
him to death, or to save his life, is afraid and quaketh as if he stood
before his own judge; neither doth he find any other comfort, but to
send him away out of his sight. Let us first learn by this, what great
force of the Spirit of God there was both in the heart and also in the
tongue of Paul, because he seeth that he must speak in the name of
Christ, he doth not behave himself like an underling;  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592.md) but he declareth the embassage which
was enjoined him, with a grace, as from on high, and having forgotten
that he was in bonds, he denounceth the heavenly judgment in the person
of Christ. And now seeing Felix’ heart is so pricked with the voice of a
prisoner, the majesty of the Spirit doth show itself in that also, which
Christ extolleth; when the Spirit shall come he shall judge the world,
etc., and that force of prophesying, which the same Paul setteth forth
elsewhere (<span id="xii.iii-p17.2"></span>[1Co
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024.md)<span
id="xii.iii-p17.2"></span>). Also, that is fulfilled which he saith in
another place, that the word of God was not bound with him; which he did
not only stoutly maintain and affirm to be true, but which did
effectually pierce into the hearts of men, (and that of such as were
proud of their greatness) as if it did lighten from heaven.

<span id="xii.iii-p18"></span>Again, we must note, that although the
reprobate be stricken with the judgment of God, yet are they not renewed
unto repentance by that terror alone. Felix is touched indeed, when he
heareth that God shall be the Judge of the world; yet he fleeth
therewithal from his judgment-seat, (whereof he is afraid) so that this
is feigned sorrow, which doth not work salvation. Therefore, repentance
requireth such fear as may both engender a voluntary hatred of sin, and
may also present a man before God, that he may willingly suffer himself
to be judged by his word. And this is a token of true profiting when the
sinner seeketh for medicine there, from whence he received his wound.
Furthermore, this place doth teach that men are then examined and tried
to the quick, when their vices, wherewith they are infected, are brought
to light, and their consciences are called back unto the judgment to
come. For when Paul disputeth of righteousness and temperance, he did
rub Felix sore upon the gall; forasmuch as he was both a man given to
filthy pleasure, and also to dissolute riot, and given over unto
iniquity.

<span id="xii.iii-p19"></span><span id="xii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p20"></span>**26.** *Hoping that money.* Though Felix
had thoroughly tried Paul’s integrity, so that he was ashamed to take
money of the Jews for condemning him; yet forasmuch as he was a covetous
man, and a man given to corruptions, he would not acquit him for
nothing; for this cause he doth often call Paul, that he may with fair
words put him in some hope of deliverance.  <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) For judges which gape after money do
insinuate themselves thus, when as they will make way for corruptions.
Whence we gather, that it was but a vain and transitory fear wherewith
Felix was taken when he heard Paul dispute, seeing hope of gain doth
compel him to call for him whom he was enforced with fear to send away.
How did Felix hope for some reward at the hands of a poor man, and one
that was destitute? for that ghoul would not have been content with a
small prey. I do not doubt but that (as those who have the law and right
to sell are witty and can perceive things  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) .md) when he saw the Jews did make such
earnest suit to have Paul put to death, he smelled somewhat afar off
touching him;  <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) to wit, that he
was none of the common sort; but such a man as was in great favor with
many. Wherefore, he did not doubt but that many of his friends would
willingly bestow cost to redeem him.

<span id="xii.iii-p24"></span><span id="xii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p25"></span>**27.** *And when two years were expired.*
Seeing Paul knew that the judge who did gape for gain would be favorable
to him so soon as he should offer him money, and seeing he had
sufficient time to gather the same; it is likely that he did not only
bear with the brethren,  <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md) but
also detest such bribery, wherewith the holiness of civil order is
shamefully polluted. Now, whereas governors use to let loose such
prisoners as they know are not guilty when they go from the province,
Felix took the contrary way to win favor. The Jews had often complained
of his filthy gain, of his extortion, cruelty, and unruly government.
Claudius Caesar being wearied with so many complaints, did call him out
of Judea; to the end the Jews may not spite him so sore, he leaveth Paul
bound; so that he maketh the guiltless servant of God, as it were, an
offering for his evil deeds, that he may therewithal appease the
priests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](cc37011.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>Strenuus,”
active. his innocence.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](cc37011.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="xii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>Perverterent
ejus innocentiam,”

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](cc37011.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="xii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p11.1"></span>Jam
praecesserat,” had already been committed.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](cc37011.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="xii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>Quae alioqui
pessum ibant,” which were otherwise becoming worse.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc37011.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="xii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span> “<span
id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>Seditionem... concitaverit,” stirred up
sedition.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc37011.htm#fr_566.md) <span
id="xii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>Tumultusos
illos sicarios qui se etiam plausibili nomine vociferabant zelotas,”
those tumultuary assassins who, assuming a specious name, boasted of
being zelotae, (zealous)

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc37011.htm#fr_567.md) <span
id="xii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p19.1"></span>Quae factio
circiter illud tempus emerserit; imo ex Josephi historia colligitur
jamtunc fuisse grassatos,” about this time that faction had broken out,
nay, it appears from Josephus that it had even then made considerable
progress, omitted.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc37011.htm#fr_568.md) <span
id="xii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p20.1"></span>Crimen velut
ex trivio aereptum,” some charge, picked up, as it were, in the streets.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc37011.htm#fr_569.md) <span
id="xii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p25.1"></span>AEqua,”
just, equitable.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc37011.htm#fr_570.md) <span
id="xii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p26.1"></span>Nec se ad
probandum offerre nisi suo arbitrio,” and that they do not offer proof
unless he decide that it shall be taken.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc37011.htm#fr_571.md) <span
id="xii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p27.1"></span>Ampullis,”
bombast.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc37011.htm#fr_572.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>Propter
inscitiam,” through ignorance, omitted.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc37011.htm#fr_573.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>Composite,”
calmly.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc37011.htm#fr_574.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>Omne
tempii discrimen,” all distinction or temple.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc37011.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>Turmatim,”
in crowds.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc37011.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>Delatus
fuerat tanquam,” was charged with being.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc37011.htm#fr_577.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>Sola
malevolentia impelli,” were instigated by sheer malevolence.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc37011.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>Gentiles,”
the Gentile.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc37011.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xii.ii-p20.1"></span>Adventitiis,” adventitious.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc37011.htm#fr_580.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span> “<span
id="xii.ii-p21.1"></span>Orthodoxae,” orthodox.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc37011.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>Carnis
sensu,” from carnal sense.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc37011.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span> “<span
id="xii.ii-p25.1"></span>Praecedit,” take precedence

<span id="fn_583"></span>[584](cc37011.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p26.1"></span>Ejus
anctoritas,” its authority

<span id="fn_584"></span>[585](cc37011.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span> “<span
id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>Promiscue,” promiscuously.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[586](cc37011.htm#fr_585.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p30.1"></span>Ad
coarguendos,” to convict.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[587](cc37011.htm#fr_586.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p31.1"></span>Respicit,”
has repect to.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc37011.htm#fr_587.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p36"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p36.1"></span>Et
proprius quasi manu conserta congressos esse,” and came, as it were, to
close quarters.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc37011.htm#fr_588.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>Magis
remissa... tractatio,” mere indulgent treatment.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc37011.htm#fr_589.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>Tale
praejudicium tulit,” did so favourably prejudge it.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc37011.htm#fr_590.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>Officio
defungi,” to do offices of kindness to him.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc37011.htm#fr_591.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p13.1"></span>Vel ut
se subtraheret a curcis molestia,” or that he might escape from bearing
the cross

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc37011.htm#fr_592.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p17.1"></span>Non
submisse agit,” he does not act crouchingly.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc37011.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p21"></span> “<span
id="xii.iii-p21.1"></span>Liberationes redimendae,” of purchasing
deliverance.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc37011.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p22.1"></span>Ut
sagaces sunt et acuti qui jus habent venale,” as those judges who act
ve-nally are sagacious and acute

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc37011.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p23.1"></span>Aliquid
procul de ipso subodoratum esse,” he had some distant idea of what kind
of a person he was.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc37011.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p26"></span> “<span
id="xii.iii-p26.1"></span>Pepercisse fratribus,” spare the brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](cc37012.md)
