[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc37002)  [Next](cc37004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And he came to Derbe and Lystra; and,
behold, there was there a certain disciple named Timotheus, the son of a
certain faithful woman, a Jewess, and his father was a Grecian. **2.**
He was well reported of by the brethren which were at Lystra and
Iconium. **3.** Paul would have him to go with him; and when he had
taken him he circumcised him, because of those Jews which were in those
places. For they all knew that his father was a Grecian. **4.** And as
they passed through the cities, they delivered to them to be kept the
decrees which were decreed by the apostles and elders which were at
Jerusalem. **5.** And so the churches were confirmed in the faith, and
abounded in number daily.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span><span id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**1.** Luke doth now begin to declare what
were the proceedings of Paul after that Barnabas and he were separate.
And first he showeth, that he took to his company at Lystra Timothy to
be his companion. But, to the end we may know that Paul did nothing
rashly, or without good consideration, Luke saith plainly, that Timothy
was such a man as the brethren did well like of, and that they gave
testimony of his godliness; for thus doth he speak word for word. And so
Paul himself observeth the like choice, which he elsewhere commandeth to
be made in choosing ministers, (<span id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>[1 Timothy
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#000)<span id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>: 7..md)
Neither is it to be thought, that those prophecies did even then come to
light wherewith Timothy was set forth and adorned by the Spirit, as Paul
doth testify elsewhere, (<span id="iv.i-p5.2"></span>[1Ti
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018)<span id="iv.i-p5.2"></span>..md) But
there seemeth to be some disagreement in that, in that Luke saith that
Timotheus was well reported of amongst the brethren; and Paul will have
him to have a good report of those who are without, who is chosen to be
a bishop. I answer, that we must principally look unto the judgment of
the godly, as they be sole meet witnesses, and do alone rightly discern
well and wisely according to the Spirit of God; and that we ought to
attribute no more to the wicked than to blind men. Therefore it
appeareth that godliness and holiness of life must be judged according
to the will and consent of godly men; that he be counted worthy to be a
bishop whom they commend. Notwithstanding, I confess that even this also
is required in the second place, that the very infidels be enforced to
commend him; lest the Church of God come in danger  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) of their slanders and evil speaking,
if it commit \[permit\] itself to be governed by men of evil report.

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**3.** *He circumcised him, because of the
Jews.* Luke doth plainly express that Timothy was not circumcised,
because it was necessary it should be so, or because the religion of
that sign did continue as yet, but that Paul might avoid an offense.
Therefore there was respect had of men, whereas the matter was free
before God. Wherefore, the circumcising of Timothy was no sacrament, as
was that which was given to Abraham and his posterity, (<span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>[Ge 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>;) but an indifferent ceremony which served only
for nourishing of love, and not for any exercise of godliness.

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>Now, the question is, whether it were lawful
for Paul to use a vain sign, whose signification and force was
abolished; for it seemeth a vain thing when there is a departure made
from the institution of God. But circumcision was commanded by God to
continue only until the coming of Christ. To this question I answer,
that circumcision did so cease at the coming of Christ, that,
notwithstanding the use thereof was not quite abolished by and by; but
it continued free, until all men might know that Christ was the end of
the law, by the more manifest revelation of the light of the gospel.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>And here we must note three degrees. The
first is, that the ceremonies of the law were so abolished by the coming
of Christ, that they did neither any longer appertain unto the worship
of God, neither were they figures of spiritual things, neither was there
any necessity to use them. The second is, that the use thereof was free,
until the truth of the gospel might more plainly appear. The third, that
it was not lawful for the faithful to retain them, save only so far
forth as the use thereof served for edification, neither was there any
superstition thereby fostered; though that free power to use them,
whereof I have spoken, be not without exception, because there was a
divers respect to be had of ceremonies. For circumcision was not in the
same place wherein the sacrifices were, which were ordained for the
purging \[expiating\] of sins. Wherefore it was lawful for Paul to
circumcise Timotheus; it had not been lawful for him to offer a
sacrifice for sin. This is, indeed, a general thing, that all the
worship of the law did cease at the coming of Christ, (because it was to
continue but for a time,) as touching faith and conscience; but
concerning the use we must know this, that it is indifferent, and left
in the liberty of the godly for a short time, so far as it was not
contrary to the confession of faith. We must note the shortness of time
whereof I speak, to wit, until the plain manifestation of the Gospel;
because some learned men are grossly deceived in this point, who think
that circumcision doth yet take place  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) among the Jews; whereas Paul teacheth,
that it is superfluous when we are buried with Christ by baptism, (<span
id="iv.i-p11.2"></span>[Col. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span id="iv.i-p11.2"></span>..md) It
was better and more truly said in the old proverb, That the synagogue
was to be buried with honor.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>Now it resteth that we declare how far forth
the use of circumcision was indifferent. That shall easily appear by the
manner of the liberty. Because the calling of the Gentiles was not as
yet generally known, it was meet that the Jews should have some
prerogative granted them. Therefore, until it might be better known that
the adoption was deducted from the lineage and kindred of Abraham unto
all the Gentiles, it was lawful, so far as edification did require, to
retain the sign of difference. For seeing that Paul would not circumcise
Titus, and doth avouch that the same was well done, (<span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>[Ga 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>,) it followeth that it was not lawful to use
this ceremony always and without choice. Therefore they were to have
respect unto edification, and unto the public commodity of the Church.
Because he could not circumcise Titus, unless he would betray the
doctrine  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) of the Gospel, and lay
himself open to the slanders of the adversaries, he abstained from the
free use of the ceremony, which he did use in Timotheus, when he saw
that it was profitable for the Church. Hereby it doth easily appear what
horrible confusion doth reign in Popery. There is there a huge heap of
ceremonies, and to what end but that hey may have instead of one veil of
the old temple an hundred. God did abrogate those ceremonies which he
had commanded, that the truth of the Gospel might shine more clearly.
Men durst take upon them to bring in new, and that without keeping any
measure. After this came in a wicked surmise, that all these serve for
the worship of God. At length followed the devilish confidence of merit.
Now, forasmuch as it is evident enough that such ceremonies are neither
veils nor sepulchres wherewith Christ is covered, but rather stinking
dunghills wherein faith  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md) and
religion are choked, those who make the use thereof generally free do
ascribe more to the Pope than the Lord granteth to his law. It is to no
end to speak of the mass and of such filthiness which contain in
themselves manifest idolatry.

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>*They all knew this.* Luke telleth us that
this was Paul’s drift, to make an entrance for Timotheus unto the Jews,
lest they should abhor him as a profane man. They knew all (saith he)
that his father was a Grecian. Therefore, because the mothers had no
power over their children, they were fully persuaded that he was
uncircumcised. Let the readers not here by the way, how miserable the
bondage of the people of God was then. Eunice, mother to Timotheus, was
one of the small remnant which the very Jews themselves counted a
monster, and yet, being married to a man which was an infidel, she durst
not consecrate her children to God. No, she durst not so much as give
them the external sign of grace, and yet she ceased not therefore to
instruct her son of a child holily in the fear of God, and in his true
worship—an example surely worthy to be followed of women, whom their
husbands affray with their tyrannous government, from keeping and
training up their children and families chastely in true godliness.
Grecian is taken in this place for a Gentile, after the old and common
custom of the Scripture.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**4.** *They delivered them the decrees to
keep.* In these words Luke doth signify unto us how desirous Paul was of
peace. The best and strongest bond to keep and foster peace among the
churches, was to keep that which was set down by the apostles. When Paul
taketh great pains about that, he taketh great heed lest through his
fault there arise any trouble. And let us remember that that continued
but for a time. Because, so soon as he seeth the danger of offense
cease, he doth quite unburthen the churches, and setting apart the
decree, he maketh that free which the apostles had their forbidden. And
yet doth he not cancel or violate by that abrogation that which the
apostles had decreed, or contemn the authors themselves; because they
were not determined to establish a perpetual law, but only to mitigate
for a short time that which might hurt weak consciences; as I did more
at large declare in the former chapter. Whereby the folly of the Papists
is sufficiently refuted, who do grievously lay to our charge that we be
far unlike Paul, because we will have the consciences of the godly
governed by the Word of God alone, setting light by the decrees of the
Church, as they call them, and not to be subject to the will of men.
But, as I have already said, Paul meant nothing less than to ensnare
men’s consciences in the snare of necessity, for he is not contrary to
himself, when he crieth in other places, that

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>“all things are clean to the clean,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p18.2"></span>Titus 1:15.)

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>And again,

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>“He which is clean eateth all things,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p20.2"></span>[Ro
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="iv.i-p20.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>And again,

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>“The kingdom of God is not meat and drink,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>And again,

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>“Meat doeth not commend us to God,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p24.2"></span>[1Co
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span id="iv.i-p24.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span>Again,

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span>“Eat all things which are sold in the
shambles, asking no question for conscience sake,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p26.2"></span>[1Co
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025)<span id="iv.i-p26.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span>But in one word he reconcileth those things
which might otherwise seem to disagree, when he commanded to abstain
from things sacrificed to idols, for another’s man conscience sake.
Nevertheless, he taketh great heed that he bind not godly souls with the
laws of men.

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span>Therefore we attempt nothing at this day
which is contrary to or disagreeing with Paul. But the Papists mock us
too grossly when they compare their laws with the decrees of the
apostles. The apostles invented no new worship of God, they had erected
no new spiritual government; but for the desire they had to maintain
peace, they exhorted the Gentiles that they would yield a little to the
Jews. Before the Pope can excuse his laws under this color, he must
first change them wholly. And as for us, seeing that the Papists do
place the spiritual worship of God in man’s inventions, and translate
the right which belongeth to God alone unto men, that they may reign as
lords over souls; we are enforced manfully to withstand them, unless
through treacherous silence we will betray the grace gotten by the blood
of Christ. Now, what likelihood can there be between three decrees set
down for the help and comfort of the weak, and an infinite heap of laws,
which doth not only oppress miserable souls with the weight thereof, but
also swallow up faith? We know the complaint of Augustine writing to
Januarius, that the Church was wickedly laden even then with too great a
burden of traditions. Could he, I pray you, suffer the bondage of these
times, which is almost a hundred times harder and heavier?

<span id="iv.i-p29"></span><span id="iv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p30"></span>**5.** *The churches were confirmed.* By this
we gather, that that which Luke setteth down, or rather touched
concerning the decrees of the apostles, was, as it were, put in by the
way, being not much appertinent unto the matter.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md) For he commendeth a far other fruit of
Paul’s doctrine, when he saith that the churches were confirmed in the
faith. Therefore Paul did so order external things, that he was
principally careful for the kingdom of God, which consisteth in the
doctrine of the gospel, and doth far surpass and surmount external
order. Therefore those decrees were mentioned, inasmuch as they were
expedient for maintaining concord, that we might know that the holy man
had a care thereof. But religion and godliness hath the former place,
whose sole foundation is faith; which again doth stay itself upon the
pure Word of God, and doth not depend upon men’s laws. Now, by this
example, Luke pricketh us forward to proceed continually, lest, at the
beginning, sloth or neglect of profiting come upon us. Also the way to
increase faith is expressed, to wit, when the Lord doth stir us up by
the industry of his servants; as at that time he used the labor and
diligence of Paul and his companions. When he addeth immediately that
they were also increased in number, he commendeth another fruit of
preaching, and yet he doth therewithal signify unto us, that the more
those profit in faith who are first called, the more do they bring unto
Christ; as if faith did creep abroad unto others by branches.  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md)

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** And when they had gone through Phrygia
and the country of Galatia, they were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to
speak the word in Asia **7.** And going into Mysia, they essayed to go
into Bithynia: and the Spirit suffered them not. **8.** And when they
had passed through Mysia, they came down to Troada, \[Troas.\] **9.**
And Paul saw a vision by night; There was a certain man of Macedonia,
standing and praying him, and saying, Coming into Macedonia, help us.
**10.** And so soon as he saw the vision, we sought straightway to go
into Macedonia, being surely confirmed that the Lord had called us to
preach the gospel to them.

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span><span id="iv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *When they had gone throughout.* Luke
showeth here how diligent and careful Paul and his companions were in
the office of teaching; for he saith that they journeyed through divers
regions of the Lesser Asia that they might preach the gospel. But he
reciteth one thing which is worth remembering, that they were forbidden
by the Spirit of God to speak of Christ in some places, which serveth
not a little to set forth the apostleship of Paul; as undoubtedly he was
not a little encouraged to proceed, when he knew that the Spirit of God
was his guide in his way, and the governor of his actions. And whereas
whithersoever they came they prepared themselves to teach, they did that
according to their calling, and according to the commandment of God. For
they were sent to preach and publish the gospel to the Gentiles without
exception; but the Lord revealed his counsel in governing the course of
their journey which was before unknown, even in a moment.

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>Notwithstanding, the question is, If Paul
taught nowhere by whither he was led by the Spirit, what certainty shall
the ministers of the Church have at this day of their calling, who are
certified by no oracles when they must speak or hold their peace? I
answer, Seeing that Paul’s province and charge was so wide, he had need
of the singular direction of the Spirit. He was not made the apostle of
one particular place, or of a few cities, but he had received
commandment to preach the gospel through Asia and Europe; which was to
sail in a most wide sea. Wherefore, there is no cause why we should
wonder that in that confused wideness God beckoned unto him, as it were
by reaching forth his hand, how far he would have him go, or whither.
But here ariseth another harder question, why the Lord did forbid Paul
to speak in Asia, and suffered him not to come into Bithynia? For, if
answer be made that these Gentiles were unworthy of the doctrine of
salvation, we may again demand why Macedonia was more worthy? Those who
desire to be too wise, do assign the causes of this difference in men,
that the Lord vouchsafeth every man of his gospel, as he seeth him bent
unto the obedience of faith; but he himself saith far otherwise, to wit,
that he appeared plainly to those which sought him not, and that he
spake to those who asked not of him. For whence cometh aptness to those
to be taught, and a mind to obey, but from his Spirit? Therefore, it is
certain that some are not preferred before other some by their merit,
seeing that all men are naturally like backward and wayward from faith.
Therefore, there is nothing better than to leave free power to God to
vouchsafe and deprive of his grace whom he will. And surely as his
eternal election is free, so his calling is also free which floweth
thence, and is not grounded in men, seeing that he is not indebted to
any.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>Wherefore, let us know that the gospel
springeth and issueth out to us out of the sole fountain of mere grace.
And yet God doth not want a just reason, why he offereth his gospel to
some, and passeth over other some. But I say that that reason lieth hid
in his secret counsel. In the mean season, let the faithful know that
they were called freely when others were set aside, lest they take that
to themselves which is due to the mercy of God alone. And in the rest,
whom God rejecteth for no manifest cause, let them learn to wonder at
the deep depth of his judgment, which they may not seek out. And here
the word Asia is taken for that part which is properly so called. When
Luke saith that Paul and his companions essayed to come into Bithynia
until they were forbidden by oracles, save only when need required, as
they Lord useth to be present with his in doleful  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) and uncertain matters.

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span>**9.** *A vision by night.* The Lord would
not that Paul should stay any longer in Asia; because he would draw him
into Macedonia. And Luke expresseth the manner of the drawing, that a
man of Macedonia appeared to him by night. Where we must note that the
Lord did not always observe the same manner of revelation, because
divers kinds are more convenient for confirmation. And it is not said
that this vision was offered in a dream, but only in the night season.
For there be certain night visions which men see when they be awake.

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span>*Help us.* This speech setteth forth the
ministry committed to Paul. For, seeing that the gospel is the power of
God to salvation, (<span id="iv.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii-p11.1"></span>,.md)
those which are the ministers of God are said to help those who perish;
that having delivered them from death, they may bring them unto the
inheritance of eternal life. And this ought to be no small encouragement
for godly teachers to stir up the heat of their study and desire, when
they hear that they call back miserable souls from destruction, and that
they help those who should otherwise perish, that they may be saved.
Again, all people unto whom the gospel is brought are taught reverently
to embrace the ministers thereof as deliverers, unless they will
maliciously reject the grace of God; and yet this commendation and title
is not so translated unto men, that God is robbed even of the best part
of his praise; because, though he by his ministers give salvation, yet
is he the only author thereof, as if he reached out his hands to help.

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span><span id="iv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span>**10.** *Being fully persuaded.* Hence we
gather, that is was not bare vision, but that it was also confirmed by
the testimony of the Spirit. For Satan doth oftentimes abuse ghosts and
visures \[masks\] to deceive withal, that he may mock and cozen the
unbelievers. Whereby it cometh to pass, that the bare vision leaveth
man’s mind in doubt; but such as are divine indeed, those doth the
Spirit seal by a certain mark, that those may not doubt nor waver whom
the Lord will have certainly addicted to himself. A wicked spirit
appeared to Brutus, inviting him to enter that unhappy combat and battle
which he had at Philippi, even in the very same place whereunto Paul was
afterwards called. But as the cause was far unlike, so the Lord dealt
far otherwise with his servant, so that he put him out of doubt, and
left him not astonished with fear. Now, in Paul and his companions the
desire to obey ensued immediately upon the certainty; for, so soon as
they understand that the Lord called them, they address themselves to
their journey. The termination of the participle which is here used is
active; and though it have divers significations, I do not doubt but
that Luke’s meaning is, that Paul and the rest, after that they had
conferred \[compared\] this vision with the former oracles, were fully
persuaded that the Lord had called them into Macedonia.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**11.** Therefore, when we had loosed from
Troas, we came with a straight course in Samothracia, and the day
following to Neapolis; **12.** And from thence to Philippi, which is the
chief city of the parts of Macedonia, being a free city; and we stayed
in the same city certain days. **13.** And on the day of the Sabbaths we
went out of the city beside a river, where was wont to be prayer; and
sitting, we spake to the women which came together. **14.** And a
certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purples, of the city of the
Thyatirans, which worshipped God, heard; whose heart the Lord opened,
that she might take heed to those things which were spoken of Paul.
**15.** And when she was baptized, and her house, she besought us,
saying, If ye judge me faithful to the Lord, enter into my house and
tarry. And she enforced us.

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span><span id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>**11.** This history doth, as it were in a
glass, show how sharply the Lord did exercise the faith and patience of
his, by bringing them in great straits which they could not have
overcome unless they had been endued with singular constancy; for the
entrance of Paul into Macedonia is reported to be such, as that it might
have cause him to give but small credence to the vision. These holy men,
leaving the work which they had in hand, did cross the seas with great
haste, as if the whole nation of the Macedonians would have come to meet
them with earnest desire to be helped. Now, the success is so far from
being answerable to their hope, that their mouths are almost quite
stopped. When they enter the chief city, they find non there with whom
they may take any pains; therefore they are enforced to go into the
field, that they may speak in an obscure corner and wilderness. Yea,
even there they cannot have one man which will hearken to their
doctrine; they can only have one woman to be a disciple of Christ, and
that one which was an alien. Who would not have said that this journey
was taken in hand foolishly which fell out so unhappily? But the Lord
doth thus bring to pass his works under a base and weak kind,  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) that his power may shine more clearly
at length; and it was most meet that the beginnings of the kingdom of
Christ should be so ordered, that they might taste \[savor\] of the
humility of the cross. But we must mark the constancy of Paul and his
companions, who being not dismayed with such unprosperous beginnings,
try whether any occasion will offer itself contrary to their
expectation. And assuredly the servants of Christ must wrestle with all
lets, neither must they be discouraged, but go forward to-morrow, if
this day there appear no fruit of their labor, for there is no cause why
they should desire to be more happy than Paul. When Luke saith that they
abode in that city, some had rather have it, that they conferred or
disputed, but the other translation is more plain. And the text
persuadeth us to make choice thereof, because Luke will shortly after
declare that Lydia was the first-fruits of that Church; and we may
easily guess that the apostles went out of the city, because there was
no gate opened to them in it.

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span>**13.** *In the day of the Sabbaths.* No
doubt the Jews sought some place which was solitary and by the way, when
they were disposed to pray, because their religion was then everywhere
most odious. And God, by their example, meant to teach us what great
account we ought to make of the profession of faith; that we do not
forsake it either for fear of envy or of dangers. They had, indeed, in
many places synagogues, but it was not lawful for them to assemble
themselves publicly at Philippi, which was a free city of Rome.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) Therefore, they withdraw themselves
into a secret corner, that they may pray to God where they could not be
espied; and yet there were those who did grudge even at this, so that
they might think that it might both cause trouble and danger, but they
prefer the worship of God before their own quietness and commodity.
Furthermore, we may gather by this word Sabbath, that Luke speaketh of
the Jews. Secondly, forasmuch as he commendeth the godliness of Lydia,
it must needs be that she was a Jewess, which matter needeth no long
disputation, forasmuch as we know that it was an heinous offense for the
Grecians and Romans to celebrate the Sabbath, or to take up Jewish
rites. Now, we understand that the Jews made choice of the river’s bank,
but because they shunned the company of men, and the sight of the
people. If any man object, why did not every man pray in his house
privately? The answer is ready, that this was a solemn rite of praying,
to testify godliness; and that being far  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) from the superstitions of the
Gentiles, they might one exhort another to worship God alone, and that
they might nourish the religion received of the fathers among
themselves. As touching Paul and his fellows who were lately come,
 <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) it is to be thought that they
came thither not only to pray, but also because they hope to do some
good. For it was a fit place for them to teach in, being far from noise;
and it was meet that they should be more attentive to hear the word who
came thither to pray. Luke putteth the day of the Sabbaths instead of
the Sabbath; where, following Erasmus, I have translated it, *There was
wont* to be prayer; the old interpreter hath, *did seem*. And the word
\[<span id="iv.iii-p11.2"></span>νομιζεσθαι\] hath both significations
among the Grecians. Yet this sense is more fit for this present place,
that they did commonly use to have prayer there.

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span>*We spake to the women.* Either that place
was appointed for the assemblies of women,  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) or else religion was cold among men,
so that they came more slowly. Howsoever it be, we see that the holy men
omit no occasion or opportunity, because they vouchsafed to offer the
gospel even to women alone. Furthermore, forasmuch as it seemeth likely
to me that men and women made their prayers there together, I suppose
that Luke omitted the men either because they would not hear, or else
because they profited nothing by hearing.

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span><span id="iv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span>**14.** *A woman named Lydia.* If they had
been heard of a few women, yet this had been to enter in, as it were, by
a strait chink; but now whereas one only heareth attentively and with
fruit, might it not have seemed that the way was stopt before Christ?
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) But afterward there sprung a
noble Church of that one small graft, which Paul setteth out with many
excellent commendations; yet it may be that Lydia had some companions,
whereof there is no mention made, because she did far excel them all.
And Luke doth not assign that for the cause why this one woman did show
herself apt to be taught, because she was more witty  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) than the rest, or because she had some
preparation of herself; but he saith that the Lord opened her heart that
she might give ear and take heed to the speech of Paul. He had of late
commended her godliness; and yet he showeth that she could not
comprehend the doctrine of the gospel, save only through the
illumination of the Spirit. Wherefore, we see that not faith alone, but
all understanding and knowledge of spiritual things, is the peculiar
gift of God, and that the ministers do no good by teaching and speaking
unless the inward calling of God be thereunto added.

<span id="iv.iii-p18"></span>By the word heart, the Scripture meaneth
sometimes the mind, as when Moses saith, “God hath not given thee
hitherto a heart to understand.” So likewise in this place, Luke doth
not only signify unto us that Lydia was brought by the inspiration of
the Spirit, with affection of heart to embrace the gospel, but that her
mind was lightened, that she might understand it. By this let us learn
that such is the blockishness, such is the blindness of men, that in
seeing they see not, in hearing they hear not, until such time as God
doth give them new eyes and new ears. But we must note the speech, that
the heart of Lydia was opened was opened that she might give ear to the
external voice of the teacher. For as preaching alone is nothing else
but the dead letter, so we must beware lest a false imagination, or a
show of secret illumination, lead us away from the word whereupon faith
dependeth, and wherein it resteth. For many, to the end they may amplify
the grace of the Spirit, feign to themselves certain inspired persons,
 <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) that they may leave no use of
the external word. But the Scripture doth not suffer any such divorce to
be made which joineth the ministry of men with the secret inspiration of
the Spirit. Unless the mind of Lydia had been opened, Paul’s preaching
should have been only literal;  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md)
and yet the Lord doth not inspire her with bare revelations only, but he
giveth her the reverence of his word, so that the voice of man, which
might otherwise have been uttered in vain, doth pierce into a mind
endued with heavenly light.

<span id="iv.iii-p21"></span>Therefore, let those brain-sick fellows be
packing, \[begone,\] who, under color \[pretext\] of the Spirit, refuse
external doctrine. For we must note the temperature of moderation which
Luke setteth down here, that we can have or obtain nothing by the
hearing of the word alone, without the grace of the Spirit; and that the
Spirit is given us, not that he may bring contempt of the word, but
rather that he may dip \[instill\] into our minds into our minds, and
write in our hearts the faith thereof.

<span id="iv.iii-p22"></span>Now, if the cause be demanded why the Lord
opened one woman’s heart alone, we must return unto that principle, that
so many believe as we are ordained  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md) to life. For the fear of God, which
went before the plain and manifest knowledge of Christ in Lydia, was
also a fruit of free election. The describers of situations of places
 <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) say, that Thyratira is a city
of Lydia situate upon the side of the river called Hermus, and that it
was sometimes called Pelopia; but some there be who attribute it to
Phrygia, some to Mysia.

<span id="iv.iii-p25"></span><span id="iv.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p26"></span>**15.** *When she was baptized.* Hereby it
appeareth how effectually God wrought in Lydia even in a short moment.
For it is not to be doubted but that she received and embraced the faith
of Christ sincerely, and gave him her name, before Paul would admit her
unto baptism. This was a token of mere readiness; also, her holy zeal
and godliness do therein show themselves, in that she doth also
consecrate her family to God. And, surely, all the godly ought to have
this desire, to have those who are under them to be partakers of the
same faith. For he is unworthy to be numbered among the children of God,
and to be a ruler over others, whosoever is desirous to reign and rule
in his own house over his wife, children, servants, and maids, and will
cause them to give no place to Christ. Therefore, let every one of the
faithful study to govern and order his house so, that it may be an image
of the Church. I grant that Lydia had not in her hand the hearts of all
those which were of her household, that she might turn unto Christ
whomsoever she would;  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md) but the
Lord did bless her godly desire, so that she had her household obedient.
The godly (as we have already said) must endeavor, with might and main,
to drive from their houses all manner of superstition; secondly, that
they have not profane families, but that they keep them under the fear
of the Lord. So Abraham, the father of the faithful, was commanded to
circumcise all his servants with him; and he is commanded for the care
he had to govern his house, and to instruct his family. Furthermore, if
this duty be required at the hands of the householder, much more of a
prince, that he suffer not so much as in him lieth the name of God to be
profaned in his realm.

<span id="iv.iii-p28"></span>*She besought them, saying.* This hath the
force of an adjuration, when she saith, if ye have judged me faithful;
as if she should say, I beseech you by that faith which you have
approved by baptism, that ye refuse not to lodge with me; and Lydia did
by such an earnest desire testify how entirely she loved the gospel.
Nevertheless, it is not to be doubted but that the Lord gave her such an
affection, to the end Paul might be the more encouraged to proceed, not
only because he saw that he was liberally and courteously entertained,
but also because he might thereby judge of the fruit of his doctrine.
Therefore, this was not the woman’s inviting only, but also God’s to
keep Paul and his company there, to which end that tendeth also that
Lydia enforced them, as if God did lay hand upon them, and stay them in
the woman’s person.

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>**16.** And it happened, as we went to
prayer, a certain maid, having a spirit of divination, did meet us,
which brought her masters much gain by divining. **17.** She followed
Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most
high God, which preach to us the way of salvation. **18.** And this she
did many days. And Paul, taking it grievously, and turning back, said to
the spirit, I command thee, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that
thou come out of her. And he came out the same hour. **19.** And when
her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, having taken Paul
and Silas, they drew them into the market-place to the rulers. **20.**
And when they had presented them to the magistrates, they said, These
men trouble our city, seeing they be Jews: **21.** And they preach
ordinances, which we may not receive nor keep, seeing we are Romans.
**22.** And the multitude came together against them; and when the
magistrates had rent their garments, they commanded them to be beaten
with rods.

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span><span id="iv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Luke prosecuteth the increase of the
Church; for though he do not straightway in a word express that thing,
yet is it easily gathered out of the text, that many were brought into
the faith, or at least that the Church was somewhat augmented, and Paul
did not frequent the assemblies in time of prayer in vain.
Notwithstanding, Luke doth also report that Satan did interrupt this
course; to wit, because after that the apostles were beaten with rods,
and cast in \[into\] prison, they were at length enforced to depart the
city; yet we shall see in the end of this chapter, that when Satan had
done his worst, there was some body of the Church gathered before they
did depart.

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span>*Having a spirit of divination,* (or of
Python.) The poets do feign that the serpent called Python was slain
with the dart of Phoebus; hereupon rose another invention;  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) that they said, that those who were
possessed were inspired with the spirit of Python, and, peradventure,
they were thereupon called Phoebades, in honor of Apollo. But Luke
followeth the common custom of speaking, because he showeth the error of
the common people, and not through what inspiration the maid did
prophesy. For it is certain that the devil did deceive men under the
visor of Apollo, as all idolatry and subtilty was invented and forged in
his shop. But some men may marvel that the devil (through whose motion
and persuasion the maid did cry) was the author of such an honorable
commendation, wherewith she adorned Paul and Silas, and the rest. For,
seeing that he is the father of lying, how could the truth proceed from
him? Secondly, how is it that he gave place willingly to the servants of
Christ, by whom his kingdom was destroyed? how can this hang together,
that he prepared the minds of the people to hear the gospel, whose
mortal enemy he is? Assuredly, there is nothing more proper to him than
to turn away the minds of the people from the word of the gospel, which
he doth now will and wish them to hear.

<span id="iv.iv-p8"></span>Whence cometh such a sudden change, or
unwonted emotion? But the devil is the father of lying in such sort,
that he covereth himself under the ale and deceivable color of truth.
There he played another person through his crafty subtilty, than was
agreeable to his nature;  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) that
by creeping in craftily he might do the more hurt; and, therefore,
whereas he is called the father of lies, we must not so take it as if he
did always lie manifestly and without any color. Yea, rather we must
beware of his crafty subtilty, lest when he pretendeth the color of
truth he deceive us under a vain show. We see, also, how he useth like
subtilty daily. For what can bear a fairer show than the Pope’s titles,
wherein he doth not boast himself to be the adversary of Christ, but he
doth not boast himself to be the adversary of Christ, but his vicar?
What can be more plausible than that solemn preface, In the name of the
Lord, Amen? Notwithstanding we know, that whilst the hypocritical
ministers of Satan do thus pretend the truth, they corrupt it, and, with
a deadly corruption, infect it. Seeing that Satan hath a double way to
resist the gospel, to wit, because he doth sometimes rage openly, and
sometimes he creepeth in craftily under lies, he hath also two kinds of
lying and deceiving, either when he overthroweth the Word of God with
false doctrines and gross superstitions, or else when he doth craftily
feign that he is a friend of the Word, and so doth insinuate himself
subtilely;  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md) yea, he doth never
hurt more deadly than when he transformeth himself into an angel of
light. Now, we perceive to what end that so gorgeous a title did tend,
wherewith he did extol Paul and his companions, namely, because it was
not so convenient for him to make open war against the gospel, he went
about to overthrow the credit thereof by secret shifts. For if Paul had
admitted that testimony, there should have been no longer any difference
between the wholesome  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) doctrine
of Christ and the mocks of Satan. The light and brightness of the gospel
should have been entangled in the darkness of lying, and so quite put
out.

<span id="iv.iv-p12"></span>But the question is, why God doth grant
Satan so great liberty, as to suffer him to deceive miserable men, and
to bewitch them with true divinations? For, omitting the disputations
which some men move concerning his foresight, I take this for a plain
case, that he doth prophesy and foretell things to come, and which are
hidden only through God’s sufferance. But God seemeth by this means to
lay open men who are reckless or careless to his subtilty, so that they
cannot beware. For seeing that prophecies breathe out divine power,
men’s minds must needs be touched with reverence so often as they come
abroad, unless they contemn God. I answer, that Satan hath never so much
liberty granted him of God, save only that the unthankful world may be
punished, which is so desirous of a lie, that it had rather be deceived
than obey the truth. For that is a general evil, whereof Paul
complaineth in the first chapter to the Romans,(<span
id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span>[Ro 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p12.1"></span>,) That men do not glorify God, being known
naturally by the creation of the world, and that they suppress his truth
unjustly.

<span id="iv.iv-p13"></span>It is a just reward for so great
unthankfulness, that Satan hath the bridle given him, that through
divers jugglings he may work the ruin of those who turn away maliciously
from the light of God. Therefore, so often as you read the divinations
of Satan, think upon the just judgment of God. Now, if God so sharply
punish the contempt of his light in the profane Gentiles, who have no
other teachers but the heaven and earth, how much more sharp punishment
do those deserve who wittingly and willingly choke the pure doctrine of
salvation, revealed to them in the law and the gospel? No marvel,
therefore, if Satan have long bewitched the world so freely with his
subtilty, since that the truth of the gospel hath been wickedly
contemned, which was made most manifest. But it is objected again, that
no man is free from danger when false divinations fly to and fro so
fast. For even as well the good as the evil seem to be subject to the
cozenage of Satan when the truth is darkened and overcast. The answer is
ready, though Satan set snares for all men in general, yet are the godly
delivered by the grace of God, lest they be caught together with the
wicked. There is also a more manifest distinction set down in the
Scripture, because the Lord doth by this means try the faith and
godliness of his, and doth make blind the reprobate, that they may
perish as they be worthy. Therefore Paul saith plainly, that Satan hath
not leave granted him to lead any into error save those who will not
obey God and embrace the truth, (<span id="iv.iv-p13.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv-p13.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iv-p14"></span>Whereby is also reproved their wicked
ungodliness, who, under this color, excuse the profane contempt of all
doctrine; whither shall we turn ourselves, (say they,) seeing that Satan
is so expert to deceive? Therefore, it is better for us to live without
any religion at all, than, through the desire of religion, to run
headlong into destruction. Neither do they object and pretend this fear
for their excuse in earnest; but, seeing they desire nothing more than
to wander carelessly, like beasts, without any fear of God, they can be
content with any excuse, so they be not tied to any religion. I confess,
indeed, that Satan doth no less craftily than wickedly abuse the sacred
name of God; and that that proverb is too true which Papistry hath
brought forth, that, the Lord doth pronounce that he will be the teacher
of the humble, and hath promised that he will be nigh to those which are
right in heart; seeing that Paul teacheth that the Word of God is the
sword of the Spirit; seeing that he doth testify that those who are
well-grounded in the faith of the gospel are not in danger to be seduced
by man; seeing that Peter calleth the Scripture a light shining in a
dark place; seeing that courteous exhortation, or inviting of Christ,
can never deceive us, “Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened to you;” let Satan do what he can, and let the false prophets
seek to darken the truth so much as they are able, we need not be afraid
lest the Spirit of wisdom and discretion \[discernment\] forsake us, who
ruleth  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) Satan at his pleasure,
and maketh us triumph over him by the faith of his word.

<span id="iv.iv-p16"></span><span id="iv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p17"></span>**18.** *Paul took it grievously.* It may be
that at the first Paul neglected, and did not greatly regard the crying
of the maid, because he hoped that there would be no account made
thereof, and had rather that it should vanish away of itself. But the
continual repetition doth at length make him weary; because, if he had
any long dissembled, Satan would have waxed more and more insolent
through his silence and patience. Secondly, he ought not to have broken
out into this prohibition rashly, until he knew for a certainty that he
was furnished with the power of God. For Paul’s commandment  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) had been foolish and vain without the
commandment of God. And this must be noted, lest any man condemn Paul of
too great hastiness, because he encountered so valiantly with the
unclean spirit. For he did not conceive any grief or indignation, save
only that he saw that the stability of Satan would increase, unless he
did betimes prevent it; neither did he attempt any thing without the
motion of the Spirit; neither did he enter the conflict until he was
armed with power from heaven. Notwithstanding, he seemeth to be contrary
to himself, seeing that he saith elsewhere that he rejoiceth upon what
occasion soever he see the gospel preached, (<span
id="iv.iv-p18.2"></span>[Php 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p18.2"></span>,) even by wicked men, and such as did study of
set purpose to bring him in contempt. I answer, that he had another more
apt reason for himself in this place;  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) because all men would have thought
that the spirit of the maid had played with Paul;  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) so that by that means the doctrine of
the gospel should not only have come in \[into\] suspicion, but should
also have come into great contempt.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) And to this end was it that Christ
also did command the devil to hold his peace, (<span
id="iv.iv-p21.2"></span>[Mr 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p21.2"></span>,) whereas notwithstanding he suffered his name
to be extolled by unmeet and unworthy men, (<span
id="iv.iv-p21.3"></span>[Lu 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.iv-p21.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv-p22"></span>*I command thee.* We must note the form of
speech; for as the miracle was about to have a double use, namely, that
the power of Christ might be known; secondly, that he might declare that
he had no fellowship with Satan’s jugglings; so Paul, in giving the
authority and power to Christ alone, doth declare that he is only a
minister; that done, he doth openly set Christ against the devil,  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) to the end that, by the conflict, all
men may see that they be deadly enemies. For it was profitable that many
should be awaked who had been given to such gross seducing, that being
well purged, they might come to the true faith.

<span id="iv.iv-p24"></span><span id="iv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p25"></span>**19.** *But when her masters.* The same
devil who of late did flatter Paul by the mouth of the maid, doth now
drive her masters into fury, that they may put him to death; so that,
having changed his coat, he doth now play a tragedy, who could not speed
well before by his fair speech and flattery. And though the heat of zeal
wherewith Paul was provoked to anger did raise the whirlwind of
persecution, yet is he not therefore to be blamed; neither did it any
whit repent Paul that he had wrought the miracle, so that he did wish
that were undone which was done, because he knew full well through what
motion he had driven the devil out of the maid. Whereby we are taught
that we must not rashly condemn things which are well done, and that
which is taken in hand at the commandment of God, though an unhappy
success follow; because God doth then examine \[test\] the constancy of
those which be his, until a more joyful and prosperous end drive away
all sorrow. As touching the men, Luke expresseth the cause why they were
so mad upon Paul; to wit, because their hope of filthy gain was gone.
But though they were pricked forward with covetousness only to persecute
the Gospel and the ministers thereof; yet they pretend a fair color,
that it grieveth them that the public state should be perverted, that
their ancient laws should be broken, and peace troubled. So, through the
enemies of Christ behave themselves wickedly and unhonestly, yet they
always invent some cause for their sin. Yea, though their wicked desire
appear plainly, yet, with an impudent withal. So at this day those
Papists which are more zealous over their law,  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) have nothing else in their minds
besides their gain and government. Let them swear and forswear by all
their saints and sacrifices, that they are enforced only with a godly
affection; yet the matter itself doth plainly show, that it is the
coldness of their kitchens which maketh their zeal so hot, and that
ambition is the fan  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) thereof.
For they be either hungry dogs pricked forward with greediness, or
furious lions breathing out nothing but cruelty.

<span id="iv.iv-p28"></span><span id="iv.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p29"></span>**20.** *These men trouble our city.* This
accusation was craftily composed to burden the servants of Christ. For
on the one side they pretend the name of the Romans, than which nothing
was more favorable; on the other, they purchase hatred, and bring them
in contempt, by naming the Jews, which name was at that time infamous;
for, as touching religion, the Romans were more like to any than to the
Jewish nation. For it was lawful for a man which was a Roman to do
sacrifice either in Asia or in Grecia, or in any other country where
were idols and superstitions. I warrant you Satan did agree with himself
very well, though he put on divers shapes, but that which was religion
only, than which there was no other in the world, was counted among the
Romans detestable. They frame a third accusation out of the crime of
sedition;  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) for they pretend that
the public peace is troubled by Paul and his company. In like sort was
Christ brought in contempt,  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md)
(<span id="iv.iv-p31.2"></span>[Lu
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv-p31.2"></span>.md)
and even at this day the Papists have no more plausible thing wherewith
they may bring us to be hated, than when they cry that our doctrine
tendeth to no other end but to confusion of all things. But we must
valiantly contemn this filthy and false infamy as did Christ and Paul,
until the Lord bring to light the malice of our enemies, and refute
their impudence.

<span id="iv.iv-p32"></span><span id="iv.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p33"></span>**21.** *Ordinances which.* They lean to a
prejudice, lest the cause should come to be disputed; as the Papists
deal with us at this day, this was decreed in a General Council; it is a
more ancient and common opinion, than that is may be called in question;
custom hath long time approved this; this hath been established by
consent more than a thousand years ago. But to what end tend all these
things, save only that they may rob the Word of God of all authority?
They make boast of man’s decrees, but in the mean season they leave no
place at all for the laws of God. We may see only this place what force
these prejudices ought to have. The laws of the Romans were excellent,
but religion doth depend upon the Word of God alone. Therefore in this
matter we must take great heed, that men being brough under, the
authority of God alone do prevail, and that he make all things which in
the world are excellent subject to him.

<span id="iv.iv-p34"></span><span id="iv.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p35"></span>**22.** *The multitude came together.* When
Luke declareth that there was great encourses of the people made, after
that a few men of no reputation, to wit, such as did juggle and cozen to
get gain, and whose filthiness was well known, had made some stir; he
reacheth with what fury the world rageth against Christ. Foolishness and
inconstancy are indeed common vices among all people, and almost
continual, but the wonderful force of Satan doth therein betray itself,
in that those who are in other matters modest and quiet, are for a
matter of no importance in a heat,  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) and became companions of most vile
persons, when the truth must be resisted. There was never a whit more
modesty to be found in the judges themselves, if we consider what was
their duty. For they ought, by their gravity, to have appeased the fury
of the people, and to have set themselves stoutly against their
violence, they ought to have aided and defended the guiltless; but they
lay hands on them outrageously, and renting their garments, they command
them to be stripped naked and whipt before they know the matter. Surely
the malice of men is to be lamented;  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) whereby it came to pass, that almost
all the judgment-seats of the world, which ought to have been
sanctuaries of justice, have been polluted with the wicked and
sacrilegious oppugning of the gospel.

<span id="iv.iv-p38"></span>Notwithstanding, the question is, why they
were cast in prison, seeing that they were already punished, for the
prison was ordained for the keeping of men? They used this kind of
correction, until they might know more; and so we see the servants of
Christ more sharply handled than adulterers, robbers, and other most
vile persons.  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) Whereby appeareth
more plainly that force of Satan in stirring up the minds of men, that
they observe no show of judgment in persecuting the gospel. But though
the godly be more hardly handled for defending the truth of Christ, than
are the wicked for their wickedness; yet it goeth well with the godly,
because they triumph gloriously before God and his angels in all
injuries which they suffer. They suffer reproach and slander; but
because they know that the marks of Christ are in greater price and more
esteemed in heaven than the vain pomps of the earth, the more wickedly
and reproachfully the world doth vex them, the greater cause have they
to rejoice. For if profane writers did so honor Themistocles, that they
preferred his prison before the seat and court of judges; how much more
honorably must we think of the Son of God, whose cause is in hand so
often as the faithful suffer persecution for the gospel? Therefore,
though the Lord suffered Paul and Silas to be scourged and imprisoned by
the wicked judges, yet he did not suffer them to be put to any shame,
but that which turned to their greater renown. For seeing that those
persecutions, which we must suffer for the testimony of the gospel, are
remnants of the sufferings of Christ; like as our Prince turned the
cross, which was accursed, into a triumphant \[triumphal\] chariot, so
he shall, in like sort, adorn the prisons and gibbets of his, that they
may there triumph over Satan and all the wicked.

<span id="iv.iv-p40"></span>*Renting their garments.* Because the old
interpreter had truly translated this, it was evil done of Erasmus to
change it, that the magistrates did rent their own garments. For this
was Luke’s meaning only, that the holy men were outrageously  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) beaten, the lawful order of judgment
being neglected, and that they laid hands on them with such violence
that their garments were rent. And this had been too far disagreeing
with the custom of Romans, for the judges to cut \[rend\] their own
garments publicly in the market-place; especially seeing the question
was concerning an unknown religion, for which they did not greatly care;
but I will not long stand about a plain matter.

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>**23.** And when they had given them many
stripes, they did cast them into prison, commanding the keeper of the
prison to keep them safe; **24.** Who, seeing he had received such
commandments, did put them in the inner prison, and made fast their feet
in the stocks. **25.** And at midnight Paul and Silas praying, did
praise God; and those which lay bound heard them. **26.** And suddenly
there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were
shaken; and by and by all the doors were opened, and all their hands
\[chains\] were loosed. **27.** And when the keeper of the prison
awaked, and saw all the prison doors open, drawing out his sword, he was
about to slay himself, thinking that those which lay bound were fled.
**28.** And Paul cried with a loud voice, Do thyself no harm: for we be
all here.

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span><span id="iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span>**23.** *That he should keep them safe.*
Whereas the magistrates command that Paul and Silas should be kept so
diligently, it was done to this end, that they might know more of the
matter. For they had already beaten them with rods to appease the
tumult. And this is that which I said of late, that the world doth rage
with such blind fury against the ministers of the gospel, that it doth
keep no mean in severity. But as it is very profitable for us, for
example’s sake, to know how uncourteously and uncomely the witnesses of
Christ were entertained in times past; so it is no less profitable to
know that which Luke addeth immediately concerning their fortitude and
patience. For even when they lay bound with fetters, he saith that in
prayer they lauded God, whereby it appeareth that neither the reproach
with they suffered, nor the stripes which made their flesh smarter, nor
the stink of the deep dungeon, nor the danger of death, which was hard
at hand, could hinder them from giving thanks to the Lord joyfully and
with glad hearts.

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span>We must note this general rule, that we cannot
pray as we ought, but we must also praise God. For though the desire to
pray arise of the feeling of our want and miseries, and therefore it is,
for the most part, joined with sorrow and carefulness;  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) yet the faithful must so bridle their
affections, that they murmur not against God; so that the right form of
prayer doth join two affections together, (to look too contrary,)
\[viz.\] carefulness and sorrow, by reason of the present necessity
which doth keep us down, and joyfulness, by reason of the obedience
whereby we submit ourselve to God, and by reason of the hope which,
showing us the haven high at hand, doth refresh us even in the midst of
shipwreck. Such a form doth Paul prescribe to us. Let your prayers
(saith he) be made known to God with thanksgiving, (<span
id="iv.v-p7.2"></span>[Php 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.v-p7.2"></span>.) But in this history we must note the
circumstances. For though the pain of the stripes were grievous, though
the prison were troublesome, though the danger were great, seeing that
Paul and Silas cease not to praise God, we gather by this how greatly
they were encouraged to bear the cross. So Luke reported before that the
apostles rejoiced, because they were counted worthy to suffer reproach
for the name of the Lord, (<span id="iv.v-p7.3"></span>[Ac
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="iv.v-p7.3"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v-p8"></span>*And those which lay bound.* We must know that
Paul and Silas prayed aloud, that they might make the boldness of a good
conscience known to others who were shut up in the same prison; for they
might have made their prayer with secret groaning and sighing of heart
as they were wont, or they might have prayed unto the Lord quietly and
softly. Why do they then exalt their voice? Assuredly, they do not that
for any ambition; but that they may profess, that, trusting to the
goodness of their cause, they fly without fear unto God. Therefore, in
their prayers was included a confession of faith, which did appertain
unto a common example, and prepared as well the malefactor’s as the
jailer’s house to consider the miracle.

<span id="iv.v-p9"></span><span id="iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p10"></span>**26.** *There was an earthquake.* The Lord,
in showing this visible sign, meant chiefly to provide for his servants,
that they might more manifestly know that they prayers were heard; yet
he had respect also of the rest. He could have loosed the fetters of
Paul and Silas without an earthquake, and also have opened the gates.
But that addition served not a little to confirm them, seeing that the
Lord, for their sakes, did shake both the air and also the earth. Again,
it was requisite that the keeper of the prison and the rest should feel
the presence of God, lest they should think that the miracle came by
chance. Neither is it to be doubted, but that the Lord did then show a
token of his power, which should be profitable for all ages; so that the
faithful may fully assure themselves that he will be nigh unto them so
often as they are to enter  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md)
combats and dangers for the defense of the gospel. Nevertheless, he doth
neither always keep the same course, to testify his presence by manifest
signs; neither is it lawful for us to prescribe him a law. For he did
help his by manifest miracles then for this cause, that we may be
content with his hidden grace at this day; concerning which matter we
have spoken more upon the second chapter.

<span id="iv.v-p12"></span><span id="iv.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p13"></span>**27.** *When the keeper of the prison was
awaked.* He would have slain himself that he might prevent punishment;
for it had been a foolish answer to have said that the doors were opened
of their own accord. But this question may be asked, Seeing that Paul
seeth that they might have some hope to escape if he should slay
himself, why doth he hinder him? for he seemeth by this means to refuse
the deliverance which was offered by God; yea, it seemeth to have been a
mere toy,  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) in that the Lord
would have the jailer awaked, lest there should be any use  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) of the miracle. I answer, that we must
in this place have respect unto his counsel and purpose. For he did not
loose Paul and Silas, and the rest, from their fetters, neither did he,
therefore, open the doors, that he might straightway let them go free;
but that, by showing the power of his hand, he might seal up the faith
of Paul and Silas, and might make the name of Christ glorious among
others. Therefore, he doth so yield to the petitions of Paul and Silas,
that he showeth that he is able enough to deliver them so often as he
shall think it good; and that nothing can hinder him, but that he is
able to enter not only into prisons, but also into graves, that he may
deliver those that be his.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) He
opened the gates of the prison to Peter to another end, as we saw in
chapter twelve. But now, forasmuch as he had another way in readiness to
deliver Paul and Silas, he meant not so much to deliver them for the
present time by miracle, as to confirm them against the time to come.
Again, we must call that to mind which I said of late, that the opening
of the prison appertained unto others, that it might be known to many
witnesses that God did favor the doctrine, which was now burthened with
an unjust prejudice. Undoubtedly, Paul perceived this; and therefore,
though his hands were loosed, he did not once wag from his place.  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) He might have gone away, if he had
been so disposed. Why doth he not? Was it because he contemned the grace
of God? or because, through his slothfulness, he will make the miracle
frustrate? None of all these is probable; whence we gather that he was
holden by God, as the Lord useth to direct the minds of those which be
his in doubtful matters, that they may follow sometimes ignorantly,
sometimes wittingly, that which is expedient to be done, and not pass
their bounds.

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>**29.** And calling for a light he sprang in,
and, trembling, he fell down at the feet of Paul and Silas. **30.** And
when he had brought them forth, he saith, Sirs, what must I do to be
saved? **31.** And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved, and thy household. **32.** And they spake to him the
word, and to all that were in his house. **33.** And taking them at the
same hour of the night, he washed their stripes; and was himself
baptized, and all his household, forthwith. **34.** And when he had
brought them into his house, he set meat before them; and he rejoiced
that he and all his whole house believed in God.

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span><span id="iv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span>**29.** *Being astonished, he fell down.*
This keeper was no less brought under with fear to show obedience to God
than with the miracle prepared.  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md)
Hereby it appeareth what a good thing it is for men to be thrown down
from their pride, that they may learn to submit themselves to God. He
was hardened in his superstitions; therefore, he might with a lofty
stomach  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) have despised
whatsoever Paul and Silas should have said, whom he had reproachfully
 <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) thrust into the innermost part
of the prison. Now, fear maketh him apt to be taught and gentle.
Therefore, so often as the Lord shall strike us or cast us down,  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) let us know that this is done that we
may be brought in \[to\] order from our too much haughtiness.

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span>But it is a wonder that he was not reproved
for falling down at their feet. For why did Paul wink at that which (as
Luke recordeth) Peter would not suffer in Cornelius? (<span
id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>[Ac 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>.) I answer, that Paul doth therefore bear with
the keeper, because he knoweth that he was not moved with superstition,
but with fear of God’s judgment so to humble himself. It was a kind of
worship common enough; but chiefly among the Romans it was a solemn
thing when they would humbly crave any thing, or crave pardon, they fell
down at their knees to whom they put their supplication. Therefore,
there was no cause why Paul should be displeased with a man whom he saw
simply humbled of God. For if there had been any thing committed
contrary to the glory of God, he had not forgotten that zeal which he
showed before among the men of Lycaonia. Therefore, by his silence, we
gather that in this kind of worship there was nothing contrary to
godliness or the glory of God.

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span><span id="iv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span>**30.** *Sirs, what must I do?* He doth so
ask counsel, that he showeth therewith that he will be obedient. By this
we see that he was thoroughly  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md)
touched, so that he was ready to do what they should command him, whom
not many hours before he had bound uncourteously. The wicked oftentimes
when they see wonders, though they tremble for a time, yet are they
straightway made more obstinate, as it befell Pharaoh, (<span
id="iv.vi-p13.2"></span>[Exod. 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#008.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#032)<span id="iv.vi-p13.2"></span>;.md) at
least they are not so tamed that they give over themselves to God. But
in this place the keeper (acknowledging the power of God) was not only a
little afraid, so that he returned straightway unto his former cruelty,
but he showeth himself obedient to God, and desirous of sound and
wholesome doctrine. He demandeth how he may obtain salvation; whereby it
appeareth more plainly that he was not suddenly taken with some light
 <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) fear of God only, but truly
humbled to offer himself to be a scholar to his ministers. He knew that
they were cast in prison for no other cause, save only because they did
overthrow the common estate of religion. Now he is ready to hear their
doctrine which he had before contemned.

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span><span id="iv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span>**31.** *Believe in the Lord Jesus.* This is
but a short, and, to look to, a cold and hungry definition of salvation,
and yet it is perfect to believe in Christ. For Christ alone hath all
the parts of blessedness and eternal life included in him, which he
offereth to us by the gospel; and by faith we receive them, as I have
declared, (<span id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span>[Ac
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span>..md)
And here we must note two things; first, that Christ is the mark  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) whereat faith must aim; and,
therefore, men’s minds do nothing else but wander when they turn aside
from him. Therefore, no marvel if all the divinity of Popery be nothing
else but an huge lump  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) and
horrible labyrinth; because, neglecting Christ, they flatter themselves
in vain and frivolous speculations. Secondly, we must note, that after
we have embraced Christ by faith, that alone is sufficient to salvation.
But the latter member, which Luke addeth by and by, doth better express
the nature of faith, Paul and Silas command the keeper of the prison to
believe in the Son of God. Do they precisely stay in this voice \[word\]
only? Yea, it followeth in Luke, in the text, \[context,\] that they
preached the word of the Lord. Therefore, we see how the faith is not a
light or dry opinion concerning unknown things, but a plain and distinct
knowledge of Christ conceived out of the gospel. Again, if the preaching
of the gospel be absent, there shall no faith remain any longer. To
conclude, Luke coupleth faith with preaching and doctrine; and after
that he hath briefly spoke of faith, he doth, by way of exposition, show
the true and lawful way of believing. Therefore, instead of that
invention of entangled faith, whereof the Papists babble, let us hold
faith unfolded in the word of God, that it may unfold to us the power of
Christ.

<span id="iv.vi-p19"></span><span id="iv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p20"></span>**33.** *He was baptized, and all his
household.* Luke doth again commend the godly zeal of the keeper, that
he did consecrate all his whole house to the Lord; wherein doth also
appear the grace of God, in that he brought all his whole family unto a
godly consent. And we must also note the notable exchange: he was of
late about to murder himself, because he thought that Paul and the rest
were escaped; but now laying aside all fear, he bringeth them home.
 <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) So that we see how faith doth
animate and encourage those to behave themselves stoutly who before had
no heart. And surely, when we droop  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) through fear and doubtfulness, there
is no better matter of boldness than to be able to cast all our cares
into God’s bosom; that no danger may terrify us from doing our duty,
whilst that we look for an end at God’s hand, such as he shall see to be
most profitable.

<span id="iv.vi-p23"></span><span id="iv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p24"></span>**34.** *He rejoiceth that he believed.* The
external profession of faith was before commended in the jailer; now the
inward fruit thereof is described. When he did lodge the apostles,
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) and was not afraid of
punishment, but did courteously entertain them in his own house,
otherwise than he was enjoined by the magistrate, he did testify that
his faith was not idle. And that joy whereof Luke speaketh in this place
is a singular good thing, which every man hath from his faith. There is
no great torment than an evil conscience; for the unbelievers, though
the seek by all means to bring themselves into a certain amazedness, yet
because they have no peace with God, they must needs quake and tremble.
But admit they perceive not their present torments, yea, they rage and
play the madmen through mad and unbridled licentiousness; yet are they
never quiet, neither do they enjoy quiet joy.  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) Therefore, sincere and quiet stable
joy proceedeth from faith alone, when we perceive that God is merciful
to us. In this respect, Zacharias saith, “Rejoice and be glad, O
daughter of Sion, behold, they King cometh.” Yea, this effect is
everywhere in the Scripture attributed to faith, that it maketh the
souls joyful. Therefore, let us know that faith is not a vain or dead
imagination, but a lively sealing \[sense\] of the grace of God, which
bringeth perfect joy by reason of the certainty of salvation, whereof it
is meet that the wicked be void, who do both fly from the God of peace,
and disturb all righteousness.

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
16:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#035.md)<span id="iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span>**35.** And when it was day, the magistrates
sent the apparitors, \[officers,\] saying, Let those men go. **36.** And
the keeper of the prison told these words to Paul, The magistrates have
sent to loose you: now therefore going out, depart in peace. **37.** And
Paul said to them, After that they have beaten us openly, before our
cause was known, seeing that we be Romans, they have cast us into
prison; and now they cast us out privily? No, surely; but let them come
themselves and fetch us out. **38.** And the apparitors \[officers\]
told these words to the magistrates; who feared, after that they heard
that they were Romans. **39.** And they came and besought them; and when
they had brought them out, they requested that they would depart out of
the city. **40.** And coming out of the prison, they entered in unto
Lydia; and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and
departed.

<span id="iv.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii-p4"></span><span id="iv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p5"></span>**35.** *When it was day.* The question is,
how it came to pass that the judges did so suddenly change their
purpose? The day before they had commanded that Paul and Silas should be
bound with fetters, as if they meant to punish them cruelly, now they
let them go free. At least, if they had heard them, it might have been
that the knowledge of the cause had brought them to be more gentle and
better minded.  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226.md) But it appeareth
that, forasmuch as the matter stood as yet still in one state, they were
brought into repentance of their own accord. I answer, that there is no
other thing here set down but that which falleth out most commonly when
sedition is once raised. For not only the minds of the common people
begin to rage, but also the tempest carrieth away the governors also, no
doubt perversely. For we know that of Virgil, —

<span id="iv.vii-p7"></span>“And as amidst a mighty rout, when discord
oft is bred, And baser froward-minded men with furious rage are led;
Forthwith flies fire, and stones are flung, madness doth tools supply,
Then if on the sudden they do any one espy Whom love to commonwealth and
just deserts have reverent made, They hush, and eke attentive stand, to
hear what will be said: He governs both their will and rage, With words
their wrath he doth assuage.”

<span id="iv.vii-p8"></span>Therefore, there can be nothing more
unseemly than what in a hot tumult the judges should be set on fire
\[along\] with the people; but it falleth out so for the most part.
Therefore, when those officers saw the people up, they thought there was
cause enough why they should beat the apostles with rods. But now they
are caused with shame and infamy to suffer punishment for their
lightness, \[levity.\] Peradventure also, when they inquire of the
beginning of the tumult, they find those who had deceived the people
 <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md) in the fault. Therefore, when
they had found out that Paul and Silas were innocent, they let them go,
though too late. By which example, those which bear rule are taught to
beware of too much haste. Again, we see how carelessly magistrates
flatter  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) themselves in their own
offenses, which they know full well they have committed, especially when
they have to do with unknown and base persons. When these men grant free
liberty to Paul and Silas to depart, they are not ignorant that they had
before done them injury; yet they think it will be sufficient if they do
not continue to do them injury still, and to be more cruel upon them.
 <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) The apparitors \[officers\] are
called \[<span id="iv.vii-p11.2"></span>ραβδουχοι\], of the staves which
they did bear; whereas the ensigns of the sergeants \[lictors\] were
hatches bound with rods.

<span id="iv.vii-p12"></span>*After that they have beaten us openly.*
Their defense consisteth upon \[of\] two points, that they raged
against, and cruelly intreated, the body of a man that was a Roman;
secondly, that they did that contrary to the order of law. We shall see
afterwards that Paul was a citizen of Rome. But it was straitly provided
by Portius’ law, by the laws of Sempronius, and also by many more, that
no man should have power of life or death over any citizen of Rome but
the people. Notwithstanding, it may seem to be a strange thing that Paul
did not maintain \[assert\] his right before he was beaten with rods;
for the judges might honestly excuse themselves by his silence; but it
is to be thought that he was not heard in the midst of the tumult. If
any man object that he doth now seek remedy too late, and out of season,
yea, that he doth catch at a vain and foolish comfort,  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) when he requireth that the magistrates
come themselves, we may readily answer, Paul was like to fare never a
whit the better therefore; but we must mark that he meant nothing less
than to provide for his own private commodity; but that he might ease
the brethren somewhat afterward,  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) that the magistrates might not be so
bold as to rage so freely against the good and innocent brethren.
Because he had gotten their heads under his girdle,  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) he translated his right to help the
brethren, that they might be borne with. This was the cause for which he
did chide them. And so Paul did wisely use the opportunity offered him;
as we must neglect nothing which may take for the bridling of the
enemies, that they take not to themselves so much liberty to oppress or
vex the innocent, forasmuch as the Lord bringeth to our hands such helps
not in vain. Notwithstanding, let us remember that if we have been
injured in anything, we must not repay injuries, but we must only
endeavor to stay their lust, lest they hurt others in like sort.

<span id="iv.vii-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p17"></span>**38.** *They were afraid, because they
were Romans.* They are not once moved with the other point, because they
had handled innocents cruelly without discretion;  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) and yet that was the greater reproach.
But because they did not fear that any man would punish them, they were
not moved with God’s judgment. This is the cause that they do carelessly
pass over that which was objected concerning injury done by them, only
they are afraid of the officers  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md)
of the Romans, and lest they should be beheaded for violating the
liberty in the body of a citizen. They knew that this was death if any
of the chief governors \[prefects\] should commit it, then what should
become of the officers of one free city?  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) Such is the fear of the wicked,
because they have an amazed  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md)
conscience before God, they do long time flatter themselves in all sins,
until the punishment  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md) of men
hang over their heads.

<span id="iv.vii-p23"></span><span id="iv.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p24"></span>**40.** *When they saw, etc.* They were
desired to part presently; yet it became them to regard the brethren,
lest the tender seed of the gospel should perish, and undoubtedly they
would have tarried longer if they had been suffered, but the prayers and
requests of the magistrates were imperious and armed, which they are
enforced to obey. Nevertheless, they foreslow \[neglect\] not their
necessary duty, but they exhort the brethren to be constant. And whereas
they went straight to Lydia, it is a token, that though the Church were
increased, yet that woman was the chief even of a greater number, as
touching diligence in duties of godliness;  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) and that appeareth more plainly
thereby, because all the godly were assembled in her house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc37003.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="iv.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>Obnoxia sit,” be
subjected to.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc37003.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>Locum adhuc
habere apud Judaeos,” is still binding on the Jews.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc37003.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="iv.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>Puram
doctrinam,” the pure doctrine.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc37003.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="iv.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>Sincera
fides,” sincere faith.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc37003.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="iv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p31"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p31.1"></span>Accessorium,”
accessory.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc37003.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="iv.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p32"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p32.1"></span>Propagine,” by
propagation.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc37003.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="iv.ii-p8.1"></span>Dubiis,”
doubtful.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc37003.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p6.1"></span>Specie,”
appearance.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc37003.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p9.1"></span>Colonia
Romana,” a Roman colony.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc37003.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>Remoti,”
removed, at a distance from.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc37003.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p11.1"></span>Novi
hospites,” new guests.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc37003.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p13.1"></span>Tantum,”
only, omitted.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc37003.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p16.1"></span>Obstructos
esse Christo ingressus,” that the entrance of Christ was hindered.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc37003.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p17.1"></span>Acutiori
ingenio,” of acutor intellect.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc37003.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p19"></span> “\[<span
id="iv.iii-p19.1"></span>Ενθουσιασμους\],” inspirations.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc37003.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p20"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii-p20.1"></span>Literalis,” literal, (gone no farther than the
letter.)

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc37003.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p23"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii-p23.1"></span>Praeordinati,” preordained.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc37003.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p24"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii-p24.1"></span>Geographi,” geographers.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc37003.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="iv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p27.1"></span>Suo
arbitrio,” at her own will.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc37003.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p7.1"></span>Figmento,”
fiction.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc37003.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p9.1"></span>Egit igitur
callido artificio aliam personam quam ferret ejus natura,” there with
cunning artifice he played a character different from that which
naturally belonged to him.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc37003.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p10.1"></span>Quasi per
cuniculos obrepit,” creeps in as if by burrowing.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc37003.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p11.1"></span>Salvificam,”
saving.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc37003.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p15.1"></span>Compescit,”
quelleth.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc37003.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p18"></span> “<span
id="iv.iv-p18.1"></span>Impreccatio,” impreccation, anathema.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc37003.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p19.1"></span>Hic diversam
rationem,” that here there was a different reason.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc37003.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p20.1"></span>Colludere
puellae daemonum cum Paulo,” that the demon of the damsel was in
collision with Paul.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc37003.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p21.1"></span>Sed
recidisset in merum ludibrium,” but became a mere laughing-stock.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc37003.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p23.1"></span>Opponit
Christum daemoni,” he opposes Christ to the demon.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc37003.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p26.1"></span>Acerrimi
zelotae legis suae,” the fiercest zealots for their law.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc37003.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p27.1"></span>Flabellum,”
bellows.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc37003.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p30.1"></span>Tertiam
calumniam ex crimine seditionis concinnant,” they concoct a third
calamny out of the charge of sedition.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc37003.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p31.1"></span>Odiose
traductus fuit,” was hatefully traduced.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc37003.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p36.1"></span>Repente
effervent,” suddenly effervesce, break out.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc37003.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p37.1"></span>Deploranda,”
desperate, deplorable.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc37003.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p39"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p39.1"></span>Et alios
quosvis sceleratos,” and villains of any description.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc37003.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="iv.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p41"></span> “<span id="iv.iv-p41.1"></span>Tumultuose,”
tumultuously.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc37003.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span> “<span id="iv.v-p7.1"></span>Anxietate
animi,” anxiety of mind.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc37003.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="iv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.v-p11.1"></span>Subeunda,”
undergo.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc37003.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p14"></span> “<span
id="iv.v-p14.1"></span>Merum...ludicrum,” a mere absurdity.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc37003.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="iv.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.v-p15.1"></span>Ne quis esset
usus,” that there might be no use.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc37003.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="iv.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.v-p16.1"></span>A morte,” from
death.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc37003.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="iv.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.v-p17.1"></span>Pedem loco non
movit,” he did not stir a foot from the place.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc37003.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p6.1"></span>Quam miraculo
praeparatus,” than prepared by the miracle.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc37003.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span>Sprevisset
igitur alto animo,” hence he might have shown high contempt for.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc37003.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p8.1"></span>Probrose,”
disgracefully.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc37003.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p9.1"></span>Aliqua
consternatione tanget,” or throw us into consternation.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc37003.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p13.1"></span>Serio,”
seriously.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc37003.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p14.1"></span>Evanido,”
evanescent.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc37003.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p17.1"></span>Unicum
scopum,” the only mark.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc37003.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p18.1"></span>Immane
chaos,” immense chaos.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc37003.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p21.1"></span>Sponte,” of
his own accord.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc37003.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p22.1"></span>Torpeamus,”
become torpid.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc37003.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p25"></span> “<span
id="iv.vi-p25.1"></span>Hospitaliter,” hospitably.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc37003.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="iv.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p26"></span> “<span id="iv.vi-p26.1"></span>Nec sereno
gaudio potiuntur,” nor do they obtain serene joy.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc37003.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p6.1"></span>Ad
mansuetudinem et sanam mentem,” to mildness and a sound mind.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc37003.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p9"></span> “<span
id="iv.vii-p9.1"></span>Circulatores,” the circulators (of the charge.)

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc37003.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p10"></span> “<span
id="iv.vii-p10.1"></span>Condonent.” forgive.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc37003.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p11.1"></span>Si non
pergant usque in illos esse injusti et crudeles,” if they do not persist
to the last in injustice and cruelty towards them.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc37003.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p13.1"></span>Solatium,”
solace, compensation.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc37003.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p14"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p14.1"></span>Aliquid
levationis in posterum afferret,” produce some alleviation in future.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc37003.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p15.1"></span>Quia illos
jam sibi tenebat obnoxios,” because he now had them in his power.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc37003.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p18.1"></span>Nulla
interposita cognitione,” without any previous cognisance.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc37003.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p19"></span> “<span
id="iv.vii-p19.1"></span>Securibus,” axes.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc37003.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p20.1"></span>Coloniae,”
colony.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc37003.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p21.1"></span>Stupidam,”
stupid, dull.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc37003.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p22.1"></span>Ultro,”
vengeance.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc37003.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="iv.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.vii-p25.1"></span>In
officiis pictatis,” in offices of piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](cc37004.md)
