[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc37001)  [Next](cc37003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 15

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And certain which came down from Judea
did teach his brethren, that unless they should be circumcised according
to the manner of Moses, they could not be saved. **2.** And when there
arose sedition, and disputing not a little to Paul and Barnabas against
them, they appointed that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to the apostles and elders to Jerusalem about this
question. **3.** And when they were sent by the Church, they passed
through. Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles,
and they brought great joy to all the brethren. **4.** And when they
were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the
apostles and elders, and they showed what things soever God had done
with them. **5.** And there arose certain of the sect of the Pharisees
which believed, saying, That, it was needful that they should be
circumcised, and to declare that the law of Moses must be kept.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span><span id="iii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>**1.** When Paul and Barnabas had endured
many combats against the professed enemies of the gospel, Luke doth now
begin to declare that they were tried by domestic war; so that it was
meet that their doctrine and ministry should be proved by all means, to
the end it might the better appear that they were furnished by God, and
armed against all the assaults of the world and Satan. For that was no
small confirmation for their doctrine, in that being shaken and battered
with so many engines, it stood nevertheless, neither could the course
thereof be broken off by so many hindrances. Therefore, to this end doth
Paul boast that he suffered fights without and terrors within, (<span
id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>[2Co 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span
id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>.) This history is most worthy the noting; for
though we do naturally abhor the cross and all manner \[of\]
persecution, yet civil and domestic discord is more dangerous, lest
haply they discourage us.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) When
tyrants bend their force and run violently upon men, flesh indeed is
afraid; and all those who are not endued with the spirit of fortitude do
tremble with all their heart; but then their consciences are not
properly touched with any temptation. For this is known to be as it were
the fatal estate of the Church. But when it falleth out so that the
brethren go together by the ears, and that the Church is on an uproar
within itself, it cannot be but that weak minds shall be troubled and
also faint; and especially when the controversy is about doctrine, which
alone is the holy bond of brotherly unity. Finally, there is nothing
which doth more indamage the gospel than civil discord, because it doth
not only pierce and wound weak conscience, but also minister occasion to
the wicked to backbite.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>Wherefore, we must diligently note this
history, that we may know that it is no new example, if among those who
profess the same gospel there arise some wranglings and strife about
doctrine, when proud men can get them a name, (whereof they are so
furiously desirous,) by no other means but by bringing in their own
inventions. It is certain, that as there is but one God, so there is but
one truth of this God.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) Therefore,
when Paul goeth about to exhort the faithful unto mutual consent, he
useth this argument, “One God, one faith, one baptism,” etc., (<span
id="iii.i-p8.2"></span>[Eph 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.i-p8.2"></span>.) But when we see wicked men arise, who go about
to divide \[rend\] the Church by their factions, and also either to
corrupt the gospel with their false and filthy \[spurious\] inventions,
or else to bring the same in suspicion, we ought to know the subtlety
\[artifice\] of Satan. Therefore, Paul saith elsewhere that heresies
come abroad, that those who are tried may be made manifest, (<span
id="iii.i-p8.3"></span>[1Co 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span
id="iii.i-p8.3"></span>.) And, assuredly, the Lord doth wonderfully make
void the subtlety of Satan, in that he trieth the faith of his by such
trials, and doth beautify his word with worthy and excellent victory;
and causeth the truth to shine more clearly which the wicked went about
to darken. But it is very convenient to weigh all the circumstances of
the history which Luke noteth.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>*Which came down from Judea.* This cloak and
color was very forcible to deceive even good men then. Jerusalem was
honored not without cause among all churches, because they reverenced it
even as their mother. For the gospel was deducted, as it were, by pipes
and conduits  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) from that fountain.
These seducers come thence; they pretend the apostles; they boast that
they bring nothing but that which they learned of them. They blind and
blear the eyes of the unskillful with this smoke; and those who are
light and wicked do greedily snatch at the color which is offered them.
The perturbation of the Church doth, like a tempest, shake those who
were otherwise good and moderate, so that they are enforced to stumble.
Therefore, we must note this subtlety of Satan, that he abuseth the
names of holy men that he may deceive the simple, who, being won with
the reverence of the men, dare not inquire after the thing itself. Luke
doth not express, indeed, with what affection these knaves were moved;
yet it is likely that perverse zeal was the cause which moved them to
set themselves against Paul and Barnabas; for there be certain churlish
natures which nothing can please but that which is their own. They had
seen that circumcision and other rites of the law were observed at
Jerusalem; wheresoever they become, they can abide nothing which is not
agreeable thereto, as if the example of one church did bind all the rest
of the churches with a certain law. And though such be carried with a
preposterous zeal to procure tumults, yet are they pricked inwardly with
their ambition, and with a certain kind of stubbornness. Nevertheless,
Satan hath that he would; for the minds of the godly have such a mist
cast before them that they can scarce know black from white.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>Therefore, we must beware first of this
plague, that some prescribe not a law to other some after their manner,
that the example of one church be not a prejudice  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) of a common rule. Also, we must use
another caution, that the persons of men do not hinder or darken the
examination of the matter or cause. For if Satan transfigure himself
into an angel of light, (<span id="iii.i-p12.2"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="iii.i-p12.2"></span>,)
and if, by sacrilegious boldness, he usurp the holy name of God, what
marvel is it if he do like wickedly deceive men under the names of holy
men? The end shall at length declare that the apostles meant nothing
less than  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) to lay the yoke of the
law upon the neck of the Gentiles; and yet Satan meant under this shift
to get in. So it falleth out oftentimes that those who contrary
\[oppose\] the doctrine of Christ, creep in under the title of his
servants. Therefore, there is one only remedy, to come to search out the
matter  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) with sound judgments; also
it behoveth us to prevent an offense, lest we think that the faithful
servants of God do therefore strive among themselves, because Satan doth
falsely abuse their names, that he may set certain shadows by the ears
together to terrify the simple.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span><span id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**2.** *When there was sedition arisen.*
This was no small trial, in that Paul and Barnabas are haled into a
troublesome tumult. There was mischief enough already in the matter
\[dissension\] itself; but it is a more cruel mischief when the
contention waxeth so hot, that they are enforced to fight with their
brethren as with enemies. Add, moreover, the infamy wherewith they saw
themselves burdened among the simple and unskillful, as if they would
trouble the peace of the Church with their stubbornness. For it falleth
out oftentimes so, that the faithful servants of Christ are envied
alone, and bear all the blame, after that they have been unjustly
troubled, and have faithfully employed themselves in defense of a good
cause. Therefore, they must be endued with invincible courage to despise
all false reports which are carried about concerning them. Therefore,
Paul boasteth in another place that he went through the midst of
seditions, (<span id="iii.i-p16.1"></span>[2Co
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005)<span id="iii.i-p16.1"></span>.)
But the servants of God must observe such moderation, that they abhor so
much as they can all discord; if at any time Satan raise tumults and
contentions, let them endeavor to appease them, and, finally, let them
do all that they can to foster and cherish unity. But again, on the
other side, when the truth of God is assailed, let them refuse no combat
for defense thereof; nor let them fear to oppose themselves valiantly,
though heaven and earth go together.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>And let us, being admonished by this
example, learn, so often as there ariseth any tumult in the Church,
wisely to weigh through whose fault it came, lest we rashly condemn the
faithful ministers of Christ, whose gravity is rather to be praised,
because they can abide so valiantly such violent assaults of Satan.
Secondly, let us call to mind that Satan was bridled by the wonderful
providence of God, that he might not put the doctrine of Paul to the
foil. For if he had been suffered to do hurt at his pleasure, so soon as
the faith of the Gentiles had been pulled down and overthrown, the
gospel preached by Paul should have fallen to the ground, and the gate
should have \[been\] shut against the calling of the Gentiles. Thirdly,
let us learn that we must in time prevent dissension, of what sort
soever it be, lest it break out into the flame of contention; because
Satan seeketh nothing else by the fans of dissension but to kindle so
many fires. But again, seeing we see the primitive Church on an uproar,
and the best servants of Christ exercised with sedition, if the same
thing befall us now, let us not fear as in some new and unwonted matter;
but, craving at the Lord’s hands such an end as he now made, let us pass
through tumults with the same tenor of faith.

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>*Unless ye be circumcised.* Luke setteth
\[defineth\] down briefly in these words the state of the question, to
wit, that these seducers went about to bind men’s consciences with
necessity of keeping the law. Circumcision is indeed mentioned alone in
this place; but it appeareth by the text that they moved the question
about the keeping of the whole Law. And, because circumcision was, as it
were, a solemn entrance and admission into other rites of the law,
therefore, by *synecdoche,* the whole law is comprehended under one
part. These enemies of Paul did not deny that Christ was the Messiah;
but though they gave him their names, they retained therewithal the old
ceremonies of the law.

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>The error might have seemed tolerable at the
first glimpse. Why doth not Paul then dissemble, at least, for some
short time, lest he shake the Church with conflict? for the disputation
was concerning external matters, concerning which Paul himself
forbiddeth elsewhere to stand and strive too much. But there were three
weighty causes which enforced him to gainstand. For, if the keeping of
the law be necessary, man’s salvation is tied to works, which must be
grounded in the grace of Christ alone, that the faith may be settled and
quiet. Therefore, when Paul saw the worship of the law set against the
free righteousness of faith, it was unlawful for him to hold his peace,
unless he would betray Christ. For, seeing the adversaries did deny that
any should be saved, save he which did observe the law of Moses, by this
means they did translate unto works the glory of salvation, which they
took from Christ, and having shaken assurance, they did vex miserable
souls with unquietness. Again, it was no small thing, neither of any
small importance, to spoil and rob faithful souls of the liberty gotten
by Christ’s blood. Though the inward liberty of the Spirit were common
to the fathers as well as to us, yet we know what Paul saith, that they
were shut up under the childish ward and custody of the law, so that
they did not much differ from servants; but we are loose from the
schoolmastership of the law after that Christ was revealed, (<span
id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>[Ga 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>,) and we have more liberty, the time of our
nonage being, as it were, ended. The third vice of this doctrine was,
because it darkened the light of the Church,  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) or at least did put in, as it were,
certain clouds, that Christ the Sun of righteousness might not give
perfect light. In sum, Christianity should shortly have come to nothing
if Paul should have yielded to such beginnings. Therefore, he entereth
the combat, not for the external uncircumcision of the flesh, but for
the free salvation of men. Secondly, that he may acquit and set free
godly consciences from the curse of the law, and the guilt of eternal
death. Last of all, that after all hindrances are driven away, the
brightness of the grace of Christ may shine as in a pleasant and clear
heaven. Moreover, these knaves did great injury to the law when they did
wickedly corrupt the right use thereof. This was the natural and right
office of the law, to lead men by the hand, like a schoolmaster, unto
Christ; therefore, it could not be worse corrupt than when, under color
of it, the power and grace of Christ were diminished.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>After this sort must we look into the
fountains of all questions, lest by our silence we betray the truth of
God, so often as we see Satan, by his subtlety, aim right at it; neither
let our minds be changed and wax faint through any perils, or reproaches
and slanders, because we must constantly defend pure religion, though
heaven and earth must \[should\] go together. The servants of Christ
must be no fighters, (<span id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>[2Ti
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)<span
id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>;)therefore, if there be any contention risen,
they must rather study to appease and pacify the same by their
moderation, than by and by to blow to the assault.  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) Secondly, they must take good heed of
superfluous and vain conflicts; neither shall they handle controversies
of any small weight; but when they see Satan wax so proud, that religion
cannot any longer continue safe and sound unless he be prevented, they
must needs take a good heart to them, and rise to resist; neither let
them fear to enter even most hateful combats. The name of peace is
indeed plausible and sweet, but cursed is that peace which is purchased
with so great loss, that we suffer the doctrine of Christ to perish, by
which alone we grow together into godly and holy unity.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>The Papists cause us at this day to be sore
hated, as if we had been the causers of deadly tumults, wherewith the
world is shaken; but we can well defend ourselves, because the
blasphemies which we endeavored to reprove were more cruel  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) than that it was lawful for us to hold
our peace; there we are not to be blamed, because we have taken upon us
to enter combats in defense of that cause, for which we were to fight
even with the very angels. Let them cry till their throats be sore;
Paul’s example is sufficient for us, that we must not be either cold or
slack in defending the doctrine of godliness when the ministers of Satan
seek to overthrow it with might and main; for their brainsick
distemperature ought not to pass  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)
the constancy of the servants of God. When Paul did zealously set
himself against the false apostles, sedition began at length  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) by reason of the conflict; and yet the
Spirit of God doth not therefore reprove him; but doth rather with due
praises commend that fortitude which he had given that holy man.

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>*They determined, etc.* The Spirit of God
put them in mind of this remedy to appease the tumult, which might
otherwise have gone farther with doing much hurt, whereby we be also
taught, that we must always seek such means as be fit  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) for ending discord; because God doth so
highly commend peace, let the faithful show  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) that they do what they can to nourish the
peace of the Church. The truth must always be first in order with them,
in defense whereof they must be afraid of no tumults; yet they must so
temper their heat that they refuse no means of godly agreement; yea, let
them of their own accord invent what ways soever they can, and let them
be witty in seeking them out. Therefore, we must observe this mean, lest
being carried away through immoderate vehemency of zeal we be carried
beyond the just bounds; for we must be courageous in defense of true
doctrine, not stubborn, nor rash; therefore, let us learn to join
together these two virtues which the Spirit of God commandeth in Paul.
When he is drawn into the field by the wicked, he is not afraid boldly
to offer himself; but when he doth meekly admit the remedy which was
offered, he declareth plainly what small desire he had to fight, for
otherwise he might have boasted that he did not pass for the apostles,
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) and so have stood stoutly in that;
but the desire of peace did not suffer him to refuse their judgment.
Moreover, ignorant and weak men should have conceived a sinister
opinion, if they should have seen two men only separated from all the
servants of Christ; and godly teachers must in no case neglect this way
to cherish faith, that they may show that they agree with the Church.

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>Paul, indeed, did not depend upon the beck
of the apostles, that he would change his opinion if he should have
found them contrary to him, who would not have given place even to the
very angels, as he boasteth in first chapter to the Galatians, (<span
id="iii.i-p31.1"></span>[Ga 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span
id="iii.i-p31.1"></span>;) but lest the wicked should slanderously
report that he was a man that stood too much in his own conceit, and
which was too proud, and which did please himself with an unseemly
contempt of all men, he offered to give an account of his doctrine, as
it became him, and as it was profitable for the Church; secondly, he
presented himself before the apostles with sure hope of victory, because
he knew full well what would be their judgment, seeing they were guided
by the same Spirit wherewith he was governed. Notwithstanding, it may be
demanded for what purpose the men of Antioch sent Paul and Barnabas unto
the rest of the apostles; for if they did so greatly reverence them,
that they stood in doubt until they had given judgment on this side or
that, their faith was hitherto vain and altogether none? But the answer
is easy, seeing they knew that all the apostles were sent  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) by Christ alone with the same
commandments, and that they had the same Spirit given them, they were
fully persuaded of the end and success, and, undoubtedly, this counsel
proceeded from honest and stout men, who were not ignorant that the
knaves did falsely pretend the names of James and Peter. Wherefore, they
sought nothing else but that the apostles might further a good matter
with their consent.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span>To the same end were all holy synods
assembled since the beginning, that grave men, and such as were well
exercised in the word of God, might decide controversies, not after
their own pleasure, but according to the authority of God. This is worth
the noting, lest the Papists pierce any man with their loud outcries,
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) who, to the end they may overthrow
Christ and his gospel, and put out all the light of godliness, thrust
upon us Councils, as if every definition and determination of men were
to be counted an heavenly oracle; but if the holy Fathers had their
sitting at this day, they would cry with one mouth, that there was
nothing more unlawful for them, neither did they mean any thing less
than to set down or deliver any thing without having the word of Christ
for their guide, who was their only teacher, \[master,\] even as he is
ours. I omit this, that the Papists lean only unto untimely  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) Councils, which breathe out nothing but
gross ignorance and barbarism; but even the best and most choice must be
reckoned in that number, that they may be subject to the word of God.
There is a grievous complaint of Gregory Nazianzene extant, that there
was never any Council which had a good end. What excellency soever did
flourish and was in force in the Church, it cannot be denied but that it
began to decay an hundred years after; therefore, if that holy man were
now living, how stoutly would he reject the toys of the Papists, who,
without all shame, most impudently bring in the jugglings of visors
instead of lawful Councils, and that to that end, that the Word of God
may pack,  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) so soon as a few bald
and foolish men have set down whatsoever pleased them?

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span><span id="iii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span>**3.** *Being brought on the way by the
Church.* Whereas, by the common consent of the Church, there were joined
to Paul and Barnabas companions, who might, for duty’s sake, conduct
them, we may thereby gather, that all the godly were on their side; and
that they did never otherwise think but that the cause was theirs as
well as the apostles. Wherefore they determined the journey of Paul and
Barnabas with like minds as they took it in hand; to wit, that they
might tame and put to silence those troublesome spirits who did falsely
make boast of the apostles. Whereas he saith shortly after, that they
certified the brethren in their voyage of the wonderful conversion of
the Gentiles, it is a testimony and token that they came not to
Jerusalem fraught with fear; but that they did even without fear stoutly
profess that which they had taught before. Therefore, they come not to
plead their cause before their judges; but that they may, with common
consent and judgment, on both sides, approve that which was commanded by
God touching the abolishing of ceremonies. For though they did not
despise the judgment of the apostles, yet because they knew that it was
not lawful for them, neither for the apostles, to decree otherwise
concerning the cause, it did not become them to stand as men whose
matter is handled at the bar.  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)
Thence cometh the boldness of rejoicing; to this end  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) tendeth the joy of the godly, whereby
they subscribe both to the doctrine of Paul and also the calling of the
Gentiles.

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span><span id="iii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span>**4.** *They were received of the Church.*
By this word *Church* he meaneth the multitude itself and the whole
body; that done, he assigneth a peculiar place to the apostles and
elders, by whom Paul and Barnabas were specially received. Furthermore,
because the apostles had no certain place of abode at Jerusalem, but
went ever now and then sometimes to one place and sometimes to another,
whithersoever occasion did call them, that church had elders to whom the
ordinary government of the Church was committed; and what the one
function differeth from the other we have before declared, (<span
id="iii.i-p43.1"></span>[Ac 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span
id="iii.i-p43.1"></span>.) And hereby it appeareth what brotherly
courtesy there was in the apostles and elders, because they do not only
courteously receive Paul and Barnabas, but so soon as they hear what
success they had with their pains they took, they magnify the grace of
God. Luke repeateth again that form of speech which we had before in the
chapter next going before, when he saith, that they declared whatsoever
things God had done with them. Wherein we must remember that which I
said before, that God is not made a fellow-laborer, but all the whole
praise of the work is ascribed to him. Therefore it is said, that he did
that with Paul and Barnabas which he did by them, as he is said to deal
mercifully with us when he helpeth our miseries.

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span><span id="iii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span>**5.** *Certain of the sect of the
Pharisees.* It is not without cause that Luke expresseth what kind of
men they were which went about to trouble or hinder Paul, even at
Jerusalem also. And it is to be thought that the evil flowed from that
fountain; and that Luke doth now more plainly express, that there brake
out now also fans \[disturbers\] out of that very same sect, from whence
the authors of that wicked dissension came. For though they had given
Christ their names, yet there remained relics of their former nature. We
know how proud the Pharisees were, how haughty, how lofty their looks
were;  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) all which they would have
forgotten if they had truly put on Christ. Like as there remained no
Phariseeism in Paul, but a great part had gotten the habit of
stubbornness by long custom, which they could not shake off so easily by
and by. Forasmuch as there reigned most of all among them hypocrisy,
they were too much addicted to external rites, which are coverings for
vices. They were likewise puffed up with pride, so that they did
tyrannously covet to make all other men subject to their decrees. It is
well-known how sore sick the monks are of both diseases. Whereby it
cometh to pass, that nothing is more cruel than they to oppress the
Church, nothing is more wicked or forward than they to despise the Word
of God. Moreover, we see many of them which came out of those dens which
have cast from them their cowl, and yet can they never forget those
conditions which they learned there.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** And the apostles and elders came
together, that they might look to this business. **7.** And after there
had been great disputing, Peter arose and said to them, Men and
brethren, ye know how that of old time God did choose in us, that by my
mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the gospel and believe.
**8.** And God, who is lower of the hearts, bare witness to them giving
them his Holy Spirit, as to us. **9.** And he put no difference between
them and us, after that by faith he had purified their hearts. **10.**
Therefore, why do ye now tempt God to lay a yoke upon the necks of the
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? **11.**
But we believe that we have salvation through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, even as they.

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span><span id="iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *The apostles and elders met
together.* Luke saith, not that all the whole Church was gathered
together, but those who did excel in doctrine and judgment, and those
who, according to their office, were competent  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) judges in this matter. It may be, indeed,
that the disputation was had in presence of the people. But lest any man
should think that the common people were suffered hand over head to
handle the matter, Luke doth plainly make mention of the apostles and
elders, as it was more meet that they should hear the matter and to
decide it.  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) But let us know, that
here is prescribed by God a form and an order in assembling synods, when
there ariseth any controversy which cannot otherwise be decided. For
seeing that many did daily gainstand Paul, this disputation alone, by
reason whereof there was great ruin like to ensue, and which was already
come to hot combats, did enforce him to go to Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span><span id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** *And when there had been great
disputation.* Though there were choice made of grave men, and such as
were public teachers of the Church, yet could not they agree by and by.
 <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Whereby appeareth how the Lord did
exercise his Church, even then, by the infirmity of men, that it might
learn to be wise with humility. Moreover, he suffered (even in that
company and assembly wherein he was chief) the principal point of
Christian doctrine to be diversely tossed and handled, lest we should
wonder, if at any time it so fall out, that men, who are otherwise
learned and godly, do, through unskillfulness, fall into an error. For
some were not so quick witted \[acute\] that they could thoroughly see
into the greatness of the matter. So that when they judge that the law
ought to be kept, being unadvisedly carried away with the zeal of the
law, they see not into how deep a labyrinth they throw the consciences
of other men, and their own also. They thought that circumcision was an
eternal and inviolable token of God’s covenant; the same opinion had
they of all the whole law. Wherefore Peter standeth chiefly upon this,
to show the state of the question, which the most of them knew not. And
his oration hath two members. For, first, he proveth by the authority of
God that the Gentiles must not be enforced to keep the law; secondly, he
teacheth that all man’s salvation is overthrown, if the conscience be
once caught in this snare. Therefore, the former part (wherein he
declareth that he was sent of God to teach the Gentiles, and that the
Holy Spirit came down upon them) tendeth to this end, that men did not
unadvisedly disannul the ceremonies of the law, but that God is the
author of that disannulling. And so soon as the authority of God is
brought forth, all doubting is taken away, because this is all our
wisdom, to stay ourselves upon the authority, government, and
commandment of God,  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) and to make
more account of his beck and pleasure than of all reasons. Now, it is
meet that we ponder the words of Peter, whereby he proveth that this was
granted to the Gentiles by God, to be free from the yoke of the law.

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>*You know.* He calleth them to bear
witness, (and unto them he appealeth,) lest any man should think that he
is about to speak of some dark and doubtful thing. The history was well
known to them all. That which remained, he showeth that they were blind
even in most clear light, yea, because they had not long ago learned
that which was openly showed. He calleth the beginning of the preaching
of the gospel old days, or the old time, as if he should say, ago, as it
were since the first beginning of the Church, after that Christ began to
gather to himself any people.

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span>*God did choose in us.* The word *choose*
doth signify to appoint or decree. Though Peter doth comprehend as well
the free election of God as the choice whereby God did adopt the
Gentiles to be his people; therefore, he chose, that is, as it were,
making choice, that he might show a token of his free election in the
Gentiles, he would that by my mouth they should hear the doctrine of the
gospel. These words, *in us,* do import as much as in our sight, or we
being witnesses, or among us.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) For
his meaning is, that he declareth nothing but that which they knew full
well; to wit, which was done before their eyes. The phrase is common
enough both among the Grecians, and also among the Hebretians,
\[Hebrews,\] unless we had liefer resolve it as some other do, He hath
chosen me out of this company.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>*And believe.* This was a seal to confirm
the calling of the Gentiles. The office of teaching was enjoined Peter
by an oracle; but the fruit which came of his doctrine doth make his
ministry noble and authentical, as they call it. For, seeing that the
elect are illuminate into the faith by a peculiar grace of the Spirit,
doctrine shall bring forth no fruit, unless the Lord show forth his
power in his ministers, in teaching the minds of those inwardly which
hear, and in drawing their hearts inwardly. Therefore, seeing the Lord
commanded that the doctrine of the gospel should be brought unto the
Gentiles, he did sanctify them to himself, that they might be no longer
profane. But the solemn consecration was then perfect in all points,
when he imprinted in their hearts, by faith, the mark of their adoption.
The sentence which followeth immediately is to be understood as set down
by way of exposition;  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) for Peter
annexeth the visible graces of the Spirit unto faith, as, assuredly,
they were nothing else but an addition thereof. Therefore, seeing that
the Gentiles are ingrafted into the people of God without circumcision
and ceremonies, Peter gathereth that it was not well done to lay upon
them any necessity to keep the law. Yet it seemeth to be but a weak
argument to prove their election withal, because the Holy Ghost came
down upon them. For they were such gifts that they could not reason from
the same, that they were reckoned in the number of the godly. But it is
the Spirit of regeneration alone which distinguisheth the children of
God from strangers. I answer, Though men, who were otherwise vain, were
endued with the gift of tongues and such like, yet doth Peter take for a
thing which all men grant, that which was known, that God had sealed in
Cornelius and his cousins \[relatives\] his free adoption by the visible
grace of the Spirit, as if he should point out his children with his
finger.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span>*The knower of the hearts.* He applieth
this adjunct to God, according to the circumstance of the present
matter; and it hath under it a secret contrariety,  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) that men are more addicted to external
purity, because they judge according to their gross and earthly sense
and understanding; but God doth look into the heart. Therefore, Peter
teacheth that they judge preposterously in this matter according to
man’s understanding, seeing that the inward pureness of the heart alone
is here to be esteemed, which we know not.  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) And by this means doth he bridle our
rashness, lest, taking to ourselves more than we ought, we murmur
against the judgment of God. As if he should say, if thou see no reason
of that testimony which God gave them, think with thyself what great
difference there is between him and thee. For thou art holden with
external pomp according to thy gross nature, which must be abandoned
when we come to the throne of God,  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)
where the hearts of men are known spiritually. But, in the mean season,
we must note a general doctrine, that the eyes of God do not look upon
the vain pomp of men,  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) but upon
the integrity of men’s hearts, as it is written, (<span
id="iii.ii-p21.2"></span>[Jer 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span
id="iii.ii-p21.2"></span>.) Whereas the old interpreter and Erasmus
translate it, that God knoweth the hearts, it doth not sufficiently
express that which Luke saith in Greek; for when he calleth God <span
id="iii.ii-p21.3"></span>καρδιαγνωστην, he setteth him against  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) men, who judge rather for the most
part by the outward appearance; and therefore they may be <span
id="iii.ii-p22.2"></span>προσωπογνωσται, or *knowers of the face,* if
they be compared with God.

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span><span id="iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span>**9.** *And he put no difference.* There
was indeed some difference, because the Gentiles who were uncircumcised
were suddenly admitted unto the covenant of eternal life; whereas the
Jews were prepared by circumcision unto faith. But Peter’s meaning is,
that they were both chosen  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)
together by God unto the hope of the same inheritance, and that they
were extolled into the like degree of honor, that they might be the
children of God and members of Christ, and, finally, the holy seed of
Abraham, a priestly and princely generation. Whereupon it followeth,
that they cannot without sacrilege be counted unclean, sithence God hath
chosen them to be a peculiar people, and hath consecrated them to be
holy vessels of his temple. For the wall of separation being pulled
down, whereby the Gentiles and Jews were divided among themselves, he
hath joined the Gentiles to the Jews, that they might grow together into
one body, (<span id="iii.ii-p25.2"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="iii.ii-p25.2"></span>;)
and that I may so say, he hath mixed circumcision and uncircumcision
together, that as well those of the household as strangers may be one in
Christ, and may make one Church; and that there may not be any longer
either Jew or Grecian.

<span id="iii.ii-p26"></span>*Seeing that by faith he hath purified.*
This member is answerable to that former adjunct which he applieth to
God; as if he should say, that God, who knoweth the hearts, did inwardly
purge the Gentiles, when he vouchsafed to make them partakers of his
adoption, that they might be endued with spiritual cleanness. But he
addeth farther, that this purity did consist in faith. Therefore he
teacheth, first, that the Gentiles have true holiness without
ceremonies, which may suffice before God’s judgment-seat. Secondly, he
teacheth that this is attained unto by faith, and from it doth it flow.
In like sort, Paul gathereth, that uncircumcision doth not hinder a man
but that he may be counted holy and just before God, (<span
id="iii.ii-p26.1"></span>[Ro 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii-p26.1"></span>;) because circumcision did follow after
righteousness in the person of Abraham, and by order of time it was
latter, \[posterior.\]

<span id="iii.ii-p27"></span>But here ariseth a question, whether that
purity which the fathers had in times past were unlike to that which God
gave now to the Gentiles? For it seemeth that Peter distinguisheth the
Gentiles from the Jews by this mark, because, being content with the
cleanness of the heart alone, they need no help of the law. I answer,
that the one of them differ from the other, not in substance, but in
form, \[only.\] For God had respect always unto the inward cleanness of
the heart; and the ceremonies were given to the old \[ancient\] people
only for this cause, that they might help their faith. So that
cleanness, as touching figures and exercises, was only for a time, until
the coming of Christ, which hath no place among us at this day; like as
there remaineth from the very beginning of the world unto the end the
same true worship of God, to wit, the spiritual worship; yet is there
great difference in the visible form. Now, we see that the fathers did
not obtain righteousness by ceremonies, neither were they therefore pure
before God, but by the cleanness of the heart. For the ceremonies of
themselves were of no importance to justify them; but they were only
helps, which did accidentally (that I may so term it) purge them; yet so
that the fathers and we had the same truth. Now, when Christ came, all
that which was accidental did vanish away; and, therefore, seeing the
shadows be driven away, there remaineth the bare and plain pureness of
the heart.

<span id="iii.ii-p28"></span>Thus is that objection easily answered
which the Jews think cannot possibly be answered. Circumcision is called
the eternal covenant, or of the world, (<span
id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ge
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013)<span id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>;)
therefore, say they, it was not to be abolished. If any man shall say
that this is not referred unto the visible sign, but rather unto the
thing figured, it shall be well answered; but there is another answer
besides this. Seeing that the kingdom of Christ was a certain renewing
of the world, there shall no inconvenience follow if he made an end of
 <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) all the shadows of the law,
forasmuch as the perpetuity of the law is grounded in Christ. I come now
unto the second member, where Peter placeth the cleanness \[purity\] of
the Gentiles in faith. Why doth not he say, In perfection of virtues, or
holiness of life, save only because men have righteousness from another,
and not from themselves? For, if men, by living well and justly, should
purchase righteousness, or if they should be clean before God by nature,
this sentence of Peter should fall to the ground. Therefore, the Spirit
doth in these words plainly pronounce that all mankind is polluted, and
with filthiness defiled; secondly, that their blots can by no other
means be wiped away than by the grace of Christ. For, seeing that faith
is the remedy whereby the Lord doth freely help us, it is set as well
against the common nature of all men, as against every man’s own merits.
When I say that all mankind is polluted, my meaning is, that we bring
nothing from our mother’s womb but mere filthiness, and that there is no
righteousness in our nature which can reconcile us to God. Man’s soul
was indeed endued with singular gifts at the first; but all parts
thereof are so corrupt with sin, that there remaineth in it no drop of
pureness any longer; therefore we must seek for cleanness without
ourselves.

<span id="iii.ii-p30"></span>For if any man allege that it may be
recovered by merits of works, there is nothing more absurd than to
imagine that wicked and coward nature can deserve anything. Therefore,
it resteth that men seek elsewhere for that which they shall never be
able to find within themselves. And surely it is the office of faith to
translate that unto us which is proper to Christ, and to make it ours by
free participation. So that there is a mutual relation between faith and
the grace of Christ. For faith doth not make us clean, as a virtue or
quality poured into our souls; but because it receiveth that cleanness
which is offered in Christ. We must also note the phrase, that God
purifieth the hearts; whereby Luke doth both make God the author of
faith, and he teacheth also that cleanness is his benefit. To make
short, he signifieth unto us, that that is given to men by the grace of
God which they cannot give to themselves. But forasmuch as we said that
faith taketh that of Christ which it transpoureth \[transferreth\] into
us; we must now see how the grace of Christ doth make us clean, that we
may please God. And there is a double manner of purging, because Christ
doth offer and present us clean and just in the sight of his Father, by
putting away our sins daily, which he hath once purged by his blood;
secondly, because, by mortifying the lusts of the flesh by his Spirit,
he reformeth us unto holiness of life. I do willingly comprehend both
kinds of purging under these words; because Luke doth not touch one kind
of purging only, but he teacheth that the whole perfection thereof
consisteth without the ceremonies of the law.

<span id="iii.ii-p31"></span><span id="iii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p32"></span>**10.** *Now, therefore, why tempt ye?*
This is the other part of the sermon wherein Peter showeth how deadly
that doctrine is which Paul’s enemies sought to bring in; to wit, which
might drown godly souls in despair. He inferreth and gathereth out of
the former member, that God is tempted if the Gentiles be enforced to
keep the law of necessity;  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) he
riseth higher, and pierceth even unto the very fountain. For he
reasoneth hitherto, that the Gentiles should have injury done them if
there be more required at their hands than God will; and seeing that he
made them equal with the holy people, and did vouchsafe them the honor
of adoption, it was. an unmeet and inconvenient \[absurd\] matter that
they should be rejected, and so his liberality should be restrained. For
he saith last of all, that this faith is sufficient for them, though
they want ceremonies. And now he taketh an higher principle, that those
who tie men’s salvation to the works of the law leave them no good hope;
but rather throw the whole world headlong into horrible destruction, if
it can obtain salvation by no other means but by keeping the law. With
what arguments he proveth this we shall see in their place. As touching
the words, seeing the Scripture saith, that God is tempted diverse ways,
Peter’s meaning is, in this place, that God is provoked as it were of
set purpose, when there is an heavier burden laid upon men than they be
able to bear; and that his power is brought within bounds  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) when that yoke is bound which he doth
loose, which is nothing else but by striving against nature to match
ourselves with giants, as they say.

<span id="iii.ii-p35"></span>*That the yoke should be laid upon their
necks.* The meaning of the words is plain, that God is tempted when
there is laid upon men’s consciences a sorer burden than they are able
to bear, and by this means the salvation of men’s souls is sore shaken;
seeing that they must needs by this means be drowned in despair, which
cannot be without their destruction. But that injury which is done to
God is no whit more tolerable, when as he is robbed of his right that he
may not have liberty to deliver us. But we may easily gather out of the
thing itself that he doth not speak of the ceremonies only. The
servitude of the old training up under the law was hard and laborious;
but yet it were too absurd to call it a yoke that cannot be borne; and
we know that not only holy men, but also even most hypocrites, did well
and exactly accomplish the outward observation of the rites.

<span id="iii.ii-p36"></span>Moreover, it were not any hard matter to
satisfy the moral law, if it were content with corporeal obedience only,
and did not require spiritual righteousness; for it is granted to many
to bridle their hands and feet; but to moderate all the affections so
that there may reign perfect abstinence and purity, as well in the soul
as in the body, this is too hard a matter.

<span id="iii.ii-p37"></span>Therefore, those be too foolish who
restrain unto ceremonies Peter’s words, whereby the weakness of men to
perform the righteousness of the heart is expressed; which doth not only
far pass their strength, but is altogether contrary to nature. These men
were, I warrant you, deceived by one reason, because the question was
moved concerning ceremonies only; but they do remember that Peter did
more attentively and more wisely consider as became him, what a
labyrinth this error (to look to, but light) did bring with it. The
false apostles did avouch, that no man could attain unto salvation
unless he did keep the ceremonies. If man’s salvation be tied to works,
it shall be no longer grounded in the grace of Christ, and so, by this
means, free reconciliation shall fall flat to the ground. Now, seeing
that man’s strength is unable to keep the law, all men are subject to
the curse which the Lord there denounceth against the transgressors; and
so, by this means, all men shall come in danger of despair, seeing that
they see themselves guilty of eternal death by the law. Peradventure the
false apostles understood these things craftily. But Peter pierceth the
very fountain, that he may bring to light the deadly poison of that
doctrine; and thus must we do, so often as Satan doth craftily thrust in
wicked errors.

<span id="iii.ii-p38"></span>At this day we seem to some to be too
contentious, when as we do so stoutly stand in this, that men must not
pray for the dead; for it is both a most ancient custom, neither is it a
thing to look to very dangerous, though men pour out superfluous prayer;
yet \[nay\] it is a plausible opinion, because it carrieth some color of
human godliness.

<span id="iii.ii-p39"></span>Furthermore, unskillful men judge thus,
because they seek. not out the head spring. For, if we grant that men
may pray for the dead, we must also admit this, that they are now
punished by the judgment of God, because they made not satisfaction in
this life for their sins. And so, by this means the force of Christ’s
satisfaction is translated unto the works of men. Secondly, the rule of
praying aright is overthrown, if men may pray at all adventure, without
the word of God. This is also a greater absurdity than that we ought
lightly to pass over it. In sum, we can never give true judgment of any
question, unless, having thoroughly ripped up the fountain of that
doctrine which is called in question, we deduct all consequences which
it bringeth with it. Therefore, it is no marvel if Peter, to the end he
may pull the false apostles out (by the ears,) as it were out of their
lurking dens, do generally dispute touching the whole law; because he
doth nothing else but open the matter itself, whereof the simple were
ignorant; that they may all see what a deadly doctrine it is, which doth
both extinguish the grace of Christ, and drown souls in the horrible
dungeon of despair.  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)

<span id="iii.ii-p41"></span>*Neither we nor our fathers.* Peter doth
not only dispute what men have done indeed, but what they were able to
do; neither doth he speak only of the common riff-raff,  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) but of the holy fathers. Seeing that
he denieth that they were able to bear the yoke of the law, it is
manifest that the law cannot possibly be kept. I know that Jerome’s
saying is so generally received, that it is, as it were, an undoubted
and most certain maxim, If any man say that it is a thing impossible to
keep the law, let him be accursed; but we must not hearken to any voice
of man which is contrary to the judgment of the Spirit of God. We hear
what the Spirit pronounceth in this place by the mouth of Peter, not
concerning the will and works of men, but touching their ability and
power. And hereunto agreeth Paul, affirming that it was an impossible
thing that the law should give us life, forasmuch as it was weak through
the flesh. Indeed, if any man were able to fulfill the law, he should
find the life which is there promised; but forasmuch as Paul denieth
that life can be gotten by the law, it followeth that there is farther
and higher righteousness required there than man is able to perform. I
confess, indeed, that Jerome doth not wholly grant to the strength of
nature power to fulfill the law, but partly also to the grace of God, as
he doth afterward expound himself, that a faithful man, holpen by the
grace of the Spirit, may be said to be able to fulfill the law. But even
that mitigation is not true. For, if we do weigh the strength of nature
only, men shall not only be unable to bear the yoke of the law, but they
shall not be able to move so much as a finger to perform the least jot
of the law. And surely if that be true, that all the cogitations of
man’s mind are wicked from his childhood, (<span
id="iii.ii-p42.2"></span>[Ge 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)<span
id="iii.ii-p42.2"></span>;) that all the understandings of flesh  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) are enemies to God, (<span
id="iii.ii-p43.2"></span>[Ro 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii-p43.2"></span>;) that there is none which seeketh after God,
(<span id="iii.ii-p43.3"></span>[Ps
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span id="iii.ii-p43.3"></span>;)
and other such places, which are common in the Scripture, tending to the
same end, but especially which are cited by Paul in the third to the
Romans, (<span id="iii.ii-p43.4"></span>[Ro
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011)<span id="iii.ii-p43.4"></span>,)
man’s power and ability to fulfill the law shall not only be weak and
lame, but altogether none to begin.  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="iii.ii-p45"></span>Therefore, we must thus think, that even
the very faithful, after they being regenerate by the Spirit of God, do
study to attain unto the righteousness of the law, do perform,
notwithstanding, but the half, and far less than half, not the whole.
For doubtless Peter speaketh not in this place of the epicure  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) or profane men; but of Abraham, of
Moses, and of other holy fathers which were the most perfect in the
world; and yet he saith that these fainted under the burden of the law,
because it did pass their strength. It is hatefully objected that the
Spirit of God is blasphemed when as ability to fulfill the law is taken
away from his grace and help; but we may readily answer, because the
question is not what the grace of the Spirit is able to do, but what
that measure of grace is able to do which God doth divide to every one
in this life. For we must always consider what God doth promise to do;
neither let us unadvisedly ask this question, whether that can be done
which he himself doth testify shall never be, and which he will not have
done? He promiseth the grace and aid of the Spirit to the faithful,
whereby they may be able to resist the lusts of the flesh, and to subdue
them; yet shall they not quite abolish and drive them away. He promiseth
them grace, whereby they may walk in newness of life; yet shall they not
be able to run so swiftly as the law requireth. For he will have them
kept under during their whole life, that they may fly to beg pardon. If
it be unlawful to separate from the power of God’s counsel, and the
order by him set down, it is a foolish and vain cavil, whereby the
adversaries go about to burden us, when as they say that we diminish the
power of God; nay rather, they transform God, when they hold that his
counsel and purpose can be altered.

<span id="iii.ii-p47"></span>The Pelagians did in times past, in like
sort, burden  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) Augustine. He
answereth, that though it be a thing possible that the law should be
fulfilled, yet is that sufficient for him, that no man did ever fulfill
it, and that the Scripture doth not testify that it shall be fulfilled
until the end of the world. By which words he delivereth himself from
their importunate subtlety. But there was no cause why he should doubt,
but freely and flatly grant that it might be fulfilled, the Holy Ghost
being the author. For we must limit the grace of the Spirit, that it may
agree with the promises. Furthermore, we have already declared how far
the promises reach. There is no man which moveth any question concerning
this, whether God be not able if he will to make men perfect; but they
dote foolish which separate his power from his counsel, whereof they
have an evident and plain testimony in the Scripture. God doth plainly
declare a hundred times what he will, and what he hath determined to do:
to go any farther is sacrilege.

<span id="iii.ii-p49"></span>Jerome was enforced by reason of philosophy
to hurl out the thunderbolt of his curse against Peter and Paul;  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) because the laws must be applied unto
their hability for whom they be appointed; which, as I confess to take
place in man’s laws, so I utterly deny that it is good as touching the
law of God, which, in exacting righteousness, doth not respect what man
is able to do, but what he ought to do.

<span id="iii.ii-p51"></span>Though here ariseth a harder question,
“Whether the law were not given to this end, that it might enforce men
to obey God? And this should be in vain, unless the Spirit of God should
direct the faithful to keep it; and that the solemn protestation of
Moses seemeth to put the matter out of doubt, when he saith that he
giveth precepts to the Jews, not such as they may read, but indeed
fulfill, (<span id="iii.ii-p51.1"></span>[De
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span id="iii.ii-p51.1"></span>;)
whence we gather that the yoke was laid upon the neck of the Jews when
the law was given, that it might make them subject to God, that they
might not live as them lusted.” I answer, that the law is counted a yoke
two ways. For, inasmuch as it bridleth the lusts of the flesh and
delivereth a rule of godly and holy life, it is meet that the children
of God take this yoke upon them; but, inasmuch as it doth exactly
prescribe what we owe to God, and doth not promise life without adding
the condition of perfect obedience, and doth again denounce a curse if
we shall in any point offend, it is a yoke which no man is able to bear.
I will show this more plainly.

<span id="iii.ii-p52"></span>The plain doctrine of good life, wherein
God doth invite us unto himself, is a yoke which we must all of us
willingly take up; for there is nothing more absurd than that God should
not govern man’s life, but that he should wander at pleasure without any
bridle. Therefore, we must not refuse the yoke of the law, if the simple
doctrine thereof be considered. But these sayings do otherwise qualify
(that I may so term it) the law.

<span id="iii.ii-p53"></span>“He which shall do these things shall live
in theme” etc.  
(<span id="iii.ii-p53.2"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="iii.ii-p53.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii-p54"></span>Again,

<span id="iii.ii-p55"></span>“Cursed is he which continueth not in all
things which are written,”  
(<span id="iii.ii-p55.2"></span>[De
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span id="iii.ii-p55.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.ii-p56"></span>that it may begin to be a yoke which no man
can bear.

<span id="iii.ii-p57"></span>For, so long as salvation is promised to
the perfect keeping of the law alone, and every transgression is called
into judgment, mankind is utterly undone. In this respect doth Peter
affirm that God is tempted, when man’s arrogance doth burden the
consciences of men with the law; for it is not his purpose to deny but
that men must be governed by the doctrine of the law, and so he granteth
that they be under the law  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) not
simply  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) to teach, but also to
humble men with the guilt of eternal death. Considering that that
quality was annexed unto doctrine, he affirmeth that the souls of the
godly must not be tied with the yoke of the law, because by this means
it should of necessity come to pass that they should be drowned in
eternal destruction. But, when as not only the grace of the Holy Spirit
is present to govern us, but also free forgiveness of sins to deliver
and acquit us from the curse of the law; then is that of Moses
fulfilled, that the commandment is not above us, (<span
id="iii.ii-p59.2"></span>[De
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)<span id="iii.ii-p59.2"></span>;)
and then do we also perceive how sweet the yoke of Christ is, and how
light his burden is, (<span id="iii.ii-p59.3"></span>[Mt
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="iii.ii-p59.3"></span>.)
For, because we know that through the mercy of God that is forgiven us,
which is wanting through the infirmity of the flesh, we do cheerfully,
and without any grief,  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) take
upon us that which he enjoineth us. Wherefore, so that the rigor of the
law be taken away, the doctrine of the law shall not only be tolerable,
but also joyful and pleasant; neither must we refuse the bridle which
doth govern us mildly, and cloth not urge us sorer than is expedient.

<span id="iii.ii-p61"></span><span id="iii.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p62"></span>**11.** *By the grace of Jesus Christ.*
Peter compareth these two together as contrary the one to the other; to
have hope  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) in the grace of
Christ, and to be under the yoke of the law; which comparison doth
greatly set out the justification of Christ, inasmuch as we gather
thereby, that those are justified by faith who, being free and quit from
the yoke of the law, seek for salvation in the grace of Jesus Christ.
Furthermore, I said before that the yoke of the law is made of two
cords. The former is, “He which doth these things shall live in them;”
the other is, “Cursed is every one which doth not continue in all the
commandments.” Let us return unto the contrary member. If we cannot
otherwise attain unto salvation by the grace of Christ, unless the yoke
of the law be taken away, it followeth that salvation is not placed in
keeping the law, neither are those which believe in Christ subject to
the curse of the law; for if he could be saved through grace, who is as
yet enwrapped in the yoke of the law, then should Peter’s reasoning be
but foolish, which is drawn from contraries: thus, We hope for salvation
by the grace of Christ; therefore we are not under the yoke of the law.
Unless there were a disagreement between the grace of Christ and the
yoke of the law, Peter should deceive us.  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116)

<span id="iii.ii-p65"></span>Wherefore, those must needs depart from the
righteousness of the law, whosoever desire to find life in Christ; for
this contrariety appertaineth not unto doctrine, but unto the cause of
justification.

<span id="iii.ii-p66"></span>Whereby is also refuted their surmise,
 <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) who say that we are justified
by the grace of Christ, because he regenerateth us by his Spirit, and
giveth us strength to fulfill the law. Those who imagine this, though
they seem to ease the yoke of the law a little, yet they keep souls
bound with the cords thereof. For this promise shall always stand in
force, He which shall do these things shall live in them; on the other
side, The curse shall come upon all which shall not absolutely fulfill
the law. Wherefore, we must define the grace of Christ far otherwise
(whereunto the hope of salvation leaneth) than they dream; to wit, that
it be free reconciliation gotten by the sacrifice of his death; or,
which is all one, free forgiveness of sins, which, by pacifying and
appeasing God, doth make him of an enemy or severe judge,  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) and which cannot be pleased nor
entreated, a merciful Father. I confess, indeed, that we be regenerate
into newness of life by the grace of Christ; but when we are about
assurance of salvation, then must we call to mind the free adoption
alone, which is joined with the purging \[expiation\] and forgiveness of
sins. For, if works be admitted, that they may make us righteous in part
only, the yoke of the law shall not be broken, and so Peter’s
contrariety \[antithesis\] shall fall to the ground, or else be
dissolved.

<span id="iii.ii-p69"></span>*Even as they.* Peter doth testify in this
place, that though the servitude of the law were laid upon the fathers
as touching the external shoe, yet were their consciences free and quit;
whereby is put away that absurdity, which might otherwise have troubled
godly minds not a little. For, seeing that the covenant of life is
eternal, and the same which God made with his servants from the
beginning until the end of the world, it were an absurd thing, and
intolerable, that any other way to obtain salvation should be taught at
this day than that which the fathers had in times past. Therefore, Peter
affirmeth that we agree very well with the fathers, because they no less
than we reposed hope of salvation in the grace of Christ; and so,
reconciling the law and the gospel together, as touching the end of the
doctrine, he taketh from the Jews the stumbling-block which they reigned
to themselves by reason of the discord.

<span id="iii.ii-p70"></span>Whereby it appeareth that the law was not
given to the fathers that they might thereby purchase salvation, neither
were the ceremonies added, that, by the observing thereof, they might
attain unto righteousness; but this was the only end of all the whole
law, that, casting from them all confidence which they might repose in
works, they might repose all their hope in the grace of Christ. Whereby
is also refuted the doting of those who think that the old people,
inasmuch as they were content with earthly goods, did think no whit of
the heavenly life. But Peter maketh the fathers partners with us of the
same faith; and doth make salvation common to both; and yet there be
some which delight in that brain-sick fellow, Servetus, with his so
filthy sacrileges. Furthermore, we must note that Peter teacheth that
the faith of the fathers \[ancients\] was always grounded in Christ,
seeing that they could neither find life anywhere else, neither was
there any other way for men to come unto God. Therefore, this place
agreeth with that saying of the apostle,

<span id="iii.ii-p71"></span>“Christ yesterday, and today, and for
ever,” *  
*(<span id="iii.ii-p71.2"></span>[Heb
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span id="iii.ii-p71.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** And all the multitude kept silence,
and heard Barnabas and Paul declare what signs and wonders God had
wrought by them among the Gentiles. **13.** And after they had done
speaking, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hear me: **14.**
Simeon hath showed how at the first God hath visited, that he might take
of the Gentiles a people in his name. **15.** And hereunto agree the
words of the prophets, as it is written, **16.** After these things will
return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is decayed;
and will restore the ruins thereof, and will set it up; **17.** That
the, men which remain may seek the Lord, and all nations which call upon
my name, saith the Lord, which doth all these things. **18.** Known from
the beginning \[to God\] are all his works.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span><span id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** *All the multitude held their
peace.* By these words, Luke giveth us to understand that the Spirit of
God did so reign in that assembly, that they yielded forthwith to
reason. The disputation was hot before; but now, after that Peter hath
laid open the counsel of God, and hath handled the question according to
the doctrine of the Scripture, by and by all noise being stayed, they
are quiet and whist who did of late unadvisedly defend the error. This
is a lively image of a lawful Council, when the truth of God alone, so
soon as it is once come to light, maketh an end of all controversies;
and assuredly it is effectual enough to appease all discord when the
Spirit beareth the chief sway; because he is again a fit governor, as
well to moderate their tongues who must speak before others as to keep
the rest under obedience, that they be not too much addicted to
themselves and wedded to their own wills, but that, laying away
stubbornness, they may show themselves obedient to God. Neither is it to
be doubted but that there was some few which would not yield, as it
falleth out in a great assembly; yet the truth of God had the upper
hand, so that the silence whereof Luke speaketh was a manifest testimony
of common obedience. And this was no small moderation in Peter, in that
having suffered every one to say for himself what he could, he deferred
his judgment (lest it should be prejudicial to others) so long, until
the question had been thoroughly discussed to and fro.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>*They heard Barnabas and Paul. We* may
gather by these words that they were not heard with silence before.: For
seeing that the more part was persuaded that they did wickedly admit the
profane Gentiles into the Church, there should nothing which they should
have said have been patiently received until this false opinion were
corrected and reformed; but all should have been taken at the worst. We
see what a poison displeasure conceived for no cause is, which doth so
possess men’s minds, that it stoppeth the way, so that the truth can
never have en, trance. Hereby we learn how true that saying is, All
things are sound to the sound, (<span id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>Titus
1:15,) for there is nothing so wholesome but corrupt affection do turn
the same into that which is hurtful. And to this end tendeth the
narration made by Paul and Barnabas, that they may show and prove that
God doth allow their apostleship among the Gentiles; forasmuch as it was
ratified and confirmed by miracles, which are, as it were, certain seals
thereof.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** *James answered, saying.* Some old
writers of the Church think that this James was one of the disciples,
whose surname was Justus and Oblia, whose cruel death is recorded by
Josephus in the Twentieth Book of his Antiquities. But would to God the
old writers had travailed rather to know the man, than to set forth,
with reigned praises, the holiness of a man whom they knew not. It is a
childish toy and surmise, in that they say that it was lawful for him
alone to enter into the most holy place. For if in that entering in
there had been any religion, he had done it contrary to the law of God,
forasmuch as he was not the highest priest. Secondly, it was a
superstitious thing thus to foster the shadowish worship of the Temple.
I omit other trifles. And they are greatly deceived in that they deny
that he was one of the twelve apostles. For they are enforced to confess
that it is he whom Paul commandeth so honorably, that he maketh him the
chief among the three pillars of the Church, (<span
id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ga 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>.) Assuredly, a man inferior in order and
degree could never have excelled the apostles so far; for Paul giveth
him the title of an apostle. Neither is that worth the hearing which
Jerome bringeth, \[viz.\] that the word is general there, seeing that
the dignity of the order is there handled; forasmuch as Christ did
prefer the apostles before other teachers of the Church.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span>Moreover, we may gather out of this place,
that they made no small account of James, (<span
id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>[Ac
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018)<span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>;)
forasmuch as he doth with his voice and consent so confirm the words of
Peter, that they are all of his mind. And we shall see afterwards how
great his authority was at Jerusalem. The old writers think that this
was because he was bishop of the place; but it is not to be thought that
the faithful did at their pleasure change the order which Christ had
appointed. Wherefore, I do not doubt but that he was son to Alpheus, and
Christ’s cousin, in which sense he is also called his brother. Whether
he were bishop of Jerusalem or no, I leave it indifferent; neither doth
it greatly make for the matter, save only because the impudency of the
Pope is hereby refuted, because the decree of the Council is set down
rather at the appointment, and according to the authority of James than
of Peter. And assuredly Eusebius, in the beginning of his Second Book,
is not afraid to call James, whosoever he were, the Bishop of the
Apostles. Let the men of Rome go now and boast that their Pope is head
of the Universal Church, because he is Peter’s successor, who suffered
another to rule him,  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) if we
believe Eusebius.

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>*Men and brethren, hear me.* James’
oration consisteth upon \[of\] two principal members; for, first, he
confirmeth and proveth the calling of the Gentiles by the testimony of
the prophet Amos; secondly, he showeth what is best to be done to
nourish peace and concord among the faithful; yet so that the liberty of
the Gentiles may continue safe and sound, and that the grace of Christ
may not be darkened. Whereas Peter is in this place called Simeon, it
may be that this name was diversely pronounced then. Whereas he saith
that God did visit to take a people of the Gentiles, it is referred unto
the mercy of God, whereby he vouchsafed to receive strangers into his
family. It is, indeed, a harsh phrase, yet such as containeth a
profitable doctrine; because he maketh God the author of the calling of
the Gentiles, and pronounceth that it is through his goodness that they
began to be reckoned among his people, when he saith that they were
taken by him; but he proceedeth further, when he saith that he did visit
that he might take. For this is his meaning, That at such time as the
Gentiles were turned away from God he did mercifully look upon them;
because we can do nothing but depart farther and farther from him, until
such time as his fatherly look prevent us of his own accord.

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>*In his name.* The old interpreter hath,
To his name, which is almost all one, though the preposition, it may be
otherwise translated, to wit, For his name, or Upon his name.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) Neither shall the sense disagree, that
the salvation of the Gentiles is grounded in the power or name of God,
and that God did respect no other thing in calling them but his own
glory; yet did I retain that which is more usual; to wit, that, in
numbering them among his people, he would have them counted in his name,
like as it shall be said shortly after, that his name is called upon by
all those whom he gathereth together into his Church. The adverb of
time, <span id="iii.iii-p13.2"></span>πρωτον, may be expounded two ways;
if you read it, first, as the old interpreter and Erasmus have it, the
sense shall be, that Cornelius and others were, as it were, the first
fruits at whom God began the calling of the Gentiles; but it may be
taken also comparatively, because there was already some token of the
adoption of the Gentiles showed in Cornelius and his cousins, before
that Barnabas and Paul preached the gospel to the Gentiles. And I do
better like this latter sense.

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span><span id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>**15.** *Hereto agree the words of the
prophets.* We see now how the apostles took nothing to themselves
imperiously, but did reverently follow that which was prescribed in the
word of God. Neither did it grieve them, neither did they count it any
disgrace to them to profess themselves to be the scholars of the
Scripture. Also we must here note, that the use of the doctrine of the
prophets is yet in force, which some brain-sick men would banish out of
the Church. By citing the prophets, in the plural number, to be
witnesses, whereas he doth allege one place only, he signifieth that
there is such an agreement among them, that that which is spoken by one
is the common testimony of them all, because they speak all with one
mouth, and every one speaketh as in the person of all, or rather the
Spirit of God speaketh in them all. Moreover, the oracles of all the
prophets were gathered together, that they might make one body.
Wherefore that might worthily and fitly be ascribed to all the prophets
in general, which was taken out of some one part of the general book.

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span><span id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>**16.** *After these things I will
return.* Because the place is not cited word for word as it is in the
prophet, we must see what difference there is, though it be not
necessary to examine straitly what diversity there is in the words, so
it appear that the prophecy doth fitly agree with the matter which is in
hand. After that God hath promised the restoring of the tabernacle of
David, he saith also, that he will bring to pass that the Jews shall
possess the remnants of Edom. In all that text, there appeareth nothing
as yet whence the calling of the Gentiles can be fet  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) or gathered; but that which followeth
immediately after in the prophet, concerning the remnant of the Gentiles
which shall call upon the name of the Lord, doth plainly show that the
Jews and Gentiles shall make one Church, because that which was then
proper to the Jews alone is given to both in general. For God placeth
the Gentiles in like degree of honor with the Jews, when he will have
them to call upon his name. Those of Idumea, and the people thereabout,
were in times past under David subject to the Jews; but though they were
tributaries to the people of God, yet were they nevertheless strangers
from the Church. Therefore, this was news and a strange thing, in that
God reckoneth them up with the holy people, that he may be called  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) the God of them all; seeing that it is
certain that they are all made equal in honor among themselves by this
means. Whereby it doth plainly appear how well the testimony of the
prophet agreeth with the present purpose. For God promiseth to restore
the decayed tabernacle, wherein the Gentiles shall obey the kingdom of
David, not only that they may pay tribute, or take \[to arms\] weapon at
the king’s commandment, but that they may have one God, and that they
may be one family to him.

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span>Yet there may a question be moved, why he
had rather cite this prophecy, than many other which contain more
plentiful proof of the matter which he hath in hand, of which sort Paul
citeth many? (<span id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>[Rom.
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#011)<span id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>.)
I answer, first, that the apostles were not ambitious in heaping up
places of Scripture; but they did simply aim at this, which was
sufficient for them, to wit, that they might prove that their doctrine
was taken out of the word of God; secondly, I say that this prophecy of
Amos is more plain than it is commonly taken to be. The prophet
intreateth of the restoring of an house which was decayed;  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) he describeth the miserable ruin
thereof. Therefore, the promise, which is added immediately, that the
seat and throne shall be set up again, from of which kings of the
posterity of David shall rule over the Gentiles, doth properly appertain
unto Christ. Therefore, so soon as the kingdom of Christ is set up, that
must needs follow which the prophet saith also, that the Gentiles shall
call upon the name of God. Now, we see that James did not unadvisedly
make choice of this place; for if the kingdom of Christ cannot be
otherwise established, unless God be called upon everywhere throughout
the whole world, and the Gentiles grow together to be one with his holy
people, it is an absurd thing that they should be driven from hope of
salvation, and the middle wall must fall to the ground, wherewith the
one was separate from the other under the law,  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) (<span id="iii.iii-p22.2"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iii-p22.2"></span>.)
The first word, *I will return,* is not in the prophet, but the change
of the state which he denounceth is very well expressed by this means.

<span id="iii.iii-p23"></span>*The tabernacle of David, which was
decayed.* It is not without cause that that evil-favored wasteness and
ruin of the king’s house is set before our eyes by the prophet; for
unless the godly should have been persuaded that Christ should
notwithstanding come, though the kingdom of David were brought to
nought, who should not only restore to their old order things which were
decayed, but should exalt even unto the heavens the glory of his kingdom
with incomparable success, they should have despaired a hundred times in
a day. After they were returned from the exile wherein they lived at
Babylon, they were brought by continual destructions almost unto utter
destruction. Afterward that which remained was consumed by little and
little with civil  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) discord, yea,
when God did relieve their miseries, that kind of help which they had
was a certain matter of despair;  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) for that rule which the Maccabees took
upon them was then taken away from the tribe of Juda. For these causes
the Spirit of God doth diligently beat in \[inculcate\] this by the
prophet, that Christ shall not come until the kingdom of David shall
perish, that they may not despair of salvation even amidst greatest
miseries. So Isaiah saith, that there shall a branch arise out of the
contemptible and base stock,  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127)
(<span id="iii.iii-p26.2"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii-p26.2"></span>;)
and let us also remember, that God doth observe this wonderful way in
restoring the Church, that he doth build it up,  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) when it is decayed.

<span id="iii.iii-p28"></span>Furthermore, this place teachers when the
Church is best ordered, and what is the true and right constitution
thereof, to wit, when the throne of David is set up, and Christ alone
hath the preeminence, that all may meet together in his obedience.
 <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129)

<span id="iii.iii-p30"></span>Though the Pope have oppressed the Church
with his sacrilegious tyranny, yet doth he make boast of the title of
the Church; yea, he deceiveth men under the vain title of the Church,
that he may put out the clear light of sound doctrine. But if we shall
come thoroughly to examine the matter, we may easily refute such a gross
mock, because he alone beareth rule, having deposed Christ. He doth in
word confess that he is Christ’s vicar; but in very deed after that he
hath by a beautiful banishment  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130)
sent Christ into the heavens, he taketh to himself all his power; for
Christ reigneth by the doctrine of his gospel alone, which is wickedly
trodden under foot by this abominable idol. But let us remember that
this shall be the lawful estate of the Church among us, if we do all in
general  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) obey Christ, the King
of kings, that there may be one sheepfold and one Shepherd, (<span
id="iii.iii-p32.2"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p33"></span><span id="iii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p34"></span>**17.** *That those which remain may
seek.* James added this word *seek* by way of exposition, which is not
found nor read in the prophet; and yet it is not superfluous, because,
to the end we may be numbered among the people of God, and that he may
take us for his own, we must, on the other side, \[in our turn,\] be
encouraged to seek him. And it is to be thought that Luke did summarily
comprehend those things whereof James did dispute in his own language
among the Jews; whereby it came to pass that the exposition of the
matter was mixed with the words of the prophet. Instead of the *relics
of the Gentiles* which Amos useth, Luke, out of the Greek translation,
(which was more familiar,) putteth the *rest of the men* in the same
sense, to wit, that there must go before the purging of the filthiness
of the world a cutting, or paring, as it came to pass. And this doctrine
must be also applied unto our time. For, because the corruption of the
world is worse than that it can be wholly brought to obey Christ, he
bloweth away, with diverse fans of tribulations, the chaff and weeds,
that he may at length gather unto himself that which shall remain.

<span id="iii.iii-p35"></span><span id="iii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p36"></span>**18.** *Known from the beginning.* This
is a prevention,  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) to put away
the hatred which might have risen upon the novelty; for the sudden
change might have been suspected, and therefore did it trouble weak
minds. Therefore James preventeth, showing that this was no new thing
with God, though it fell out suddenly otherwise than men thought;
because God saw, before the world was created, what he would do, and the
calling of the Gentiles was hidden in his secret counsel. Whereupon it
followeth, that it must not be esteemed according to the sense of man.
Furthermore, James hath respect unto the words of the prophet, when he
affirmeth that God, who should do all these things, was also the author
of the prophecy. Therefore, his meaning is, that, seeing God speaketh by
his prophet, he saw then, yea, from the very beginning,  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) that neither uncircumcision nor
anything else should let him, but that he would choose the Gentiles into
his family. Nevertheless, there is comprehended under this a general
exhortation, that men do not take upon them to measure, with the small
measure of their wit, the works of God, the reason whereof is oftentimes
known to none but to himself; but rather let them cry, being astonished,
 <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) that his ways are past finding
out, and that his judgments are too deep a depth, (<span
id="iii.iii-p39.2"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="iii.iii-p39.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**19.** Wherefore, I think that we ought not
to trouble those who of the Gentiles are turned to God: **20.** But that
we must write unto them, that they abstain from the filthiness of
images, and from fornication, and from strangled, and from blood.
**21.** For Moses of old time hath those in every city which preach him,
when he is read in the synagogues every Sabbath day.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span><span id="iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span>**19.** *That we must not trouble.* He
denieth that the Gentiles must be driven from the Church through the
disagreement about ceremonies, seeing they were admitted by God; yet it
\[he\] seemeth contrary to himself, when he denieth that they ought to
be troubled, and yet prescribeth certain rites. The answer is easy,
which I will hereafter more at large prosecute. First, he requireth
nothing at their hands but that which they were bound to do by brotherly
concord; secondly, these precepts could no whir trouble or disquiet
their consciences, after that they knew that they were free before God,
and that false and perverse religion was taken away, which the false
apostles sought to bring in. The question is now, why James doth enjoin
the Gentiles these four things alone? Some say that this was let
\[derived\] from the ancient custom of the fathers, who did not make any
covenant  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) with any people which
they could enforce to obey them but upon this condition; but because
there is no fit author of that thing brought to light, I leave it in
doubt and undecided.

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span><span id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>But here appeareth a manifest reason why
they gave particular commandment concerning things offered to idols,
blood, and that which was strangled. They were, indeed, of themselves
things indifferent; yet such as had some special thing in them more than
other rites of the law. We know how straitly the Lord commandeth to
eschew those things which are contrary to the external profession of
faith, and wherein there is any appearance or suspicion of idolatry.
Therefore, lest there should any blot of superstition remain in the
Gentiles, and lest the Jews should see anything in them which did not
agree with the pure worship of God, no marvel if, to avoid offense, they
be commanded to abstain from things offered to idols.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>The word <span
id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>αλισγημα, which Luke useth, doth signify all
manner of profanation; therefore I have not changed the common
translation, which hath pollution or filthiness. Yet it is sometimes
taken for sacrifices; which sense should not disagree with James’
purpose; and, peradventure, it shall be more plain and natural so to
expound it in this place; because, where Luke doth shortly after repeat
the same decree, he will put <span id="iii.iv-p9.2"></span>ειδωλοθητα*,*
or things sacrificed to idols.

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>As concerning blood and that which was
strangled, not only the Jews were forbidden by the law of Moses to eat
them, (<span id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>[De
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>;)
but this law was given to all the world after the flood, (<span
id="iii.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ge 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv-p10.2"></span>,) whereby it came to pass, that those which
were not quite grown out of kind  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) did loathe blood. I do not speak of
the Jews, but of many of the Gentiles. I confess, indeed, that even that
commandment was but temporal; yet, notwithstanding, it was extended
farther than unto one people. No marvel, therefore, if there might arise
greater offense thereupon, which to cure seemed good to the apostles.
But there ariseth a harder question concerning fornication; because
James seemeth to reckon the same among things indifferent, whereof they
must beware only in respect of offense; but there was another cause for
which he placed fornication among those things which were not of
themselves unlawful. It is well known what unbridled liberty to run
awhoring did reign and rage everywhere; and this disease had got the
upper hand principally among the men of the east country, as they be
more given to lust. Assuredly the faith and chastity of wedlock was
never less observed and kept any where than among them. Moreover, he
doth not intreat indifferently, in my judgment, in this place of all
manner \[of\] fornication or whoredom, as of adultery, and wandering,
and unbridled lusts, whereby all chastity is violate and corrupt; but I
think he speaketh of concubineship, as they call it; which was so common
among the Gentiles, that it was almost like to a law.

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>Therefore, whereas James reckoneth up a
common corruption among things which are of themselves not corrupt,
there is therein no inconvenience;  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) so that we know that it was not his
meaning to place those things in one order which are very far unlike
among themselves. For, whereas unclean men do thereby color and cloak
their filthiness, they may easily be refuted. James, say they, coupled
eating of blood with whoredom; but doth he compare them together as
things that are like, at least which disagree not in any point. Yea, he
doth only respect  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) the wicked
and corrupt custom of men, which was fallen away from the first law and
order of nature appointed by God. As concerning the judgment of God, the
knowledge thereof must be let \[sought\] out of the continual doctrine
of the Scripture; and it is nothing doubtful what the Scripture saith;
to wit, that whoredom is accursed before God, and that the soul and body
are thereby defiled, that the holy temple of God is polluted, and Christ
is rent in pieces; that God doth daily punish whoremongers, and that he
will once pay them home.  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) The
filthiness of whoredom, which the heavenly Judge doth so sore condemn,
can be covered with no cloaks by the patrons of whoredom how witty and
eloquent soever they be.

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span><span id="iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>**21.** *For Moses hath.* This place, in my
judgment, hath been badly expounded, and drawn into a contrary sense.
For interpreters think that James addeth this, because it were
superfluous to prescribe anything to the Jews, who were well acquainted
with the doctrine of the law, and to whom it was read every Sabbath-day;
and they pick out this meaning, Let us be content to require these few
things at the hands of the Gentiles, which are not accustomed to bear
the yoke of the law; as touching the Jews they have Moses, out of whom
they may learn more. Some do also gather out of this place, that
circumcision, with its appurtenances, ought to be observed even at this
day among the Jews. But they reason unfitly and unskillfully, though
that exposition which I have set down  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) were true. But James had a far other
meaning; to wit, he teachers that it cannot be that ceremonies can be
abolished so quickly, as it were, at the first dash; because the Jews
had now a long time been acquainted with the doctrine of the law, and
Moses had his preachers; therefore, it stood them upon to redeem concord
for a short thee, until such time as the liberty gotten by Christ might,
by little and little, appear more plainly. This is that which is said in
the common proverb, That it was meet that the old ceremonies should be
buried with some honor. Those who are skillful in the Greek tongue shall
know that that last member, When he is read every Sabbath-day in the
synagogues, was by me changed not without cause, for avoiding of
doubtfulness.  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141)

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)<span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**22.** Then it seemed good to the apostles
and elders, with the whole church, to send chosen men of them to
Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas, Judas, surnamed Barsabas, and Silas,
chief men among the brethren. **23.** Sending letters by their hands
after this form: The apostles, and elders, and brethren, to those
brethren which are at Antioch, and in Syria and Gilicia, which are of
the Gentiles, greeting: **24.** Because we have heard that certain which
went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls,
commanding you to be circumcised, and to keep the law, to whom we gave
no commandment; **25.** It seemed good to us, being gathered together
with one mind, to send chosen men to you, with our beloved Barnabas and
Paul; **26.** Men which have ventured their souls for the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. **27.** Therefore we have sent Judas and Silas, who
shall also tell you the same things by word of mouth. **28.** For it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, to lay no greater burden upon you
than these necessary things, **29.** That ye abstain from those things
which are sacrificed to images, and from blood, and from that which is
strangled, and from fornication; from which things, if you shall keep
yourselves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span><span id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span>**22.** *It pleased the apostles.* That
tempest was made calm not without the singular grace of God, so that
after the matter was thoroughly discussed, they did all agree together
in sound doctrine. Also the modesty of the common people is gathered by
this, because, after that they had referred the matter to the judgment
of the apostles and the rest of teachers, they do now also subscribe to
their decree; and, on the other side, the apostles did show some token
of their equity, in that they set down nothing concerning the common
cause of all the godly without admitting the people. For assuredly, this
tyranny did spring from the pride of the pastors, that those things
which appertain unto the common state of the whole Church are subject
(the people being excluded) to the will, will not say lust, of a few.
 <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) We know what a hard matter it
is to suppress the slanders of the wicked, to satisfy most men who are
churlish and forward, to keep under the light and unskillful, to wipe
away errors conceived, to heal up hatred, to appease contentions,
\[and\] to abolish false reports. Peradventure, the enemies of Paul and
Barnabas might have said that they had gotten letters by fair and
flattering speeches; they might have invented some new cavil; the rude
and weak might, by and by, have been troubled; but when chief men come
with the letters, that they may gravely dispute the whole matter in
presence, all sinister suspicion is taken away.

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span><span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>**24.** *Certain which went out from us.* We
see that there was no respect of persons among these holy men, which
doth always corrupt sound and right judgments. They confess that there
were knaves of their own company; and yet they do no whit flatter them,
or, through corrupt favor, incline to cover their error; yea, rather in
condemning them freely, they spare not even themselves. And, first, they
pluck from their faces that visure \[mask\] which they had abused, to
deceive withal. They boasted that they were privy to the meaning of the
apostles.  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) The apostles reprove
them, and condemn them of and for lying in that false pretense, when
they utterly deny that they did command any such thing. Again, they
accuse them far more sharply, that they troubled the Church and
subverted souls. For by this means they bring them in contempt and
detestation with the godly, because they cannot be admitted but to their
destruction. But false teachers are said to subvert souls, because the
truth of God doth edify or build them up, and so this speech containeth
a \[this\] general doctrine, Unless we will willingly have our souls
drawn headlong from being any longer temples of the Holy Ghost, and
unless we desire their ruin, we must beware of those which go about to
lead us away from the pure gospel. That which they say touching the
keeping of the law doth only appertain unto ceremonies, though we must
always remember, that they did so intreat of ceremonies; that \[as if\]
both the salvation and also the righteousness of men did therein
consist. For the false apostles did command that they should be kept, as
if righteousness came by the law and salvation did depend upon works.

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span><span id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span>**25.** *With our beloved Barnabas and Paul*
They set these praises against the slanders wherewith the false apostles
had essayed to bring Paul and Barnabas out of credit.  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) And, first, to the end they may remove
the opinion of disagreement which had possessed the minds of many, they
testify their consent; secondly, they commend Paul and Barnabas for
their ferventness in zeal and most manlike courage, that they were not
afraid to venture or lay down their souls for Christ’s sake. And this is
an excellent virtue in a minister of the gospel, and which deserveth no
small praise, if he shall not only be stout and courageous to execute
the office of teaching, but also be ready to enter danger which is
offered in defense of his doctrine. As the Lord doth thus try the faith
and constancy of those which be his, so he doth, as it were, make them
noble with the ensigns of virtue, that they may excel in his Church.
Therefore, Paul holdeth forth the marks of Christ which he did bear in
his body, (<span id="iii.v-p12.2"></span>[Ga
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="iii.v-p12.2"></span>) as
a buckler to drive back those knaves which did trouble his doctrine. And
though it do not so fall out with most stout and courageous teachers and
preachers of the gospel, that they strive for the gospel until they come
in danger of life, because the matter doth not so require, yet is this
no let but that Christ may purchase authority for his martyrs, so often
as he bringeth them into worthy and renowned conflicts.

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span>Nevertheless, let even those who are not
enforced to enter combat by any necessity be ready to shed their blood,
if God see it good at any time that it should be so. But the apostles
commend the fortitude of Paul and Barnabas only in a good cause;
because, if it were sufficient to enter dangers manfully, the martyrs of
Christ should nothing differ from troublesome and frenzied men, from
cutters and roysters.  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145)
Therefore, Paul and Barnabas are commended, not because they laid open
themselves simply to dangers, but because they refuse not to die for
Christ’s sake. Peradventure, also, the apostles meant to nip  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) those knaves by the way, who, having
never suffered any thing for Christ’s sake, came out of their roust and
dainties  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) to trouble the
churches, which cost the courageous soldiers of Christ dearly.

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span><span id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span>**28.** *It seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to us.* Whereas the apostles and elders match and join themselves
with the Holy Ghost, they attribute nothing to themselves apart therein;
but this speech importeth as much as if they should say, that the Holy
Ghost was the captain, guide, and governor, and that they did set down,
and decreed that which they write as he did indite it to them.  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) For this manner of speech is used
commonly in the Scripture, to give the ministers the second place after
that the name of God is once expressed. When it is said that the people
believed God and his servant Moses, (<span id="iii.v-p19.2"></span>[Ex
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span id="iii.v-p19.2"></span>,)
faith is not rent in pieces, as if it did addict itself partly to God,
and partly to mortal man. What then? to wit, whereas the people had God
for the sole author of their faith, they believed or gave credence to
his minister, from whom he could not be separate. Neither could they
otherwise believe God than by believing the doctrine set before them by
Moses, as they did shake off the yoke of God after that they had once
rejected and despised Moses. Whereby the wickedness of those men is also
refuted, who, making boast of faith with full mouth, do no less wickedly
than proudly contemn the ministry. For, as it were a sacrilegious
partition, if faith should depend even but a very little upon man, so
those men do openly mock God who feign that they have him to be their
teacher, when they set nought by the ministers by whom he speaketh.
Therefore, the apostles deny that they invented that decree of their own
brain which they deliver to the Gentiles, but that they were only
ministers of the Spirit, that they may, with the authority of God, make
them commendable, which (proceeding from him) they do faithfully
deliver. So, when Paul maketh mention of his gospel, he doth not enforce
upon them a new gospel, which is of his own inventing, but he preacheth
that which was committed to him by Christ.

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span>And the Papists are doltish who go about,
out of these words, to prove that the Church hath some authority of her
own; yea, they are contrary to themselves. For, under what color do they
avouch that the Church cannot err, save only because it is grounded
immediately by the Holy Spirit? Therefore, they cry out with open mouth,
that those things be the oracles of the Spirit which we prove to be
their own inventions. Therefore, they do foolishly urge this cause, *it
seemed good to us;* because, if the apostles decreed any thing apart
from the Spirit, that principal maxim shall fall to ground, that
Councils decree nothing but which is indited by the Spirit.

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span>*Besides these necessary things.* The
Papists do forwardly triumph under color of this word, as if it were
lawful for men to make laws which may lay necessity upon the conscience.
That (say they) which the Church commandeth must be kept under pain of
mortal sin, because the apostles say that that must necessarily be
observed which they decree. But such a vain cavil is quickly answered.
For this necessity reached no farther than there was any danger lest the
unity should be cut asunder. So that, to speak properly, this necessity
was accidental or external; which was placed not in the thing itself,
but only in avoiding of the offense, which appeareth more plainly by
abolishing of the decree. For laws made concerning things which are of
themselves necessary must be continual. But we know that this law was
foredone  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) by Paul so soon as the
tumult and contention was once ended, when he teacheth that nothing is
unclean, (<span id="iii.v-p22.2"></span>[Ro
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span id="iii.v-p22.2"></span>;)
and when he granteth liberty to eat all manner \[of\] meats, yea, even
such as were sacrificed to idols, (<span id="iii.v-p22.3"></span>[1Co
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025)<span id="iii.v-p22.3"></span>.)
Wherefore, in vain do they gather any cloak or color out of this word to
bind men’s consciences, seeing that the necessity spoken of in this
place did only respect men in the external use lest there should any
offense arise thereupon, and that their liberty before God might stand
whole and sound. Also, in vain do they gather out of all the whole
place, and in vain do they go about out of the same to prove that the
Church had power given to decree anything contrary to the word of God.
The Pope hath made such laws as seemed best to him, contrary to the word
of God, whereby he meant to govern the Church; and that not ten or
twenty, but an infinite number, so that they do not only tyrannously
oppress souls, but are also cruel torments to vex and torment them.

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span>To the end the hired brabblers \[wranglers\]
of the Pope may excuse such cruelty, they do object that even the
apostles did forbid the Gentiles that which was not forbidden in the
word of God. But I say flatly, that the apostles added nothing unto the
word of God; which shall plainly appear if we list to mark their drift.
I said of late that they meant nothing less  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) than to set down a perpetual law,
whereby they might bind the faithful. What then? They use that remedy
which was fit for the nourishing of brotherly peace and concord among
the Churches, that the Gentiles may for a time apply themselves  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) to the Jews. But if we will grant
anything, we must assuredly confess that this is according to the word
of God, that love bear the sway in things indifferent; that is, that the
external use of those things which are of themselves free be bent unto
the rule of charity.

<span id="iii.v-p26"></span>In sum, if love be the bond of perfection
and end of the law; if God command that we study to preserve mutual
unity among ourselves, and that every man serve his neighbor to edify,
no man is so ignorant which doth not see that that is contained in the
word of God which the apostles command in this place, only they apply a
general rule to their time. Furthermore, let us remember that which I
said before, that it was a politic law which could not ensnare the
conscience, neither bring in any reigned worship of God; which two vices
the Scripture condemneth everywhere in men’s traditions. But admit we
should grant (which is most false) that that did not accord with the
word of God which was decreed in that council, yet that maketh nothing
for the Papists. Let the councils decree anything contrary to \[beyond,
in addition to\] the express word of God, according to the revelation of
the Spirit; yet none but lawful councils may have this authority given
them. Then let them prove that their councils were godly and holy, to
the decrees whereof they will have us subject. But I will not any
farther prosecute this point, because it was handled in the beginning of
the chapter. Let the readers know (which is sufficient for this present
place) that the apostles pass not the bounds of the word of God when
they set down an external law, as time requireth, whereby they may
reconcile the Churches among themselves.

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**30.** Therefore, when they were let go,
they came to Antioch: and when they had assembled the multitude
together, they delivered the epistle: **31.** Which, when they had read,
they rejoiced over the consolation. **32.** And Judas and Silas, seeing
they were also prophets, did with many words exhort \[or they did
comfort\] the brethren, and strengthened them. **33.** And they tarried
there for a time, and then they were let go by the brethren in peace
unto the apostles. **34.** But it seemed good to Silas to stay there.
**35.** And Paul and Barnabas stayed at Antioch, teaching and preaching
with many more the word of the Lord.

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span><span id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>**30.** *When the multitude was gathered.*
This was the most lawful kind of dealing to admit the whole multitude
unto the reading of the epistle. For if there fall out any controversy
in the doctrine of faith, it is meet that the judgment be referred over
unto the learned and godly, and to such as are exercised in the
Scripture; and, chiefly, to the pastors rightly ordained.
Notwithstanding, because it belongeth to all alike to know for a surety
what they must hold, the godly and learned teachers must make known
 <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) to the whole Church what they
have set down out of the word of God. For there is nothing more
unfitting for holy and Christian order than to drive away the body of
the people from common doctrine, as if it were a herd of swine, as they
use to do under the tyranny of Popery. For because the Pope and the
horned bishops did think that the people would never be obedient enough
until they were brought into gross ignorance, they imagined that this
was the best summary of faith, to know nothing, but to depend wholly
upon their decrees. But, on the contrary, there must be a mean observed,
that lawful governments may continue;  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) and that, on the other side, the
people may have that liberty which unto them belongeth, lest they be
oppressed like slaves.

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span><span id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span>**31.** *They rejoiced over the
consolation.* Seeing that the epistle is so short, and containeth
nothing but a bare narration, what consolation could they have by it?
But we must note, that there was no small matter of consolation therein,
because, when they knew the consent of the apostles, they were all
pacified, and also whereas before there was variance among them, they
are now reconciled one to another. Seeing there went a false report
about, that all the apostles were against Paul and Barnabas, this same
had shaken some who were too light of belief, many did stand in doubt;
the wicked abused this occasion to speak evil; others some were pricked
forward  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) with love of novelty
and with curiosity, and one was set against another. But now, after that
they see that the judgment of the first Church doth agree with the
doctrine of Paul and Barnabas, they obtain that for which the children
of God ought most to wish, that being established in the right faith,
and being of one mind among themselves, they may with quiet minds have
peace one with another.

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span><span id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span>**32.** *Judas and Silas.* These two
brethren were sent for this cause, that they might also testify the same
thing by word which was contained in the letters, and more also;
otherwise the apostles would not have sent such short letters concerning
so great and weighty a matter; and they would have also spoken somewhat
touching the mysteries of faith, and would have made some long
exhortation, wherein they would have persuaded them unto the study of
godliness. Now, Luke showeth some farther things by them done; to wit,
that being furnished with the gift of prophecy, they edify the Church in
general, as if he should say, they did not only do their duty faithfully
in the cause which was now in hand, but they did also take good and
profitable pains in teaching and exhorting the Church And we must note
that he saith that they exhorted the Church, because they were prophets;
for it is not a thing common to all men to enter such an excellent
function. Therefore, we must beware, lest any man pass  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) his bounds; as Paul teacheth, <span
id="iii.vi-p13.2"></span>[1Co
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#020)<span id="iii.vi-p13.2"></span>;
and <span id="iii.vi-p13.3"></span>[Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi-p13.3"></span>,
that every one keep himself within the measure of grace received.
Wherefore, it is not in vain that Luke saith that the office of teaching
is peculiar; lest any man, through ambition, being void of ability, or
through rash zeal, or through any other foolish desire, coveting to put
out his head, trouble the order of the Church.

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>*They were prophets.* Whereas the word hath
diverse significations, it is not taken in this place for those prophets
to whom it was granted to foretell things to come; because this title
should come in out of season  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)
when he intreateth of another matter; but Luke’s meaning is, that Judas
and Silas were endued with excellent knowledge and understanding of the
mysteries of God, that they might be good interpreters of God; as Paul,
in the fourteenth of the First to the Corinthians, (<span
id="iii.vi-p15.2"></span>[1Co
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003)<span id="iii.vi-p15.2"></span>,)
when he intreateth of the prophecy, and preferreth it before all other
gifts, speaketh not of foretelling of things to come; but he commandeth
it for this fruit, because it doth edify the Church by doctrine,
exhortation, and consolation. After this manner doth Luke assign
exhortation to the prophets, as being the principal point of their
office.

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span><span id="iii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span>**33.** *They were let go in peace.* That
is, when they departed, the brethren, in taking their leave of them, did
wish them well, as friends use to do. And there is *synecdoche* in this
member; because the one of the two did only return to Jerusalem. And in
the text there is a correction added immediately, that it seemed good to
Silas to tarry there; but when Luke joineth them both together, his
meaning is only to declare that the Church was quiet before they thought
upon any returning. At length he addeth that Paul and Barnabas, so long
as they were at Antioch, gave themselves to teaching, and did continue
in this work,  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) and yet did they
give place to many more.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)
Whereby it appeareth, that they had all one and the same desire without
grudging,  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) so that they joined
hand in hand to do good; though it seemeth that he maketh mention of
many more of set purpose, lest we should think that, after that Paul and
Barnabas were departed, that Church was destitute, which did flourish in
abundance of teachers. Moreover, the blessing of God, which began
straightway to appear again in that Church, is now again commended and
extolled, which Church Satan went about  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) by his ministers miserably to scatter
and lay waste.

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
15:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)<span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**36.** And after a few days Paul said to
Barnabas, Returning, let us now visit our brethren throughout all cities
wherein we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do.
**37.** And Barnabas counseled to take John, whose surname was Mark.
**38.** But Paul besought him, that he which slid back from them in
Pamphylia, and had not gone with them to the work, might not be taken to
their company. **39.** And the contention waxed so hot between them,
that they parted company; and Barnabas having taken to him Mark, sailed
to Cyprus. **40.** But Paul having chosen Silas, journeyed, being
committed to the grace of God by the brethren. **41.** And he went
through Syria and Cilicia, establishing the churches

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span><span id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>**36.** *Let us visit our brethren.* In
this history we must first note how careful Paul was for the churches
which he had ordained. He laboreth, indeed, at Antioch profitably, but
because he remembered that he was an apostle ordained of God, and not
the pastor of one particular place, he keepeth the course of his
calling. Secondly, as it did not become him to be tied to one place, so
he thinketh with himself, that he was bound to all whom he begat in the
Lord; therefore, he will not suffer them to want his help. Moreover, the
work that was begun in those places could not be neglected; but it would
shortly after decay. Yet it is to be thought that Paul stayed still in
the church of Antioch, until he saw the estate thereof well ordered, and
concord established. For we know and try  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) what great force principal churches
 <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) have to keep other lesser
churches in order. If there arise any tumult in an obscure street, or if
there fall out any offense, the rumor goeth not so far, neither are the
neighbors so much moved; but if any place be excellent, it cannot quail
without great ruin, or, at least, but that the lesser buildings shall be
therewith sore shaken, both far and wide. Therefore, Paul, in staying a
time at Antioch, did provide for other churches; and so we must no less
look unto his wisdom than his diligence in this example, because
oftentimes the immoderate heat of the pastors in going about matters
doth no less hurt than their sluggishness.

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>*How they do.* Paul knew that amidst so
great lightness and inconstancy of men, and as their nature is inclined
to vice, if there be any thing well ordered among them, it doth seldom
continue stable, and for any long time; and especially that churches do
easily decay or grow out of kind, unless they be looked to continually.
There ought nothing under heaven to be more firm than the spiritual
building of faith, whose stability is grounded in the very heaven; yet
there be but few in whose minds the word of the Lord doth thoroughly
take lively root; therefore, firmness is rare in men. Again, even those
who have their anchor firmly fixed in the truth of God, do not cease
notwithstanding to be subject to diverse tossings, whereby, though their
faith be not overturned, yet hath it need of strengthening, that it may
be underpropped and stayed. Moreover, we see how Satan doth assault, and
with what subtle shifts he goeth about privily to pull down sometimes
whole churches, sometimes every one of the faithful particularly.
Therefore, it is not without cause that Paul is so careful for his
scholars, lest they behave themselves otherwise than is to be wished;
and therefore is he desirous in time to prevent, if there be any
inconvenience risen, which cannot be until he have taken view.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span><span id="iii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span>**37.** *And Barnabas gave counsel.* Luke
doth here set down that doleful disagreement which ought to make all the
godly afraid for just causes. The society of Paul and Barnabas was
consecrated by the heavenly oracle. They had long time labored, being of
one mind, under this yoke whereunto the Lord had tied them; they had, by
many experiences, tried \[felt\] the excellent favor of God, yea, that
wonderful success mentioned heretofore by Luke was a manifest blessing
of God. Though they had been almost drowned so often in so many tempests
of persecution, and were set upon so sore  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) by infinite enemies, though domestical
sedition were everywhere kindled against them, yet they were so far from
being pulled in sunder, that their agreement was then most of all tried,
\[proved.\] But now, for a light matter, and which might easily have
been ended, they break that holy bond of God’s calling.

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span>This could not fall out without great
perturbance to all the godly. Seeing that the heat of the contention was
so great and vehement in these holy men, who had long time accustomed
themselves to suffer all things, what shall befall us, whose affections
being not as yet so brought to obey God, do oftentimes rage  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) without modesty? Seeing that a light
occasion did separate them, who had long time, amidst so great trials,
retained unity holily, how easily may Satan cause those to be divided
who have either none, or, at least, a cold desire to foster peace? What
great pride was it for Barnabas, who had no more honorable thing than to
be Paul’s companion, that he might behave himself like a son towards his
father, so stubbornly to refuse his counsel? Peradventure, also, some
might think that Paul was not very courteous in that he did not forgive
a faithful helper this fault. Therefore, we be admonished by this
example, that unless the servants of Christ take great heed, there be
many chinks through which Satan will creep in, to disturb that concord
which is among them.

<span id="iii.vii-p15"></span>But now we must examine the cause itself,
for some there be who lay the blame of the disagreement upon Paul;
 <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) and, at the first hearing, the
reasons which they bring seem probable. John Mark is rejected, because
he withdrew himself from Paul’s company; but he fell not away from
Christ. A young man, being as yet unacquainted with bearing the cross,
returned home from his journey. He was somewhat to be borne with for his
age, being a fresh-water soldier \[a tyro\] he fainted in troubles even
at the first dash; he was not, therefore, about to be a slothful soldier
during his whole life. Now, forasmuch as his returning to Paul is an
excellent testimony of repentance, it seemeth to be a point of
discourtesy  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) to reject him; for
those must be handled more courteously, who punish themselves for their
own offenses of their own accord. There were also other causes which
ought to have made Paul more courteous. The house of John Mark was a
famous inn,  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) (<span
id="iii.vii-p18.2"></span>[Ac
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vii-p18.2"></span>;) his mother had entertained the faithful in
most grievous persecution; when Herod and all the people were in a rage,
they were wont to have their secret meetings there, as Luke reported
before. Surely he ought to have borne with such a holy and courageous
woman, lest immoderate rigor should alienate her. She was desirous to
have her son addicted to preach the gospel; now, what a great grief
might it have been to her that his pains and industry should be refused
 <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) for one light fault? And now
whereas John Mark doth not only bewail his fault, but in very deed amend
the same, Barnabas hath a fair color why he should pardon him.  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="iii.vii-p21"></span>Yet we may gather out of the text, that
the Church did allow Paul’s counsel. For Barnabas departeth, and with
his companion he saileth into Cyprus. There is no mention made of the
brethren, (as if he had departed privily without taking his leave;) but
the brethren commend Paul in their prayers to the grace of God; whereby
appeareth that the Church stood on his side. Secondly, whereas God
showeth forth the power of his Spirit in blessing Paul, and doth bless
his labors with happy success of his grace, and leaveth Barnabas, as it
were, buried, there may a probable reason be drawn thence, that it
pleased him that such an example of severity should be showed. And
surely the offense of John Mark was greater than it is commonly taken
for. He slid not back, indeed, from the faith of Christ, yet did he
forsake his calling, and was a revolt \[apostate\] from the same;
therefore, it was a matter which might have given evil example, if he
had been straightway received again into the calling from which he was
slid back. He had given himself over to serve Christ upon this
condition, that he should be free no longer. It was no more lawful for
him to break his promise made in this behalf, than it is for a husband
to leave his wife, or for a son to forsake his father. Neither doth
infirmity excuse his unfaithfulness, whereby the holiness of the calling
was violated.

<span id="iii.vii-p22"></span>And we must note, that he was not
altogether rejected of Paul; he counted him as a brother, so he would be
content with the common order; he refused to admit him unto the common
\[public\] function of teaching, from whence he fell filthily through
his own fault. And there is no great difference between these two,
whether he which hath offended be quite excluded from pardon, or he have
only public honor denied him; though it may be that they did both exceed
measure, as accidents do oftentimes mar a matter which is otherwise
good. It was well done of Paul, and according to the right of discipline
profitably, not to admit him to be his companion, whose inconstancy he
had once tried, \[experienced;\] but when he saw Barnabas so
importunate, he might have yielded to his desire. We ought to make more
account of the truth than of the favor of all the whole world; but it is
convenient that we ponder wisely what great weight there is in the
matter which is in hand. For if, in a matter of no weight or
edification, a man vaunt of his constancy, prepare himself for the
conflict, and cease not to defend that until the end, wherein he did
once take delight it shall be but foolish and perverse obstinacy. There
was also some middle way and means whereby Paul might have granted
somewhat to the importunateness of his fellow \[colleague\] in office,
and yet have not revolted from the truth. It was not for him to flatter
Mark, or to cloak his offense, yet was he not letted by religion, but
that after he had freely professed what he thought, he might suffer
himself to be overcome in that matter, which did neither indamage true
doctrine, nor endanger man’s salvation; which I say for this cause, that
we may learn to moderate our desire, even in the best causes, lest it
pass measure, and be too fervent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc37002.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>Plus tamen et
intestinis dissidiis est periculi ne anlmos nostros frangant vel
debilitent,” yet there is more danger in intestine dissensions, lest
they weaken or dispirit us.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc37002.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>Certum quidem
est, sicuti unus est Deus, ita unam esse ejus veritatem,” it is certain,
indeed, that as God is one, so also his truth is one.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc37002.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>Per rivos,”
by streams.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc37002.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>Communis
regulae praejudicium,” be not prejudged as a common rule.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc37002.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iii.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p13.1"></span>Apostolis
nihil minus esse in animo,” that the very last thing the apostles meant
was.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc37002.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p14.1"></span>Ad rem ipsam
quaerendam accedere,” to enter upon the investigation.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc37002.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p20.1"></span>Evangelli,”
gospel.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc37002.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p22.1"></span>Quam ut
classicum protinus caniant,” than forthwith to blow the trumpet.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc37002.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p24.1"></span>Atrociores,”
more atrocious.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc37002.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p25.1"></span>Superare,”
overcome.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc37002.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p26.1"></span>Exarsit,”
blazed forth.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc37002.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p28.1"></span>Aptas et
commodas,” fit and convenient.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc37002.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p29.1"></span>Re ipsa,” in
reality.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc37002.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p30.1"></span>Nihil se
morari apostolos,” that he cared not for the apostles.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc37002.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p32.1"></span>Pariter,” in
like manner.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc37002.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p33.1"></span>Suffragio,”
suffrage.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc37002.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p35.1"></span>Ventosis
suis clamoribus,” with their vain clamor.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc37002.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p36.1"></span>Abortivis,”
abortive.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc37002.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p37.1"></span>Facessat,”
may be dismissed.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc37002.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p40.1"></span>Reos,” as
men accused, defenders.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc37002.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p41.1"></span>Huc
accedit,” to this is added.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc37002.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p46.1"></span>Quanta
confidentia, quale supercilium,” how confident, how supercilious.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc37002.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iii.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p47"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p47.1"></span>Quos illic
imbiberunt mores,” the habits which they contracted there.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc37002.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p6.1"></span>Legitimi,”
lawful.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc37002.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>Sicut magis
idonei erant cognitores,” as they were more apt to take cognisance of
it.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc37002.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>Ne inter
eos quidem statim convenire potuit,” not even could they come instantly
to an agreement.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc37002.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>Dei
imperio acquiescere,” to aequiesce in the command of God.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc37002.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p14.1"></span>In medio
nostri,” in the midst of us.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc37002.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span> “<span
id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span>Exegetice,” exegetically.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc37002.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>Tacita
antithesis,” a tacit antithesis.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc37002.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p19.1"></span>Quae nobis
occulta est,” which is hidden from us.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc37002.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p20.1"></span>Ad
coeleste tribunal,” to the heavenly tribunal.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc37002.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p21.1"></span>Operum,”
of works.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc37002.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iii.ii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p22.1"></span>Eum
opponit,” he opposes him to, or contrasts him with.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc37002.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>Utrosque
pariter allectos esse,” that both were in like manner allured.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc37002.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p29.1"></span>Nihil esse
absurdi si finem... imposuerit,” there is no absurdity in his having put
an end to.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc37002.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p33"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p33.1"></span>Ad
necessitatem servandae logis,” to a necessity of observing the law.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc37002.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p34"></span> “<span
id="iii.ii-p34.1"></span>Circumscribi,” is circumscribed.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc37002.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p40.1"></span>In
horrendae desperationis abyssum,” in the abyss of horrible despair.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc37002.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p42"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p42.1"></span>Vulgo
hominum.” of the vulgar.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc37002.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iii.ii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p43"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p43.1"></span>Carnis
sensus,” carnal propensities.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc37002.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iii.ii-p43.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p44"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p44.1"></span>Sed ad
inchoandum prorsus nulla,” but that he shall have no power at all to
begin.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc37002.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iii.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p46"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p46.1"></span>Do
Epicuro,” of Epicurus.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc37002.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p48"></span> “<span
id="iii.ii-p48.1"></span>Premebant,” pressed.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc37002.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iii.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p50"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p50.1"></span>Ut sui
anathematis fulmen Petro et Paulo infligeret,” to thunder out an
anathema against Peter and Paul.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc37002.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iii.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p58"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p58.1"></span>Jugo,”
yoke.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc37002.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iii.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p59"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p59.1"></span>Verum quia
legis officium est.” but because it is the office of the law. Omitted.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc37002.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iii.ii-p59.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p60"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p60.1"></span>Sine
molestia,” without trouble,repugnance.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc37002.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p63"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p63.1"></span>Spem
salutis,” hope of salvation.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc37002.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iii.ii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p64"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p64.1"></span>Fucum
faceret,” should make a gloss.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc37002.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iii.ii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p67"></span> “<span
id="iii.ii-p67.1"></span>Commentum,” fiction.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc37002.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iii.ii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p68"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p68.1"></span>Vel severo
et implacabili judice,” or a severe and implacable judge.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc37002.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>Sibi
praesse,” to take precedence of him.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc37002.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p13.1"></span>Propter,” on account of.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc37002.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p18.1"></span>Elici,”
inferred.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc37002.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p19.1"></span>Pariter,” in like manner.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc37002.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p21.1"></span>Collapsa
erat,” had fallen down.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc37002.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p22.1"></span>Hunc
enim finem inter alios habebant ceremoniae, ut sanctum Dei populum a
profanis Gentilus discernerent; nunc sublato discrimine, ceremonias
quoque abrogari convenit,” for ceremonies had this, among other ends,
that they might distinguish the holy people of God from the profane
Gentiles; the distinction being now removed, ceremonies must also be
abolished. The whole of this passage is omitted in the translation.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc37002.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p24"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p24.1"></span>Intestinis,” intestine.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc37002.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p25.1"></span>Quaedam
erat desperationis materia,” was a kind of material for despair.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc37002.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p26.1"></span>Ex
contempto et ignobili trunco,” from an ignoble and despised trunk.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc37002.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iii.iii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p27.1"></span>Ex
ruinis,” out of ruins.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc37002.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p29.1"></span>In ejus
obsequium conveniant,” may accord in obeying him.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc37002.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p31"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p31.1"></span>Specioso
exilio,” a specious exile.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc37002.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iii.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p32"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p32.1"></span>Omnes ad
unum,” all to a man.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc37002.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p37"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p37.1"></span>Prolepsis,” an anticipation

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc37002.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iii.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p38"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p38.1"></span>Ab
ultima aeternitate,” from the remotest eternity

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc37002.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p39"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii-p39.1"></span>Exclament cum stupore,” exclaim in amazement.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc37002.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>Qui non
soldant foedus percutere,” who were not accustomed to enter into any
covenant.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc37002.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iii.iv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>Qui non
prorsus erant degeneres,” who were not wholly degenerate.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc37002.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>In eo
nihil absurdi,” in that there is an absurdity.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc37002.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p14.1"></span>Respicit,”
refers to.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc37002.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>Et
horrendum semel fieri ultorem,” and that he will one day take fearful
vengeance on them.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc37002.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p18.1"></span>Quam
retuli,” to which I have referred

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc37002.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p19.1"></span>Nempe,
vitandae ambiguitatis causa,” namely, for the purpose of avoiding
ambiguity.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc37002.htm#fr_142) <span
id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>Prudenter vero
Apostoli et Presbyteri Judam et Silam mittendos censuerunt, quo res
minus suspecta esset,” but the apostles prudently deemed it proper to
send Judas and Silas, that there might be less ground for suspicion,
omitted.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc37002.htm#fr_143) <span
id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>Se apostolorum
mentem tenere,” that they knew the mind of the apostles.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc37002.htm#fr_144) <span
id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p12.1"></span>Paulo et
Barnabas aspergeri,” to asperse Paul and Barnabas.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc37002.htm#fr_145) <span
id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>Nihil a
tumultuosis et phreneticis, nihil a gladiatoribus differrent,” should
differ in no respect from tumultuous and frenzied men, or from
gladiators.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc37002.htm#fr_146) <span
id="iii.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>Oblique
perstringere,” indirectly to lash.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc37002.htm#fr_147) <span
id="iii.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>Ex sua umbra
et deliciis prodierant,” had come forth from their luxurious retirement.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc37002.htm#fr_148) <span
id="iii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p19.1"></span>Seque eo
dictante statuisse quod scribunt,” and that which they write was
resolved on his dictation

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc37002.htm#fr_149) <span
id="iii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>Refixam,”
remodeled.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc37002.htm#fr_150) <span
id="iii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>Nihil minus
in animo illis fuisse,” that the last thing they meant was to.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc37002.htm#fr_151) <span
id="iii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p25"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p25.1"></span>Se...
accommodent,” accommodate themselves.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc37002.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>Fraterne
communicate,” must fraternally communicate.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc37002.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>Salvae
maneant,” may continue safe.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc37002.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi-p10.1"></span>Titillibat,” tickled with.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc37002.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>Temere
transiliat,” rashly overleap.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc37002.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p15.1"></span>Parum
opportune interpositum esset,” should have been inappropriately
interposed.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc37002.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>Intentos
fuisse ad docendum, et in hoc opere assiduos,” were intent on teaching,
and assiduous in the work.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc37002.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>Aliis
compluribus,” to several other persons.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc37002.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iii.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p20.1"></span>Sine
aemulatione,” without rivalship.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc37002.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iii.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p21.1"></span>Nuper
molitus erat,” had lately plotted.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc37002.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii-p6.1"></span>Experimur,” we know by experience.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc37002.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>Quantum
habeant momenti primariae ecclesiae,” how great weight principal
churches have.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc37002.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p9.1"></span>Sine
inspectione,” without inspection.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc37002.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii-p12.1"></span>Subinde,” ever and anon.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc37002.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p14.1"></span>Subinde
lasciviant,” do every now and then wanton.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc37002.htm#fr_166) <span
id="iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p16"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p16.1"></span>Nimio
Pauli rigori,” on Paul’s excessive rigor.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc37002.htm#fr_167) <span
id="iii.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p17"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p17.1"></span>Minime
humanum,” contrary to humanity.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc37002.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>Celebre
erat Ecclesiae hospitium,” was celebrated for its hospitality to the
Church.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc37002.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iii.vii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p19.1"></span>Ejus
operam respui,” that his assistance should be spurned away.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc37002.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p20"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii-p20.1"></span>Speciosum colorem... cur ignoscat,” a specious
excuse for pardoning him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](cc37003)
