[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc37003)  [Next](cc37005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>Chapter 17

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001.md)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** And when they had journeyed through
Amphipolis and Appollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a
synagogue of the Jews. **2.** And as his manner was, Paul entered in
unto them, and three Sabbaths disputed with  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) them out of the Scriptures. **3.**
Opening and alleging that Christ must have suffered and rise again from
the dead; and that this is Christ, whom, saith he, I preach to you.
**4.** And certain of them believed, and were joined to Paul and Silas,
and of religious Grecians a great multitude, and of chief women not a
few.

<span id="v.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p5"></span><span id="v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**1.** *They came to Thessalonica.* We know not
why Paul attempted nothing at Amphipolis and Appollonia, which were,
notwithstanding, famous cities, as appeareth by Pliny; save only because
he followed the Spirit of God as his guide; and took occasion by the
present matter, as occasion he did also essay to do some good there, but
because it was without any good success, therefore Luke passeth over it.
And whereas being beaten at Philippos, \[Philippi,\] and scarce escaping
out of great danger, he preached Christ at Thessalonica, it appeareth
thereby how courageous he was to keep the course of his calling, and how
bold he was ever now and then to enter into new dangers.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>This so invincible fortitude of mind, and such
patient enduring of the cross, do sufficiently declare, that Paul
labored not after the manner of men, but that he was furnished with the
heavenly power of the Spirit. And this was all so wonderful patience in
him, in that, entering in unto the Jews, whose unbridled frowardness he
had so often tried, \[experienced,\] he proceedeth to procure their
salvation. But because he knew that Christ was given to the Jews for
salvation, and that he himself was made an apostle upon this condition,
that he should preach repentance and faith, first to the Jews and then
to the Gentiles, committing the success of his labor to the Lord, he
obeyeth his commandment, (though he had no great hope to do good.) He
seemed before to have taken his last farewell of the Jews, when he said,
It was behoveful that the kingdom of God should be first preached to
you; but because ye receive it not, behold we turn to the Gentiles; but
that harder sentence must be restrained to that company who had wickedly
rejected the gospel when it was offered unto them, and made themselves
unworthy \[of\] the grace of God. And toward the nation itself Paul
ceaseth not to do his embassage; by which example we are taught, that we
ought to make so great account of the calling of God, that no
unthankfulness of men may be able to hinder us, but that we proceed to
be careful for their salvation, so long as the Lord appointeth us to be
their ministers. And it is to be though that even now there were some
who on the first Sabbath refused sound doctrine, but their frowardness
 <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) did not hinder him, but that he
came again upon other Sabbaths.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span><span id="v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>**2.** *He disputed.* Luke setteth down first
what was the sum of the disputation; to wit, that Jesus, the son of
Mary, is Christ, who was promised in times past in the law and the
prophets, who, by the sacrifice of his death, did make satisfaction for
the sins of the world, and brought righteousness and life by his
resurrection; secondly, how he proved that which he taught. Let us
handle this second member first. Luke saith that he disputed out of the
Scriptures; therefore the proofs of faith must be fet from \[sought at\]
the mouth of God alone. If we dispute about matters which concern men,
then let human reasons take place; but in the doctrine of faith, the
authority of God alone must reign, and upon it must we depend.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>All men confess that this is true, that we
must stay ourselves upon God alone; yet there be but a few which hear
him speak in the Scriptures. But and if that maxim take place among us,
 <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) that the Scripture cometh of
God, the rule either of teaching or of learning ought to be taken
nowhere else. Whereby it doth also appear with what devilish fury the
Papists are driven, when they deny that there can any certainty be
gathered out of the Scriptures; and, therefore, they hold that we must
stand to the decrees of men. For I demand of them whether Paul did
observe a right order in disputing or no? at least, let them blush for
shame, that the Word of the Lord was more reverenced in an unbelieving
nation than it is at this day among them. The Jews admit Paul, and
suffer him when he disputeth out of the Scriptures; the Pope and all his
count it a mere mock when the Scripture is cited; as if God did speak
doubtfully there, and did with vain boughts  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) mock men. Hereunto is added, that
there is at this day much more light in the Scriptures, and the truth of
God shineth there more clearly than in the law and the prophets. For in
the gospel, Christ, who is the Son of righteousness, doth shed out his
beam with perfect brightness upon us; for which cause the blasphemy of
the Papists is the more intolerable, whilst that they will make the Word
of God as yet uncertain. But let us know, as faith can be grounded
nowhere else than in the Word of the Lord, so we must only stand to the
testimony thereof in all controversies.

<span id="v.i-p14"></span><span id="v.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p15"></span>**3.** *Opening.* In this place he describeth
the sum and subject of the disputation, and he putteth down two members
concerning Christ, that he must have died and risen again, and that the
son of Mary which was crucified is Christ. When the question is
concerning Christ, there come three things in question, Whether he be,
who he is, and what he is. If Paul had had to deal with the Gentiles, he
must have fet his beginning farther;  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md) because they had heard nothing
concerning Christ; neither do profane men conceive that they need a
Mediator. But this point was out of doubt among the Jews, to whom the
Mediator was promised; wherefore Paul omitteth that as superfluous,
which was received by common consent of all men. But because there was
nothing more hard than to bring the Jews to confess that Jesus who was
crucified was the Redeemer, therefore Paul beginneth with this, that it
was meet that Christ should die, that he may remove the stumbling-block
of the cross. And yet we must not think that he recited the bare
history, but he taketh on undoubtedly principle, that the causes were
showed why Christ must have suffered and rise again; to wit, because he
preached of the ruin of mankind, of sin and of the punishment thereof,
of the judgment of God, and of the eternal curse wherein we are all
enwrapped. For even the Scripture calleth us hither, when it foretelleth
the death of Christ. As Isaias saith not simply that Christ should die,
but plainly expressing, because \[that\] we have all erred, and every
one hath gone his own way, he assigneth the cause of his death, that God
hath laid upon him all our iniquities; that the chastisement of our
peace is upon him, that by his stripes we may be healed; that by making
satisfaction for us, he hath purchased righteousness for us, (<span
id="v.i-p16.2"></span>[Isa 53:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.i-p16.2"></span>.) So doth Daniel show the force and fruit of his
death in his 9th chapter, (<span id="v.i-p16.3"></span>[Da
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)<span id="v.i-p16.3"></span>,.md)
when he saith that sin must be sealed up, that eternal righteousness may
succeed.

<span id="v.i-p17"></span>And, surely, there is no more apt or effectual
way to prove the office of Christ, than when men, being humbled with the
feeling of their miseries, see that there is no hope left, unless they
be reconciled by the sacrifice of Christ. Then laying away their pride,
they humbly embrace his cross, whereof they were before both weary and
ashamed. Therefore, we must come unto the same fountains at this day,
from which Paul fetteth \[fetcheth\] the proof of the death and
resurrection of Christ. And that definition brought great light to the
second chapter. It had not been so easy a matter for Paul to prove, and
certainly to gather, that the Son of Mary is Christ, unless the Jews had
been taught before what manner of Redeemer they were to hope for. And
when that doth once appear, it doth only remain that those things be
applied to Christ which the Scripture doth attribute to the Mediator.
But this is the sum of our faith, that we know that the Son of Mary is
that Christ and Mediator which God promised from the beginning; that
done, that we know and understood why he died and rose again; that we do
not feign to ourselves any earthly king, but that we seek in him
righteousness, and all parts of our salvation; both which things Paul is
said to have proved out of the Scriptures. We must know that the Jews
were not so blockish, nor so impudent, as they be at this day. Paul
might have drawn arguments from the sacrifices and from all the worship
of the law, whereat the Jews gnarl at this day like dogs. It is well
known how unseemly they rent and corrupt other places of Scripture. At
that day they had some courtesy  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md)
in them; also they did somewhat reverence the Scripture, so that they
were not altogether such as would not be taught; at this day the veil is
laid over their hearts, (<span id="v.i-p18.2"></span>[2Co
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)<span id="v.i-p18.2"></span>,.md) so
that they can see no more in the clear light than moles.

<span id="v.i-p19"></span><span id="v.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p20"></span>**4.** *Certain of them believed.* We see here
the fruit of Paul’s disputation. He proved flatly \[plainly\] that Jesus
was for us, and whose resurrection is the life of the world. Yet only
certain of the Jews believe; the rest are blind at noonday, and with
deaf ears refuse the certain and plain truth. This is also worth the
noting, that whereas only a few Jews believed, a great multitude of the
Grecians, who were far farther off, came unto the faith. To what end can
you say they were nousled \[trained\] up in the doctrine of the law from
their childhood, save only that they might be more estranged from God?
Therefore, the Lord doth now begin to show some tokens of that blindness
in them which the prophets do oftentimes denounced unto them.
Notwithstanding, he declareth by this that his covenant was not in vain,
because he did at least gather some of that people unto himself, that
the sparkles of the election may shine in the remnant which was saved
freely. Luke doth moreover teach, that they did not believe the sayings
of Paul, only so far forth that they subscribed unto them with a cold
consent, but that they did testify their earnest affection, because they
had joined themselves to Paul and Silas as companions, and provoked
against themselves the hatred of their nation by the free profession of
the gospel.  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) For what meaneth
this adjoining, save only because they professed that they allowed
\[approved\] that doctrine which he delivered, and that they took his
part? For there is nothing more contrary to faith, than if, when we know
\[recognize\] the truth of God, we stand notwithstanding in doubt, and
are loath to join ourselves to any side. If any man had rather expound
it, that they did join themselves to Paul and Silas, because they were
desirous to learn, that they might be better instructed at home; thereby
doth also appear the lively heat of faith; and that doth always continue
unmovable, that no man doth truly believe in Christ, save only he which
doth give over himself to him, and doth freely and willingly fight over
his banner.

<span id="v.i-p22"></span>*Of religious Grecians a multitude.* Because
they had learned \[imbibed\] the first principles of godliness, they
were nearer to the kingdom of God than others who had always \[lain\]
laid in the filth of superstition. Notwithstanding, the question is, how
the Grecians came by religion, who, being bewitched with wicked errors
and dotings, were without God? as Paul teacheth, (<span
id="v.i-p22.1"></span>[Eph 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md)<span
id="v.i-p22.1"></span>.) But we must know, that whither soever the Jews
were exiled, there went with them some seed of godliness,  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md) and there was some smell \[savor\] of
pure doctrine spread abroad. For their miserable scattering abroad was
so turned unto a contrary end by the wonderful counsel of God, that it
did gather those unto the true faith who did wander in error. And though
religion were also corrupt among them with many wicked inventions, yet
because most of the Gentiles were weary of their madness, they were by
this short sum  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) enticed unto
Judaism, that nothing is more safe than the worship of one and the true
God. Therefore, by religious Grecians understood those who had some
taste of the true and lawful worship of God, so that they were not any
longer given to gross idolatry. Though, as I have said, it is to be
thought that it was only a light and obscure taste, which was far from
true instruction. Wherefore, Luke doth improperly give them such an
honorable title. But as the Spirit of God doth sometimes vouchsafe \[to
give\] some rude beginning and first exercise of faith, or the only
\[mere\] preparation, the name of faith, so they are called in this
place religious, who, having taken their leave of idols, had begun to
acknowledge one God.

<span id="v.i-p25"></span>And though that confused or obscure persuasion
doth not deserve of itself to be counted religion, yet because it is a
step whereby we come nearer unto God, it taketh the name of the
consequent, as they call it, or of that which followeth. Yea, the blind
and superstitious fear of God is sometimes called religion; not because
it is so indeed, but improperly, to note the difference between a mean
worship of God,  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md) and gross and
Epicurish contempt. Nevertheless, let us know that the truth and the
sound doctrine of the word of God is the rule of godliness, so that
there can be no religion without the true light of understanding.

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005.md)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**5.** And the unbelieving Jews being moved
with envy, \[zeal,\] and taking to them certain vagabonds, froward
fellows, and having assembled the multitude, they made a tumult in the
city; and besetting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out
unto the people. **6.** And when they had not found them, they drew
Jason and certain brethren unto the governors of the city, crying, Those
who have troubled the whole world are come hither also, **7.** Who Jason
hath received privily; and all these do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus. **8.** And they
troubled \[stirred up\] the multitude and the magistrates of the city
when they heard these things: **9.** And when they had received
sufficient assurance of Jason and the rest, they let him go. **10.** And
forthwith the brethren sent forth Paul and Silas by night unto Berea,
who, when they were come, they went into the synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span><span id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>**5.** *And being moved with envy.* We see how
Paul could nowhere erect the kingdom of Christ without some conflict,
for so soon as any fruit of doctrine appeared, there arose persecution
therewithal; but because he knew that he was to war against Satan and
the wickedness of the world, he was not only hardened against all
assaults, but he was more encouraged more courageously to proceed.
Therefore, all the servants of Christ must be content with this one
example of him, if they see that their labor doth yield some fruit, they
must recompense all manner of persecutions with this reward. And this
place teacheth that the zeal wherewith the unbelievers are carried
headlong, and set on fire, is nothing else but furious force,  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249.md) because it is not governed by the
prudence of the Spirit, neither yet with righteousness or equity. And
though they do always pretend the name of God for an excuse of their
disordered zeal, yet this history doth plainly declare, that mere
hypocrisy doth reign inwardly, and that all corners of their hearts are
stuffed with poisoned malice. These enemies of Paul did boast that they
were defenders of the law of God; and that they did hate Paul, and
contend with him only in defense thereof.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>Why do they then arm the wicked, and conspire
together with them to raise tumult? Why then do they also before a
profane magistrate bring the gospel in that contempt which might have
redounded to the contempt of the law? Such sedition doth plainly
declare, that they were moved with nothing less than desire to please
God, to be thus hot against Paul, for to what end do they beset Jason’s
house, and strive disorderly  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md) to
pluck out Paul thence, save only that they may set him before the people
to be stoned? Therefore, let us know that wicked zeal, which is hot
\[boils\] in superstitious men, is always infected with hypocrisy and
malice; and this is the cause that it breaketh out into cruelty without
keeping any measure.

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>*Taking to them certain vagabonds.* The Greek
word which Luke useth doth signify sluggards, and men whereof there
ought no account to be made, who, having nothing wherewith they could
keep themselves occupied at home, did run up and down idle;  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251.md) or bold \[audacious\] fellows and
hungry, who are ready to forswear themselves to raise tumults, and to be
at one end of  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md) every wicked
fact. Whereby it doth likewise appear that their own conscience told
them that they did amiss, seeing they got wicked men to take their part,
and to give them their consent. For seeing the magistrate did favor
them, what did move them to raise that tempest, save only because they
had no hope to have any success, unless (matters should be out of order
and) all should be in an uproar? And Luke describeth how such fans did
raise sedition; to wit, they gathered the people together in troops, and
spread abroad their poison here and there, until they were strong enough
to make an assault;  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md) which
policy \[artifice\] is too common among seditions fellows, as those
cities which are subject to this mischief do full well know.

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span><span id="v.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *Those men who have troubled the whole
world.* This is the state of the gospel, to have those uproars which
Satan raiseth imputeth to it. This is also the malicousness of the
enemies of Christ, to lay the blame of tumults upon holy and modest
teachers, which they themselves procure. Assuredly, the gospel is not
preached to this end that it may set men together by the ears;  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md) but rather that it may keep them in
peace, being reconciled to God. When Christ doth meekly will us  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md) there to come unto him, Satan and the
wicked rage;  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md) therefore, Paul
and Silas might easily have defended themselves; but it was requisite
for them to suffer this false slander for a time; and so long as they
were not heard, to put it up quietly. And the Lord meant by their
example to teach us, that we must not give place to slanders and false
reports; but we must stand stoutly in maintaining the truth, being ready
to hear evil for things done well. Wherefore, away with the perverse
wisdom of some, who, to the end they may escape false slanders, cease
\[hesitate\] not to betray Christ and his gospel through their
treacherous moderation, as though their good name were more precious
than Paul’s and such like, yea, than the sacred name of God, which is
not free from blasphemies.

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span><span id="v.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>**7.** *All these men, etc.* The second point
of the accusation of this, that they violate the majesty of the empire
of Rome. A great and grievous crime, yet too impudently forged. Paul and
Silas sought to erect the kingdom of Christ, which is spiritual. The
Jews knew that this might be done without doing any injury to the Roman
empire. They knew that they meant nothing less than to overthrow the
public estate, or to take from Caesar his authority. Therefore, the Jews
catch at the pretense of treason, that they may oppress the innocent
with the envy of the crime alone.  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md)

<span id="v.ii-p21"></span>Neither doth Satan cease at this day to blear
men’s eyes with such smokes and mists. The Papists know full well, and
they be sufficiently convict before God, that that is more than false
which they lay to our charge, That we overthrow all civil government;
that laws and judgments are quite taken away; that the authority of
kings if subverted by us; and yet they be not ashamed to the end they
may make all the whole world offended with us, falsely to report that
the Jews do not only allege that Caesar’s commandments were broken,
because Paul and Silas durst presume to alter and innovate somewhat in
religion, but because they said there was another king. This crime was
altogether forged; but if at any time religion enforces us to resist
tyrannical edicts and commandments which forbid us to give due honor to
Christ, and due worship to God; we may then justly say for ourselves,
that we are not rebellious against kings, for they be not so exalted,
that they may go about like giants to pull God out of his seat and
throne. That excuse of Daniel was true, that he had not offended the
king, whereas notwithstanding he had not obeyed his wicked commandment,
neither had he injured mortal man, because he had preferred God before
him. So let us faithfully pay to princes the tributes which are due to
them, let us be ready to give them all civil obedience; but if, being
not content with their degree, they go about to pluck out of our hands
the fear and worship of God, there is no cause why any should say that
we despise them, because we make more account of the power and majesty
of God.

<span id="v.ii-p22"></span><span id="v.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p23"></span>**8.** *They raised the multitude.* We see
how unjustly the holy men were handled. Because they had no place
granted them to defend themselves, it was an easy matter to oppress
them, though they were guiltless. We see, likewise, that it is no new
matter for magistrates to be carried away with the rage of the people as
with a tempest, especially when the injury toucheth those who are
strangers and unknown, at whose hands they look for no reward; because
they will not come in danger for nothing. For then they care not for
reason or equity, neither do they hear the matter,  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md) but one driveth forward another
without any resistance, and all things are done out of order, as when
they run unto some great fire. But it came to pass, by the singular
goodness of God, that so great heat was stayed by and by; for so soon as
the magistrates profess that they will know farther of the matter, the
multitude is appeased; assurance \[security\] is taken; and, at length,
the matter is ended.

<span id="v.ii-p25"></span><span id="v.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p26"></span>**10.** *They sent them out to Berea.* Hereby
it appeareth that Paul’s labor brought forth fruit in a small time; for
though the brethren send forth him and Silas, yet they adjoin themselves
as voluntary companions to their danger and cross by this duty. But the
constancy of Paul is incredible, because, having had such experience of
their stubbornness and malice of his nation, he doth never cease to try
whether he can bring any to Christ, namely, seeing he knew that he was
bound both to Jews and Gentiles, no injury of men could lead him away
from his calling. So all the servants of Christ must so wrestle with the
malice of the world, that they shake not off Christ’s yoke with what
injuries soever they be provoked.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**11.** And those were noblemen among the
Thessalonians, who had received the word with all readiness of mind,
daily searching the Scriptures whether these things were so. **12.** And
many of them believed, and honest women which were Grecians, and men not
a few. **13.** But when the Jews of Thessalonica knew that Paul did also
preach the word of God at Berea, they came thither also, moving the
multitude. **14.** And then straghtway the brethren sent forth Paul that
he might go as it were unto the sea; but Silas and Timotheus remained
there. **15.** Moreover, those which guided Paul brought him even unto
Athens; and when they had received commandment to Silas and Timotheus
that they should come to him with speed, they departed.

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span><span id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>**11.** *Did excel in nobility.* Luke
returneth again unto the men of Thessalonica. The remembrance of Christ
might have been thought to have been buried by the departure of Paul,
and surely it is a wonder that that small light, which began to shine,
was not quite put out, and that the seed of sound doctrine did not
wither away, which had need continually to be watered that it might
spring up. But after Paul’s departure, it appeareth how effectual and
fruitful his preaching had been. For those who had only tasted of the
first principles of godliness do nevertheless profit and go forward,
though he be absent, and exercise themselves in the continual reading of
the Scripture. And, first, Luke saith that they were of the chief
families. For the nobility whereof he maketh mention is referred not
unto the mind, but unto the nation. Some think that the men of Berea are
compared with the men of Thessalonica, because he saith \[<span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>ευγενεστερους\], and not in the superlative
degree \[<span id="v.iii-p5.2"></span>ευγενεστατους\]. But I think that
that manner of speech is usual and common among the Grecians, which the
Latins could not so well digest.  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259.md) Moreover, he had said a little before,
that certain principal women believed at Thessalonica, and it is not to
be thought that the men of Berea were preferred before those of this
city. And there is a threefold reason why Luke maketh mention of their
excellency of birth. We know how hardly men came down from their high
degress, what a rare matter it is for those who are great in the world
to undertake the reproach of the cross, laying away their pride, and
rejoice in humility, as James commandeth, (<span
id="v.iii-p6.2"></span>[Jas 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.iii-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>Therefore Luke commendeth the rare efficacy
and working of the Spirit of God, when he saith that these noblemen were
no whit hindered by the dignity of the flesh, but that embracing the
gospel, they prepared themselves to bear the cross, and preferred the
reproach of Christ before the glory of the world. Secondly, Luke meant
to make known the glory of the world. Secondly, Luke meant to make known
unto us, that the grace of Christ standeth open for all orders and
degrees. In which sense Paul saith, that God would have all men saved,
(<span id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>[1Ti
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>;.md)
lest the poor and those who are base do shut the gate against the rich,
(though Christ did vouchsafe them the former place.) Therefore we see
that noblemen, and those who are of the common sort,  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260.md) are gathered together, that those who
are men of honor, and which are despised, grow together into one body of
the Church, that all men, in general, may humble themselves, and extol
the grace of God. Thirdly, Luke seemeth to note the cause why there were
so many added, and the kingdom of Christ was, in such short time, so
spread abroad and enlarged at Thessalonica; to wit, because that was no
small help, that chief men, and men of honor, did show other men the
way, because the common sort is for the most part moved by authority.
And though this were no meet stay for faith and godliness, yet is it no
strange thing for God to bring the unbelievers (who wander as yet in
error) to himself, by crooked and byways.  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md)

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>*Received the word.* This is the first thing
which he commendeth in the men of Thessalonica, that with a willing and
ready desire they received the gospel. Secondly, that they confirmed
their faith  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md) by diligent
inquisition; so that their faith and godliness are commended in the
beginning for forwardness,  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md) and
in process they are praised for their constancy and fervent desire they
had to profit. And surely this is the first entrance into faith that we
be ready to follow, and that, abandoning the understanding and wisdom of
the flesh,  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md) we submit ourselves
to Christ, by him to be taught and to obey him. Also Paul himself, in
adorning the Thessalonians with this title, doth agree with Saint Luke,
(<span id="v.iii-p13.2"></span>[1Th
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)<span id="v.iii-p13.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span>As touching the second member, this
diligence is no small virtue, whereunto Luke saith the faithful were
much given for confirmation of their faith. For many who at the first
break out  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265.md) give themselves
straightway to idleness, while that they have no care to profit, and so
lose that small seed  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266.md) which they
had at the first.

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span>But two inconveniences  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md) may be in this place objected; for it
seemeth to be a point of arrogancy in that they inquire that they may
judge; and it seemeth to be a thing altogether disagreeing with that
readiness whereof he spake of late; secondly, forasmuch as inquisitions
is a sign of doubtfulness, it followeth that they were before endued
with no faith, which hath always assurance and certainty joined and
linked with it. Unto the first objection I answer, that Luke’s words
ought not so to be understood, as if the Thessalonians took upon them to
judge, or as though they disputed whether the truth of God were to be
received; they did only examine Paul’s doctrine by the rule and square
of the Scripture, even as gold is tried in the fire; for the Scripture
is the true touchstone whereby all doctrines must be tried. If any man
say that this kind of trial is doubtful, forasmuch as the Scripture is
oftentimes doubtful, and is interpreted divers ways, I say, that we must
also add judgment of the Spirit, who is, not without cause, called the
Spirit of discretion, \[discernment.\] But the faithful must judge of
every doctrine no otherwise then out of, and according to, the
Scriptures, having the Spirit for their leader and guide. And by this
means is refuted that sacrilegious quip \[quibble\] of the Papists,
Because there can be nothing gathered certainly out of the Scriptures,
faith doth depend only upon the determination of the Church. For when
the Spirit of God doth commend the men of Thessalonica, he prescribeth
to us a rule in their example. And in vain should we search the
Scriptures, unless they have in them light enough to teach us.

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span>Therefore, let this remain as a most sure
maxim, that no doctrine is worthy to be believed but that which we find
to be grounded in the Scriptures. The Pope will have all that received
without any more ado, whatsoever he doth blunder out at his pleasure;
but shall he be preferred before Paul, concerning whose preaching it was
lawful for the disciples to make inquisition? And let us not that this
is not spoken of any visured \[pretended\] Council, but of a small
assembly of men, whereby it doth better appear that every man is called
to read the Scriptures. So likewise, making of search doth not disagree
with the forwardness of faith; for so soon as any man doth hearken, and
being desirous to learn, doth show himself attentive, he is now bent and
apt to be taught, though he do not fully  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md) give his consent. For example’s sake,
an unknown teacher shall profess that he doth bring true doctrine: I
will come, being ready to hear, and my mind shall be framed unto the
obedience of the truth. Nevertheless, I will weigh with myself what
manner \[of\] doctrine it is which he bringeth; neither will I embrace
anything but the certain truth, and that which I know to be the truth.
And this is the best moderation, when, being fast bound with the
reverence of God, we hear that willingly and quietly which is set before
us, as proceeding from him. Nevertheless, we beware of the seducing
subtilty of men; neither do our minds throw themselves headlong with a
blind rage  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) to believe every
thing without advisement. Therefore, the searching mentioned by Luke
doth not tend to that end that we may be slow and unwilling to believe,
but rather readiness with judgment is made the mean between lightness
and stubbornness.

<span id="v.iii-p22"></span>Now must we answer the second objection.
Faith is contrary to doubtfulness: he which inquireth doubteth;
therefore it followeth, that forasmuch as the Thessalonians inquire and
make search touching the doctrine of Paul, they were void of faith as
yet. But the certainty of faith doth not hinder the confirmation
thereof. I call that confirmation when the truth of God is more and more
sealed up in our hearts, whereof, notwithstanding, we did not doubt
before. For example’s sake, I hear out of the gospel that I am
reconciled to God through the grace of Christ, and that my sins are
purged \[expiated\] through his holy blood: there shall be some
testimony uttered which shall make me believe this. If afterward I
examine and search the Scriptures more thoroughly, I shall find other
testimonies oftentimes which shall not only help my faith, but also
increase it and establish it, that it may be more sure and settled. In
like sort, as concerning understanding, faith is increased by reading
the Scriptures. If any man object again, that those men do attribute but
small authority to Paul’s doctrine, who search the Scriptures whether
these things be so, I answer, that such are the proceedings of faith,
that they sometimes seek for that in the Scripture whereof they are
already persuaded by God, and have the inward testimony of the Spirit.
And Luke doth not say that the faith of the Thessalonians was in all
points perfect; but he doth only declare how they were brought to
Christ,  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md) and how they did profit
in faith, until the absolute building of godliness might be erected
among them.

<span id="v.iii-p24"></span><span id="v.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p25"></span>**12.** *And many believed.* This is not
referred unto the sentence next going before, as if those of whom he
spake began to believe, making choice of some of them: for that were an
absurd thing. But Luke’s meaning is, because many were added by their
example, the Church was increased in that city. And hitherto hath Luke
declared the first beginning of the church of Thessalonica, lest any man
should think that Paul’s labors did perish through his sudden and
violent departure; for unless I be much deceived, he showeth for this
purpose what fruit his preaching brought forth in the other city, before
he came to the exile of Berea.

<span id="v.iii-p26"></span><span id="v.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p27"></span>**13.** *And when the Jews.* We see how the
Jews were carried to and fro with such hatred of the gospel as could
never be appeased. For they do not only expel Christ furiously when he
is offered unto them at home; but when they hear that he is preached
elsewhere, they run thither like mad men. But we must not so much in
this place consider the fury of the nation as the desperate malice of
Satan, who pricketh forward those which be his to trouble the kingdom of
Christ, and to destroy man’s salvation; and he useth them as fans to
raise sedition. Wherefore, let us know, that when at this day so many
furious enemies do set themselves against the faithful ministers of
Christ, it is not men which procure the war, but it is Satan, the father
of lying, who doth go about all these things that he may overthrow the
kingdom of Christ. (<span id="v.iii-p27.1"></span>[Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="v.iii-p27.1"></span>..md)
And though there be not always the same form in fighting and
encountering, yet will Satan never cease to make weary those whom he
knoweth to serve Christ faithfully, either with open war, or secret
lying in wait, or domestical combats.

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>**16.** And as Paul waited for them at Athens,
his spirit was sore grieved in him, forasmuch as he saw the city given
to idolatry. **17.** Therefore he disputed in the synagogue with the
Jews and religious men, and in the market daily with those which lit
upon him. **18.** And certain Epicures \[Epicureans,\] and philosophers
of the Stoics, disputed with him, and some said, “What will this babbler
say? and other some, He seemeth to be a declarer of new devils, \[or
gods,\] because he preached to them Jesus and the resurrection. **19.**
And when they had caught him, they led him to Mars’ Street, saying, May
we know what new doctrine this is which thou utterest? **20.** For thou
bringest certain new things to our ears: Therefore, we will know what
these things mean. **21.** And all the men of Athens, and the strangers
which were there, gave themselves to nothing else but to speak or hear
some new thing.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span><span id="v.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>**16.** *Was sore grieved.* Though Paul,
whithersoever he came, did stoutly execute that function of teaching
which he knew was enjoined with him, yet Luke showeth that he was more
incensed and moved at Athens, because he saw idolatry reign more there
than in any other place for the most part. The whole world was then full
of idols; the pure worship of God could be found nowhere; and there were
everywhere innumerable monsters of superstitions, but Satan had made the
city of Athens more mad than any other city, so that the people thereof
were carried headlong with greater madness unto their wickedness and
perverse rites. And this example is worth the noting, that the city,
which was the mansion-house of wisdom, the fountain of all arts, the
mother of humanity, did exceed all others in blindness and madness. We
know with what commandments witty and learned men did set forth the
same, and she had conceived so great good liking of herself that she
counted those rude  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) whom she had
not polished. But the Holy Ghost condemning the whole world of ignorance
and blockishness, saith that those masters of liberal sciences were
bewitched with an unwonted madness. Whence we gather what man’s wit can
do in matters which concern God. Neither need we doubt of this, but that
the Lord suffered the men of Athens to fall into extreme madness, that
all the world might learn by them, and that they might teach all ages
that the foresight and wit of man’s mind being holpen with learning and
instruction, doth altogether dote, and is mere foolishness when it
cometh to the kingdom of God. They had undoubtedly their cloaks and
colors, wherewith they did excuse their worshippings, how preposterous
and corrupt soever they were. And yet, notwithstanding, it is certain
that they did not only deceive men with childish and frivolous toys, but
that they themselves were deluded shamefully with gross and filthy
jugglings, as if they were deprived of common sense, and were altogether
blockish and brutish. And as we learn what manner \[of\] religion
proceedeth from man’s understanding, and that man’s wisdom is nothing
else but a shop of all errors, so we may know that the men of Athens,
being drunk with their own pride, did err more filthily than the rest.
The antiquity, the pleasantness, and beauty of the city, did puff them
up, so that they did boast that the gods came thence. Therefore,
forasmuch as they did pull down God from heaven, that they might make
him an inhabitant of their city, it was meet that they should be thrust
down into the nethermost hell. Howsoever it be, the vanity of man’s
wisdom is here marked with eternal infamy by the Spirit of God; because,
where it was principally resident, there was the darkness more thick.
Idolatry did reign most of all there; and Satan carried men’s minds to
and fro more freely by his mocks and juggling.

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>Now, let us come unto Paul. Luke saith,
forasmuch as he saw the city so given to idolatry, his spirit waxed hot,
or was moved. Where he doth not attribute unto him indignation only,
neither doth he only say that he was offended with that spectacle, but
he expressed the unwonted heat of holy anger, which sharpened his zeal,
so that he did address himself more fervently unto the work. And here we
must note two things. For in that Paul was wroth when he saw the name of
God wickedly profaned, and his pure worship corrupted, he did thereby
declare, that nothing was to him corrupted, he did thereby declare, that
nothing was to him more precious than the glory of God. Which zeal ought
to be of great force among us, as it is in the Psalm, (<span
id="v.iv-p7.1"></span>[Ps 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009.md)<span
id="v.iv-p7.1"></span>,) “The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.” For
it is a common rule of all the godly, that so soon as they see their
heavenly Father blasphemed, they be sore vexed, as Peter teacheth that
the godly man Lot, because he could not cure most filthy facts, did vex
his heart, (<span id="v.iv-p7.2"></span>[2Pe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv-p7.2"></span>..md) And
teachers must, above all others, be fervent, as Paul saith, that he is
jealous that he may retain the Church in true chastity, (<span
id="v.iv-p7.3"></span>[2Co 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.iv-p7.3"></span>.) And those who are not touched when they see and
hear God blasphemed, and do not only wink thereat, but also carelessly
pass over it, are not worthy to be counted the children of God, who at
least do not give him so much honor as they do to an earthly father.
Secondly, we must note that he was not so grieved, that being cast down
through despair, he was quite discouraged, as we see most men to be far
from waxing hot, or being moved, when they see the glory of God wickedly
profaned, that in professing and uttering sorrow and sighing, they do,
notwithstanding, rather wax profane with others than study to reform
them. Nevertheless, they have a fair cloak for their sluggishness, that
they will not procure any tumult when they are like to do no good.
 <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md) For they think that their
attempts shall be in vain if they strive against the wicked and violent
conspiracy of the people. But Paul is not only not discouraged with
wearisomeness, neither doth he so faint by reason of the hardness of the
matter, that he doth cast from him his office of teaching; but he is
pricked forward with a more sharp prick to maintain godliness.

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span><span id="v.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span>**17.** *With the Jews and religious men.* It
was an ordinary thing with Paul, wheresoever the Jews had synagogues,
there to begin, and to offer Christ to his own nation. After that he
went to the Gentiles, who, having tasted of the doctrine of the law,
though they were not as yet thoroughly nousled up in \[imbued with\]
true godliness, did, notwithstanding, worship the God of Israel, and
being desirous to learn, did not refuse those things which they knew
were taken out of Moses and the prophets; and because such aptness to be
taught was an entrance unto faith, yea, was a certain beginning of
faith, the Spirit vouchsafeth them an honorable title, who being only
lightly sprinkled with the first rudiments, drew nearer unto the true
God; for they be called religious. But let us remember that all the
religion of the world may be brought to nought. Those are called
worshippers of God spiritually who gave their name to the God of Israel.
Religion is attributed to them alone; therefore there remaineth nothing
else for the rest but the reproach of atheism, howsoever they toil and
moil  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md) in superstition. And that
for good considerations; for of whatsoever pomp the idolaters make
boast, if their inward affection be examined, there shall be nothing
found there but horrible contempt of God, and it shall appear that it is
a mere feigned color wherewith they go about to excuse their idols.

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span><span id="v.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>**18.** *They reasoned with him.* Luke addeth
now that Paul had a combat with the philosophers; not that he set upon
them of set purpose, forasmuch as he knew that they were even born only
to brawl and cavil; but he was enforced to enter such a conflict
contrary to his purpose, as Paul himself commandeth godly teachers to be
furnished with spiritual weapons, wherewith they may valiantly defend
the truth if any enemies set themselves against it, (<span
id="v.iv-p13.1"></span>Titus 1:9.) For it is not always in our choice to
make choice of those with whom we will deal; but the Lord doth often
suffer stubborn and importunate men to arise to exercise us, that by
their gainsaying the truth may more plainly appear. Neither is it to be
doubted but that the Epicures, \[Epicureans,\] according to their wonted
frowardness, did trouble the holy man; and that the Stoics, trusting to
their subtile quips and cavils, did stubbornly deride him;  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274.md) yet the end shall show that he did not
dispute sophistically, neither was he carried away unto any unprofitable
and contentious disputation, but did observe that modesty which he
himself commandeth elsewhere. And thus must we do, that by refuting
meekly and modestly vain cavillings, we may utter that which is sound
and true; and we must always avoid this danger, that ambition or desire
to show our wit do not unwrap us in superfluous and vain contentions.

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span>Furthermore, Luke maketh mention of two
sects, which, though they were the one contrary to the other,  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md) had, not withstanding, their contrary
vices. The Epicures \[Epicureans\] did not only despise liberal arts,
but were also open enemies to them. Their philosophy was to feign that
the sun was two feet broad, that the world was made *ex atomis*, \[of
atoms,\] (or of things which were so small that they could not be
divided or made smaller,) and by deluding men thus, to blot out the
wonderful workmanship which appeareth in the creation of the world. If
they were a thousand times convict, they were as impudent as dogs.
Though they did, in a word, confess that there be gods, yet they did
imagine that they were idle in heaven, and that they were wholly set
upon pleasure, and that they were blessed only because they were idle.
As they did deny that the world was created by God, as I have said of
late, so they thought that man’s affairs were tossed to and fro without
any governing, and that they were not governed by the celestial
providence. Pleasure was their felicity,  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276.md) not that unbridled and filthy
pleasure; yet such as did more and more corrupt men by her enticements,
being already, of their own accord, bent to pamper the flesh. They
counted the immorality of their souls but a fable, whereby it came to
pass that they gave themselves liberty to make much of their bodies.

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span>As for the Stoics, though they said that the
world was subject to the providence of God, yet did they afterwards,
through a most filthy surmise, or rather doting, corrupt that point of
their doctrine. For they did not grant that God did govern the world by
counsel, justice, and power, but they forged a labyrinth of the compass
or agreement of the causes, that God himself being bound with the
necessity of fate or destiny, might be carried violently with the frame
of heaven, as the poets do tie and fetter their Jupiter with golden
fetters, because the Fates or Destinies do govern when he is about
something else. Though they placed felicity \[the chief good\] in
virtue, they knew not what true virtue was, and they did puff up men
with pride,  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277.md) so that they did
deck themselves with that which they took from God. For though they did
all abase the grace of the Holy Ghost, yet was there no sect more proud.
They had no other fortitude, but a certain rash and immoderate
fierceness.  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md)

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span>Therefore there was in Paul wonderful force
of the Spirit, who standing amidst such beasts, which sought to pull him
to and fro, stood firm in the sound sincerity of the gospel, and did
valiantly withstand and endure, as well the dogged malapertness
\[petulance\] of the former sect, as the pride and crafty cavillings of
the other. And hereby we see more plainly what small agreement there is
between the heavenly wisdom and the wisdom of the flesh. For though the
whole multitude were offended with the gospel, yet the philosophers were
captains and standard-bearers in assaulting the same. For that did
principally appear in them which Paul himself speaketh of the wisdom of
the flesh, that it is an enemy to the cross of Christ, (<span
id="v.iv-p21.1"></span>[1Co 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026.md)<span
id="v.iv-p21.1"></span>,) so that no man can be fit to learn the
principles of the gospel unless he first abandon the same.

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span>*Other some said.* Luke setteth before us two
sects of men, which both were far from godliness; and yet the one sort
is worse than the other. Those who are desirous to hear that again which
they call new, first, they are moved not with any desire to learn, but
with vain curiousity; secondly, they think unhonorably of the Word of
God, is that the count it profane novelty; yet because they give ear,
and that being in doubt until they may know farther of the matter, they
are not quite past hope. But the rest who proudly refuse that which is
offered, yea, condemn it reproachfully, do shut the gate of salvation
against themselves. For this railing did proceed from monstrous pride;
what meaneth this babbler? Because they neither vouchsafe to hear Paul,
and also reproachfully refuse him, as if he were some common jester.
 <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) Moreover, they do not loathe
his doctrine through rash zeal, but do openly tread under foot that
which is brought unto them concerning religion, though as yet they know
it not; because these are ashamed to learn any thing of a base and
obscure fellow, who had hitherto professed themselves to be teachers of
all the whole world.

<span id="v.iv-p24"></span>*A declarer of new devils.* They do not take
devils \[deities\] in evil part, as the Scripture useth to do; but for
the lesser gods or angels, who they thought were in the midst between
the highest God and men, whereof Plato maketh mention oftentimes. As
touching the sum of the matter, we must note that those things which
Paul spake concerning Christ and the resurrection seemed to them to be
new devils. Whence we gather, that our faith is principally
distinguished and discerned from the superstitions of the Gentiles by
these marks; because it setteth forth Christ to be the sole Mediator;
because it teacheth us to seek for salvation only at his hands; because
it commandeth us to seek remission of our sins in his death, whereby we
may be reconciled to God; because it teacheth that men are renewed and
fashioned again by his Spirit, who were before profane, and slaves to
sin, that they may begin to live righteously and holy. Again, because
from such beginnings as do plainly declare that the kingdom of God is
spiritual, it lifteth up our minds at length unto the hope of the
resurrection to come. For as concerning other things, though the
philosophers do not reason purely, yet they say somewhat. Yea, they
speak much concerning eternal life and the immortality of the soul; but
as touching faith, which showeth free reconciliation in Christ; and
regeneration, whereby the Spirit of God doth restore in us the image of
God; concerning calling upon God, and the last resurrection, not a word.

<span id="v.iv-p25"></span><span id="v.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p26"></span>**19.** *They brought him to Mars’ Street.*
Though this verse a place appointed for judgment, yet Luke doth not mean
that Paul was brought before the seat of the judges, that he might plead
his cause before the judges of Mars’ Street.  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) But that he was brought thither, where
was most commonly a great assembly of people, that the serious
disputation might be had before a great and famous audience. And admit
we grant that he was brought before the judgment-seat, yet the end doth
declare that he was not presented to the judges, but that he had free
liberty to speak as before an audience. And that which followeth shortly
after, touching the nature and conditions \[manners\] of the men of
Athens, doth sufficiently declare that their curiosity was the cause;
that Paul had such audience given him, that he had such a famous place
granted him to preach Christ in, that so many came together. For in any
other place it had been a crime worthy of death, to speak in the market
or in any other public place, having gathered a company of people
together; but there, because those who did carry about trifles had
liberty granted them to prate, by reason of the immoderate desire they
had to hear news, Paul was permitted to intreat of the mysteries of
faith, being requested.

<span id="v.iv-p28"></span>*Gave themselves to nothing else.* The two
vices which Luke reciteth do almost go together. For it falleth out
seldom that those who are desirous of novelties are not also babblers.
For that saying of Horace is most true, “Fly a demander of questions,
for the same is also a blab.” And surely we see that curious men are
like rent barrels.  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md) Furthermore,
both vices came of idleness; not only because the philosophers spent
whole days in disputing, but because the common sort was too much set
upon novelty; neither was there any craftsman so base there, which would
not thrust in himself to set in order the status of Grecia. And surely
that which Luke saith here is witnessed by all writers, both Greek and
Latin, that there was nothing more light, covetous, or froward than that
people. Wherefore, there could never be any certain government set down
in that city, which was, notwithstanding, the mistress of sciences.
Therefore, in principal power,  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282.md)
they had, notwithstanding, no long liberty; neither did they ever cease
off from attempting things and making many hurly-burlies, until they
brought themselves and all Grecia to utter ruin. For when their state
was decayed, yet did not they forsake their boldness. Therefore, Cicero
doth laugh at their folly, because they did no less fiercely set forth
their decrees then, than when they were lords over Grecia. Now, though
there were small hope to do any good among curious men, yet Paul did not
neglect the opportunity, if, peradventure, he might gain some of a great
company to Christ. Neither was this any small praise for the gospel in
the most noble place of the city, and, as it were, in a common theater,
to refute and openly to reprove all forged and false worshippings, which
had reigned there even until this day.

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022.md)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**22.** And, standing in the midst of Mars’
Street, he saith, Men of Athens, I see you in all things, as it were,
more superstitious. **23.** For, passing by and beholding your manner of
worshipping, I found also an altar wherein was written, To the Unknown
God. Therefore, whom you worship ignorantly, him do I preach unto you.
**24.** God, who hath made the world, and all things which are therein,
seeing he is Lord both of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made
with hands: **25.** Neither is he worshipped with man’s hands, needing
any thing, seeing that he giveth to all life and breath through all
things.

<span id="v.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p4"></span><span id="v.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p5"></span>**22.** *Men of Athens.* We may divide this
sermon of Paul into five members. For though Luke doth only briefly
touch those things which he set down in many words, yet I do not doubt
but that he did comprehend the sum, so that he did omit none of the
principal points. First, Paul layeth superstition to the charge of the
men of Athens, because they worship their gods all at a very venture;
 <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283.md) secondly, he showeth by natural
arguments who and what God is, and how he is rightly worshipped;
thirdly, he inveigheth against the blockishness of men, who, though they
be created to this end, that they may know their Creator and Maker, yet
do they wander and err in darkness like blind men; fourthly, he showed
that nothing is more absurd than to draw any portraiture of God,  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md) seeing that the mind of man is his
true image; in the first place, he descendeth at length unto Christ and
the resurrection of the dead. For it was requisite to handle those four
points generally, before he did descend unto the faith of the gospel.

<span id="v.v-p8"></span>*As it were, more superstitions.* The Grecians
do oftentimes take \[<span id="v.v-p8.1"></span>δεισιδαιμονια\] in good
part; notwithstanding it doth sometimes signify immoderate fear,
wherewith superstitious men do carefully torment themselves, whilst that
they forge to themselves vain doubts. And this seemeth to be the meaning
of this place, that the men of Athens pass all measure in worshipping
God, or that they do not perceive what manner \[of\] work moderation
should be; as if he should say, that they deal very undiscreetly in that
they weary themselves in going byways. Thus much touching the words; now
to the matter. He proveth by this one reason, that all the worshippings
of the men of Athens are corrupt, because they be uncertain what gods
they ought to worship, because they take in hand rashly and unadvisedly
divers rites, and that without measure. For in that they had set up an
altar to the unknown God, it was a token that they knew no certainty.
They had, indeed, a great company of gods whereof they spake much, but
when they know nothing of the true divinity. Furthermore, whosoever doth
worship God without any certainty, he worshippeth his own inventions
instead of God. Howsoever credulous men do flatter themselves, yet
neither doth God allow any religion without knowledge and truth, neither
ought it to be counted holy and lawful. Yea, how proud soever they be,
yet because they doubt  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md) in their
consciences, they must needs be convict by their own judgment. For
superstition is always fearful, and doth ever know and then coin some
new thing.

<span id="v.v-p10"></span>Therefore we see how miserable their condition
is who have not the certain light of the truth, because they do both
always doubt in themselves, and lose their labor before God.
Notwithstanding, we must note that the unbelievers, whilst that they
sometimes make themselves blind through voluntary stubbornness, and are
sometimes amidst divers and manifold doubts, \[yet\] strive and fight
with themselves. Oftentimes they do not only flatter themselves, but if
any man dare mutter against their folly, they rage cruelly against him;
the devil doth so bewitch them, that they think nothing to be better
than that which pleaseth them. Nevertheless, if there arise any doubt,
if any seducer put up his head, if any new folly \[delirium\] begin to
appear, they do not only waver, being in doubt, but also of their own
accord offer themselves to be carried hither and thither. Whereby it
appeareth, that neither in judgment, neither in quiet state of mind,
they stay and rest in the common custom of worshipping God, but that
they droop like drunken men. But carefulness and doubtfulness,
\[anxiety,\] which doth not suffer the unbelievers to flatter and please
themselves, is better than amazedness.  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) Finally, though superstition be not
always fearful, yet forasmuch as it is inwrapt in divers errors, it
disquieteth men’s minds, and doth prick them with divers blind torments.
This was the cause that the men of Athens did mix their domestical gods
(whom they thought they knew, because in their vain opinion they had
invented them) with unknown gods. For thereby appeareth their
unquietness, because they confess that they have not as yet done as they
ought, when they have done sacrifice to the familiar  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) gods, which they had received of their
fathers, and whom they called their country gods.  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) Therefore, to the end Paul may pluck
out of their minds all vain and false persuasions, he taketh this maxim,
that they know not what they worship, neither have they any certain
divine power, \[deity.\] For if they had known any god at all, being
content with him, they would never have fallen away unto unknown gods,
forasmuch as the knowledge of the true God alone is sufficient for the
abolishig of all idols.

<span id="v.v-p14"></span><span id="v.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p15"></span>**23.** *To the unknown God.* I can well grant
that this altar was dedicated to all strange gods; yet I cannot yield to
that which Jerome saith, that Paul did, by a certain holy wiliness,
attribute that to one God which was written of many. For seeing the
superscription \[inscription\] was common in every man’s mouth, there
was no place for subtilty, \[craft;\] why did he then change the plural
number? Surely, not that he might deceive the men of Athens, but because
the matter did so require, he said, that he brought doctrine concerning
an unknown god. And after he hath showed that they are deceived, because
they knew not what god thee ought to worship, and had no certain godhood
in a great leap of gods, he doth now insinuate himself, and doth
purchase favor for his doctrine. Because it was an unjust thing to
reject that which was uttered concerning a new god, to whom they had
already given over themselves; and it was far better first to know him,
than rashly to worship him whom they knew not. Thus doth Paul return
again to that principle, that God cannot be worshipped rightly unless he
be first made known.

<span id="v.v-p16"></span>But here may a question be moved: how he saith
that God was worshipped at Athens, who doth refuse all worshippings
which are not agreeable to the prescript of his law, yea, he pronounceth
that all that is idolatry which men invent without his Word? If God
allow no worship but that which is agreeable to his Word, how doth Paul
give this praise to men, who did dote without measure that they
worshipped God? For Christ, in condemning the Samaritans, is content
 <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md) with this one principle, in
that they worship God without knowledge, (<span
id="v.v-p17.2"></span>[Joh 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022.md)<span
id="v.v-p17.2"></span>;) and yet they did boast that they worshipped the
God of Abraham. Then, what shall we say of the men of Athens, who,
having buried and quite put out the remembrance of the true God, had put
in place of him Jupiter, Mercury, Pallas, and all that filthy rabble? I
answer, that Paul doth not in the place commend that which the men of
Athens had done; but taketh from their affection, though it were
corrupt, free matter for teaching.

<span id="v.v-p18"></span><span id="v.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p19"></span>**24.** *God, who hath made the world.* Paul’s
drift is to teach what God is. Furthermore, because he hath to deal with
profane men, he draweth proofs from nature itself; for in vain should he
have cited  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md) testimonies of
Scripture. I said that this was the holy man’s purpose, to bring the men
of Athens unto the true God. For they were persuaded that there was some
divinity; only their preposterous religion was to be reformed. Whence we
gather, that the world doth go astray through bending crooks and
boughts, yea, that it is in a mere labyrinth, so long as there remaineth
a confused opinion concerning the nature of God. For this is the true
rule of godliness, distinctly and plainly to know who that God whom we
worship is. If any man will intreat generally of religion, this must be
the first point, that there is some divine power or godhead which men
ought to worship. But because that was out of question, Paul descendeth
unto the second point, that true God must be distinguished from all vain
inventions. So that he beginneth with the definition of God, that he may
thence prove how he ought to be worshipped; because the one dependeth
upon the other. For whence came so many false worshippings, and such
rashness to increase the same oftentimes, save only because all men
forged to themselves a God at their pleasure? And nothing is more easy
than to corrupt the pure worship of God, when men esteem God after their
sense and wit.

<span id="v.v-p21"></span>Wherefore, there is nothing more fit to
destroy all corrupt worshippings, than to make this beginning, and to
show of what sort the nature of God is. Also our Savior Christ reasoneth
thus, <span id="v.v-p21.1"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024.md)<span id="v.v-p21.1"></span>, “God
is a Spirit.” Therefore he alloweth no other worshippers but such as
worship him spiritually. And surely he doth not subtilely dispute of the
secret substance \[essence\] of God; but by his works he declareth which
is the profitable knowledge of him. And what doth Paul gather thence,
because God is the creator, framer, and Lord of the world? to wit, that
he dwelleth not in temples made with hands. For, seeing that it
appeareth plainly by the creation of the world, that the righteousness,
wisdom, goodness, and power of God doth reach beyond the bounds of
heaven and earth; it followeth, that he can be included and shut up
within no space of place.

<span id="v.v-p22"></span>Notwithstanding this demonstration seemeth to
have been in vain, because they might readily have said, that images and
pictures were placed in temples to testify God’s presence; and that none
was so gross but that he knew that God did fulfill \[fill\] all things.
I answer, that that is true which I said a little before, that idolatry
is contrary to itself. The unbelievers said, that they worshipped the
gods before their images; but unless they had tied the Godhead and power
of God to images, and had hoped  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md)
to be holpen thereby, would they have directed their prayers thither?
Hereby it came also to pass, that one temple was more holy than another.
They ran to Delphos that they might fet \[fetch\] the oracles of Apollo
thence. Minerva had her seat and mansion at Athens. Now we see that Paul
doth touch that false opinion, whereby men have always been deceived;
because they feigned to themselves a carnal God.

<span id="v.v-p24"></span>This is the first entrance into the true
knowledge of God, if we go without ourselves, and do not measure him by
the capacity of our mind; yea, if we imagine nothing of him according to
the understanding of our flesh,  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md)
but place him above the world, and distinguish him from creatures. From
which sobriety the whole world was always far; because this wickedness
is in men, naturally to deform God’s glory with their inventions. For as
they be carnal and earthy, they will have one that shall be answerable
to their nature. Secondly, after their boldness they fashion him so as
they may comprehend him. By such inventions is the sincere and plain
knowledge of God corrupt; yea, his truth, as saith Paul, is turned into
a lie, (<span id="v.v-p25.2"></span>[Ro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="v.v-p25.2"></span>..md) For
whosoever doth not ascend high above the world, he apprehendeth vain
shadows and ghosts instead of God. Again, unless we be carried up into
heaven with the wings of faith, we must needs vanish away in our own
cogitations. And no marvel if the Gentiles were so grossly deluded and
deceived, to include God in the elements of the world, after that they
had pulled him out of his heavenly throne; seeing that the same befell
the Jews, to whom notwithstanding the Lord had showed his spiritual
glory. For it is not without cause that Isaiah doth chide them for
including God within the walls of the temple, (<span
id="v.v-p25.3"></span>[Isa 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)<span
id="v.v-p25.3"></span>.) And we gather out of Stephen’s sermon, that
this vice was common to all ages; which sermon is set down by Luke in
<span id="v.v-p25.4"></span>[Ac
7:49](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#049.md)<span id="v.v-p25.4"></span>.

<span id="v.v-p26"></span>If any man asked the Jews whose grossness the
Holy Ghost reproveth, if they thought that God was included in their
temple, they would stoutly have denied that they were in any such gross
error. But because they did only behold the temple, and did rise no
higher in their minds, and trusting the temple, and did boast that God
was as it were bound to them, the Spirit doth for good causes reprehend
them, for tying him to the temple as If he were a mortal man. For this
is true which I said even now, that superstition is contrary to itself,
and that it doth vanish away into divers imaginations. Neither have the
Papists at this day any defense, saying that wherewith their errors
after a sort. In some, superstition doth feign that God dwelleth in
temples made with hands, not that it will shut him up as it were in a
prison;  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md) but because it doth
dream of a carnal (or fleshly) God, and doth attribute a certain power
to idols, and doth translate the glory of God unto external shows.

<span id="v.v-p28"></span>But if God do not dwell in temples made with
hands, (<span id="v.v-p28.1"></span>[2Ki
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#015)<span id="v.v-p28.1"></span>,.md)
why doth he testify in so many places of Scripture, that he sitteth
between the cherubims, and that the temple is his eternal rest? (<span
id="v.v-p28.2"></span>[Ps. 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md), [Ps.
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="v.v-p28.2"></span>..md) I
answer, As he was not tied to any place, so he meant nothing less than
to tie his people to earthly signs, but rather he cometh down to them
that he might lift them up unto himself. Therefore, those men did
wickedly abuse the temple and the ark, who did so behold those things
that they stayed still upon the earth, and did depart from the spiritual
worship of God. Hereby we see that there was great difference between
those tokens of God’s presence which men invented to themselves
unadvisedly, and those which were ordained by God, because men do always
incline downward, that they may lay hold upon \[apprehend\] God after a
carnal manner; but God by the leading of his word doth lift them upward.
Only he useth middle signs and tokens, whereby he doth insinuate himself
with slow men,  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) until they may
ascend into heaven by degrees (and steps.)

<span id="v.v-p30"></span><span id="v.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p31"></span>**25.** *Neither is he worshipped with man’s
hands.* The same question which was answered of late concerning the
temple, may now be objected touching ceremonies. For it seemeth that
that may be translated unto the worshippings of the law of Moses, which
Paul condemneth in the ceremonies of the Gentiles. But we may readily
answer, that the faithful did never properly place the worship of God in
ceremonies; but they did only count them helps wherewith they might
exercise themselves according to their infirmity. When they did slay
beasts, offered bread and drink offerings, light torches and other
lights, they knew that godliness was not placed in these things, but
being holpen by these,  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md) they did
always look unto the spiritual worship of God, and they made account of
it alone. And God himself saith plainly in many places, that he doth not
pass for any external or visible thing, that ceremonies are of
themselves of no importance, and that he is worshipped no otherwise but
by faith, a pure conscience, by prayer and thankfulness. What did the
Gentiles then? to wit, when they erected images, they offered incense,
they set forth plays, and laid their cushions before their idols, they
thought they had fulfilled the offices of godliness excellent well. Not
only the philosophers, but also the poets, do sometimes deride the folly
of the common people, because they did disorderly place the worship of
God in the pomp and gorgeousness of ceremonies. That I may omit infinite
testimonies, that of Persius is well known:

<span id="v.v-p33"></span>“Tell me, ye priests to sacred rites, what
profit gold doth bring? The same which Venus’ puppets fine, certes no
other thing. Why give not we to gods that which the blear-eyed issue
could of great Messiah never give from out their dish of gold? Right
justly deem’d a conscience clear, and heavenly thoughts of mind, A
breast with mildness such adorn’d, as virtue hath assign’d, Let me in
temples offer these, Then sacrifice the gods shall please.”

<span id="v.v-p34"></span>And, undoubtedly, the Lord caused profane men
to utter such speeches, that they might take away all color of
ignorance. But it doth plainly appear, that those who spake thus did
straightway slide back again unto common madness; yea, that they did
never thoroughly understand what this meant. For though those who pass
the common people in wit be enforced to confess that bare ceremonies are
in no estimation, yet it is impossible to pull from them this
persuasion, but that they will think that they be a part of the divine
worship. Therefore, the more diligently they give themselves to such
vanities, they do not doubt but that they do the duties of godliness
well. Therefore, because all mortal men, from the highest to the lowest,
do think that God is pacified with external things, and they will, with
their own works, fulfill their duty towards him, that doth Paul refute.
There is also a reason added, because, seeing he is Lord of heaven and
earth, he needeth nothing, because, seeing that he giveth bread and life
to men, he can receive nothing of them again. For what can they bring of
their own, who, being destitute of all good things, have nothing but of
his free goodness, yea, who are nothing but by his mere grace, who shall
forthwith be brought to nought, if he withdraw the Spirit whereby they
live? Whereupon it followeth, that they are not only dull, but too
proud, if they thrust in themselves to worship God with the works of
their own hands.

<span id="v.v-p35"></span>For whereas he saith, that alms and the duties
of love are sweet-smelling sacrifices, that must be distinguished from
the matter which we have now in hand, where Paul doth only intreat of
the ceremonies which the unbelievers put in place of the spiritual
worship of God. By life and breath is mean the life which men live so
long as the soul and body are joined together. Touching the end of the
sentence, though some Greek books  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) agree in this reading, \[<span
id="v.v-p36.2"></span>κατα παντα\], “through all things;” yet that
seemeth to me more agreeable which the old interpreter hath, \[<span
id="v.v-p36.3"></span>κατα παντα\], “and all things,” because it is both
plainer, and doth also contain a more perfect and full doctrine. For
thence we do better gather that men have nothing of their own; and also
certain Greek copies agree thereto.

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>**26.** And hath made of one blood all mankind
to dwell upon all the face of the earth, and hath appointed the times
before determined, and the bounds of their habitation. **27.** That they
might seek God, if peradventure they may grope \[after\] him, and find
him, though he be not far from every one of us. **28.** For in him we
live, move, and have our being; as certain of your poets said, For we be
also his generation. **29.** Therefore, seeing we be the generation of
God, we must not think that the Godhead is like to gold, or silver, or
to stone, graven by the cunning cogitation of man.

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span><span id="v.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span>**26.** *And he hath made of one blood.* Paul
doth now show unto the men of Athens to what end mankind was created,
that he may by this means invite and exhort them to consider the end of
their life. This is surely filthy unthankfulness of men, seeing they all
enjoy the common life, not to consider to what end God hath given them
life; and yet this beastly blockishness doth possess the more part, so
that do not consider to what end they be placed in the world, neither do
they remember the Creator of heaven and earth, whose good things they do
devour. Therefore, after that Paul hath intreated of the nature of God,
he putteth in this admonition in due season, that men must be very
careful to know God, because they be created for the same end, and born
for that purpose; for he doth briefly assign unto them this cause of
life, to seek God. Again, forasmuch as there was not one kind of
religion only in the world, but the Gentiles were distract into divers
sects, he telleth them that this variety came from corruption. For to
this end, in my judgment, tendeth that when he saith, that all were
created of one blood. For consanguinity and the same original ought to
have been a bond of mutual consent among them; but it is religion which
doth most of all join men together, or cause them to fly one another’s
company. Whereupon it followeth, that they be revolted from nature who
disagree so much in religion and the worship of God; because,
wheresoever they be born, and whatsoever place \[clime\] of the world
they inhabit, they have all one Maker and Father, who must be sought of
all men with one consent. And surely neither distance of places, nor
bounds of countries, nor diversity of manners, neither any cause of
separation among men, doth make God unlike to himself. In sum, he meant
to teach that the order of nature was broken, when as religion was
pulled in pieces among them, and that that diversity, which is among
them, is a testimony that godliness is quite overthrown, because they
are fallen away from God the Father of all, upon whom all kindred
dependeth.

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>*To dwell upon the face of the earth.* Luke
doth briefly gather, as he useth to do, the sum of Paul’s sermon; and it
is not to be doubted, but that Paul did first show that men are set here
as upon a theater, to behold the works of God; and, secondly, that he
spake of the providence of God, which doth show forth itself in the
whole government of the world. For when he saith, that God appointeth
the times ordained before, and the bounds of men’s habitations, his
meaning is, that this world is governed by his hand and counsel, and
that men’s affairs fall not out by chance, as profane men dream. And so
we gather out of a few words of Luke, that Paul did handle most weighty
matters. For when he saith that the times were ordained before by him,
he doth testify that he had determined, before men were created, what
their condition and estate should be. When we see divers changes in the
world; when we see realms come to ruin, lands altered, cities destroyed,
nations laid waste, we foolishly imagine that either fate or fortune
beareth the swing in these matters; but God doth testify in this place
by the mouth of Paul, that it was appointed before in his counsel how
long he would have the state of every people to continue, and within
what bounds he would have them contained. But and if he have appointed
them a certain time and appointed the bounds of countries, undoubtedly
he hath also set in order the whole course of their life.

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span>And we must note, that Paul doth attribute to
God not only a bare foreknowledge and cold speculation, as some men do
indiscreetly, but he placeth the cause of those things which fall out,
in his counsel and beck. For he saith not that the times were only
foreseen, but that they were appointed and set in such order as pleased
him best. And when he addeth also that God had appointed from the
beginning those things which he had ordained before his meaning is, that
he executeth by the power of his Spirit those things which he hath
decreed in his counsel according to that:

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>“Our God is in heaven; he hath done whatsoever
he would,”  
(<span id="v.vi-p8.2"></span>[Ps
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)<span id="v.vi-p8.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>Now, we see, as in a camp, every troop and
band hath his appointed place, so men are placed upon earth, that every
people may be content with their bounds, and that among these people
every particular person may have his mansion. But though ambition have,
oftentimes raged, and many, being incensed with wicked lust, have past
their bounds, yet the lust of men hath never brought to pass, but that
God hath governed all events from out of his holy sanctuary. For though
men, by raging upon earth, do seem to assault heaven, that they may
overthrow God’s providence, yet they are enforced, whether they will or
no, rather to establish the same. Therefore, let us know that the world
is so turned over through divers tumults, that God doth at length bring
all things unto the end which he hath appointed.

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span><span id="v.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>**27.** *That they might seek God.* This
sentence hath two members; to wit, that it is man’s duty to seek God;
secondly, that God himself cometh forth to meet us, and doth show
himself by such manifest tokens, that we can have no excuse for our
ignorance. Therefore, let us remember that those men do wickedly abuse
this life, and that they be unworthy to dwell upon earth, which do not
apply their studies to seek him; as if every kind of brute beasts should
fall from that inclination which they have naturally, which should for
good causes be called monstrous. And, surely, nothing is more absurd,
than that men should be ignorant of their Author, who are endued with
understanding principally for this use. And we must especially note the
goodness of God, in that he doth so familiarly insinuate himself, that
even the blind may grope after him. For which cause the blindness of men
is more shameful and intolerable, who, in so manifest and evident a
manifestation, are touched with no feeling of God’s presence.
Whithersoever they cast their eyes upward or downward, they must needs
light upon lively and also infinite images of God’s power, wisdom, and
goodness. For God hath not darkly shadowed his glory in the creation of
the world, but he hath everywhere engraven such manifest marks, that
even blind men may know them by groping. Whence we gather that men are
not only blind but blockish, when, being helped by such excellent
testimonies, they profit nothing.

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>Yet here ariseth a question, whether men can
naturally come unto the true and merciful  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) knowledge of God. For Paul doth give
us to understand, that their own sluggishness is the cause that they
cannot perceive that God is present; because, though they shut their
eyes, yet may they grope after him. I answer, that their ignorance and
blockishness is mixed with such frowardness, that being void of right
judgment, they pass over without understanding all such signs of God’s
glory as appear manifestly both in heaven and earth. Yea, seeing that
the true knowledge of God is a singular gift of his, and faith (by which
alone he is rightly known) cometh only from the illumination of the
Spirit, it followeth that our minds cannot pierce so far, having nature
only for our guide. Neither doth Paul intreat in this place of the
ability of men, but he doth only show that they be without excuse, when
as they be so blind in such clear light, as he saith in the first
chapter to the Romans, (<span id="v.vi-p13.2"></span>[Ro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="v.vi-p13.2"></span>..md)
Therefore, though men’s senses fail them in seeking out God, yet have
they no cloak for their fault, because, though he offer himself to be
handled and groped, they continue, notwithstanding, in a quandary;
 <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) concerning which thing we have
spoken more in the fourteenth chapter, (<span id="v.vi-p14.2"></span>[Ac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="v.vi-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span>*Though he be not far from every one of us.*
To the end he may the more touch the frowardness of men, he saith that
God is not to be sought through many crooks, neither need we make any
long journey to find him; because every man shall find him in himself,
if so be that he will take any heed. By which experience we are
convicted that our dullness is not without fault, which we had from the
fault of Adam. For though no corner of the world be void of the
testimony of God’s glory, yet we need not go without ourselves to lay
hold upon him. For he doth affect and move every one of us inwardly with
his power in such sort, that our blockishness is like to a monster, in
that in feeling him we feel him not. In this respect certain of the
philosophers called man *the little world,* \[a microcosm;\] because he
is above all other creatures a token of God’s glory, replenished with
infinite miracles.

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span><span id="v.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p17"></span>**28.** *For in him.* I grant that the
apostles, according to the Hebrew phrase, do oftentimes take this
preposition *in* for per, or *by* or *through;* but because this speech,
that we live in God, hath greater force, and doth express more, I
thought I would not change it; for I do not doubt but that Paul’s
meaning is, that we be after a sort contained in God, because he
dwelleth in us by his power. And, therefore, God himself doth separate
himself from all creatures by this word *Jehovah,* that we may know that
in speaking properly he is alone, and that we have our being in him,
inasmuch as by his Spirit he keepeth us in life, and upholdeth us. For
the power of the Spirit is spread abroad throughout all parts of the
world, that it may preserve them in their state; that he may minister
unto the heaven and earth that force and vigor which we see, and motion
to all living creatures. Not as brain-sick men do trifle, that all
things are full of gods, yea, that stones are gods; but because God
doth, by the wonderful power and inspiration of his Spirit, preserve
those things which he hath created of nothing. But mention is made in
this place properly of men, because Paul said, that they needed not to
seek God far, whom they have within them.

<span id="v.vi-p18"></span>Furthermore, forasmuch as the life of man is
more excellent than motion, and motion doth excel essence, \[mere
existence,\] Paul putteth that in the highest place which was the
chiefest, that he might go down by steps unto essence or being, thus, We
have not only no life but in God, but not so much as moving; yea, no
being, which is inferior to both. I say that life hath the pre-eminence
in men, because they have not only sense and motion as brute beasts
have, but they be endued with reason and understanding. Wherefore, the
Scripture doth for good causes give that singular gift which God hath
given us, a title and commendation by itself. So in John, when mention
is made of the creation of all things, it is added apart, not without
cause, that life was the light of men, (<span
id="v.vi-p18.1"></span>[Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.vi-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi-p19"></span>Now, we see that all those who know not God
know not; because they have God present with them not only in the
excellent gifts of the mind, but in their very essence; because it
belongeth to God alone to be, all other things have their being in him.
Also, we learn out of this place that God did not so create the world
once that he did afterward depart from his work; but that it standeth by
his power, and that the same God is the governor thereof who was the
Creator. We must well think upon this continual comforting and
strengthening, that we may remember God every minute.

<span id="v.vi-p20"></span>*Certain of your poets.* He citeth half a
verse out of Aratus, not so much for authority’s sake, as that he may
make the men of Athens ashamed; for such sayings of the poets came from
no other fountain save only from nature and common reason. Neither is it
any marvel if Paul, who spake unto men who were infidels and ignorant of
true godliness, do use the testimony of a poet, wherein was extant a
confession of that knowledge which is naturally engraven in men’s minds.
The Papists take another course. For they so lean to the testimonies of
men, that they set them against the oracles of God; and they do not only
make Jerome, or Ambrose and the residue of the holy fathers, masters of
faith, but they will no less tie us to the stinking \[vile\] answers of
their Popes than if God himself should speak. Yea, that which more s,
they have not been afraid to give so great authority to Aristotle that
the apostles and prophets were silent in their schools rather than he.

<span id="v.vi-p21"></span>Now, that I may return unto this sentence
which I have in hand, it is not to be doubted but that Aratus spake of
Jupiter; neither doth Paul, in applying that unto the true God, which he
spake unskillfully of his Jupiter, wrest it unto a contrary sense. For
because men have naturally some perseverance of God,  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) they draw true principles from that
fountain. And though so soon as they begin to think upon God, they
vanish away in wicked inventions, and so pure seed doth degenerate into
corruptions; yet the first general knowledge of God doth nevertheless
remain still in them. After this sort, no man of a sound mind can doubt
to apply that unto the true God which we read in Virgil touching the
reigned and false joy, that *All things are full of joy.* Yea, when
Virgil meant to express the power of God, through error he put in a
wrong name.

<span id="v.vi-p23"></span>As touching the meaning of the words, it may
be that Aratus did imagine that there was some parcel of the divinity in
men’s minds, as the Manichees did say, that the souls of men are of the
nature of God.  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) So when Virgil
saith concerning the world, *The Spirit doth nourish within, and the
mind being dispersed through all the joints, doth move your whole huge
weight,* he doth rather play the philosopher, and subtilely dispute
after the manner of Plato, than purely mean that the world is supported
by the secret inspiration of God. But this invention ought not to have
hindered Paul from retaining a true maxim, though it were corrupt with
men’s fables, that men are the generation of God, because by the
excellency of nature they resemble some divine thing. This is that which
the Scripture teacheth, that we are created after the image and
similitude of God, (<span id="v.vi-p24.2"></span>[Ge
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="v.vi-p24.2"></span>..md)
The same Scripture teacheth also, in many places, that we be made the
sons of God by faith and free adoption when we are engrafted into the
body of Christ, and being regenerate by the Spirit, we begin to be new
creatures, (<span id="v.vi-p24.3"></span>[Ga
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)<span id="v.vi-p24.3"></span>..md)
But as it giveth the same Spirit divers names because of his manifold
graces, so no marvel if the word sons be diversely taken. All mortal men
are called sons in general, because they draw near to God in mind and
understanding; but because the image of God is almost blotted out in
them, so that there appear scarce any slender lines, \[lineaments,\]
this name is by good right restrained unto the faithful, who having the
Spirit of adoption given them, resemble their heavenly Father in the
light of reason, in righteousness and holiness.

<span id="v.vi-p25"></span><span id="v.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p26"></span>**29.** *Therefore seeing that.* He gathereth
that God cannot be figured or resembled by any graven image forasmuch as
he would have his image extant in us. For the soul wherein the image of
God is properly engraven cannot be painted; therefore it is a thing more
absurd to go about to paint God. Now, we see what great injury they do
to God which give him a bodily shape; when as man’s soul, which doth
scarce resemble a small sparkle of the infinite glory of God, cannot be
expressed in any bodily shape.

<span id="v.vi-p27"></span>Furthermore, forasmuch as it is certain that
Paul doth in this place inveigh against the common superstition of all
the Gentiles, because they would worship God under bodily shapes, we
must hold this general doctrine that God is falsely and wickedly
transfigured, and that his truth is turned into a lie so often as his
Majesty is represented by any visible shape; as the same Paul teacheth
in the first chapter to the Romans, (<span id="v.vi-p27.1"></span>[Ro
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)<span id="v.vi-p27.1"></span>..md)
And though the idolaters of all times wanted not their cloaks and
colors, yet that was not without cause always objected to them by the
prophets which Paul doth now object that God is made like to wood, or
stone or gold, when there is any image made to him of dead and
corruptible matter. The Gentiles used images that, according to their
rudeness, they might better conceive that God was nigh unto them. But
seeing that God doth far surpass the capacity of our mind, whosoever
attempteth with his mind to comprehend him, he deformeth and disfigureth
his glory with a wicked and false imagination. Wherefore, it is
wickedness to imagine anything of him according to our own sense. Again,
that which worse is, it appeareth plainly that men erect pictures and
images to God for no other cause, save only because they conceive some
carnal thing of him, wherein he is blasphemed.

<span id="v.vi-p28"></span>The Papists also are at this day no whit more
excusable. For what colors soever they invent to paint and color those
images, whereby they go about to express God, yet because they be
enwrapped in the same error, wherein the men of old time were entangled,
they be urged with the of the prophets. And that the heathen did use the
same excuses in times past, wherewith the Papists go about to cover
themselves at this day, it is well known out of their own books.
Therefore, the prophets do not escape the mocks of certain, as if they
laid too great grossness to their charge, yea, burthen them with false
accusations; but when all things are well weighed, those who will judge
rightly shall find, that whatsoever starting holes \[evasions\] even the
most witty men have sought, yet were they taken with this madness, that
God is well pleased with the sacrifice done before images. Whereas we,
with Erasmus, translate it *numen,* Luke putteth \[<span
id="v.vi-p28.1"></span>θειον\] in the neuter gender for divinity or
godhead. When Paul denieth that God is like to gold, or silver, or
stone, and addeth afterward, *graven* by cunning or invention of man, he
excludeth both matter and form, and doth also condemn all inventions of
men, which disfigure the true nature of God.

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
17:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md)<span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>**30.** And though God have winked at the
times of this ignorance hitherto, he willeth all men everywhere to
repent now: **31.** Because he hath appointed a day, wherein he will
judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath appointed;
having fulfilled his promise to all men, when he raised him up. from the
dead. **32.** And when they had heard the resurrection, of the dead,
some mocked; and other some said, We will hear thee of this again.
**33.** So Paul went out from among them; **34.** yet certain joining
themselves to him believed: among whom was both Dionysius, Areopagita,
and a woman named Dam ark, and others with them.

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span><span id="v.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span>**30.** *And the times of this ignorance*
Because that is commonly thought to be good which hath been used of long
time, and is approved by the common consent of all men; it might have
been objected to Paul, why dost thou disannul those things which have
been received, and used continually since the beginning of the world?
and whom canst thou persuade that the whole world hath been deceived so
long? as is no kind of abomination so filthy, which the Papists do not
think to be well fortified with this buckler. Paul preventeth  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md) this question; showing that men went
astray so long therefore, because God did not reach out his hand from
heaven, that he might bring them back again into the way. It may seem an
inconvenient \[a strange\] thing, that men endued with reason and
judgment should err so grossly and filthily in a most weighty matter.
But Paul’s meaning is, that men do never make an end of erring, until
God do help them. And now he assigneth no other cause why he did not
redress this any sooner, save only his good pleasure.

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span>And assuredly we be not able to comprehend
the reason why God did at a sudden set up the light of his doctrine,
when he suffered men to walk in darkness four thousand years; at least
seeing the Scripture doth conceal it, let us here make more account of
sobriety than of preposterous wisdom. For they go about to bring God
within bounds, which is a most unseemly thing, and contrary to nature
herself, whosoever they be that will not suffer him to speak or hold his
peace at his pleasure. Again, those that will not be content with his
wisdom and secret counsel, must needs murmur against Paul, who teacheth
manifestly that ignorance did reign in the world, so long as it pleased
God to wink at it. Other some interpret it otherwise, that God did spare
ignorance, as if he did wink, being unwilling to punish it; but that
surmise is altogether contrary to Paul’s meaning and purpose, who meant
not to lessen man’s fault, but to magnify the grace of God which did
appear at a sudden, and it is proved to be false out of other places,
because those who have sinned without law shall notwithstanding perish
without law, (<span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>[Ro
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>In some, Paul’s words carry with them this
meaning only, that men were set upon blindness, until God did reveal
himself unto them; and that we ought not too curiously and boldly to
demand and require the cause why he put away darkness no sooner; but
that whatsoever pleased him ought seem to us right and equal without
making any more ado. For though this be a hard speech that men were
miserably deceived long time, whilst that God made as though he saw it
not, yet must we be content with, and stay ourselves upon his
providence. And if at any time there come upon us a vain and perverse
desire to know more than is meet for us, let us straightway call to mind
that which Paul teacheth in many places, that it was a mystery hid since
the beginning of the world, in that the light of the gospel did appear
to the Gentiles at a sudden, (<span id="v.vii-p8.1"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025.md)<span id="v.vii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="v.vii-p8.2"></span>[Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009)<span id="v.vii-p8.2"></span>;.md) and
that this is a token of the manifold wisdom of God, which swalloweth up
all the senses of men. Again, let us remember that it doth not lessen
the fault of men, because God would not heal their errors; forasmuch as
their own conscience shall always hold them convict, that they cannot
escape just damnation. And Paul (not that he might lay the fault and
blame upon God, but that he might cut off occasion of curious and
hurtful questions) said, that the world did err whilst God did wink. And
hereby we learn how reverently we ought to think of God’s providence,
lest any man should be so bold, as man’s nature is proud, to demand a
reason of God of his works.

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span>Furthermore, this admonition is no less
profitable for us than for the men of that time. The enemies of the
gospel, when it beginneth to spring again, count it a great absurdity
that God did suffer men to go astray so long under the apostasy of the
Pope, as if (though there appear no reason) it were not as lawful for
him now to wink at men’s ignorance as in times past. And we must
principally note to what end he saith this; to wit, that the ignorance
of former times may not hinder us from obeying God without delay when he
speaketh. Most men think that they have a fair color for their error, so
they have their fathers to keep them company, or so they get some
patronage or defense by long custom; yea, they would willingly creep out
here,  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) that they may not obey
the word of God. But Paul saith, that we not fet \[seek\] an excuse from
our fathers’ ignorance when God speaketh unto us; because, though they
be not guiltless before God, yet our sluggishness is more intolerable if
we be blind at noonday, and lie as deaf, or as if we were asleep, when
the trumpet of the gospel doth sound.  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md)

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span>*Now he willeth all men.* In these words
Paul teacheth that we must give ear to God so soon as he speaketh, as it
is written, “Today, if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts,”
(<span id="v.vii-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008.md)<span id="v.vii-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="v.vii-p12.2"></span>[Heb.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p12.2"></span>..md) For
the stubbornness of those men is without excuse, who foreslow
\[neglect\] this opportunity when God doth gently call them unto him.
Also, we gather out of this place to what end the gospel is preached, to
wit, that God may gather us to himself from the former errors of our
life. Therefore, so oft as the voice of the gospel doth sound in our
ears, let us know that God doth exhort us unto repentance. We must also
note that he attributeth to God the person of the speaker, though he do
it by man. For otherwise the gospel hath not so full authority as the
heavenly truth deserveth, save only when our faith doth look unto him
who is the governor of the prophetical function, and doth depend upon
his mouth.

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span><span id="v.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span>**31.** *Because he hath appointed a day.*
He maketh mention of the last judgment, that he may awake them out of
their dream. For we know how hard a matter it is for men to deny
themselves. Therefore, they must be violently enforced unto repentance,
which cannot be done better than when they be cited to appear before
God’s judgment-seat, and that fearful judgment is set before them, which
they may neither despise nor escape. Therefore, let us remember that the
doctrine of repentance doth then take place, when men, who would
naturally desire to flatter themselves, are awaked with fear of God’s
judgment and that none are fit teachers of the gospel but those who are
the criers or apparitors of the highest Judge, who bring those who are
to come the Judge to plead their cause, and denounce the judgment
hanging over their heads, even as if it were in their own hand. Neither
is this added in vain, *in righteousness,* or *righteously.* For though
all men in the world confess that God is a just Judge, yet we see how
they, for the most part, pamper and flatter themselves; for they will
not suffer God to demand an account farther than their knowledge and
understanding doth reach. Therefore, Paul’s meaning is, that men do
profit themselves nothing by vain flattery; because they shall not
prejudice God’s justice by this means, which showeth that all that is an
abomination before God which seemeth goodly in the sight of men, because
he will not follow the decrees of men, but that form which himself hath
appointed.

<span id="v.vii-p15"></span>*By the man whom he hath appointed.* It is
not to be doubted but that Paul spake more largely concerning Christ,
that the Athenians might know that he is the Son of God, by whom
salvation was brought to the world, and who had all power given him in
heaven and earth; otherwise this speech, which we read here, should have
had but small force to persuade. But Luke thought it sufficient to
gather the sum of the sermon briefly. Yet is it to be thought that Paul
spake first concerning the grace of Christ and that he did first preach
him to be the Redeemer of men, before he made him a Judge. But because
Christ is oftentimes contemned, when he offereth himself to be a
Redeemer, Paul denounceth that he will once sharply punish such wicked
contempt, because the whole world must be judged by him. The word
\[<span id="v.vii-p15.1"></span>ὁριζειν\] may be referred, as well unto
the secret counsel of God, as unto external manifestation. Yet because
the former exposition is more common, I do willingly embrace the same;
to wit, that God, by his eternal decree, hath ordained his Son to be the
Judge of the world; and that to the end the reprobate, who refuse to be
ruled by Christ, may learn that they strive but in vain against the
decree of God, which cannot be broken. But because nothing seemeth more
strange to men, than that God shall judge in the person of man, Paul
addeth afterward, that dignity of Christ, which were hard to be
believed, was approved by his resurrection.

<span id="v.vii-p16"></span>The will of God alone ought to be so
reverenced among us, that every man for himself subscribe to his decrees
without delay. Because the cloak and color of ignorance useth oftentimes
to be objected, therefore Paul saith plainly, that Christ was by his
resurrection openly showed to be the Judge of the world, and that that
was revealed to the eyes of men, which God had before determined with
himself concerning him. For that point of doctrine, which Luke toucheth
briefly in few words, was handled by Paul at large. He said not only in
a word that Christ rose from death, but he did also intreat of the power
of his resurrection as was meet. For to what end did Christ rise, but
that he might be the first fruits of those which rise again? (<span
id="v.vii-p16.1"></span>[1Co
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023)<span id="v.vii-p16.1"></span>..md)
And to what end shall we rise again, but either to life or death?
Whereupon it followeth, that Christ by his resurrection is declared and
proved to be the Judge of the world.

<span id="v.vii-p17"></span><span id="v.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p18"></span>**32.** *Some mocked.* By this we see how
great the carelessness of men is, whom neither the tribunal-seat of God,
nor the majesty of the highest \[supreme\] Judge, doth make afraid,
(<span id="v.vii-p18.1"></span>[Ac
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023)<span id="v.vii-p18.1"></span>..md)
We have said that this is a most sharp prick, wherewith men’s minds are
pricked forward to fear God, when his judgment is set before their eyes;
but there is such unspeakable hardness in the contemners, that they are
not afraid to count that a fable or lie which is spoken concerning the
giving of an account of our life once.  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md) Notwithstanding, there is no cause why
the ministers of the gospel should omit.  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) the preaching of the judgment which is
enjoined them. Though the wicked do laugh and mock, yet this doctrine,
which they go about to make of none effect, shall so gird them, that
they shall at length perceive that they have striven in vain with their
snare.  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306.md) And no marvel if this
point of Paul’s doctrine were derided at Athens; for it is a mystery hid
from men’s minds, whereon the chiefest philosophers did never think,
neither can we otherwise comprehend it, than when we lift up the eyes of
faith unto the infinite power of God. And yet Paul’s sermon was not
altogether without fruit; because there were some of the hearers which
were desirous to profit and go forward. For when they say that they will
hear him again, their meaning is, that though they were not as yet
thoroughly persuaded, yet had they some taste, which did provoke them to
be desirous to profit. Surely this desire was contrary to loathsomeness.
 <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307.md)

<span id="v.vii-p23"></span><span id="v.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p24"></span>**34.** *Among whom was also Dionysius.*
Seeing that Luke doth name one man and one woman only, it appeareth that
there was but a small number of those which believed at the first. For
those other of whom he maketh mention remained indifferent; because they
did neither wholly despise Paul’s doctrine, neither were they so
thoroughly touched, that they joined themselves unto him that they might
be his scholars. Luke maketh mention of Dionysius above the rest,
because he was in no small authority among his citizens. Therefore, it
is likely that Damaris was also a woman of some renown, \[rank.\]

<span id="v.vii-p25"></span>Furthermore, it is ridiculous in that the
Papists \[have\] made of a judge an astrologer. But this is to be
imputed partly to their ignorance, partly to their boldness,  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308.md) who, seeing they knew not what
Areopagus or Mars’ Street meant, took to themselves liberty to feign
whatsoever they would. And their rudeness is too gross, who ascribe the
books of the heavenly and ecclesiastical hierarchy, and of the names of
God, to this Dionysius. For the heavenly hierarchy is stuffed not only
with many doltish and monkish trifles, but also with many absurd
inventions, and wicked speculations. And the books of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy do themselves declare that they were made many years after,
when as the purity of Christianity was corrupt with an huge heap of
ceremonies. As for the book of the names of God, though it have in it
some things which are not altogether to be despised, yet it doth rather
breathe out subtilties than sound godliness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc37004.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="v.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p3"></span> “<span id="v.i-p3.1"></span>Disserebat,”
discoursed to.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc37004.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="v.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p8"></span> “<span id="v.i-p8.1"></span>Pravitas,”
depravity, perverseness.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc37004.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="v.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p12"></span> “<span id="v.i-p12.1"></span>Valet inter
nos,” is held good among us.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc37004.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="v.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p13"></span> “<span id="v.i-p13.1"></span>Ambagibus,”
ambiguities.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc37004.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p16"></span> “<span id="v.i-p16.1"></span>Necesse fuisset
altius sumere exordium,” it would have been necessary to go farther back
with his exordium.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc37004.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p18"></span> “<span id="v.i-p18.1"></span>Ingenuitas,”
ingenuousness.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc37004.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="v.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p21"></span> “<span id="v.i-p21.1"></span>Ingenua,” frank,
ingenuous.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc37004.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="v.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p23"></span> “<span id="v.i-p23.1"></span>Dispersum fuisse
aliquod prelatis semen,” some seed of piety was spread.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc37004.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="v.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p24"></span> “<span id="v.i-p24.1"></span>Hoc compendio,”
by this compendious argument, viz.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc37004.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="v.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p26"></span> “<span id="v.i-p26.1"></span>Qualemcunque Dei
cultum,” any kind of divine worship.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc37004.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p6.1"></span>Rabiosum...
impetum,” a rabid impulse.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc37004.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>Tumultuose,”
tumtultuously.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc37004.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p10.1"></span>Per forum,”
through the market-place.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc37004.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="v.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>Operam suam
locare,” hire out their assistance in.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc37004.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="v.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p12.1"></span>Donec ad vim
inferendam sufficerent,” until they were able to offer violence.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc37004.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="v.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p15.1"></span>Ut homines ad
mutuous conflictus accendat,” that it may inflame men to mutual
conflict.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc37004.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="v.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p16.1"></span>Ad se benigne
invitet,” benignity invite us to himself.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc37004.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="v.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span> “<span
id="v.ii-p17.1"></span>Tumultuanture,” make a tumult.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc37004.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="v.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p20.1"></span>Sed colorem
hunc malitiose obtendunt quaerendae invidiae causa. Non tanti erat apud
Macedones religio, praesertim Judaica, ut ejus causa homines ignotos,
protinus ad caedem raperent;” but maliciously use this pretext for the
purpose of producing obloquy. There was not so much religion, especially
Jewish, among the Macedonians, that for its sake they would hurry off
strangers to execution. Omitted.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc37004.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="v.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p24.1"></span>Nec suscipitur
causae cognitio,” nor do theytake cognisance of the cause.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc37004.htm#fr_259.md) <span
id="v.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>Quae Latinis
auribus esset durior,” which would have sounded harsher to Latin ears.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc37004.htm#fr_260.md) <span
id="v.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>Nobiles et
plebeios,” that nobles and plebeians.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc37004.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="v.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>Per obliquas
vias,” through winding paths.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc37004.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p11.1"></span>Quotidie,”
daily.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc37004.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="v.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p12.1"></span>Initio a
promptitudine,” at the commencement for promptitude or readiness.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc37004.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="v.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p13.1"></span>Proprio
carnis sensu,” our own carnal sense.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc37004.htm#fr_265.md) <span
id="v.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p15.1"></span>Ebulliunt,”
spring forth.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc37004.htm#fr_266.md) <span
id="v.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p16.1"></span>Fidei
semen,” seed of faith.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc37004.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="v.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p18.1"></span>Absurdo,”
absurdities.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc37004.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="v.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p20.1"></span>Statim
plane,” plainly, and at once.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc37004.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="v.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p21.1"></span>Caeco
levitatis impetu,” with a blind and giddy impulse.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc37004.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="v.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p23.1"></span>Qualiter
initiati fuerint Christo,” how they were initiated in Christ.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc37004.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="v.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p6.1"></span>Barbaros,”
barbarians.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc37004.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="v.iv-p7.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p8.1"></span>Quod nolint sine
profectu tumultuare,” that they are unwilling to excite tumult to no
good purpose.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc37004.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p11.1"></span>Anxie se
torqueant,” anxiously torment themselves.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc37004.htm#fr_274.md) <span
id="v.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p14.1"></span>Contumaciter
insultaverint,” did contumaciously insult him.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc37004.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="v.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p16.1"></span>Ex diametro
inter se essent oppositae,” were diametrically opposed to each other.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc37004.htm#fr_276.md) <span
id="v.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p17.1"></span>Summum bonum,”
the supreme good.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc37004.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="v.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p19.1"></span>Superba
confidentia,” with proud confidence.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc37004.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="v.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p20.1"></span>Ferrea
immanitus,” iron-hearted cruelty.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc37004.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="v.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p23.1"></span>Trivialis
nugator,” silly or paltry trifler.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc37004.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="v.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p27.1"></span>Areopagitis,”
the Areopagites.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc37004.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="v.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p29.1"></span>Doliis
pertusis,” broken, leaking casks.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc37004.htm#fr_282.md) <span
id="v.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p30"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p30.1"></span>In summa
potentia,” though in supreme power, (an independent state.)

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc37004.htm#fr_283.md) <span
id="v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p6"></span> “<span id="v.v-p6.1"></span>Fortuito,”
fortuitously.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc37004.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="v.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p7"></span> “<span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>Deum statuis vel
picturis figurare,” to figure God by picture or statues.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc37004.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="v.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p9"></span> “<span id="v.v-p9.1"></span>Perplexi haerent,”
remain perplexed.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc37004.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="v.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p11"></span> “<span id="v.v-p11.1"></span>Tali stupore
magis tolerabilis est,” is more tolerable than such stupor.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc37004.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="v.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p12"></span> “<span id="v.v-p12.1"></span>Popularibus,”
popular.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc37004.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="v.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p13"></span> “<span id="v.v-p13.1"></span>Indigetas et
patrios,” native and country gods.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc37004.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="v.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p17"></span> “<span id="v.v-p17.1"></span>Nititur et
contentus est,” founds on, and is contented with.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc37004.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="v.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p20"></span> “<span id="v.v-p20.1"></span>Pugnasset,”
contended with them by citing.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc37004.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="v.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p23"></span> “<span id="v.v-p23.1"></span>An inde
sperassent,” could they have hoped?

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc37004.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="v.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p25"></span> “<span id="v.v-p25.1"></span>Pro sensu carnis
nostrae,” according to our carnal sense.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc37004.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="v.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p27"></span> “<span id="v.v-p27.1"></span>In ergastulis,”
in houses of hard labor.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc37004.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="v.v-p28.3"></span>

<span id="v.v-p29"></span> “<span id="v.v-p29.1"></span>Familiariter...
se insinuet,” he may familiarly insinuate himself.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc37004.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="v.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p32"></span> “<span id="v.v-p32.1"></span>Talibus
rudimentis,” by such rudiments.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc37004.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="v.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p36"></span> “<span id="v.v-p36.1"></span>Codices,”
manuscripts.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc37004.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="v.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="v.vi-p13.1"></span>Liquidam,”
clear.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc37004.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="v.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="v.vi-p14.1"></span>Attoniti,” in
stupid amazement.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc37004.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="v.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p22"></span> “<span id="v.vi-p22.1"></span>Aliquo Dei
sensu imbuti sunt,” are imbued with some knowledge of God

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc37004.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="v.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="v.vi-p24.1"></span>Ex traduce
Dei,” are transferred from God.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc37004.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="v.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p6.1"></span>Anticipat,”
anticipates.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc37004.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="v.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p10.1"></span>Imo libenter
et cupide hoc captant effugium,” nay, they willingly and eagerly catch
at this subterfuge.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc37004.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="v.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p11.1"></span>Clangente
evangelii tuba,” during the clang of the gospel trumpet.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc37004.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="v.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p19"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p19.1"></span>De reddenda
semel vitae ratione,” about one day rendering an account of our lives.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc37004.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="v.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p20"></span> “<span
id="v.vii-p20.1"></span>Supersedant,” supersede.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc37004.htm#fr_306.md) <span
id="v.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p21.1"></span>Laqueo,”
snare or fetter.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc37004.htm#fr_307.md) <span
id="v.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p22.1"></span>Fastidio,”
fastidiousness or disdain.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc37004.htm#fr_308.md) <span
id="v.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p26"></span> “<span id="v.vii-p26.1"></span>Audaciae,”
effrontery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc37005.md)
