[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc37004)  [Next](cc37006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
18:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** After this Paul departed from Athens,
and came to Corinthus. **2.** And having gotten a certain Jew called
Aquila, born in Pontus, who came \[had come\] lately from Italy, and
Priscilla, his wife, (because Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart
from Rome,) he came unto them. **3.** And because he was of the same
craft, he abode with them, and wrought; and they were tent-makers.
**4.** And he disputed in the synagogue every Sabbath day, and persuaded
both Jews and Greeks,: **5.** And when Silas and Timotheus were come
from Macedonia, Paul was forced in the spirit, testifying to the Jews
that Jesus was Christ.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span><span id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**1.** This history is worthy to be remembered
even for this one cause, because it containeth the first beginning of
the Church of Corinthus, which, as it was famous for good causes, both
because of the multitude of men, and also because of the excellent gifts
bestowed upon them, so there were in it gross and shameful vices.
Furthermore, Luke showeth in this place with what great labor, and how
hardly, Paul did win the same to Christ. It is well known what a rich
city Corinthus was by reason of the noble mart, how populous, how
greatly given to pleasure. And the old proverb doth testify that it was
sumptuous and full of riot: All men cannot go to Corinthus. When Paul
entereth the same, what hope, I pray you, can he conceive? He is a
simple man, unknown, having no eloquence or pomp, showing no wealth or
power. In that that huge gulf doth not swallow up his and desire which
he had to spread abroad the gospel, by this we gather that he was
furnished with wonderful power of the Spirit of God; and also that God
wrought by his hand after a heavenly manner, and not after any human
manner. Wherefore he boasteth not without cause, that the Corinthians
are the seal of his apostleship, (<span id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>[1Co
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>.) For
they be twice blind, who do not acknowledge that the glory of God did
more plainly appear in such a simple and base kind of dealing; and he
himself showed no small token of invincible constancy, when, being vexed
with the mocks of all men, (as the proud did contemn him,) he did
notwithstanding stay himself upon God’s help alone. But it is worth the
labor to note all the circum-stances, as Luke setteth down the same in
order.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span><span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**2.** *A Jew called Aquila.* This was no
small trial, in that Paul findeth none at Corinthus to lodge him save
Aquila, who had been twice exiled. For being born in Pontus, he forsook
his country, and sailed over the sea, that he might dwell at Rome. He
was compelled to depart thence again by the commandment of Claudius
Caesar. Though the commodiousness of the city was such, the plenty so
great, the situation so pleasant, and there were also so many Jews
there, yet Paul found no more fit host than a man that had been banished
out of his own country, and also out of another soil.  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) If we compare the great fruit which
ensued immediately upon his preaching with such a base entrance, the
power of the Spirit of God shall \[more\] plainly appear. Also we may
see how the Lord, by his singular counsel, turneth those things to his
glory, and the salvation of the godly, which seem contrary to the flesh,
and unhappy.  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) Nothing is more
miserable than exile, according to the sense of the flesh. But it was
far better for Aquila to be Paul’s companion, than to be in the highest
office either at Rome or in his country. Therefore, this happy calamity
of Aquila doth teach us, that the Lord doth often better provide for
when he doth sharply punish  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) us,
than if he should most gently entreat us, and when he tosseth us to and
fro in most extreme exile,  <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) that
he may bring us unto the heavenly rest.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>*All Jews to depart from Rome.* The estate of
that nation was then very miserable, so that it is a wonder that they
did not almost all depart from the worship of God. But this is a greater
wonder, that the religion wherein they had been brought up prevailed
against Caesar’s tyranny, and that so soon as Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, did arise, few were turned unto him. Notwithstanding, I
do not doubt but that the Lord suffered them  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) to pass through many troubles, that
they might the more willingly, yea, the more greedily receive the grace
of redemption offered them; but the more part  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) became dull in their misery,  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) few did submit themselves to be taught
when the Lord did punish them, as did Aquila and Priscilla. Yet, if
Suetonius say the truth, they were expelled through hatred of the name
of Christ, and so calamity might have more provoked and angered a great
part, because they were wrongfully accused for that religion which they
did detest.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span><span id="vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>**3.** *They were of the same trade.* This
place teacheth that Paul, before he came to Corinth, was wont to work
with his hands; and that not upon pleasure, but that he might get his
living with his handiwork. It is not known where he first learned his
occupation; notwithstanding it appeareth by his own testimony that he
wrought principally at Corinth. And he showeth a reason, because the
false apostles taught freely without taking any thing, that they might
craftily creep in, therefore the holy man would not give place to them
in that point, lest he should cause the gospel of Christ to be evil
spoken of, (<span id="vi.i-p17.1"></span>[1 Cor.
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)<span id="vi.i-p17.1"></span>.) But
we may easily gather out of this place, that whithersoever he came,
(until he was occupied in the continual labor of teachings) he wrought
of his occupation, that he might get his living. When Chrysostom saith
that Paul was a cordiner he doth no whit dissent from Luke, because they
were wont at that time to make tents of skins.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span><span id="vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**4.** *He disputed in the synagogue* It is a
wonder how that crept in which is in the Latin books,  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) that Paul put in the name of Christ:
unless it were because some reader would supply the want of the general
sentence. For Luke setteth down two things in this place: to wit, that
Paul disputed among the Jews; secondly, that he began more plainly to
profess Christ after that Silas and Timotheus were come. And though it
be likely that he began to speak of Christ even at the first entrance,
because he could not omit the principal point of the heavenly doctrine,
yet that doth not hinder but that he might use some other manner of
disputation. Therefore I take \[<span id="vi.i-p20.2"></span>πειθειν\]
that is, to *persuade,* for *to induce by little and little.* For, in my
judgment, Luke doth signify, that forasmuch as the Jews did handle the
law coldly and foolishly, Paul spake of the corrupt and wicked nature of
man, of the necessity of grace of the Redeemer which was promised, of
the means to obtain salvation, that he might awake them; for this is a
fit and brief  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) preparation unto
Christ. Again, when he saith that he was forced in spirit to teach that
Jesus was Christ, his meaning is, that he was enforced with greater
vehemency to intreat and speak of Christ freely and openly. So that we
see that Paul did not utter all things at one time, but he tempered his
doctrine as occasion did serve.

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>And because like moderation is profitable at
this day, it is convenient for faithful teachers wisely to consider
where to begin, lest a preposterous and confused order do hinder the
proceeding of doctrine. Furthermore, though there were ferventness
enough in Paul, yet it is no inconvenient thing that he was made more
courageous by some new help, not that he was *encouraged* by shame, or
the hope which he reposed in his fellows, but because he considered that
this help was sent him, as it were, from heaven. But this forcing in the
spirit is not taken for a violent or external impulsion, (as they say,
 <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) ) as those which were called
Phoebades and frantic men were wont to be carried away with devilish
madness; but there was more ferventness added unto the wonted
inspiration of the Spirit which was in Paul, so that he was moved with
new power of God, and yet did he of his own accord follow the Spirit as
his guide. Whereas Paul did testify that Jesus is Christ, I expound it
thus: when he had thoroughly taught the Jews concerning the office of
the Redeemer, he declared by testimonies of Scripture that this is he
which was to be hoped for, because all those things agree to him which
the law and the prophets attribute to Christ. Therefore, he did not
simply affirm, but using a solemn testification, he proved Jesus, the
Son of Mary, to be that Christ who should be the Mediator between God
and men, that he might restore the world from destruction to life.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
18:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**6.** And when they gainsayed him, and
railed upon him, shaking his garments, he said unto them, Your blood be
upon your own head; I will go henceforth clean unto the Gentiles. **7.**
And going thence, he entered into the house of a certain man named
Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house joined to the synagogue. **8.**
And Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with
all his household: and many of the Corinthians which heard believed, and
were baptized. **9.** And the Lord said by night, by a vision, to Paul,
Fear not, but speak, and hold not thy peace: **10.** Because I am with
thee, and no man shall lay hand on thee to hurt thee: because I have
much people in this city. **11.** And he remained there a year and six
months, teaching them the word of the Lord.

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span><span id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *When they gainsayed.* The Jews
suffered Paul after a sort until he came unto the manifest preaching of
Christ. And here brake out their rage. And we must note the speech, that
they go from gainsaying unto blaspheming and railing. For it falleth out
thus for the most part, when men take to themselves such liberty, that
the devil doth inflame them by little and little unto greater madness.
For which cause, we must take good heed that no wicked lust or desire
provoke us to resist the truth; and, above all, let that horrible
judgment terrify us which the Spirit of God thundereth out by the mouth
of Paul against all rebels. For undoubtedly, in that Paul by shaking his
garments gave some token of detestation, it was no human or private
indignation, but zeal kindled by God in his heart; yea, God raised him
up to be a preacher and setter forth of his vengeance, to the end the
enemies of the word might know that they should not escape scot free for
their stubbornness. We spake somewhat touching this sign of execration
or cursing in the thirteenth chapter, (<span id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ac
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051)<span id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>.)
Let the readers repair thither. The sum is, that God is sorer displeased
with contempt of his word than with any wickedness. And surely, men be
quite past hope when they tread under foot, or drive from them, the only
remedy of all evils and maladies. Now, as the Lord cannot abide
rebellion against his word, so it ought to sting and nettle us full
sore. My meaning is this, that when the wicked enter combat with God,
and, as it were, arm themselves to resist, we are called, as it were, by
the heavenly trumpet unto the conflict, because there is nothing more
filthy than that the wicked should mock God to his face, whilst we say
nothing, and that they should even break out into reproaches and
blasphemies.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>*Your blood.* He denounceth to them
vengeance, because they be without excuse. For they can shift no part of
their fault from themselves, after that despising the calling of God
they have endeavored to put out the light of life. Therefore, seeing
they bear the blame of their own destruction, he doth also affirm that
they shall be punished. And in saying that he is clean, he testifieth
that he hath done his duty, it is well known what the Lord giveth all
his ministers in charge in Ezekiel, (<span id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>[Eze
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018)<span id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>.) If
thou show not unto the wicked that he may convert,  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) I will require his blood at thy hand.
Therefore Paul (because he did what he could to bring the Jews to
repentance) doth acquit himself of all guiltiness. And by these words,
teachers are warned that unless they will be guilty of blood before the
Lord, they must do what in them lieth to bring those which go astray
into the way, and that they suffer nothing to perish through ignorance.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>*I will go undo the Gentiles.* Though the
Jews had showed themselves to be most ready to be taught, yet ought Paul
to have employed himself to teach the Gentiles, whose apostle and
minister he was made; but here he expresseth the passage whereby he
withdrew himself from the stubborn Jews for all. For he observed this
course in teaching, that beginning with the Jews he might couple the
Gentiles with them in the society of faith, and so might make of both
together one body of the Church. When there remained no hope to do any
good among the Jews, then the Gentiles only remained. Therefore, the
sense is this, that they must be deprived of their own inheritance, that
it may be given to the Gentiles, and so be wounded, partly that being
stricken with fear, yea, being cast down,  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) they might come to soundness of mind;
partly that the emulation or striving of the Gentiles might prick them
forward unto repentance. But because they were incurable, reproach and
shame served for this purpose only to bring them into despair.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>**7.** *Departing thence.* Paul did not
change his lodging which he had with Priscilla and Aquila, because he
was weary of their company; but that he might more familiarly insinuate
himself and come in favor with the Gentiles. For I suspect that this
Justus, of whom Luke maketh mention, was rather a Gentile than a Jew.
Neither doth the highness of the synagogue any whit hinder; for the Jews
were scattered abroad, so that they had no certain place of the city to
dwell in. Yea, it seemeth that Paul did make choice of the house which
did join to the synagogue, that he might the more nettle the Jews. The
title and commendation ascribed to Justus confirmeth this opinion; for
it is said that he was a worshipper of God. For though the Jews had not
sincere religion, yet because they did all profess the worship of God,
it might have seemed that godliness took place commonly in all the whole
nation. But because it was a rare matter among the Gentiles to worship
God if any drew near unto true godliness, he hath this singular
testimony given him which is set against idolatry. Also, I think that
the Corinthians, of whom Luke speaketh shortly after, were Gentiles.
Nevertheless, lest we should think that Paul’s labor was altogether
fruitless which he bestowed among the Jews, Luke reckoneth up two of
them which believed, Crispus and Sosthenes, of whom Paul himself
speaketh in the first chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians,
(<span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>.)
For in his salutation he maketh Sosthenes his fellow in office, after
that he saith that he baptized Crispus. I take it that he is called the
ruler of the synagogue, not as if he alone did bear rule and had the
government, because Sosthenes hath the same title given him shortly
after, but because he was one of the chief men.

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span><span id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>**9.** *And the Lord said.* Though the fruit
of Paul’s doctrine (in that he gained some daily to Christ) might have
encouraged him to go forward, yet is the heavenly oracle added for his
farther confirmation. Whence we gather that there were great combats set
before him, and that he was sore tossed divers ways. For the Lord did
never, without cause,  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) pour out
his oracles; neither was it an ordinary thing with Paul to have visions,
but the Lord used this kind of remedy when necessity did so require; and
the thing itself doth show that there laid upon the holy man a great
weight of business, under which he might not only sweat but almost
faint, unless he had been set on foot again, and refreshed with some new
help. And it is not without cause that he saith that his coming was base
and contemptible, and that he was conversant there in fear and
trembling, (<span id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>[1Co
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>.)
For mine own part, I think thus, that the wonderful power of the Spirit,
wherewith Paul was endued before, was holpen with the oracle.
Furthermore, forasmuch as the Scripture distinguisheth visions from
dreams, as it appeareth by the twelfth chapter of the book of Numbers,
(<span id="vi.ii-p14.3"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p14.3"></span>,)
Luke meaneth by this word *vision,* that when Paul was in a trance he
saw a certain shape or form whereby he knew that God was present with
him. Assuredly, it is not to be doubted but that God appeared by some
sign.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>*Fear not.* This exhortation showeth that
Paul had cause of fear ministered unto him; for it had been a
superfluous thing to correct fear, or to will him not to fear when all
was well and quiet, and especially in a man so willing and ready.

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span>Furthermore, when the Lord (to the end he
may have his servant to do his duty faithfully and stoutly) beginneth
with restraining fear, by this we gather that nothing is more contrary
to the pure and free preaching of the gospel than the straits of a faint
heart. And surely experience doth show that none are faithful and
courageous ministers of the word whom this fault doth hinder; and that
those only are rightly prepared and addressed to teach to whom it is
granted with boldness and courage of heart to overcome all manner \[of\]
danger. In which respect, he writeth to Timothy that the spirit of fear
is not given to the preachers of the gospel, but of power, and love, and
sobriety, (<span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>[2Ti
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>.)
Therefore, we must note the connection of words, Fear not, but speak,
which is all one as if he should have said, Let not fear let thee to
speak. And because fear doth not only make us altogether without tongue,
but doth so bind us that we cannot purely and freely speak that which is
needful. Christ touched both briefly. Speak, (saith he,) and hold not
thy peace; that is, speak not with half thy mouth, as it is in the
common proverb. But in these words there is prescribed to the ministers
of the word of God a common rule, that they expound and lay open
plainly, and without color or dissimulation, whatsoever the Lord will
have made known to his Church; yea, let them keep back nothing which may
make for the edifying or increase of God’s Church.

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span><span id="vi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span>**10.** *Because I am.* This is the former
reason why Paul, having subdued fear, must manfully and stoutly do his
duty, because he hath God on his side. Whereto answereth the rejoicing
of David,

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span>“If I shall walk in the midst of the shadow
of death, I shall fear none ill: because thou art with me,” (<span
id="vi.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ps 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="vi.ii-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span>Again,

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span>“If tents be pitched about me,” etc., (<span
id="vi.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ps 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003)<span
id="vi.ii-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span>The question is, whether he did not perceive
that God was present with him elsewhere, as he had had experience of his
help in divers places. For the promise is general,

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>“I am with you until the end of the
world,”  
(<span id="vi.ii-p23.2"></span>[Mt
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="vi.ii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>Neither is it lawful for us to mistrust so
often as we obey his calling, but that he will be present with us. But
it is an usual thing with the Lord to apply that unto certain kinds when
the matter so requireth, which he hath promised to do in all affairs;
and we know that when we come to the push, then are we most desirous of
help. Moreover, these two members are joined together, “I am with thee,
and no man shall hurt thee.” For it falleth out sometimes that God doth
help us, and yet doth he, to look to, suffer us to be oppressed, as he
forsook not Paul even in the midst of death; and here he promiseth the
peculiar defense of his hand, whereby he shall be preserved from the
violence of his enemies.

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span>But the question is, whether Paul needed any
such confirmation, who ought to have been willing to enter \[undergo\]
all manner \[of\] dangers. For what if he had been to suffer death,
should he therefore have fainted through fear? I answer, that if at any
time God pronounce that his servants shall be safe for a time, that doth
no whit hinder, but that they may prepare themselves to suffer death
valiantly; but as we distinguish between profitable and necessary, so we
must note that there be some promises, which, if the faithful want, they
must needs faint and sink down;  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322)
and that other some are added when it is expedient so to be, which,
though they be taken away, (because the grace of God doth nevertheless
remain firm and sure,) the faith of the godly doth not fail. After this
sort, Paul is commanded not to fear, because his enemies shall not touch
him; and if so be he should have been oppressed even then with their
violence, yet would he not have been afraid, but God would have his
boldness and courage to increase even by this, because he should be
without danger. If at any time the Lord bear with us so far forth, we
are not to despise such a comfort of our infirmity. In the mean season,
let this be sufficient for us to tread under foot all corrupt fear of
the flesh, that so long as we fight under his banner we cannot be
forsaken of him. And when it is said, “No man shall gainstand thee to do
thee hurt,” the Lord doth not mean that he shall be free from violence
and tumult whom the Jews did afterward deadly invade; but his meaning
is, that their attempts shall be frustrate, because the Lord had
determined to deliver him out of their hands. Therefore, we must fight
stoutly that we may win the field.  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323)

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span>*Because I have much people.* The second
reason why he should take a good heart is, because the Lord will raise
up a great and populous church there, though it be to be doubted whether
this member depend upon that which goeth next before; for the text will
run fitly thus, Because the Lord determined by the hand of Paul to
gather together a great church, he would not suffer the enemies to
interrupt the course of his labors, as if he should have said, I will
help thee, that thou mayest not fail my people whose minister I have
appointed thee to be. I do willingly embrace this exposition, that
divers reasons are not inferred which are to be read apart, but that
they be so distinguished that they agree together. Furthermore, the Lord
calleth those his people, who, though they might then for good causes be
counted strangers, yet because they were written in the book of life,
and were forthwith to be admitted into his family, they have this title
given them not improperly. For we know that many sheep wander without
the flock for a time, as the sheep have many wolves among them.
Therefore whom the Lord determined shortly after to gather to himself,
those doth he take for his people in respect of their future faith. But
let us remember, that those are engrafted into the body of Christ who
appertain unto the same by the eternal adoption of God; as it is
written,

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>“Thine they were and thou gavest them me”
(<span id="vi.ii-p29.1"></span>[Joh
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span><span id="vi.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span>**11.** *He continued there a year.* We do
not read that Paul stayed so long anywhere else save there; and yet it
appeareth by his two epistles that he was not only likely to suffer much
troubles, but that he had suffered many unjust and unmeet things by
reason of the pride and unthankfulness of the people, so that we see
that there was no part of warfare wherein the Lord did not wonderfully
exercise him. Also, we gather what a hard and laborious matter the
edifying of the Church is, seeing that the most excellent workmaster
spent so much time about the laying of the foundation of one church
only. Neither doth he boast that he had finished the work, but that the
Lord had put others in his place, that they might build upon his
foundation; as he saith afterwards that he had planted, and that Apollos
had watered, (<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>[1Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
18:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**12.** Now when Gallio was deputy of
Achaia, the Jews rose with one accord against Paul, and brought him
before the judgment-seat, **13.** Saying, This man persuadeth men to
worship God contrary to the law. **14.** And when Paul was about to open
his mouth, Gallio said unto them, If it were any injury or wicked fact,
O Jews, I would according to reason maintain you: **15.** But if it be a
question of words and names, and your law, look ye to it yourselves; for
I will be no judge in these matters. **16.** And he drove them from the
judgment-seat. **17.** And when all the Greeks had caught Sosthenes, the
ruler of the synagogue, they smote him before the judgment-seat. Neither
did Gallio care for any of these things.

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span><span id="vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**12.** *When Gallio.* Either the change of
the deputy did encourage the Jews to wax more proud and insolent, as
froward men use to abuse new things that they may procure some tumult,
or else hoping that the judge would favor them, they brake the peace and
silence at a sudden, which had continued one whole year. And the sum of
the accusation is, that Paul went about to bring in a false kind of
worship contrary to the law. Now, the question is, whether they spake of
the law of Moses or of the rites used in the empire of Rome. Because
this latter thing seemeth to me to be cold,  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) I do rather receive that, that they
burdened Paul with this crime that he brake and altered the worship
prescribed in the law of God, and that to the end they might hit him in
the teeth with novelty or innovation. And surely Paul had been worthy to
have been condemned if he had gone about any such thing; but forasmuch
as it is most certain that they did treacherously and wickedly slander
the holy man, they endeavored to cover an evil cause with an honest
excuse. We know how straitly the Lord commandeth in the law, how he will
have his servants to worship him. Therefore, to depart from that rule is
sacrilege. But forasmuch as Paul never meant to add to or take away
anything from the law, he is unjustly accused of this fault. Whence we
gather, that though the faithful themselves never so uprightly and
blamelessly, yet can they not escape false and slanderous reports until
they be admitted to purge themselves. But Paul was not only unworthily
and falsely slandered by the adversaries, but when he would have refuted
their impudency and false reports, his mouth was stopped by the deputy.
Therefore he was enforced to depart from the judgment-seat without
defending himself. And Gallio refuseth to hear the cause, not for any
evil will he bare to Paul, but because it was not agreeable to the
office of the deputy to give judgment concerning the religion of every
province. For though the Romans could not enforce the nations which were
subject to them to observe their rites, yet lest they should seem to
allow that which they did tolerate, they forbade their magistrates to
meddle with this part of jurisdiction.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>Here we see what the ignorance of true
godliness doth in setting in order the state of every commonwealth and
dominion. All men confess that this is the principal thing that true
religion be in force and flourish. Now, when the true God is known, and
the certain and sure rule of worshipping him is understood, there is
nothing more equal  <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) than that
which God commandeth in his law, to wit, that those who bear rule with
power (having abolished contrary superstitions) defend the pure worship
of the true God. But seeing that the Romans did observe their rites only
through pride and stubbornness, and seeing they had no certainty where
there was no truth, they thought that this was the best way  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) they could take if they should grant
liberty to those who dwelt in the provinces to live as they listed. But
nothing is more absurd than to leave the worship of God to men’s choice.
Wherefore, it was not without cause that God commanded by Moses that the
king should cause a book of the law to be written out for himself,
(<span id="vi.iii-p9.2"></span>[De
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018)<span id="vi.iii-p9.2"></span>;)
to wit, that being well instructed, and certain of his faith, he might
with more courage take in hand to maintain that which he knew certainly
was right.

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span><span id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>**15.** *Of words and names.* These words
are not well packed together. Yet Gallio speaketh thus of the law of God
by way of contempt, as if the Jewish religion did consist only in words
and superfluous questions. And surely (as the nation was much given to
contention) it is not to be doubted but that many did trouble themselves
and others with superfluous trifles. Yea, we hear with what Paul hitteth
them in the teeth  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) in many
places, especially in the Epistle to Titus, (<span
id="vi.iii-p12.2"></span>Titus 1:14, and <span
id="vi.iii-p12.3"></span>Titus 3:9.) Yet Gallio is not worthy to be
excused who doth mock the holy law of God together with their curiosity.
For as it behooved him to cut off all occasion of vain contentions in
words, so we must, on the other side, know that when the worship of God
is in hand, the strife is not about words, but a matter of all other
most serious is handled.

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span><span id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>**17.** *All the Grecians having taken
Sosthenes.* This is that Sosthenes whom Paul doth honorably couple with
himself as his companion in the beginning of the former Epistle to the
Corinthians. And though there be no mention made of him before among the
faithful, yet it is to be thought that he was then one of Paul’s
companions and advocates. And what fury did enforce the Grecians to run
headlong upon him, save only because it is allotted to all the children
of God to have the world set against them, and offended with them and
their cause, though unknown? Wherefore, there is no cause why such
unjust dealing should trouble us at this day when we see the miserable
Church oppugned on every side. Moreover, the frowardness of man’s nature
is depainted out unto us as in a table, \[picture.\] Admit we grant that
the Jews were hated everywhere for good causes, yet why are the Grecians
rather displeased with Sosthenes, a modest man, than with the authors of
the tumult, who troubled Paul without any cause? Namely, this is the
reason, because, when men are not governed with the Spirit of God, they
are carried headlong unto evil, as it were, by the secret inspiration of
nature, notwithstanding it may be that they bare Sosthenes such hatred,
thinking he had lodged wicked men to raise sedition.

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span>*Neither did Gallio care for any of these
things.* This looseness  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) must be
imputed not so much to the sluggishness of the deputy as to the hatred
of the Jewish religion. The Romans could have wished that the
remembrance of the true God had been buried. And, therefore, when as it
was lawful for them to vow their vows, and to pay them to all the idols
of Asia and Greece, it was a deadly fact  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) to do sacrifice to the God of Israel.
Finally, in the common liberty  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330)
of all manner \[of\] superstition, only true religion was accepted. This
is the cause that Gallio winketh at the injury done to Sosthenes. He
professed of late that he would punish injuries if any were done; now he
suffereth a guiltless man to be beaten before the judgment-seat. Whence
cometh this sufferance, save only because he did in heart desire that
the Jews might one slay another, that their religion might be put out
 <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) with them? But forasmuch as, by
the mouth of Luke, the Spirit condemneth Gallio’s carelessness, because
he did not aid a man who was unjustly punished,  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) let our magistrates know that they be
far more inexcusable if they wink at injuries and wicked facts, if they
bridle not the wantonness of the wicked, if they reach not forth their
hand to the oppressed. But and if the sluggish are to look for just
damnation, what terrible judgment hangeth over the heads of those who
are unfaithful and wicked,  <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) who,
by favoring evil causes, and bearing with wicked facts, set up, as it
were, a banner of want of punishment,  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) and are fans to kindle boldness to do
hurt?

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
18:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**18.** And when Paul had tarried there many
days, having taken his leave of the brethren, he sailed into Syria,
Priscilla and Aquila accompanying him, when he had shaven his head at
Cenchrea: for he had a vow. **19.** And he came to Ephesus, when he left
them. And when he had entered into the synagogue, he disputed with the
Jews. **20.** And when they desired him that he would stay longer time
with them, he did not consent; **21.** But took his leave, saying, I
must needs keep the feast which is at hand in Jerusalem: but I will
return to you again, God willing. And he loosed from Ephesus. **22.**
And when he was come down to Caesarea, and was gone up, and had saluted
the Church, he came down to Antioch. **23.** And when he had tarried
there some time, he departed, walking through the country of Galatia and
Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span><span id="vi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>**18.** *And when he had tarried there many
days.* Paul’s constancy appeareth in this, in that he is not driven away
with fear, lest he should trouble the disciples, who were as yet
ignorant and weak, with his sudden and untimely departure. We read in
many other places, that when persecution was raised against him
elsewhere he fled forthwith. What is the cause then, that he stayeth at
Corinthus? to wit, when he saw that the enemies were provoked with his
presence to rage against the whole Church, he did not doubt but that the
faithful  <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) should have peace and
rest by his departure; but now, when he seeth their malice bridled, so
that they cannot hurt the flock of God, he had rather sting and nettle
them, than by departing minister unto them any new occasion of rage.
Furthermore, this was the third journey which Paul took to Jerusalem.
For going from Damascus, he went once up that he might be made known to
the apostles. And he was sent the second time with Barnabas, that he
might handle and end the controversy about ceremonies. But Luke doth not
set down for what cause he now took such a long and laborious journey,
determining with all speed to return.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>*When he had shorn his head.* It is uncertain
whether that be spoken of Aquila or of Paul: neither skilleth it much.
Though I interpret it willingly of Paul, because it seemeth to me a
likely thing that he did this for because of the Jews, unto whom he was
about to come. Assuredly, I think this to be a thing which all men
grant, that he made not any ceremonial vow for his own cause, only that
he might do some worship to God. He knew that that was to continue only
for a time which God commanded under the law to the old people; and we
know how diligently he teacheth that the kingdom of God consisteth not
in these external elements, and how straitly he urgeth the abrogating
thereof. It had been an absurd thing for him to bind his own conscience
with that religion from which he had loosed all other men.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>Therefore, he did shear his head for no other
cause, save only that he might apply himself  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) to the Jews, who were as yet ignorant,
and not thoroughly taught; as he doth testify that he took upon him the
voluntary observing of the law, from which he was freed, that he might
gain those who were under the law, (<span id="vi.iv-p9.2"></span>[1Co
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)<span id="vi.iv-p9.2"></span>.) If
any man object that it was not lawful for him to make semblance of a vow
which he had not made from his heart, we may easily answer, that as
touching the substance of purifying he did not dissemble, and that he
used the ceremony which was as yet free, not as if God did require such
worship, but that he might somewhat bear with the ignorant.

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span>Therefore, the Papists are ridiculous when
they fet  <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) from hence an example
of making vows. Paul was moved with no religion to make his vow; but
these men place a reigned worship of God in vows. Respect of time
enforced Paul to keep the rites of the law. These men do nothing else
but entangle in superstition the Church of Christ, which was set free
long ago. For it is one thing to bring in use again old ceremonies used
long ago, and another to tolerate the same being as yet used, until such
time as they may by little and little grow out of use. I omit that the
Papists in vain and foolishly compare the shaving of their priests with
the sign of purifying which God had allowed in the law. But because we
need not stand any longer to refute them, let this one thing suffice us,
that Paul bound himself with a vow that he might bring those which were
weak to Christ, at least that he might not offend them, which vow he
knew was of no importance before God.

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span>19. *Entering into the synagogue.* In that
he shook his garment at Corinthus,  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) it was \[not\] done for that cause,
(as this place teacheth,) that he might cast off the whole nation, but
only such as he had already tried \[experienced\] to be of desperate
obstinacy. Now, he cometh afresh unto the Ephesians, that he might try
whether he could find any more obedience among them. Furthermore, it is
a wonder, that seeing it appeareth by Luke’s report that he was heard
more patiently in this synagogue than in any other place, and also that
he was requested to tarry, he did not grant their request. Hence we may
easily gather that which I said before, that he had some great cause to
go up to Jerusalem in haste. Also, he himself showeth that he must make
haste, saying, I must keep the feast which is at hand at Jerusalem.
Neither is it to be doubted but that after he had set things in good
order there, he departed with their good leave; and we may gather out of
Luke’s words that they did admit his excuse lest the repulse should
offend them. And this is worth the noting, that when better hope to do
good is offered us than we were wont to have, we are drawn unto divers
affairs, as it were, by the hand of God, that we may learn to give over
ourselves to be governed at his pleasure.

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span>*The feast.* That which I said of late
touching the vow doth also appertain unto the feast day. For Paul meant
not to do thereby any duty of godliness  <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) to God, but to be at the assembly,
wherein he might do more good than at any other time of the year. For
the Epistle to the Galatians doth sufficiently testify what account he
made of difference of days, (<span id="vi.iv-p15.2"></span>[Ga
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p15.2"></span>.)
And we must note that he maketh no promise touching his return without
using this exception, if it please the Lord. We do all confess that we
be not able to stir one finger without his direction; but because there
reigneth in men so great arrogancy everywhere, that they dare determine
anything (passing over God) not only for the time to come, but also for
many years, we must oftentimes think upon this reverence and sobriety,
that we may learn to make our counsels subject to the will and
providence of God; lest, if we be deliberate and take counsel as those
use to do who think that they have fortune at their commandment, we be
justly punished for our rashness. And though there be not so great
religion in words but that we may at our pleasure say that we will do
this or that, yet is it good to accustom ourselves to use certain forms
in our speeches, that they may put us in mind that God doth direct all
our doings.

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span><span id="vi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>**22.** *When he came down to Caesarea.*
Though Luke saith in a word that Paul saluted the Church at Jerusalem,
yet is it certain that he was drawn thither with some great necessity.
And yet we may gather by this text that he stayed not long at Jerusalem,
peradventure because things fell not out as he would. Moreover, he
declareth that his journey in his return was not idle or barren, in that
he saith that he strengthened all the disciples, undoubtedly not without
great pains-taking, because he was enforced to go hither and thither,
and oft to turn out of his way; for this word \[<span
id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>καθεξης\] doth signify a continual course. Now,
we have already declared (<span id="vi.iv-p17.2"></span>[Ac
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)<span id="vi.iv-p17.2"></span>) in
what respect those be called disciples who had given their names to
Christ, and professed the name of Christ; to wit, because there is no
godliness without true instruction. They had, indeed, their pastors
under whom they might profit. Yet the greater Paul’s authority was, and
the more excellent spirit he had given him, so they were not a little
strengthened by his by them, especially seeing he was the chief
work-master in the founding of all these churches.

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
18:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**24.** And a certain Jew named Apollos, born
in Alexandria, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, being mighty in the
Scriptures. **25.** He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being
fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently those things which
are the Lord’s, knowing only the baptism of John. **26.** And he began
to speak freely in the synagogue: whom when Priscilla and Aguila had
heard, they took him to their company, and showed him the way of the
Lord more perfectly. **27.** And when he was determined to go into
Achaia, the brethren exhorting him, wrote to the disciples that they
should receive him: who, when he was come, he helped them much who had
believed through grace. **28.** For he overcame the Jews mightily, and
that openly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span><span id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span>**24.** *A certain Jew.* This ought for good
causes to be ascribed to the providence of God, in that whilst Paul is
enforced to depart from Ephesus, Apollos cometh in his place to supply
his absence. And it is very expedient to know the beginning of this man
of what sort it was, forasmuch as he was Paul’s successor among the
Corinthians, and did behave himself so excellently, and did his faithful
endeavor, and took great pains, so that Paul commendeth him honorably as
a singular fellow in office.

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>“I have planted, (saith he,) Apollos hath
watered,”  
(<span id="vi.v-p6.2"></span>[1Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="vi.v-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>Also, these things have I figuratively
appointed unto myself and Apollos, (<span id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>[1Co
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>.) Luke
giveth him first two titles of commendation, that he was eloquent and
mighty in the Scriptures; afterward he will add his zeal, faith, and
constancy. And though Paul do truly deny that the kingdom of God
consisteth in words, and he himself was not commended for eloquence yet
dexterity in speaking and reasoning  <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) (such as Luke doth here commend) is
not to be despised, especially when no pomp or vain boasting is sought
after, by using fine words and great eloquence; but he which is to teach
counteth it sufficient for him, without fraud or ambition, without lofty
words and curious cunning, plainly to lay open the matter he hath in
hand. Paul was without eloquence; the Lord would have the chief apostle
to want this virtue, to the end the power of the Spirit might appear
more excellent in his rude and homely speech. And yet was he furnished
with such eloquence as was sufficient to set forth the name of Christ,
and to maintain the doctrine of salvation. But as the distribution of
the gifts of the Spirit is divers and manifold, Paul’s infancy,  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) that I may so call it, did no whit let
but that the Lord might choose to himself eloquent ministers.
Furthermore, lest any man should think that Apollos’ eloquence was
profane or vain,  <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) Luke saith
that it was joined with great power,  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) namely, that he was mighty in the
Scriptures. Which I expound thus, that he was not only well and soundly
exercised in the Scriptures, but that he had the force and efficacy
thereof, that, being armed with them, he did in all conflicts get the
upper hand. And this (in my judgment) is rather the praise of the
Scripture than of man,  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) that it
hath sufficient force both to defend the truth, and also to refute the
subtilty of Satan.

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span><span id="vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p14"></span>**25.** *He was instructed.* That which Luke
addeth shortly after seemeth not to agree with this commendation, to
wit, that he knew only the baptism of John. But this latter member is
added by way of correction. Nevertheless, these two agree very well
together; that he understood the doctrine of the gospel, because he both
knew that the Redeemer was given to the world, and also was well and
sincerely instructed concerning the grace of reconciliation; and yet had
he been trained up only in the principles of the gospel, so much as
could be had out of John’s institution.  <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) For we know that John was in the midst
between Christ and the prophets; and of his office doth both his father
Zacharias intreat in his tongue, (<span id="vi.v-p15.2"></span>[Lu
1:76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076)<span id="vi.v-p15.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.v-p15.3"></span>[Lu
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#016)<span id="vi.v-p15.3"></span> and
17;) and also the angel out of the prophecy of Malachi, (<span
id="vi.v-p15.4"></span>[Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v-p15.4"></span>.) Surely, seeing that he carried the light
before Christ, and did highly extol his power, his disciples are for
good causes said to have had knowledge of Christ. Moreover, the speech
is worth the noting, that he knew the baptism of John. For thence we
gather the true use of the sacraments; to wit, that they enter  <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) us in some certain kind of doctrine,
or that they establish that faith which we have embraced. Surely, it is
wickedness and impious profanation to pull them away  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) from doctrine. Wherefore, that the
sacraments may be rightly administered, the voice of the heavenly
doctrine must sound there. For what is the baptism of John? Luke
comprehendeth all his ministry under this word, not only because
doctrine is annexed unto baptism, but also because it is the foundation
and head thereof, without which it should be a vain and dead ceremony.

<span id="vi.v-p18"></span>*Being fervent in spirit he spake.* Apollos
hath another commendation given him in these words, that he was inflamed
with an holy zeal to teach. Doctrine without zeal is either like a sword
in the hand of a madman, or else it lieth still as cold and without use,
or else it serveth for vain and wicked boasting. For we see that some
learned men become slothful; other some (which is worse) become
ambitious; other some (which is of all the worst) trouble the Church
with contention and brawling. Therefore, that doctrine shall be unsavory
which is not joined with zeal. But let us remember that Luke putteth the
knowledge of the Scripture in the first place, which must be the
moderation of zeal,  <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) for we know
that many are fervent without consideration, as the Jews did rage
against the gospel, by reason of a perverse affection which they did
bear toward the law; and even at this day we see what the Papists be,
who carried headlong with furious violence, being pricked forward with
an opinion unadvisedly conceived. Therefore, let knowledge be present
that it may govern zeal. And now it is said that zeal was the cause of
diligence, because Apollos gave himself to teach diligently. But and if
that man, being not yet thoroughly and perfectly taught in the gospel,
did preach Christ so diligently and freely, what excuse do those men
hope to have, who know that more perfectly and fully, which he knew not
as yet, if they do not endeavor so much as in them lieth to further and
advance the kingdom of Christ? Luke doth attribute zeal to the Spirit,
therefore, because it is a rare and peculiar gift; neither do I so
expound it that Apollos was moved and pricked forward with the instinct
of his mind, but by motion of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.v-p20"></span><span id="vi.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p21"></span>**26.** *Whom, when Priscilla.* By this it
appeareth how far Priscilla and Aquila were from the love of themselves,
and from envying another man’s virtue, in that they deliver those things
familiarly and privately to an eloquent man, which he may afterward
utter publicly. They excelled not in the same grace wherein he did
excel, and, peradventure, they might have been despised in the
congregation. Moreover, they most diligently help him, whom they see
better furnished as well with eloquence as the use of the Scripture; so
that they keep silence, and he alone is heard.

<span id="vi.v-p22"></span>Again, this was no small modesty which was in
Apollos, in that he doth suffer himself to be taught and instructed not
only in \[by\] an handy-craftsman, but also by a woman. He was mighty in
the Scripture, and did surpass  <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349)
them; but as touching the accomplishment of the kingdom of Christ, those
do polish and trim him who might seem to be scarce fit ministers. Also,
we see that at that time women were not so ignorant of the word of God
as the Papists will have them; forasmuch as we see that one of. the
chief teachers of the Church was instructed by a woman. Notwithstanding,
we must remember that Priscilla did execute this function of teaching at
home in her own house, that she might not overthrow the order prescribed
by God and nature.

<span id="vi.v-p24"></span><span id="vi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p25"></span>**27.** *When he was determined.* Luke doth
not express for what cause Apollos would go to Achaia. Notwithstanding,
we gather out of the text \[context\] that he was not allured with any
private commodity, but because more plentiful fruit in spreading abroad
the gospel did show itself there; because the brethren did more
encourage him with their exhortation, and did spur him when he did
already run. Which they would not have done, unless it had been for the
common profit of the Church. For it had been an absurd thing to entreat
a man to depart to another place, whose faithful industry they already
used, and did know that they should have need of him afterward, unless
there had been some better recompense offered. And I take it that the
brethren of Ephesus wrote to those of Achaia, not only that they should
provide lodging for the man, but also that they should suffer him to
teach. This is holy commendation indeed, when we study to extol every
good man with our testimony and consent, \[suffrage,\] lest the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, which he hath given to every man for the edifying of the
Church, lie buried.

<span id="vi.v-p26"></span>*When he came.* The brethren foresaw this,
who had already had experience thereof, when they exhorted him to
address himself to that journey which he had already in mind conceived.
And whereas it is said that he helped the faithful much, we may take it
two ways; either that he helped those who were not so well furnished,
and that he did support them to beat down the pride of their enemies;
for every man was not able to have weapon in readiness, to undertake a
hard combat against old  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350)
enemies, who would never have yielded, unless they had been enforced; or
that he aided them, lest their faith should fail, being shaken with the
gainsaying of the enemies, which thing doth oftentimes befall the weak.
I take it that they were helped both ways; that having a skillful and
practiced captain, they got  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) the
victory in the conflict. Secondly, that their faith was fortified with a
new prop, that it might be without danger of wavering. Furthermore, Luke
seemeth to note that the brethren were helped with this stoutness and
constancy, when as he saith that he disputed publicly with the Jews. For
this was a sign of zeal and boldness not to fly the light. Whereas, in
the end of the sentence, these words are used, *through grace;* it doth
either agree with the word going before, *they believed;* or else it
must be referred unto the help wherewith he helped the brethren. The
former interpretation is nothing hard. For the meaning thereof shall be
this, that the faithful were illuminate by the grace of God, that they
might believe; as if he had said, The brethren, who were already called
by the benefit of God unto faith, were furthered. Yet the other text
seemeth to agree better, that Apollos, in imparting that grace which he
had received with the brethren, did help them. So that, *through grace,*
shall import as much as according to the measure of the grace received.

<span id="vi.v-p29"></span><span id="vi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p30"></span>**28.** *He overcame the Jews.* By this it
appeareth to what use that ability which Apollos had (in that he was
mighty in the Holy Scriptures) did serve; to wit, because he had a
strong and forcible proof to reprove and overcome the enemies withal.
Also, the state of the disputation is briefly set down, that Jesus is
Christ. For this was out of question among the Jews, that Christ was
promised to be the deliverer; but it was a hard matter to persuade them
that Jesus, the Son of Mary, was this Christ, through whom salvation was
offered. Therefore, it was expedient for Apollos so to dispute
concerning the office of Christ, that he might prove that the
testimonies of the Scripture were fulfilled in the Son of Mary; and that
he might thereby gather that he was Christ.

<span id="vi.v-p31"></span>Also, this place doth testify, that the
Scripture is profitable not only to teach, but also to break the
obstinacy of those which do not obey and follow willingly. For our faith
should not otherwise be firm enough, unless there were an evident
demonstration extant there of those things which are necessary to be
known for salvation. Surely, if the law and the prophets had so great
light, that Apollos did thereby prove manifestly that Jesus is Christ,
as if he did point out the matter with his finger, the adding of the
gospel must bring this to pass at least, that the perfect knowledge of
Christ may be let \[sought\] from the whole Scripture.

<span id="vi.v-p32"></span>Wherefore it is detestable blasphemy against
God in that the Papists say, that the Scripture is dark and doubtful.
For to what end should God have spoken, unless the plain and invincible
truth should show itself in his words? And whereas they infer, that we
must stand to the authority of the Church, and they are not to dispute
with heretics out of the Scriptures; their cavil is sufficiently refuted
by Luke. For, seeing there was nothing more stubborn than the Jews, we
need not to fear but that those weapons whereto Apollos trusted, and
overcame them, shall suffice us against all heretics, seeing that by
them we get the victory of the devil, the prince of all errors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc37005.htm#fr_309) <span
id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>Alieno solo,” a
foreign soil.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc37005.htm#fr_310) <span
id="vi.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>Infausta,”
ill-omened, unpropitious.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc37005.htm#fr_311) <span
id="vi.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>Affligit,”
afflict.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc37005.htm#fr_312) <span
id="vi.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>Per dura
exilia,” through the hardships of exile.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc37005.htm#fr_313) <span
id="vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span> “<span
id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>Consulto...passus fuerit,” purposely suffered.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc37005.htm#fr_314) <span
id="vi.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p14.1"></span>Ut fieri
solet,” as is usual, omitted.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc37005.htm#fr_315) <span
id="vi.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>In suis malis
obstupuit,” were stupified by their calamities.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc37005.htm#fr_316) <span
id="vi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p20.1"></span>Mirum est unde
repserit quod legitur in Latinis codicibus,” it is strange how the
reading crept into the Latin manuscripts.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc37005.htm#fr_317) <span
id="vi.i-p20.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p21.1"></span>Concinna,”
appropriate.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc37005.htm#fr_318) <span
id="vi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p23.1"></span>Pro violento
impulsu et extrinseco ut loquuntur,” for a violent and extrinsic
impulse, as it is called.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc37005.htm#fr_319) <span
id="vi.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>Si non
annunciaveris ut se convertat,” if you do not warn the wicked to be
converted.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc37005.htm#fr_320) <span
id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>Confusi,”
confounded.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc37005.htm#fr_321) <span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>Temere,” at
random.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc37005.htm#fr_322) <span
id="vi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p26.1"></span>Penitus,”
altogether.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc37005.htm#fr_323) <span
id="vi.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p27.1"></span>Victoria,”
victory.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc37005.htm#fr_324) <span
id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p6.1"></span>Et coactum,”
and forced.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc37005.htm#fr_325) <span
id="vi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>Aequum,”
equitable or just.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc37005.htm#fr_326) <span
id="vi.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>Optimum
compendium,” the best and shortest way.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc37005.htm#fr_327) <span
id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>Quid illis
exprobet Paulis,” how Paul upbraideth them.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc37005.htm#fr_328) <span
id="vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p16.1"></span>Cessatio,”
non-interference.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc37005.htm#fr_329) <span
id="vi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p17.1"></span>Capitale
erat,” it was a capital offence.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc37005.htm#fr_330) <span
id="vi.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>In
communi... licentia,” while there was a common license.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc37005.htm#fr_331) <span
id="vi.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii-p19.1"></span>Extingueretur,” might be extinguished.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc37005.htm#fr_332) <span
id="vi.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p20"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii-p20.1"></span>Afflictum,” afflicted, oppressed.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc37005.htm#fr_333) <span
id="vi.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p21.1"></span>Perfidis
et malignis,” malignant and perfidious.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc37005.htm#fr_334) <span
id="vi.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p22"></span> “<span
id="vi.iii-p22.1"></span>Impunitatis,” of impudity.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc37005.htm#fr_335) <span
id="vi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p6.1"></span>Pacem et
quitem fidelibus redimere,” to purchase the peace and quiet of the
faithful.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc37005.htm#fr_336) <span
id="vi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p9.1"></span>Se
accommodaret,” accommodate himself.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc37005.htm#fr_337) <span
id="vi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p11.1"></span>Eliciunt,”
extract.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc37005.htm#fr_338) <span
id="vi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p13.1"></span>In signum
detestationis,” in token of detestation.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc37005.htm#fr_339) <span
id="vi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.iv-p15.1"></span>Pietatis
officio,” office of piety.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc37005.htm#fr_340) <span
id="vi.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>Sermocinandi,”
sermonising, haranguing.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc37005.htm#fr_341) <span
id="vi.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p9.1"></span>Pauli infantia,”
Paul’s want of utterance.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc37005.htm#fr_342) <span
id="vi.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p10.1"></span>Vel inanem et
fulinem,” or futile and vain.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc37005.htm#fr_343) <span
id="vi.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p11.1"></span>Cum
majore...virtute,” with a greater virtue or excellence.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc37005.htm#fr_344) <span
id="vi.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p12.1"></span>Scripturae
potius quam hominis laus est,” is greater prase to Scripture than to the
man.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc37005.htm#fr_345) <span
id="vi.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p15.1"></span>Institutio,”
instruction.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc37005.htm#fr_346) <span
id="vi.v-p15.5"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p16"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p16.1"></span>Initient,”
initiate.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc37005.htm#fr_347) <span
id="vi.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p17"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p17.1"></span>Avelli,” to
dissever.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc37005.htm#fr_348) <span
id="vi.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p19"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p19.1"></span>Quae esset
zeli moderatio,” to moderate zeal.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc37005.htm#fr_349) <span
id="vi.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p23"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p23.1"></span>Illis longe
superior,” and far superior to them.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc37005.htm#fr_350) <span
id="vi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p27"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p27.1"></span>Veteranos,”
veteran.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc37005.htm#fr_351) <span
id="vi.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p28"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p28.1"></span>Superiores
essent,” might be victorious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](cc37006)
