[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we08)  [Next](we10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### EGYPT AND HER "GOLDEN AGE."

There are few voices to be heard underrating the greatness of Egypt.
Reclus declares, that when the whole of Europe was still overrun by
savage tribes, that have left no records behind them, Egypt existed a
civilized power of greatness. Astronomical observations, arithmetic,
geometry, architecture, all the arts, and nearly all the sciences, and
industries of the present day, were known when the Greeks were still
cave men. The origin of the sciences and many moral precepts, still
taught from the wisdom of the ancients were recorded upon the Egyptian
papyri or on the monuments. The very groove of our present thought had
its origin upon the banks of the Nile. (*The Earth and Its Inhabitants.
Africa*.--Vol. 1. p. 207.) Earlier works of art show the Egyptians to
have been a kindly people who did not believe in charms. As the ages
succeeded and Egypt became mingled with other races, her arts declined,
she seemed to forget the meaning of her religion, and finally only
animal worship remained.

Reclus continues, "So ancient is the civilization of Egypt, that it is
known by virtue of its decadence. The most powerful epoch is the most
ancient known to us. After Ramses II there

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

was a rapid decline in art." Unlike the eastern rulers no had the power
of life and death over their subjects, the life of the Pharaoh was
prescribed by religious rule. The rights and property of his subjects
were protected by law. .In the earlier creative days Egypt attained some
arts not yet equaled and some that today are lost. They, perhaps,
developed embalming, because of the dampness of the soil from the rising
Nile. Embalming enabled them to better preserve the body. Sayce
described the statue of Khaf-Re in the museum of Gizeh as a living
portraiture. There is a sublime charm about it. The work is of exquisite
finish; yet it is carved out of diorite rock, the hardest of hard stone.
The stone mason of today possesses no tools with which to work it.

Donnelly affirms that Egypt, Chaldea, India, Greece and Rome passed the
torch of civilization from one to another. They added nothing to the
arts that existed at the earliest period of Egyptian history. These arts
continued without material change until two or three hundred years ago.
For all these years men did not improve, but perpetuated. The age of
Columbus possessed only printing that was unknown to the Egyptians.
Egyptian civilization was highest at its first appearance showing that
they drew from a fountain higher than themselves. In that day Egypt
worshipped only one supreme being. At the time of Menes, this race had
long been architects, sculptors, painters, mythologists and theologians.
What king of modern times ever

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

devoted himself to medicine and the writing of medical books to benefit
mankind, as did the son of Menes? For six thousand years men did not
advance beyond the arts of Egypt.

The primitive religious beliefs of the Egyptians lie back in obscurity.
The later monuments reveal the worship of many gods. De Rouge thinks
that this polytheism developed from the worship of one God. Ptah was the
greatest of the Egyptian gods. He was Lord of Truth, Ruler of the Sky,
and King of both Worlds. After Ptah came Ra, the god of the Sun. His
worship was more general than that of any deity save Osiris. The
Ethiopians said that Egypt was a colony drawn out of them by Osiris. The
greatest of all the Egyptian myths centered about Osiris and Isis. Their
[primitive](errata.htm#21) seats of worship were at Philae and Abydos
high up the Nile. Here Petrie found many relies of the Old Race. At
Abydos was the tomb of Osiris. Every Egyptian of sufficient wealth and
dignity desired to be buried there. Horus was the son of Osiris and
Isis. Isis wears the horned [crescent](errata.htm#22), the moon disk
between. She was a black goddess of the Soudan. Thot was a magician
priest. One text calls him the brother of Osiris. He was the chief
Moon-god and deity of knowledge, wisdom and art. The seat of Moon
worship was the Soudan. Thot originally was of those regions.

After Thot, from whom the ancients said came writing, were many lesser
gods. Certain animals, were sacred to each. No intelligent Egyptian
worshipped the bull. It was only the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

symbol that represented Osiris. Any offense to it was an insult to him.
Therefore the sacred animals were respected as deities. To injure one
meant death from the fury of the populace. The sacred animals were
chosen by certain markings, they were fed the finest of foods, clad in
costly raiment and at their death, the wealth of the king and the
noblemen was squandered in a gorgeous funeral. Osiris had the power of
awakening life out of death. He examined the soul and judged its deeds.
Each spirit must pass before the judgment seat of Osiris. Thot recorded
the sentence of eternal doom. All the art and literature of Egypt was
woven about her religion and in honor of her gods. 3500 B. C. Egypt
believed that God became incarnate in man.

Circumcision was a rite universally practiced as a part of the religion
of the old Egyptians, as long as the native institutions flourished. It
was a rite of the ruling Ethiopian element. Under Greek and Roman rule
it fell into disuse but was always retained by the priesthood and those
who desired to cultivate ancient wisdom. Herodotus said that all
Ethiopians circumcised. Lenormant calls it original with them. The
Coptic church practices it to this day. Abyssinians do the same. They
did not adopt it from the Jews for they circumcise both sexes.
Oldendorpe finds the rite in western Africa. It must be a relic of
ancient African customs. It is older than Mohammed, who did not regard
it as a religious rite. Southern Arabia had the rite from Ethiopia.
Himyartic Arabs (Cushites), circumcise their

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

children on the eighth day. Pocock found that other Semitic Arabs
circumcise between the tenth and fifteenth years.

Budge in *Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection*, preface, tells us,
"that the knowledge of the Egyptian priests of the real meaning of their
religion after 1200 B. C. seemed extremely vague and uncertain. The
early beliefs became buried in magic spells and amulets." Only a few
clung to the old faith. 3400 B. C., Egypt had possessed a conception of
truth, justice and righteousness. He continues page XIV, "that all
characteristics indicate that the Egyptian religion was of African
rather than Asiatic origin. Its true form died about 3000 years ago. The
best explanation of the Egyptian religion could only be obtained from
the religion of the Soudan." The priest caste of Egypt had been
Ethiopian and the first rulers priest-kings. As they were overthrown the
priesthood was not able so perfectly to dominate the thought of the
empire. When the priests of Amen, the Ethiopian priesthood emigrated to
Napata it is clear why Egypt lost the inner meaning of the religious
cults.

In commercial life the Egyptians were [consciencious](errata.htm#23) and
honest. In the towns there was little. quarrelling or disorder. Justice
was administered speedily and impartially. Among the many crafts were
blacksmiths, gold and coppersmiths, cabinet makers, weavers,
upholsterers, potters, glass Mowers, shoe makers, tanners, tailors and
armorers. West describes them as workmen of marvelous dexterity, masters
of processes

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

that are now unknown. Weavers in particular produced delicate and
exquisite linen, almost as fine as silk, workers in glass and gold were
famous for their skill. Jewels were imitated in colored glass so
artfully that only an expert today can detect the fraud by appearance.
The belief that a good life would win reward after death appeared upon
the monuments hundreds of years before the Hebrew Ten Commandments. Some
of their writings were medical treatises. One a recipe for an
application whereby Osiris cured his father Amen-Ra of the headache.
(*World Progress*--West.) It seems unreasonable that Osiris could have
done this if Amen-Ra was as the sun.

Unlike the Cretan and Ethiopian inscriptions, the Egyptians never took
the final steps to a true alphabet. "Their writing remained to the end a
queer mixture of hundreds of signs of things." Sayce speaks of Egyptian
manuscripts that contain versions of stories very similar to those we
have read in the Arabian Nights. There tire tales with plots like
Cinderella. The Taking of Joppa, is almost identical with the Forty
Thieves. There are other stories like Sinbad the Sailor. Africans tell
many tales like those of Aesop. Many nations claimed Aesop. This was
because he was a Cushite of which they were all divisions, so by
identity of race he belonged to them all. Tradition said that he was
black and deformed. It is very likely that he was a part of the life of
Alexandria and the cities of Asia The great similarity or the old
Egyptian

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

tales and those of the Arabian Nights lay in the fact that they
originated and were the common property of all the colonies of the
widespread empire of Cushite Ethiopians, of which Egypt was for many
centuries a part.

The ordinary homes of sun dried bricks showed no small degree of skill.
They were generally square of two stories in height with an open gallery
above. There were many latticed windows. The rooms ranged around three
and sometimes four sides of an open square or courtyard. In this trees
were planted, cisterns and fountains constructed. The public edifices
were built of stone. The men of Egypt worked at the loom and carried on
the trades. The women looked after the marketing and frequently
transacted the business. This is a custom among all African nations. The
warrior class enjoyed great privileges. They possessed fully one-third
of the soil exempt from taxation. The husbandman was attached to the
soil, paying rent. The modern fellah owns no land. The Cushite habit of
India, where the wife died with her husband, may be seen among the rites
of the Cushite Pharaohs. The tomb of Amen-hotep II, at Thebes, shows his
favorite wives buried with him.

The domestic life of Egypt is described by Duncker, in his *History of
Antiquity* Vol. I, p. 118. "On the tombs, five
[varieties](errata.htm#24) of plows can be seen. There were herds of
bullocks, calves, asses, sheep, goats, cows, and fowl. Butter and cheese
were made. In other sculptures, we see spinners and weavers at their
-work. Potters, smiths,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

painters, masons, shoemakers and glass blowers, performed their tasks as
they worked four thousand years ago." There representations of their
social occupations, attainments, and all forms of social, political, and
religious life are truly marvelous. The pictures referring to rural
affairs reveal a state of life at that early day, which may lead us to
speak modestly of our own attainments. An Egyptian villa contained all
the conveniences of one of Europe at the present day. In weaving and all
processes connected with the manufacture of linen, they have never been
surpassed. In the making of furniture, musical instruments, vessels and
arms they showed great taste and skill.

Among Semitic people herding is highly esteemed. The fact that shepherds
and swineherds were the lowest strata of Egyptian society, proves that
they were not Semitic in origin. Exodus VIII, 26, says: "Egyptians would
not eat with Hebrews because they were. shepherds, who sacrificed beasts
that were an abomination to Egyptians." The people of the Nile were
primarily agriculturalists which was the basic occupation of all the
Hamitic races, coupled with great skill in the arts and industries. The
trade of father descended to son. One inscription speaks of the
profession of architect in one family for twenty-three generations. This
may account for the unequalled genius of the ancient in many lost arts.
Intermarriage between the various castes was never forbidden. The
domestic tie was strong. The monuments reveal courtesy, kindness and
affection

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

as the rule. The homes of the mechanics and husbandmen 4000 years ago
were generally of brick, well furnished and better built than the homes
of today. In the houses of the wealthy, tables, chairs and beds were
elaborately finished and ornamented. Vases and cups were of silver and
gold.

The Egyptians were fond of amusements. The jugglers' art was carried to
perfection. All the athletic sports were greatly enjoyed. Indoor games
were popular. There were [ingenious](errata.htm#25) toys and amusements
for their children. Among the higher classes music was the delight of
all. Egyptian musicians played upon harps, lyres, guitars, flutes,
triangles, pipes, horns, trumpets and drums. The dancing was but
graceful and [pleasing](errata.htm#26) gestures to music. Ancestor
worship and the belief in immortality, caused them to embalm their dead.
Their bodies treated five thousand years ago are today in perfect state
of preservation. The. secrets of their methods are unknown to us. We can
preserve the body for only a few weeks. The cost of preparing a mummy in
the highest style was twelve hundred dollars. The lowest style was in
the reach or all. In the museums of the world we may look upon the faces
of the Pharaohs as they appeared four thousand years ago.

The Egyptians were master engineers. The Nile was diverted from its
course to build Memphis. Moeris was an artificial lake 450 miles in
circumference. It was 350 feet deep, with flood gates, locks and dams.
The joints were no wider

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

than silver paper. Cement still clings to the casing stones. The
Labyrinth astonished Herodotus. It had three thousand chambers, one-half
above, the other half below, the surface of the earth. The Temple of
Karnak covers a square eighteen hundred feet each way. Travelers are
unable to find words to express its sublimity. It is a sight too much
for human comprehension. They must have had the knowledge of the
principles of the derrick, the lever and the inclined plane to put into
position the monstrous obelisks and stone animals that stood in rows
before the temples. Greeks appropriated the Doric style of architecture
from Egypt. We shall see in the chapter on art that Egypt was the
originator of almost all of the designs of Greek decorative art. Huge
statutes were covered with highly finished hieroglyphics. It seems
impossible to tell how they carved this stubborn material. Our best
modern steel, with difficulty carves even plain letters in granite.

Amelia B. Edwards in *A Thousand Miles Up the Nile*, says, "The
distinguishing feature of Egyptian architecture is it vastness and
sublimity. The avenues of colossal sphinxes and lines of obelisks led to
[stupendous](errata.htm#27) palaces and temples elaborately sculptured
and containing balls of solemn and gloomy grandeur, in which the largest
of our cathedrals might stand. The earliest monuments reveal a
considerable degree of skill which never advanced. Egyptian walls and
ceilings were painted in beautiful patterns which we still imitate. The
great hall of Karnak

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

is the noblest work ever executed by the hand of man. In the doorway of
the Hall of Pillars, the columns are the wonder of the world. How was
that lintel-stone raised? Beside it we feel shrunk to the feebleness of
a fly. We are [stupefied](errata.htm#28) by the thought of the mighty
men who made them." Perhaps not untruly the builders called themselves
the descendants of the gods.

The Great Pyramid contains ninety million cubic feet of masonry. It
stands on the thirtieth parallel facing the four cardinal points with
geometrical exactitude. Beneath the pyramids lie the bodies of
Egyptians. Within were sepulchral chambers containing mummies, long ago
despoiled of the rich treasures buried with them. So perfectly were they
built that after the lapse of tens of centuries the stones are still in
position supporting the mountain weight above them. Sayce says that in
the pyramid of Khufa, the stones are in exact contact and cemented so
perfectly as to seem impossible. Petrie believes that the stones were
cut with tubular drills fitted with jewel points. The lines marked upon
the stones by the drills can still be seen, with evidence that not only
the tool but the stone was rotated. The machinery with which the latter
was erected is still unknown. The Egyptian carved the
[hardest](errata.htm#29) granite, regarded now as impossible to work,
[as](errata.htm#30) though it was so much soapstone.

How the letters and figures were elaborately embossed and counter-sunk
is astonishing to modern workers in granite. The edges of the
inscriptions after forty centuries are as sharp and

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

beautifully delineated as though the work of yesterday. It is thought by
some that they must have possessed the knowledge of electricity. Solomon
truly said, "There is no new thing under the sun." Sayce asserts, "Those
who view Egyptian art in museums, have but little idea of the perfection
of the Egyptian sculptors and painters of the fifth and sixth Dynasties.
The wooden figure of Sheik-el-Beled is one of the noblest works of human
genius. Pictures in low relief resemble exquisite embroidery in stone.
In statuary they have never been surpassed. They have excelled the
artists of every age in solemn dignity and everlasting repose. In the
laws of color harmony Theban painters were as well versed as those of
today."

The blocks of the pyramids weighing from two and a half to fifty tons
were squared and fitted and levelled with an accuracy that puts to shame
our very best work. Acres of buildings were put together with an
accuracy of [measurement](errata.htm#31) equalled only by the optician
fitting glasses. The Egyptians were surpassed only in the plastic arts
by the Greeks. Nude figures are seen as through a veil. Naked figures
can be seen when the body is clothed. The paintings on the tombs after
the lapse of three thousand years retain the distinctness of outline and
brillancy of color of recent productions. The lions of Gebel Barkal
Nubia, now in the British museum, are probably the finest example of the
idealization of animal forms that any age has produced. The Grottoes of
Beni-Hasan contain many pictures characterized

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

by remarkable fidelity and beauty. Very many of the monuments of Egypt
have been mutilated and destroyed, not always by Arabs. Some of the work
has been done by Englishmen and Americans, to the everlasting shame of
our claim to culture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Egypt and Her Mighty Pharaohs](we10)
