[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we10)  [Next](we12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

### ARABIA AND HER ANCIENT RACES.

Arabia was once a portion of the ancient Cushite empire. Some
authorities claim that it was the original seat of Ethiopian culture.
The ordinary encyclopedia and historical book give but little light upon
the early race life of Arabia. When our research has gone deeper we will
find that the true ethnic story of Arabia, Asia Minor and India have not
yet been told. Recent books have rewritten the history of ancient
Greece, as the findings or archaeology reveal other races and other
sources for the civilization of Hellenic lands. The history of Arabia
needs rewriting. This chapter is a contribution in that direction; the
sum total of the careful investigations of scholars and investigators
whom we can trust. The ancients gave Arabia a triple division. Petrea
the stony, Deserta the desert, and Felix the happy. They did not assign
to these any very distinct [boundries](errata.htm#46) and much of the
real surface of Arabia is unknown to us today. Yemen includes the whole
southwest quarter which possesses many advantages in climate and soil.
Here existed to almost our times the late flowers of a rich primeval
civilization, which did not spring from the Semitic race, which is in
possession of Arabia today.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

Arabia Deserta, is the land of the Semitic Arabian for we, find two
races incorporated in the term Arabian. The ancient Adites and
Thamudites were of Ham. The ancient inhabitants of Arabia Petrae were of
the "Anu" of the "Old Race" of Egypt. The Semitic Arabians trace their
descent from Heber of the race of Shem. Deserta had the Euphrates for
its eastern [boundary](errata.htm#47). The inhabitants live a wandering
life, having no cities or fixed habitations, but wholly dwelling in
tents. These are called Bedouins. When the Scriptures spoke of Arabia it
referred to a smaller territory than the vast region we call Arabia
today. Hebrews spoke of Kedem as the land to the east of them. Arabia
Petrae lies south of the Holy Land. In this region dwelt the Edomites,
Amalkites, Cushites and other tribes. Arabia Felix lay still farther
south being bounded by the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea and the ocean. This
country abounded in riches and especially in spices and is now called
Hedjaz. It is much celebrated because the cities of Mecca and Medina are
situated in it.

Having never been really conquered, Arabia has known no changes saving
those of nature. There the deserts and mountains have always secured
them from conquest. Nejd the central plateau is an important region
regarded by the Arabians as the stronghold of their cherished
institutions and traditions. Nejd is the favored land of the date palm
of superior species. It is the special pride and ornament of the
country. The coffee plant is highly prized. This central

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

highland is surrounded on all sides by a broad desert belt. In general
features, Arabia resembles the African Sahara of which it is but a
continuation. Its general characteristics are African. Arabia roughly
summed up is composed of one third coast ring and mountains, one third
central plateau which is tolerably fertile, and one third desert circle.
Throughout the highland of Nejd, though the days are hot, the nights are
cool and pleasant. Here epidemic diseases are rare. It is very hot below
in the plains. Sayce says that the divisions of "sandy," "stony" and
"happy," so familiar to the Greeks and Latins is unknown to the Arabians
of today. This is because they were terms used by the earlier Cushite
Arabians.

Arabia was originally settled by two distinct races, an earlier Cushite
Ethiopian race and a later Semitic Arabian. 'The Cushites were the
original Arabians and dwelt there before Abraham came to Canaan. Ancient
literature assigns their first settlement to the extreme southwestern
point of the peninsula. From thence they spread northward and eastward
over Yemen, Hadramaut and Oman. A proof that they were Hamites lay in
the name Himyar or dusky, given to the ruling race. The Himyaritic
language, now lost, but some of which is preserved, is African in origin
and character. Its grammar is identical with the Abyssinian. The
Encyclopedia Britannica in its article on Arabia says, "The institutions
of Yemen bear a close resemblance to African types. The inhabitants of
Yemen, Hadramaut,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Oman and the adjoining districts, in shape of
head, color, length and slenderness of limbs and scantiness of hair,
point to an African origin." The first inhabitants of Arabia were known
to the national traditions as Adites. The Scriptures called Ad a
descendant of Ham.

These Cushite Arabians were given to a settled life and not to the
wandering habits of the Semitic Arabians. They were fond of village
life, society, the dance, and music. Among the cities the most ancient
and populous were in "Happy Yemen." Like the Cushites of Egypt, here was
the marvelous reservoir of Marib constructed by the Himyaritic kings.
Their descendants of today are good cultivators of the soil, traders and
artizans and averse to pastoral [pursuits](errata.htm#48). All of these
traits distinguish them from the Semitic race. They have much more to do
with the African coast than the Asiatic. Marriage with extreme facility
exists between all classes of southern Arabia and the African races.
There is the absence of any caste feeling between these Arabs and the
still darker natives of Africa. All of this points to a common origin.
Keane thinks that these people of southwestern Arabia, at a remote
period found their way across the narrow strait of Bab-el-Mandeb and
secured a permanent foothold on the Nubian steppes. These Himyaritic
Arabians call themselves Æthiopians still in diplomatic and elevated
circles.

Arabia in the average book is described as a dreary barren waste, the
home of the Semitic Arabian. In the most sterile regions we do find

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

this race. They are a nomadic people wandering from pasturage to
pasturage, as their ancestors have done from time immemorial and as they
shall probably do to the end. The Arab despises agriculture and the
customs and restraints of civilized life. There is constant resistance
among them to anything like regal power or organization. There is some
similitude between them and the Cushite Arabians for they have long
lived in proximity; yet there is rivalry and the enmity that would
spring from difference in race. The Semitic Arabians are compelled to a
pastoral life because they occupy the most waste portions of the
plateau. Their condition involves them in constant quarrels over wells
and pasturage. This caused the separation of Abraham and Lot. Extreme
want makes them plunderers of caravans. They are utterly ignorant of
writing or books. This division of the inhabitants has no remembrance of
the ancient geography of Arabia, because they were not then the
inhabitants. The only authority that they recognize is that of an elder.

These Arabs trace their descent from Heber, from whom the line of
Abraham descended. Abraham's son Joktan became the first king of the
country. According to Herodotus their original home lay between Colchis
and the Medes. They lived in Arabia without mingling until Ishmael, the
son of Hagar settled among them. Some of these Ishmaelites applied
themselves to traffic and husbandry; for Hagar was Hamitic. It was from
this class in later days arose the Mohammedan conquest. The tribe of
Koreysh claimed

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

to have descended from Ishmael through Hagar. They were intimately
connected with the southern Cushite tribes that were the originators of
the idol worship of the Kaaba at Mecca. The great majority of the
Ishmaelites lived a life like the modern Bedouin, who too traced back to
Ishmael. Their domains stretched from the Persian Gulf to the Red Sea.
Their hand was against every man and every man's hand against them.
These Arabs will not marry with the settled tribes or with Turks or
Moors. The third division of pure Semitic Arabians probably sprang from
the children of Abraham and Keturah. In prodigious multitude they cover
Syria, Mesopotamia, Palestine, Egypt, and a great part of Africa.

These Semitic Arabians are quite unlike in nature to the Cushite and
Hebrew stock, which in early ages must have been deeply permeated with
Ethiopian blood. This made the Jew more gentle than the fierce nature of
his wilder unmixed Semitic brethren. This intermingling of Hebrew and
Ethiopic blood could easily have taken place in the four hundred years
of the Jewish exile in Egypt, and later in Canaan they intermingled with
the original inhabitants who were Cushite. Let us examine the nature of
the pure Semitic race. Sayce. describes their life as full of danger and
distress. Our private citizens possess more solid and pleasing luxuries
than the proudest emir, head of ten thousand horse. The care of the
sheep and camels is abandoned to the women, while under the banner of
the emir the men practice the use of the bow, javelin and
[scimitar](errata.htm#49).

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The dignities of sheik and emir descend in an
order that is loose and precarious. If an Arabian prince abuses his
power, he is quickly punished by the desertion of his subjects. The
natural state of the nation is free, each of her sons disdains
submission to the will of a master.

Caravans from the remote times of Job and Sesostris have been the
victims of their rapacious spirit. They pretend that the riches of the
earth and the fertile climates were given to the other branches of the
human family and that they must recover the portion of their inheritance
of which they have been unjustly deprived. The caravans that traverse
the deserts are ransomed or pillaged. The temper of a people thus armed
against mankind is doubly inflamed by this domestic license of rapine,
murder and revenge. Each Arab might point his javelin against the life
of his countryman with impunity and renown. The jurisdiction of the
magistrate was impotent. The recital in prose or verse of an obsolete
feud was sufficient to kindle the same passions among the descendants of
the hostile tribes. They would wait whole months and years for the
opportunity of revenge. The refined malice of the Arab refuses even the
head of the murderer, substitutes the innocent for the guilty person and
transfers the penalty to the best and most considerable of the race by
whom they have been injured.

The bitter hardships of the son of Abraham, cast out without succor,
seems to have accentuated the evil of his nature. Sayce reveals a better
side of Abraham showing in their hospitality. This

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

ferocious Arab, the terror of the desert, embraces freely without
inquiry, the stranger who, dares to confide in his honor and enter his
tent. He is kind and respectful. He shares his wealth or property with
his guest and dismisses him with gifts. Though disdaining law he proudly
indulges the impulse of pity and alms. Thus everywhere over the earth
where we find people crowded back by climate or conquest to bleak and
barren districts we see the change of human nature from gentleness to
ferocity. Columbus found a peaceful and gentle people in America.

The foregoing description of Arabia and Arabians found in *Ancient
Empires of the East*, is not sufficient to give us a clear idea of
Arabia and Arabians. It is a true and faithful account of the Semitic
branch but does not amount for other conditions and races there.
Palgrave's expedition to Arabia in 1862 found beside wandering Bedouins
and wastes, a rich and beautiful country. Arabia is a vast region.
Baldwin reports that he found throughout almost all his journey a
settled and civilized country, with cities, towns, villages and a
settled government. All of this was the legacy of the earlier culture.
In these regions the Bedouin or later Arab counted for nothing. He found
central Arabia an extensive, fertile tableland, surrounded by a circle
of desert waste. Here were settled nations of the Cushite Arabian stock.
Here they had developed for thousands of years the noble breed of
Arabian horse. Naturalists agree hat Arabia is the genuine and original
home of the horse. Here

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

it attained its highest perfection, not perhaps in size, but in form,
symmetry and beauty. For endurance, docility and speed for incredible
distances these horses have no equals. Sayce says, that the Barb, the
Spanish and the English breed are all built on the foundation of the
imported Arabian horse.

The development of the camel is Arabian. It does not appear on any of
the Egyptian monuments. The Bedouin has superstitious love for the pure
horses of Arabia. A female is rarely sold. These horses are educated in
the tents among the children of the Arabs. This trains them to habits of
gentleness and attachment. Their senses are not blunted by abuse of spur
or whip. As they feel the touch of the hand or stirrup, they dart away
like the wind, if the rider is dismounted in the rapid chase, they
instantly stop till he has recovered his seat. They disappear before the
enemy like the mist. In the sands of the deserts of Africa and Arabia
the camel is a sacred and precious gift. The driest thistle and the
barest thorn is all the food they require, Nature has formed cisterns
within the camel. He can lay up a store of water that will last him from
twenty to thirty days. The value of the camel to the Arabs and Oriental
nations is inestimable. They regard it as a peculiar gift of heaven to
their race. They were called the "ships of Persia," so dependent was
commerce upon their instinct to cross the trackless wastes. A dromedary
can cover ten times as much ground

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

as a horse. Every part of the camel filled some Arabian need.

To the Cushite race belonged the oldest and purest Arabian blood. They
were the original Arabians and the creators of the ancient civilization,
evidences of which may be seen in the stupendous ruins to be found in
every part of the country. At the time that Ethiopians began to show
power as monarchs of Egypt about 3000 to 3500 B. C. the western part of
Arabia was divided into two powerful kingdoms. In those days the princes
of Arabia belonged wholly to the descendants of the Cushites, who ruled
Yemen for thousands of years. Zohak, celebrated in Iranian history was
one of these famous rulers. These Arabians hid the sources of their
commerce and the Greeks had of them only cunning stories that the
Arabians put in circulation about their country. Much of the rich
commerce of India, the treasurers of Africa, crossed between Yeman and
Syria avoiding the tedious navigation of the Red Sea. Strabo, Pliny,
Diodorus and Ptolemy tell us that in very early ages, Yemen reached a
high state of civilization. Arts and commerce flourished and wealth was
accumulated, literature was cultivated and talent held in esteem. The
national writings that survive to this day, tell the same story. This
culture had declined before its extinction in the seventh century.

The *Encyclopedia Britannica* (Vol. II, p. 222, 223) says, "The first
dawning gleams that deserve to be called history find Arabia under the
rule of a southern race. They claimed descent

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

from Khatan. They were divided anciently into several aristocratic
monarchies. These [Yemenite](errata.htm#50) kings descendants of Khatan
and Himyar 'the dusky,' a name denoting African origin, whose rulers
were called 'Tobba,' of Hamitic etymology, reigned with a few dynastic
interruptions for about 2500 years. They demanded the obedience of the
entire southern half of the peninsula and the northern by tribute
collectors. The general characteristics of the institutions of Yemen
bore considerable resemblance to the neighboring one of the Nile
Valley." One of its monarchs subdued the whole of central Asia, reaching
even the boundries of China. Another made conquests in Africa. Their
chroniclers appropriated the glories and some of the exploits of the
early kings of Ethiopia, because Arabia, Egypt, Chaldea, and India were
colonies of the Cushite empire. Ethiopia was mother of them all and her
rulers under various titles were their rulers. Modern histories speak of
the Semitic conquest of Babylon as early as 4500 B. C. which is
erroneous unless they explain that these Arabians were Cushite Arabians,
another division of the race of the black Sumerians. The line of Sargon
3800 B. C. was of the same race. Each one of these early Arabian
conquests was of African Arabs.

While the sceptre of Yemen was outstretched far over the length and
breadth of the land and the genuine or African Arabs formed a complete
and dense circle all around, the deserts of Arabia remained the
stronghold of a different

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

race, wild, ferocious tribes, less susceptible to culture, but of a far
greater energy. This race was the Semitic Arabian, that had come into
the land from the north. They spoke a language akin to the Syriac and
Hebrew. Unlike the African Arabians they had little disposition for
agriculture, architecture or the fine arts. Their instincts led them to
a nomadic, pastoral life. History has left unrecorded the exact date of
their arrival and the period that they remained tributary, though often
refractory, to the kings of Yemen. In the fifth century of the Christian
era, a late date, a leader arose who broke off the bonds of Yemen. He
slew the tax gatherer and raised the banner of revolt. He was
assassinated and in the sixth century they had narrowed the boundries of
the earlier Cushite Arabian monarchies, and both northern and southern
communities were coming under the growing power of the tribe of Koreysh.

The Koreysh figure as the descendants of Ishmael. In their artificial
annals, says Britannica, me Yemenites or genuine Arabs appear under a
cousinly character. On all these points Mohammedan annalists are equally
positive. All other trusty testimony is adverse. Their falsifications
have found favor with our European writers. Baldwin in *Prehistoric
Nations*, pp. 76, 77, says, that the Semitic Arabians and later
Mohammedans confused and altered the earlier Arabian history. They
sought to bring upon themselves the glory of the Cushite Arabian name.
They have appropriated the names of the old Ethiopians, whose career had
long since closed before the entrance

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

of the Semites into Arabia. Mohammedan writers give but vague pictures
of the conditions of their country. They were not a literary people. and
their first attempts were after the death of their prophet. The times of
Mohammed were becoming ancient when these men wrote. They had entered
Arabia after the extended empire of the Cushite Arabians had declined
and disunited. The Semitic Arabian lived a rude nomadic life in
obscurity until 700 A. D., Arabian civilization extended back behind
them for thousands of years.

To sum up, 3000 to 3,500 B. C. Arabian civilization equaled that of
Egypt and Babylon. The ancient glory had departed prior to the rise of
Assyria. The same wave that entered Arabia from the north had become
predominant in Assyria, which from its monuments had in its origin been
Cushite. The fierce nature of the Semitic Arabian and of the children of
Esau, whom Abraham had said in blessing their father, "they shall live
by the sword," showed in the merciless tortures and cruelties of the
later Assyrians. The first Adite empire of Arabia was overthrown 1800 B.
C., so long ago that the cause now is mythical. The ancient chronicles
speak of a "Flood of Arem," which dispersed the families of Yemen over
the northern part of Arabia. This flood destroyed Mareb the ancient
capital. Lenormant says in the *Ancient History of the East*, Vol. II,
p. 306, "The Jokanites were subject to the Cushites until the end of the
second Adite empire. We may be sure the Sabaeans, who at first

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

let them in peaceably made a stout resistance. The Cushites were their
superiors in knowledge and, civilization." It had been a Cushite
principle to mete out equal justice to aliens. For many years the
Semites lived subject to the laws of the Sabaeans, silently increasing
in strength. They accepted in part the language, manners and
institutions of the Cushites. At last they rose and overthrew those who
had given them the light.

None of the ancient empires were able to subjugate Arabia. Bravely for
thousands of years she maintained her freedom. When the second Adite
empire was overthrown, masses of the Sabaeans emigrated to Abyssinia.
Ghez is a living relic of the ancient speech of Yemen. These Cushites
clung long to their faith and peculiar institutions. Alexander the
Great, hearing of her rich treasures, desired to pit his great strength
against her, but death interrupted his plans. Ælius Gallus, Roman
prefect of Egypt, undertook an expedition against Yemen, with an army of
ten thousand infantry and fifteen hundred horsemen. He crossed the Red
Sea but his soldiers, disorganized by the intense beat, were incapable
of laying [siege](errata.htm#51) to Mareb. The old Cushites of Yemen
stoutly maintained their independence, when other dominions were forced
to yield to Rome. After me Mohammedan conquests, which exhausted the
Arabians, they were easy prey for the Turks. Thus came the fall of that
empire, as Assyrians, taught and inspired by an earlier culture, which
carried the arms, language

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and institutions of Arabia over half of the old world, "from the banks
of the Indus to the shores of the Atlantic ' from the mid-African desert
with its burning sands to the green vineyards of pleasant France." This
later flower of Semitic culture "s grafted upon the old Cushite root.
The later lines of conquest following the identical pathways of the
ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Marvelous Arabian Civilization](we12)
