[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we12)  [Next](we14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

# CHAPTER X.

### THE RICH ARABIAN LITERATURE.

Gibbon speaks of the times of ignorance that preceeded Mohammed. This is
true if we speak of Semitic Arabia, but later research has revealed a
different source for the literature of the land. *Britannica* says of
Arabia (Vol. 2, p. 230), "Arabia if poor in monuments is superabundantly
rich in manuscripts. There are verses inscribed to the kings and heroes
of Yemen dated a thousand years or more before the Christian era. We
find undeniable specimens of at least two full centuries before
Mohammed, of poems which in vigor and polish yield to few composed in
Arabic or any other tongue. At this early date we find metrical and
[rhythmical](errata.htm#69) laws simple, yet susceptible to the highest
art, with a scansion of almost Horatian elegance and variety, that Pope
himself might have admired but could hardly have imitated." The nations
of Arabia that were nomadic were tardy in the arts of peace. Before the
time of Mohammed they had no literature. The times of the prophet were
growing ancient when his [disciples](errata.htm#70) wrote. To whom then
would we attribute this earlier literature of Arabia? Let us go deeper
into research to find out.

Oriental histories say that the language spoken in the more ancient
times was wholly different

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

from the Arabic of Mohammed. The fragments of verse composed at least a
thousand years before Christ were in the ancient Himyaritic tongue and
the language of Yemen glorifying its heroes was the same Himyaritic
dialect. In the days before Islam, not far from Mecca at Okad, was held
a national meeting like the [Olympiads](errata.htm#71) of the Greeks. It
was an annual fair, frequented by men of all conditions from every
quarter of Arabia. It lasted thirty days, preceeding the annual
pilgrimage, which itself was taken over by Mohammed from the earlier
life. As well as the exchange of corn and wine, there was the enjoyment
of eloquence and poetry. We may read in our own language the seven
original poems which were inscribed in letters of gold and suspended in
the temple at Mecca. In the Fourth and Fifth Centuries A. D. poetry had
become a refined art. The metrical contests were firmly established. The
most renowned poets crowned at these festivals were Antar, Amur-El-Kais
and Tarafab. This Arabian Olympiad was abolished by the ignorance and
fanaticism of the first followers of Mohammed.

Let us examine this fair that had sprung out of the culture of the
earlier Cushite Arabian races Horse races, poetical recitals, and every
kind of amusement, was used to offset the weightier commercial
transactions of an open fair. It had the proportions of a national
exhibition. Here the best masters of art met for the purpose of reciting
their compositions and receiving the reward. Metenebhe was esteemed by
many as the greatest

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Arabian poet. In range of thought and excellence
of diction he surpassed all. Toghrai furnished Tennyson with his model
for *Locksley Hall*. Ebn Farigh composed poetry that has never in its
kind been surpassed or even equaled by the poets of any land. We find in
the annals Noseyyeb, a Negro who was master of descriptive poetry. This
is the estimate of the Arabian poets by the literary critics of high
repute of other lands. Many European writers drew their inspirations
from romances and legends like the Exploits of Antar, and the Arabian
Nights, which have become a part of the real literature of the world.

The culture of the Saracens and Islam arose and flourished from
ingrafting of Semitic blood upon the older Cushite root. The mingled
language was distinguished for its richness, softness and high degree of
development. By the spread of Islam it became the sole written language
of all southwestern Asia, eastern and northern Africa and for a time of
southern Spain, Malta and Sicily. Arabic writers of the Semitic
division, wrote so late, that from religious prejudice and lapse of time
they were incapable of being faithful historians of the older Cushite
civilization. In their versions those old cities of the Adites and
Thalmonites were enterprising rich and powerful. They represented them
as of wonderful magnificence, but Mohammedan ardor, as Baldwin points
out, executed upon these cities miraculous judgments, because of
unbelief in Islam, which did not then exist. "These are but faint and
confused recollections of a civilization that had decaying

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

monuments, ruined cities, and mysterious antiquities before the, time of
Khatan which itself was ancient. These wonderful creations disappeared,
not in fiery wrath from heaven but under the influence of thousands of
years of time and change." (*Prehistoric Nations*, Baldwin, p. 104.)

The Koreysh to whom many European and American writers delight in
dedicating the Arabian genius have carefully, too carefully, built up
the family tree that includes Mohammed himself and in their annals the
Yemenites, the genuine Arabs of genius, appear as cousins and
descendants of Heber. On these points all Mohammedan annalists are
equally positive and that we should accept these falsities, the fruit of
vanity and ignorance, Britannica says, is surprising. Mohammedan
chroniclers adopted much from the Jewish records, their country at that
time was full of the Jews dispersed by the conquest of their own lands.
They conceal the facts of their own late appearance in Arabia by
childish fictions. Saracen conquest was directly represented by the
tribes of Mustareb origin, but the civilizing influence sprang from the
accompanying arms of the old culture, the ancient aristocratic tribes of
Yemen. Nations in the south, east and north, of the same ancestry had
sunk to half vassalage to Persian or Byzantine authority. In their hands
had been the custody of the temple of Mecca which was seized and forever
after held by the Koreysh who thus gained religious preeminence by
possession of the treasures of gold, silver,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

jewels and other offerings gathered by pagan piety of Cushite Arabians.
The Semitic Arabian race has not been noted for any creative or
constructive qualities and until united in conquest with the more
ancient Cushite. race was wholly destructive. Mohammed took over a
primitive Cushite pilgrimage to Mecca.

Myers says, "The poetry of the Arabians was wholly original. It was the
natural and beautiful expression of Arabic genius." The fanciful imagery
of the Arabian poetry and the legends were very much like the literature
of the same type in India. It showed in the superior development of the
speech of Islam, the lustre of the empire of the caliphs, and in the
knowledge of the arts and sciences carried to western Europe by the
Saracens. This rich Arabian language was the union of the dialects of
northern and central Semitic Arabians and the Himyaritic of southern
Arabia. This can be proved by the similarity of the roots. The languages
had so overlapped that the Cushite inhabitants of Palestine, who were
called Samaritans, could converse with the Hebrews. Christ talked with
the Samaritan woman at the well. Constant trade, relations had unified
the tongues. Moses in earlier days had been able to converse with the
Ethiopian daughters of Jethro. Gideon and his servant went down to the
camp of the Midianites, who were Cushites, he overboard their
conversation and understood it. The Queen of Sheba, who was Ethiopian,
was able to converse with Solomon. The Ethiopian treasurer of Queen
Candace was reading a Hebrew

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

version of the Scriptures, when Peter was told by the Spirit to preach
to him Christ crucified.

Students of philology know that there was great dissimilarity between
the Hebrew of later times and the Arabic; for the language of the
Israelites underwent a change during the captivity in Babylon. After the
exile, the Hebrews spoke Aramaic. The order of Hebrew letters and Arabic
are different. The Arabic of the earliest form have that of the
Himyaritic alphabet, and are strikingly like this Ethiopian language in
form. Thus we see how easy it is for superficial scholarship to have
made the mistake of blending under the same name Arabian, two distinct
races, to have failed to recognize the blending of two languages, to
have failed to perceive the earlier ancient Cushite civilization. Even
the Hebrews were introduced to the art of building cities and to a
settled life by the Cushites and Canaanites. The Semitic race was always
nomadic, never becoming settled traders, unless mixed with Hamitic
blood. In the dispersion of the Hebrew family they scattered to Arabia,
Africa, and to the east. Arabia is densely populated with a free black
population. They have so intermixed with Semitic Arabians that a fair
skin is the exception. In Arabia because of the old high Ethiopic
culture no prejudice whatever exists against black and Arab alliances.
There is no social or political bar between African and Arab. A Negro
may become the highest official or ruler if his talents allow.

We must decide from these evidences, that out of the bare life of the
Semitic Arabians could not

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

have sprung the abundant roots and rich variety of the perfected Arabic
tongue; but these additions were but budded growth from the rich ancient
Cushite Arabian life. It seemed a language most perfect as "a vehicle
for impassioned and sublime appeals, for artless simplicity and
philosophic [subtleties](errata.htm#72). The genius of the Arab
constantly flowered in poetry of highly artistic form, delicate
descriptive poems and novels in verse." This was the Arabian heritage of
splendor from the magnificence of Cushite Arabian days which the
prodigality of the later caliphs sought to imitate. The tales of genii,
fairies, and enchantments passed into the poetry of the west. We might
think this addition to western barbarism of little worth but the images
and fancies of powerful [imagination](errata.htm#73) have given the
world the fuel for the fires of art. The warlike Arabian, as the earlier
cruel Assyrian, [imbibing](errata.htm#74) an older culture, by conquest
scattered widely for later ages the precious cultural seeds of the
ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians.

The *Arabian Nights Entertainments* filled Europe in 1717 with wonder
and delight. Few books have been translated and read among so many
nationalities as these tales, which were the gateway into fairyland of
our childhood. They were a collection of tales from the widespread
colonies of the Cushite race. The richest of the tales came from India,
the cradle of story and fable. Many were from Bagdad the royal city of
the eastern caliphs. They are fanciful pictures of the
[decadence](errata.htm#75) from a higher and more perfect civilization.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The *Arabian Nights* will always be one of the
most wonderful books of the world and is an addition to the world's
imperishable literature. The Arabian writers were remarkable for their
sublimity of conception, power to stir the heart, and the intensity of
love and hate shown in their creations. This literature carried westward
by the Saracens had a powerful influence in [molding](errata.htm#76) the
forms of poetry and letters of Europe. Arabian ideals and philosophy
rule all the ecclesiastical life of Persia, Turkey and all of the
eastern lands that have come under Mohammedan sway.

The Arabians brought to Europe not only poetry but astronomy and
mathematical science. They gave Europe the nine digits, the Arabian
figures to ten, and algebra. The oldest mathematical book, 1700 B. C.,
contains some problems similar to algebra. The book was written by the
Ethiopian Aahmes. We find a little of the study among the Greeks, but
the Arabians brought it up to the importance of a science. In the tenth
century they left the Greek masters behind and reached the limits of
spherical trigonometry and solved quadratic and even cubic equations.
What the later Phoenicians were in [navigating](errata.htm#77) the
Mediterranean, the Sabaeans had been in the Indian Ocean. They created
the knowledge of geography in the Middle Ages, which they had gained
from the commercial activities that had nourished the ancient cities of
Babylon, Tyre and Sidon. Lucian thought that the Arabian Cushites were.
the first who invented astronomy, being led to the science by their
cloudless skies and favorable climate

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

and by their surprising intellectual sagacity, [subtlety](errata.htm#78)
and force.

With the knowledge gained from the earlier civilization, the Saracens
made their own scientific additions. In the earlier days no Greek
poetry, orations or history were ever translated into Arabic. Arabian
[imagination](errata.htm#79) and reason did not need such assistance.
For a period the studies of the Mohammedans were confined to the
interpretation of the Koran and the eloquence and poetry of their native
tongue, but the, later caliphs collected the knowledge of other seats of
ancient culture. With comparatively rough musical instruments, they
carefully elaborated a musical scale. Their book of songs contains a
hundred airs, each esteemed a masterpiece by competent judges. As a
people continually facing death in battle, the medical art became highly
esteemed. They were the first to make medicine a true science. They
invented the probang, a valuable surgical instrument. To them must be
credited the lancet and the couching needle. Arabians were the first to
develop chemistry and they first prepared prescriptions for the mixing
of drugs. From them have come down to us most of the medical recipes of
today. For whatever resources chemistry availed itself up to a recent
date, we are [indebted](errata.htm#80) to Arabic research. The real
scientific development of medicine must be credited to their genius.

In the great cities of Bagdad, Cairo and Cordova, centuries before
Europe could boast of anything beyond cathedral or monastic schools,
great

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Arabian universities were drawing together vast
throngs of eager young Arabians; and creating an atmosphere of learning
and refinement. Students from all parts of Europe in the Middle Ages,
studied mathematics and medicine in the Arabian schools. The famous
university of Cairo has at the present day an attendance of several
thousand, a survival of the great days of Arabian Islam. Their libraries
and schools were visited by many Christians, especially in Spain, who
helped to introduce their learning into western Europe. In geography,
history, philosophy, medicine physics and mathematics, the Arabians
rendered important service to science. They are considered the founders
of modern experimental science. They devised the duo-decimal system of
notation and gave Europe this [indispensable](errata.htm#81) instrument
of calculation. The Arabian architect developed a new striking style of
edifice, which has been preserved at Cordova and Granada in Spain. This
style has given modern builders some of their finest models. The temples
of India, perhaps unsurpassed in beauty anywhere in the world, are the
result of Arabian genius unfolding in Mohammedan art.

The rival schools of the Arabian empire, investigated in the eighth,
ninth, and tenth centuries, every nicety of grammar. The grammatical
treatise of the celebrated Ebn Malek is even now a standard work in the
hands of our professors. The practice in the earlier days of suspending
in gold letters the poems of the highest merit that won the premium, in
the temple of Mecca, had

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

brought to the highest point the passion for perfect results in
literature. To Hereeree must be credited the absolute mastership of
language, combined with exquisite taste in the use of the subtlest
refinements of both rhetoric and grammar. His Makamat of the eleventh
century, though it has many imitators has never yet had a rival. Great
libraries existed at Bagdad, Alexandria and Cairo. In every city the
productions of Arabic literature were copied and collected. The royal
library of the Fatimite caliphs contained over one hundred thousand
manuscripts, [elegantly](errata.htm#82) transcribed and splendidly
bound. The Omayyads of Spain had formed a library of six hundred
thousand volumes. Everywhere the Arabians of the tenth century
conquered, they became the preservers and [distributors](errata.htm#83)
of knowledge.

Romances and stories of a biographical character were very popular among
the Arabians. Antar the Lion, 525 A. D. was the story of the life of one
of the most renowned poets of those crowned at the contests at Okad,
which in the earlier days were more greatly attended than those of
Thebes. Antar was a black poet who had killed a man who had failed in
respect to a woman. He had a purely African face, his mother being a
black slave. He married a princess of one of the noblest and purest
tribes. By deeds of heroism he became protector of his people and the
pattern of chivalry. His fame spread across the Arabian peninsula and
throughout the Mohammedan world. Like the Homeric legends his deeds were
recorded in poetic form. The romance

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

of Antar was a source of wonder and admiration for hundreds of years to
millions of Arabians. He was the father of knighthood, champion of the
weak and oppressed, protector of women, impassioned love poet. It was
from the tales of Antar that Europe received her inspirations for
romantic chivalry, so common in the twelfth century in Italy and France.
How Cushite ideals have colored all the life of the ages.

This national classic, Antar the Lion, the Arabian Iliad, is of great
length in the original, being often thirty or forty manuscript volumes.
Portions of it have been translated into English, German and French. The
original book [purports](errata.htm#84) to have been the delight of all
Arabians. Every wild Bedouin of the desert knew much of the tale by
heart and listened to its periods and poems with quivering interest.
Compare this with our poetical apathy today. Every coffee house in
Aleppo, Bagdad, or Constantinople had a narrator who nightly recited it
to [rapt](errata.htm#85) audiences. The united sentiment of the east has
been that the romance of Antar, is a book that has reached the highest
summit of literature. One Arabian author has said that the Arabian
Nights, is for the amusement of women and children, but that Antar is a
book for men. From it they learn eloquence, magnanimity, generosity,
statecraft and bravery. Mohammed a foe to the ancient gatherings that
fostered poetry, instructed his disciples to relate the traditions of
Antar to their children. There is nothing surprising in this recognition

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

and adoration of Antar when we understand that his race was the basic
blood of Arabia.

The Saracens also carried westward knowledge of irrigation, rotation of
crops, fertilizers and the art of grafting and producing new
[varieties](errata.htm#86) of plants and fruits. This knowledge came
directly from the Cushites of the southern and western coasts, who were
peculiarly agricultural. From these came cotton, flax, hemp, buckwheat,
rice, sugar cane and coffee. Others of our vegetables trace to the same
source including asparagus, artichokes, beans and such fruits as melons,
oranges, lemons, apricots and plums. To prove that these plants
originated among Cushites, wild specimens which only grow where the
plant originated, can be found across the Soudan. The Arabs excelled in
manufactures. The industrious Arabs led the way by their inventions and
skill to most of the complicated manufactures of our time. In metallurgy
their art in tempering and enamelling became justly famous. No sword
blades ever ranked higher than those of Damascus. It was also famous for
its brocades, tapestries and the damask of our day which still preserves
the name of the city. No coppersmiths excelled those of Bagdad.

Cordova was famous for leather, Toledo for armor, and Granada for rich
silks. Specimens of their skill in porcelain yet remain in Spain and
Syria. The smiths of Oman were unexcelled in gold and silver
workmanship. Arabian craftsmen taught the Venetians how to make crystal
and plate glass. The work of these potters and weavers was the
admiration and' despair of the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

craftsmen of Europe. The words morocco, [gauze](errata.htm#87) from
Gaza, and cordovan, still in use in our times attest their cleverness in
preparing and dyeing leather. They seem to have introduced the pointed
arch into Europe, swelling domes, vaulted roofs, arched porches and
minarets were characteristic of Arabic architecture. The pendulum and
[semaphoric](errata.htm#88) telegraph, if not invented, were introduced
by them into Europe, as was the manufacture of silk and cotton, and an
invention of the highest importance--the mariners compass. They knew the
lost secrets of dyeing. As early as 706 A. D. writing paper was made at
Mecca, whence it spread through the Arabian dominions to the western
world. They claim the invention of gun-powder as far back as the
eleventh century.

To sum up, the literature, art and science of the Arabs formed a
connecting link between the civilizations of ancient and modern times.
"To them," says Britannica, "we owe the revival of learning and
philosophy in western Europe and the first awakenings of the critical
and inquiring spirit, that rescued western Europe from the
[lethargy](errata.htm#89) of monkish ignorance and from ecclesiastical
bigotry. To them is due the credit for most of the useful arts and
practical inventions laboriously perfected by later nations. Widespread
was the empire of the Arabs' sword but wider and more durable was the
empire of the Arabs' mind." (*Britannica*, V. 2, Arabia, p. 232.) Today
among the Bedouins there are no schools. Utterly ignorant of writing and
unacquainted with books they trust to memory or imagination.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Their assertions as to the past cannot be
trusted Yet many a modern history of Arabia is built upon no more solid
foundation. It is doubtful it Mohammed could read or write. Their
genealogies cannot be depended upon, by the real seeker after truth.

Let us glance at Arabians living today in fixed habitations, as their
ancestors have done in Arabia from time immemorial. There is rivalry and
enmity between these Cushite settlers of today and the Semitic division
that under various forms has never ceased down to our times. Even in the
desert the children of these settled Arabians are taught to read and
write and calculate. In the towns education is general. The possession
of written records, the habits of order and reflection, enable the
settled Arabs to retain: a more accurate knowledge and nicer distinction
of pedigree and race. It was their idols that Mohammed cast down in the
Kaaba at Mecca, which had belonged to the kings of Yemen. To the Arabian
of the old unsettled nomadic life we must give the credit of Saracen
conquest. These tribes went forth at first unarmed comparatively,
spurred on by religious zeal. They bore westward and eastward over the
[oft](errata.htm#90) recrossed highways of the old Cushite empire the
latest impulses of that race that in earlier ages had originated
civilization for the world. On the crest of the conquering arms rode the
princes of Yeman not one whit less in valor but carrying the genius that
fully developed in the lifting of a headlong campaign to the status of a
culturing conquest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Strange Races of Chaldea](we14)
