[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we14)  [Next](we16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

# CHAPTER XXII.

### BABYLONIA THE LAND OF MARVELS.

Across the Mesopotamian plain flows two great rivers the rise in the
Armenian mountains. These two great streams flowing from different
angles, finally unite and enter the Persian Gulf. Here we find a rich
alluvial delta like that of the Nile. North of this flat area rises the
Chaldean plain, on the Tigris side being called Assyria. It was in the
rich lowlands near the confluence of the rivers that the civilization of
Western Asia first developed. The Mesopotamian plain is about 250 miles
in length. The numerous mounds show how thickly this region was once
populated. Babylon like Egypt was a country of scarcity of rain and
depended upon the floods from the snowcapped mountains of Armenia for
moisture. The flat low country was subject to overflow and the
Babylonians had to dyke their country. Like Egypt these landmarks swept
away and the knowledge of geometry developed in replacing the ancient
dividing lines. Engineering developed from the building of the large and
small canals that covered the country like a network, furnishing means
of communication and irrigation.

The dams of the country were very ancient and the canals that covered
the plains of Shinar must have required incredible skill and labor. They

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

excavated natural lakes more deeply and turned into them the surplus
waters of the Euphrates. The earth from the canals diked the rivers. The
lakes were faced with stone. These stupendous dikes and canals protected
the country from overflow and watered it in seasons of drought. In later
days Nitrocris, princess of Egypt, assumed the direction of the great
works at Babylon. Herodotus credits her with diverting the channels of
the Euphrates to make a stone bridge connecting the two divisions of the
city. If in no other way, we would recognize these people as Hamitic by
their gigantic engineering achievements. Such works marked all their
ancient sites. In India, in Arabia and in old Ethiopia, are to be found
the ruins of similar indefatigable labors. We find lakes faced with
heavy [mortared](errata.htm#111) stone, immense tanks as big as lakes,
that stored water for irrigation. Under Turkish rule, the last
[vestiges](errata.htm#112) of these ancient works have gone to ruin.

5000 B. C. Mesopotamia was filled with little city republics like those
of Greece and Italy. So great was the fertility of the soil that
according to Herodotus, grain commonly returned two hundred fold and
occasionally three hundred fold. Pliny said that wheat was cut twice
from one sowing and afterwards was good keep for sheep. Quintius Curtius
declared that the country between the Tigris and the Euphrates was so
rich that the cattle were driven from these pastures lest they be
destroyed by satiety. Berosus spoke of wheat, barley, sesame, ochrys,
palms and many kinds of shelled fruits that grew wild, for here

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

some of them originated. The soil needed only moderate labor to produce
all that man required. It was natural that here should grow up one of
the first populations of the ancient world. Everywhere we see the
ancient remains of cities long gone to decay. In our day we have
uncovered memorials that prove that the city of Niffer was the center of
religious life for more than four thousand years. A period more than
twice as long as Rome was the religious center of Catholic Christendom.

Delitzsch in describing Syria says, "As far as the eye can reach mounds
may be seen of varying heights. They increase in size and number as we
approach Susa. They are the remains of those ancient nations, the
Hittites, the Assyrians, the Babylonians and the Elamites. Their
palaces, temples, walls and gates, terraces and towers, lie buried
beneath them." This had been a wide battle field of the armies of Egypt
and western Asia, also it was the territory across which the trading
caravans of these nations found their way to India or the Mediterranean.
In the earliest ages the inhabitants of these regions were Ethiopians.
Even in historical times the nations of Persia, Assyria, Mesopotamia,
and Syria were largely permeated with this Cushite blood. This race was
entirely responsible for the architectural wonders, of these plains. The
temples of Elam, Belbec and Babylon were reared by the same race that
built the mighty structures of India and Egypt. At this age the Turanian
race had produced no engineers and builders. The inscriptions of

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Persepolis are of a race and age preceeding the
nomadic Persians. The people of the sculptures of Nineveh are of a
different lineage from the later Semitic conquerors of Nineveh. The
sculptures of the Hittites and Philistines reveal the Ethiopian
physiognomy.

The temples and palaces of Babylon were built upon enormous platforms
high above the water soaked land. These structures were many acres in
extent. They were cemented with bitumen in place of mortar made from
lime. This cement has withstood the elements for ages and is superior to
anything of the sort in modern masonry. The use of buttresses, drains,
and of external ornamentation shows that architectural knowledge was
already advanced. The temple with its huge masses of brick work, rising
stage upon stage, each brilliantly painted and surmounted by a chamber,
which was at once a shrine and an observatory; while the palace stood
upon a heap of rubble, with open courts and imposing entrances; but
never more than two or three stories high. These structures were made of
sun-dried bricks. The outside was of burnt brick. These edifices have
sunk down into great heaps mistaken for many centuries as hills. In the
middle of the nineteenth century many were excavated. Magnificent
statutes, ruins of great buildings and extensive writings, were
revealed. These Sumerian libraries written upon clay tablets were
composed of mythologies, religious knowledge, legal forms, astronomical,
mathematical and geographical works, revealing all developed
civilization.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

The material used in the body of the Babylonian structures was burnt
brick of the finest and most durable quality. The mortar was so lasting
that after the lapse of ages, the bricks can only be separated by heavy
blows. In early structures of Babylonia we can trace the origin of the
Doric and Ionic pillars of Greece. Here Gibbon tells us the columns
branched out into fantastic forms. These columns were rather an ornament
than a support. Like the walls overlaid with plaster and painted with
bright colors or overlaid with plates of shining metal. The rain was
carried off by elaborately constructed drains, some of which afford us
the earliest examples of the arch, and which occasionally consisted of
leaden pipes. In Assyria sculpture was adopted instead of painting
because they had not attained to the brilliancy of the colors used in
Babylon. The Greeks probably derived this art of painting sculpture from
the cultivated populations of the Euphrates. The walls of their cities
were of enormous thickness. Herodotus said that the walls of Babylon
were fifty-six miles in circumference, which would include an area of
two hundred square miles.

The conservative estimate of Ctesias would make Babylon cover five times
the area of London. These authorities said the walls were over three
hundred feet high With a width of eighty-five feet. These writers were
eye witnesses. Astonishing as is their reports we know that the walls of
Nineveh were one hundred and fifty feet high at the time of Xenophon.
Quintius Curtius said that four horse chariots could pass each other

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

on them without danger. The city was entered on each side by twenty-five
gates of brass and strengthened by two hundred and fifty towers. Two of
the gates were so massive that they were opened and shut with a machine.
From all the gates proceeded streets, each 15 miles in length. A river
ran through the city from north to south. On each side was a quay as
broad as the walls of the city. In these quays they had constructed
brass gates and steps leading down to the river. A bridge of great
beauty and [ingenious](errata.htm#113) contrivances was thrown across
the river. On the western side of the city they had excavated an
immense, lake forty miles square. Herodotus said it was thirty-five feet
deep. Into this lake the river was turned until the bridge was
completed. At the end of the bridge on each side was built a palace and
these had subterranean connections. Babylon in those days might have
been considered an enclosed district rather than a compact city. In time
of [siege](errata.htm#114) food could be produced from within for the
population. Perhaps the most remarkable structure in Babylon was the
great temple of Belus. Its height was four hundred and eighty feet,
being a few feet less than the Great Pyramid of Egypt. Its summit
overtopped the city. From this height the whole scene of the beautiful
city lay spread below as a picture. The shrine on the summit of the
temple had contained originally, Ridpath tells us, three colossal
statutes of Bel, of Beltis and of Isthar. Here were two great censers
and three golden bowls. In front of Beltis were two lions of gold

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

and three silver serpents. These were accompanied by two huge bowls of
silver. These splendid treasures were carried away at the time of the
Persian conquest. When Herodotus visited the temple they were gone. In
their place was a golden table and couch. A second and less pretentious
shrine at the base of the temple was also despoiled by the Persians.
Here had stood a colossal human figure wrought of solid gold, which was
twelve cubits high.

Not as high but greater in ground dimensions was the royal palace. It
was a quadrangular building with threefold ramparts of masonry. The
outermost being nearly seven miles in extent. The inner wall measured
more than two miles around. The basement of the palace was of almost
incredible size. There were three bronze gates so heavy, as to require
machinery to open and close them. Within the enclosure were constructed
the famous hanging gardens of Babylon one of the seven wonders of the
ancient world. Nebuchadnezzar had constructed them for his Median wife
Amyitis, who pined for the mountains of her native land. Babylon was
flat. A rectangle was selected four hundred feet on one side. Around
this space was built a series of open arches, and upon these serving as
piers, other arches were erected. This vast structure was built to the
height of seventy-five feet. Terraces rose until they over-topped the
walls of me city. Earth was heaped to such depth that large trees could
grow. Seeds were sown, flowers and shrubs were then set out and the
largest trees

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

transplanted from distant provinces and set up in all their beauty. A
huge hydraulic machine was built on the banks of the Euphrates and by
this means water was raised in pipes to the summit and distributed about
the garden. From a distance the hanging gardens gave the appearance of
woods overhanging mountains. From the highest terrace of his gardens the
king had a perfect view of his magnificently constructed city.

The remains of the palace and gardens formed the vast mound called by
the natives Kasr. Continued digging takes place in its
[inexhaustible](errata.htm#115) quarries for brick of the finest and
strongest quality. An endless succession of curious relics have been
taken from this mound. Babylon in her treasury of antiquities became the
rich prey of all the nations that were her conquerors. From the fallen
towers and ruins of Babylon have been built all the cities of the
vicinity, besides others which have gone to dust. Since the days of
Alexander the Great, four capitals have been built out of the remains.
The palaces of the Babylonians were splendidly decorated with the
statutes of men and animals, with vessels of gold and silver and
furnished with luxuries of all kinds. In the Assyrian temples everything
was secular but the Chaldeans lavished their treasures upon the gods,
showing the depth of their religious nature. The riches that this city
possessed and her merchandise easily made her the emporium of the east
and the true mistress of the ancient world. The Bible called Babylon the
golden city, the glory of kingdoms and the beauty of the Chaldeans.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

"Through her magnificent streets swept the chariots of princes and
monarchs. Out of her gates of splendor, poured the bronzed cohorts of
well nigh invincible soldiers going forth to conquer. Into these same
gates were driven the captives of a hundred vanquished provinces. In the
might of her power she saw her rivals one by one expire and in her
triumph she arrogated to herself the rank and title of mistress of the
world. In the slow process of destiny her own time came to suffer
humiliation and downfall. No other city reared by the genius and pride
of man has suffered a more complete extinction. Babylon is literally in
the dust. Only scattered mounds which the rolling years have covered
with grass and shrubs, remain of the once mighty metropolis of the
Babylonians. Birs Nimrud is the ruin of the great temple of Nebo, that
the blasts of twenty-five centuries have not sufficed to level. The
great temple was the symbolization of Babylonian mythology. The seven
platforms were dedicated to the seven planets. To each a color was
assigned. The base was black. The second platform dedicated to Jupiter
was painted orange, the third for Mars was red, the fourth a golden
square was for the sun, the fifth yellow, for Venus, the sixth a blue
platform for Mercury, and the last assigned to the moon was silver."
(*Ridpath's History of the World*.)

These colors were laid on in various ways, some being burnt into the
surface of the bricks, some painted and the fourth and seventh squares
faced with thin layers of gold and silver and probably

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

the shrine itself. This temple like that of the Medes in Ecbatana seen
in successive bands of brilliant color, viewed from a distance, as the
sun flashed its splendors upon the brilliant hues of the great pyramids
or when the full orbed moon in milder [radiance](errata.htm#116)
diffused tier light around the gigantic pile, the awe-struck worshiper
may have well imagined that Nebo himself was [enshrined](errata.htm#117)
on the summit. (*Ridpath's History of the World*, Vol. 1, pp. 263, 264.)
In these temples the Babylonians offered at stated seasons human
sacrifice. In the lowest strata of the excavated temples were found
vessels of copper and bronze. Some of clay were lacquered in red and
black in designs seemingly of Greek origin. This peculiar ware was
[coeval](errata.htm#118) with the products of Minoan culture which
preceeded the historic Greek culture, in Hellas and was of itself
Ethiopian.

To sum up, Rawlinson supposed these Chaldeans to have resembled the
other Ethiopians. He concludes that the Cushites that occupied the
country south of Egypt sent their colonies along the shores of Arabia,
whence they crept into the Persian Gulf occupying Chaldea, Susiana and
the Indus. Baldwin continuing his argument says, "The Bible points
toward Africa for the central seat of the Ethiopians. It derives Nimrod
from Cush not Cush from Nimrod. The., monuments and traditions of
Chaldea present some curious indications of East African origin. Much
stress has been placed upon the theory that the Chaldeans were a mixed
people but Berosus spoke of -no influx of a foreign people. He
identifies the

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Chaldeans of the time of Nebuchadnezzar also
with the primitive people of the country. The joint testimony of Berosus
and the Scriptures should be sufficient. Babylonian tablets tell of an
original race of black men called Admi, the Adites of the Cushite
Arabian traditions. Scientists often make the statement that the
original inhabitants of the earth were dark. The blond types that we see
today may have developed by emigration to northern latitudes and the
change was thus made from dark types to the fair-hued races of today. We
will deal with the details of this argument later.

The earliest civilization of Babylonia was coeval with the earlier
civilization of the Upper Nile. Ross says that Babylonian script goes
back to 6000 B. C. Rawlinson mentions a Cushite inscription of 3200 B.
C. Bochart points out [Genesis](errata.htm#119) X, 7, as showing that
Havelah son of Cush peopled the region where the Tigris and Euphrates
unite. We know that the Hebrews while in captivity in Babylon secured
the authentic [genealogies](errata.htm#120) of the first children of
men. We would believe that the Babylonians could not have given them
incorrect information as to their own origin. Diodorus Siculus said that
the Chaldeans were a body of learned men resembling the priests of Egypt
(both of the same race). Their whole time was spent in philosophic
meditation. The learning of the Chaldeans was a family tradition. The
Scriptures speak of them as the "Wise Men of the East." The son was
taught by the father. Almanacs were to be found all over Babylon

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

which was noted for its schools, libraries and temples, "The Cushite
Ethiopians were the absolutely governing class in politics. They
commanded the armies and held the offices of state. From them came the
royal families of Babylon." (Diodorus Siculus, Bk. II, Ch. 21.)

These Chaldeans were the same as the priestly race that ruled Egypt for
many ages as priests and kings. As Chayas or Casdim they were the
superior ruling caste of all Ethiopian colonies. Diodorus continues to
speak of their great reputation in astronomy. They foretold the future
and thought themselves able to ward off evil and procure benefits by
their sacrifices and enchantments. They considered matter as eternal and
that the arrangement and order of the world were the result of divine
intelligence. Being of superior caste they inherited the stations of
priests, governors and kings. Their positions of trust and dignity gave
to the Babylonian kingdom the name of Chasyas or Chaldeans. Bryant in
his *Ancient Mythology* (Vol. III, p. 226) quotes from Dionysus "The
Chaldeans were the most ancient inhabitants of the country called by
their name. They seemed to be the most early constituted and settled of
any people on the earth. They seem to have been the only people who did
not migrate at the general dispersion. They extended to Egypt westward
and eastward to the Ganges. These were the Accadians of Chaldea, who
looked to the southwest of the Caspian for the cradle of their race."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Civilization of Babylonia](we16)
