[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

# FINAL WORD.

The story of India, Persia, Arabia, Chaldea, Egypt and Ethiopia has been
astonishing, but more amazing and fascinating is the recital describing
the life and deeds of the Cushite nations of western Europe. The
beautiful, world renowned mythology of the Greeks throws upon the screen
of literature the mystic figures of the Cushites who played a mighty
drama in western Europe and the circle of magic cities around the
Mediterranean in ages long preceeding the life of the Grecian period of
history.

The prints of Cushite footsteps are found all over the three regions, as
proved by the facts of accepted sciences today. We learn that the
strange surge of races backward and forward across the plains of western
Europe at the dawn of recorded history was but the reaction of earlier
age old conflicts between Cush and Turan, the most western of the sons
of Japheth.

The story solves the baffling problem of who were the Celts and the
origin of the so-called Aryan race of modern times. Reliable authorities
confess that Aryans do not know their own origin. Careful mining into
the authentic testimony of the ancients and a study of the relies and
remains of western Europe proves that the greatest names of the Ad
traditions, the heroic figures of the Greek mythology and the subjects
of classic culture

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

were the sons of Cush, the founder of the ancient Cushite empire of
Ethiopians. Hercules Bacchus, Apollo, Hermes and other heroes were his
descendants.

The world just now is witnessing a revival of interest in the myths of
ancient: races. Reason has always told man that myth was but confused
pictures of literal truth. The scholarship of entire ages has wrestled
with the enigma of the meaning of the beautiful legends of the Weeks.
The most beautiful and intensely interesting of these now have
scientific proofs that they but pictured the figures and told the heroic
deeds of ancient Cushites and their cousins, the descendants of the
African brothers of Cush, the Zeus of the Greeks, the Jupiter of Rome
and the Amen-Ra of Egypt.

So fascinating and vital has the world considered these classic stories
that they are still the commanding literature of Aryan college life
everywhere; for strange as it may seem the most powerful branches of the
so-called Aryan race, as can be indisputably proven, are as well as the
African Ethiopians, descendants of Cushite Ethiopian blood. Another
[volume](errata.htm#196) of this work (Book II) gives more authentic
information upon this subject than any other book extant, in it has been
interwoven the undeniable proofs of the Cushite origin of western
Europe, linked with the intense drama that was the foundation of the
Greek legends.
