[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Legends &
Sagas](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](hbs00) [Next](hbs02.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

## PREFACE

 The purpose of the present volume is to give specimens of the best
portions of a ballad literature that is among the most remarkable in
Europe. For the translation of the ballads from the Servian, and for the
introduction and notes, I am responsible; Mr. Bacon has transformed my
prose texts into English verse. Each of us, however, has of course made
suggestions as to the work of the other.

 Most of the material in the introduction I have taken from Karájich
(see below, pp. 10, 11), and from the concise *Sketch of Servian
Literature* (in Servian) of Professor Pópovich (Belgrade, 1909). For
various minor details in the book as a whole I am indebted to several
previous translators from the Servian and writers on Servia and its
literature; to be exact, to Bowring, *Servian Popular Poetry* (London,
1827); Elodie Lawton Mijatovich, *Kossovo* (London, 1881); D’Avril, *La
Bataille de Kossovo* (Paris, 1868); Vogl, *Marko Kraljevits* (Vienna,
1851); Chedo Mijatovich, *Servia and the Servians* (Boston, Page, 1908);
Lazarovich-Hrebelianovich, *The Servian People* (New York, Scribner,
1910); W. Miller, *The Balkans* (New York, Putnam, 1896); Ranke, <span
id="page_ii">p. ii</span> *Serbien und die Türkei im neunzehnten
Jahrhundert* (Leipzig, 1879; also translated by Kerr, London, 1847). To
Messrs. Charles Scribner’s Sons and G. P. Putnam’s Sons I am indebted
for their courteous permission to reprint passages of some length from
the copyright works published by them.

 Next to Karájich and Pópovich, however, I owe most to Mr. Milivoy S.
Stanoyevich, a graduate of the University of Belgrade, who has aided me
in various ways, notably in the selection of the later ballads, in the
translation of difficult passages, and in the accentuation of the
Servian names. Without his kindly help this volume would be much more
imperfect than it is at present.

G. R. N<span class="small">OYES</span>. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](hbs02.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
