[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc14)  [Next](sfoc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ILLUSTRATION OF THE TABU.

On a second visit to the reservation the writer once had a practical
illustration of the gaktû'<sup>n</sup>ata or tabu, which may be of
interest as showing how little sanitary ideas have to do with these
precautions. Having received several urgent invitations from Tsiskwa
(Bird), an old shaman of considerable repute, who was anxious to talk,
but confined to his bed by sickness, it was determined to visit him at
his house, several miles distant. On arriving we found another doctor
named Sû'<sup>n</sup>kï (The Mink) in charge of the patient and were
told that he had just that morning begun a four days'
gaktû<sup>n</sup>ta, which, among other provisions, excluded all
visitors. It was of no use to argue that we had come by the express
request of Tsiskwa. The laws of the gaktû<sup>n</sup>ta were as
immutable as those of the Medes and Persians, and neither doctor nor
patient could hope for favorable results from the treatment unless the
regulations were enforced to the letter. But although we might not enter
the house; there was no reason why we should not talk to the old man, so
seats were placed for us outside the door, while Tsiskwa lay stretched
out on

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

the bed just inside and The Mink perched himself on the fence a few
yards distant to keep an eye on the proceedings. As there was a
possibility that a white man might unconsciously affect the operation of
the Indian medicine, the writer deemed it advisable to keep out of sight
altogether, and accordingly took up a position just around the corner of
the house, but within easy hearing distance, while the interpreter sat
facing the doorway within a few feet of the sick man inside. Then began
an animated conversation, Tsiskwa inquiring, through the interpreter, as
to the purpose of the Government in gathering such information, wanting
to know how we had succeeded with other shamans and asking various
questions in regard to other tribes and their customs. The replies were
given in the same manner, an attempt being also made to draw him out as
to the extent of his own knowledge. Thus we talked until the old man
grew weary, but throughout the whole of this singular interview neither
party saw the other, nor was the gaktû<sup>n</sup>ta violated by
entering the house. From this example it must be sufficiently evident
that the tabu as to visitors is not a hygienic precaution for securing
greater quiet to the patient, or to prevent the spread of contagion, but
that it is simply a religious observance of the tribe, exactly parallel
to many of the regulations among the ancient Jews, as laid down in the
book of Leviticus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Neglect of Sanitary Regulations](sfoc16)
