[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc12)  [Next](sfoc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SELECTED LIST OF PLANTS USED.

1\. UNASTE'TSTYÛ = "very small root "--Aristolochia
serpentaria--Virginia or black snakeroot: Decoction of root blown upon
patient for fever and feverish head ache, and drunk for coughs; root
chewed and spit upon wound to cure snake bites; bruised root placed in
hollow tooth for toothache, and held against nose made sore by constant
blowing in colds. Dispensatory: "A stimulant tonic, acting also as a
diaphoretic or diuretic, according to the mode of its application; \* \*
\* also been highly recommended in intermittent fevers, and though
itself generally inadequate to the cure often proves serviceable as an
adjunct to Peruvian bark or sulphate of quinia." Also used for typhous
diseases, in dyspepsia, as a gargle for sore throat, as a mild stimulant
in typhoid fevers, and to promote eruptions. The genus derives its
scientific name from its supposed efficacy in promoting menstrual
discharge, and some species have acquired the "reputation of antidotes
for the bites of serpents."

2\. UNISTIL'Û<sup>n</sup>ISTÎ \[2\]= "they stick on"--Cynoglossum
Morrisoni--Beggar lice: Decoction of root or top drunk for kidney
troubles; bruised root used with bear oil as an ointment for cancer;
forgetful persons drink a decoction of this plant, and probably also of
other similar bur plants, from an idea that the sticking qualities of
the burs will thus be imparted to the memory. From a similar connection
of ideas the root is also used in the preparation of love charms.
Dispensatory: Not named. C. officinale "has been used as a demulcent and
sedative in coughs, catarrh, spitting of blood, dysentery, and diarrhea,
and has been also applied externally in bums, ulcers, scrofulous tumors
and goiter."

\[1. Wood, T. B., and Bache, F.: Dispensatory of the United States of
America, 14th ed., Philadelphia, 1877.

2\. The Cherokee plant names here given are generic names, which are the
names commonly used. In many cases the same name is applied to several
species and it is only when it is necessary to distinguish between them
that the Indians use what might be called specific names. Even then the
descriptive term used serves to distinguish only the particular plants
under discussion and the introduction of another variety bearing the
same generic name would necessitate a new classification of species on a
different basis, while hardly any two individuals would classify the
species by the same characteristics.\]

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

3\. Û<sup>n</sup>NAGÉI = "olack"--Cassia Marilandica--Wild senna: Root
bruised and moistened with water for poulticing sores; decoction drunk
for fever and for a disease also called û<sup>n</sup>nage'i, or "black"
(same name as plant), in which the hands and eye sockets are said to
turn black; also for a disease described as similar to
û<sup>n</sup>nage'i, but more dangerous, in which the eye sockets become
black, while black spots appear on the arms, legs, and over the ribs on
one side of the body, accompanied by partial paralysis, and resulting in
death should the black spots appear also on the other side.
Dispensatory: Described as "an efficient and safe cathartic, most
conveniently given in the form of infusion."

4\. KÂSD'ÚTA = "simulating ashes," so called on account of the
appearance of the leaves--Gnaphalium decurrens--Life everlasting:
Decoction drunk for colds; also used in the sweat bath for various
diseases and considered one of their most valuable medical plants.
Dispensatory: Not named. Decoctions of two other species of this genus
are mentioned as used by country people for chest and bowel diseases,
and for hemorrhages, bruises, ulcers, etc., although "probably
possessing little medicinal virtue."

5\. ALTSA'STI = "a wreath for the head"--Vicia Caroliniana--Vetch:
Decoction drunk for dyspepsia and pains in the back, and rubbed on
stomach for cramp; also rubbed on ball-players after scratching, to
render their muscles tough, and used in the same way after scratching in
the disease referred to under û<sup>n</sup>nage'i, in which one side
becomes black in spots, with partial paralysis; also used in same manner
in decoction with Kâsduta for rheumatism; considered one of their most
valuable medicinal herbs. Dispensatory: Not named.

6\. DISTAI'YÏ = "they (the roots) are tough"--Tephrosia
Virginiana--Catgut, Turkey Pea, Goat's Rue, or Devil's Shoestrings:
Decoction drunk for lassitude. Women wash their hair in decoction of its
roots to prevent its breaking or falling out, because these roots are
very tough and hard to break; from the same idea ball-players rub the
decoction on their limbs after scratching, to toughen them.
Dispensatory: Described as a cathartic with roots tonic and aperient.

7\. U'GA-ATASGI'SKÏ = "the pus oozes out"--Euphorbia
hypericifolia--Milkweed: Juice rubbed on for skin eruptions, especially
on children's heads; also used as a purgative; decoction drunk for
gonorrhœa and similar diseases in both sexes, and held in high
estimation for this purpose; juice used as an ointment for sores and for
sore nipples, and in connection with other herbs for cancer.
Dispensatory: The juice of all of the genus has the property of
"powerfully irritating the skin when applied to it," while nearly all
are powerful emetics, and cathartics. This species "has been highly
commended as a remedy in dysentery after due depletion, diarrhea,
menorrhagia, and leucorrhea."

8\. GÛ'NÏGWALÏ'SKÏ = "It becomes discolored when bruised"--Scutellaria
lateriflora--Skullcap. "The name refers to the red juice which comes out
of the stalk when bruised or chewed. A decoction of the four varieties
of Gûnigwalï'skï--lateriflora, S. pilosa, Hypericum corymbosum, and
Stylosanthes elatior--is drunk to promote menstruation, and the same
decoction is also drunk and used as a wash to counteract the ill effects
of eating food prepared by a woman in the menstrual condition, or when
such a woman by chance comes into a sick room or a house under the tabu;
also drunk for diarrhea and used with other herbs in decoction for
breast pains. Dispensatory: This plant "produces no very obvious
effects," but some doctors regard it as possessed of nervine,
antispasmodic and tonic properties. None of the other three species are
named.

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

9\. KÂ'GA SKÛ'<sup>n</sup>TAGÏ = "crow shin"--Adiantum
pedatum--Maidenhair Fern: Used either in decoction or poultice for
rheumatism and chills, generally in connection with some other fern. The
doctors explain that the fronds of the different varieties of fern are
curled up in the young plant, but unroll and straighten out as it grows,
and consequently a decoction of ferns causes the contracted muscles of
the rheumatic patient to unbend and straighten out in like manner. It is
also used in decoction for fever. Dispensatory: The leaves "have been
supposed to be useful in chronic catarrh and other pectoral affections."

10\. ANDA'NKALAGI'SKI = "it removes things from the gums"--Geranium
maculatum--Wild Alum, Cranesbill: Used in decoction with Yânû Unihye stï
(Vitis cordifolia) to wash the mouths of children in thrush; also used
alone for the same purpose by blowing the chewed fiber into the mouth.
Dispensatory: "One of our best indigenous astringents. \* \* \*
Diarrhea, chronic dysentery, cholora infantum in the latter stages, and
the various hemorrhages are the forms of disease in which it is most
commonly used." Also valuable as "an application to indolent ulcers, an
injection in gleet and leucorrhea, a gargle in relaxation of the uvula
and aphthous ulcerations of the throat." The other plant sometimes used
with it is not mentioned.

11\. Û'<sup>n</sup>LË, UKÏ'LTÏ = "the locust frequents it"--Gillenia
trifoliata--Indian Physic. Two doctors state that it is good as a tea
for bowel complaints, with fever and yellow vomit; but another says that
it is poisonous and that no decoction is ever drunk, but that the beaten
root is a good poultice for swellings. Dispensatory: "Gillenia is a mild
and efficient emetic, and like most substances belonging to the same
class occasionally acts upon the bowels. In very small doses it has been
thought to be tonic."

12\. SKWA'LÏ = Hepatica acutiloba--Liverwort, Heartleaf: Used for coughs
either in tea or by chewing root. Those who dream of snakes drink a
decoction of this herb and I'natû Ga'n\`ka = "snake
tongue"--(Camptosorus rhizophyllus or Walking Fern) to produce vomiting,
after which the dreams do not return. The traders buy large quantities
of liverwort from the Cherokees, who may thus have learned to esteem it
more highly than they otherwise would. The appearance of the other
plant, Camptosorus rhizophyllus, has evidently determined its Cherokee
name and the use to which it is applied. Dispensatory: "Liverwort is a
very mild demulcent tonic and astringent, supposed by some to possess
diuretic and deobstruent virtues. It was formerly used in Europe in
various complaints, especially chronic hepatic affections, but has
fallen into entire neglect. In this country, some years since, it
acquired considerable reputation, which, however, it has not maintained
as a remedy in hæmoptysis and chronic coughs." The other plant is not
named.

13\. DA'YEWÛ = "it sews itself up," because the leaves are said to grow
together again when torn--Cacalia atriplicifolia--Tassel Flower: Held in
great repute as a poultice for cuts, bruises, and cancer, to draw out
the blood or poisonous matter. The bruised leaf is bound over the spot
and frequently removed. The dry powdered leaf was formerly used to
sprinkle over food like salt. Dispensatory--Not named.

14\. Â'TALÏ KÛLÏ' = "it climbs the mountain."--Aralia
quinquefolia--Ginseng or "Sang:" Decoction of root drunk for headache,
cramps, etc., and for female troubles; chewed root blown on spot for
pains in the side. The Cherokees sell large quantities of sang to the
traders for 50 cents per pound, nearly equivalent there to two days'
wages, a fact which has doubtless increased their idea of its
importance. Dispensatory: "The extraordinary medical virtues formerly
ascribed to ginseng had no other existence than in the imagination of
the Chinese. It is little more than a demulcent, and in this

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

country is not employed as a medicine." The Chinese name, ginseng, is
said to refer to the fancied resemblance of the root to a human figure,
while in the Cherokee formulas it is addressed as the "great man" or
"little man," and this resemblance no doubt has much to do with the
estimation in which it is held by both peoples.

15\. Û'TSATÏ UWADSÏSKA = "fish scales," from shape of leaves--Thalictrum
anemonoides--Meadow Rue: Decoction of root drunk for diarrhea with
vomiting. Dispensatory: Not named.

16\. K'KWË ULASU'LA = "partridge moccasin"--Cypripedium
parviflorum--Ladyslipper: Decoction of root used for worms in children.
In the liquid are placed some stalks of the common chickweed or purslane
(Cerastium vulgatum) which, from the appearance of its red fleshy
stalks, is supposed to have some connection with worms. Dispensatory:
Described as "a gentle nervous stimulant" useful in diseases in which
the nerves are especially affected. The other herb is not named.

17\. A'HAWÏ' AKÄ'TÄ'--"deer eye," from the appearance of the
flower-Rudbeckia fulgida--Cone Flower: Decoction of root drunk for flux
and for some private diseases; also used as a wash for snakebites and
swellings caused by (mythic) tsgâya or worms; also dropped into weak or
inflamed eyes. This last is probably from the supposed connection
between the eye and the flower resembling the eye. Dispensatory: Not
named.

18\. UTÏSTUGÏ'--Polygonatum multiflorum latifolium--Solomon's Seal: Root
heated and bruised and applied as a poultice to remove an ulcerating
swelling called tu'stï', resembling a boil or carbuncle. Dispensatory:
This species acts like P. uniflorum, which is said to be emetic, In
former times it was used externally in bruises, especially those about
the eyes, in tumors, wounds, and cutaneous eruptions and was highly
esteemed as a cosmetic. At present it is not employed, though
recommended by Hermann as a good remedy in gout and rheumatism." This
species in decoction has been found to produce nausea, a cathartic
effect and either diaphoresis or diuresis, "and is useful as an internal
remedy in piles, and externally in the form of decoction, in the
affection of the skin resulting from the poisonous exhalations of
certain plants."

19\. ÄMÄDITA\`TÏ--"water dipper," because water can be sucked up through
its hollow stalk--Eupatorium purpureum--Queen of the Meadow, Gravel
Root: Root used in decoction with a somewhat similar plant called
Ämäditá\`tï ü'tanu, or "large water dipper" (not identified) for
difficult urination. Dispensatory: "Said to operate as a diuretic. Its
vulgar name of gravel root indicates the popular estimation of its
virtues." The genus is described as tonic, diaphoretic, and in large
doses emetic and aperient.

20\. YÂNA UTSËSTA = "the bear lies on it"--Aspidium
acrostichoides--Shield Fern: Root decoction drunk to produce vomiting,
and also used to rub on the skin, after scratching, for rheumatism--in
both cases some other plant is added to the decoction; the warm
decoction is also held in the mouth to relieve toothache. Dispensatory:
Not named.

The results obtained from a careful study of this list maybe summarized
as follows: Of the twenty plants described as used by the Cherokees,
seven (Nos. 2, 4, 5, 13, 15, 17, and 20) are not noticed in the
Dispensatory even in the list of plants sometimes used although regarded
as not officinal. It is possible that one or two of these seven plants
have medical properties, but this can hardly be true of a larger number
unless we are disposed to believe that the Indians

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

are better informed in this regard than the best educated white
physicians in the country. Two of these seven plants, however (Nos. 2
and 4), belong to genera which seem to have some of the properties
ascribed by the Indians to the species. Five others of the list (Nos. 8,
9, 11, 14, and 16) are used for entirely wrong purposes, taking the
Dispensatory as authority, and three of these are evidently used on
account of some fancied connection between the plant and the disease,
according to the doctrine of signatures. Three of the remainder (Nos. 1,
3, and 6) may be classed as uncertain in their properties, that is,
while the plants themselves seem to possess some medical value, the
Indian mode of application is so far at variance with recognized
methods, or their own statements are so vague and conflicting, that it
is doubtful whether any good can result from the use of the herbs. Thus
the Unaste'tstiyû, or Virginia Snakeroot, is stated by the Dispensatory
to have several uses, and among other things is said to have been highly
recommended in intermittent fevers, although alone it is "generally
inadequate to the cure." Though not expressly stated, the natural
inference is that it must be applied internally, but the Cherokee
doctor, while he also uses it for fever, takes the decoction in his
mouth and blows it over the head and shoulders of the patient. Another
of these, the Distai'yï, or Turkey Pea, is described in the Dispensatory
as having roots tonic and aperient. The Cherokees drink a decoction of
the roots for a feeling of weakness and languor, from which it might be
supposed that they understood the tonic properties of the plant had not
the same decoction been used by the women as a hair wash, and by the
ball players to bathe their limbs, under the impression that the
toughness of the roots would thus be communicated to the hair or
muscles. From this fact and from the name of the plant, which means at
once hard, tough, or strong, it is quite probable that its roots are
believed to give strength to the patient solely because they themselves
are so strong and not because they have been proved to be really
efficacious. The remaining five plants have generally pronounced
medicinal qualities, and are used by the Cherokees for the very purposes
for which, according to the Dispensatory, they are best adapted; so that
we must admit that so much of their practice is correct, however false
the reasoning by which they have arrived at this result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Medical Practice](sfoc14)
