[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc52)  [Next](sfoc54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DIDA'LATLI'\`TÏ.

Sgë! Nâ'gwa tsûdantâ'gï tegû'<sup>n</sup>yatawâ'ilateli'ga. Iyustï (O O)
tsilastû'\`lï Iyu'stï (O O) ditsadâ'ita. Tsûwatsi'la elawi'nï
tsidâ'hïstani'ga. Tsûdantâgï elawi'nï tsidâ'hïstani'ga.
Nû'<sup>n</sup>ya gû'<sup>n</sup>nage
gû<sup>n</sup>yu'tlû<sup>n</sup>tani'ga. Ä\`nûwa'gï gû'<sup>n</sup>nage'
gû<sup>n</sup>yû'tlû<sup>n</sup>tani'ga. Sû<sup>n</sup>'talu'ga
gû'<sup>n</sup>nage degû'<sup>n</sup>yanu'galû'<sup>n</sup>tani'ga,
tsû'nanugâ'istï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Usûhi'yï nûn<sup>n</sup>nâ'hï
wite'tsatanû'<sup>n</sup>û<sup>n</sup>sï gûne'sâ gû'<sup>n</sup>nage
asahalagï'. Tsûtû'neli'ga. Elawâ'tï asa'halagï'a'dû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga.
Usïnuli'yu Usûhi'yï gûltsâ'të digû'<sup>n</sup>nagesta'yï, elawâ'tï
gû'<sup>n</sup>nage tidâ'hïstï wa\`yanu'galû<sup>n</sup>tsi'ga. Gûne'sa
gû'<sup>n</sup>age sû<sup>n</sup>talu'ga gû'<sup>n</sup>nage
gayu'tlû<sup>n</sup>tani'ga. Tsûdantâ'gï ûska'lû<sup>n</sup>tsi'ga.
Sa\`ka'nï adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga. Usû'hita atanis'se'tï, ayâ'lâtsi'sestï
tsûdantâ'gï, tsû'nanugâ'istï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Sgë!

#### Translation.

### TO DESTROY LIFE.

Listen! Now I have come to step over your soul. You are of the (wolf)
clan. Your name is (A\`yû'<sup>n</sup>inï). Your spittle I have put at
rest under the earth. Your soul I have put at rest under the earth. I
have come to cover you over with the black rock. I have come to cover
you over, with the black cloth. I have come to cover you with the black
slabs, never to reappear. Toward the black coffin of the upland in the
Darkening Land your paths shall stretch out. So shall it be for you. The
clay of the upland has come (to cover you). (?) Instantly the black clay
has lodged there where it is at rest at the black houses in the
Darkening Land. With the black coffin and with the black slabs I have
come to cover you. Now your soul has faded away. It has become blue.
When darkness comes your spirit shall grow less and dwindle away, never
to reappear. Listen!

#### Explanation.

This formula is from the manuscript book of A\`yû'<sup>n</sup>inï, who
explained the whole ceremony. The language needs but little explanation.
A blank is left for the name and clan of the victim, and is filled in by
the shaman. As the purpose of the ceremony is to bring about the death
of the victim, everything spoken of is symbolically colored black,
according to the significance of the colors as already

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

explained. The declaration near the end, "It has become blue," indicates
that the victim now begins to feel in himself the effects of the
incantation, and that as darkness comes on his spirit will shrink and
gradually become less until it dwindles away to nothingness.

When the shaman wishes to destroy the life of another, either for his
own purposes or for hire, he conceals himself near the trail along which
the victim is likely to pass. When the doomed man appears the shaman
waits until he has gone by and then follows him secretly until he
chances to spit upon the ground. On coming up to the spot the shaman
collects upon the end of a stick a little of the dust thus moistened
with the victim's spittle. The possession of the man's spittle gives him
power over the life of the man himself. Many ailments are said by the
doctors to be due to the fact that some enemy has by this means "changed
the spittle" of the patient and caused it to breed animals or sprout
corn in the sick man's body. In the love charms also the lover always
figuratively "takes the spittle" of the girl in order to fix her
affections upon himself. The same idea in regard to spittle is found in
European folk medicine.

The shaman then puts the clay thus moistened into a tube consisting of a
joint of the Kanesâ'la or wild parsnip, a poisonous plant of
considerable importance in life-conjuring ceremonies. He also puts into
the tube seven earthworms beaten into a paste, and several splinters
from a tree which has been struck by lightning. The idea in regard to
the worms is not quite clear, but it may be that they are expected to
devour the soul of the victim as earthworms are supposed to feed upon
dead bodies, or perhaps it is thought that from their burrowing habits
they may serve to hollow out a grave for the soul under the earth, the
quarter to which the shaman consigns it. In other similar ceremonies the
dirt-dauber wasp or the stinging ant is buried in the same manner in
order that it may kill the soul, as these are said to kill other more
powerful insects by their poisonous sting or bite. The wood of a tree
struck by lightning is also a potent spell for both good and evil and is
used in many formulas of various kinds.

Having prepared the tube, the shaman goes into the forest to a tree
which has been struck by lightning. At its base he digs a hole, in the
bottom of which he puts a large yellow stone slab. He then puts in the
tube, together with seven yellow pebbles, fills in the earth and finally
builds a fire over the spot to destroy all traces of his work. The
yellow stones are probably chosen as the next best substitute for black
stones, which are not always easy to find. The formula mentions "black
rock," black being the emblem of death, while yellow typifies trouble.
The shaman and his employer fast until after the ceremony.

If the ceremony has been properly carried out, the victim becomes blue,
that is, he feels the effects in himself at once, and, unless

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

he employs the countercharms of some more powerful shaman, his soul
begins to shrivel up and dwindle, and within seven days he is dead. When
it is found that the spell has no effect upon the intended victim it is
believed that he has discovered the plot and has taken measures for his
own protection, or that, having suspected a design against him--as, for
instance, after having won a girl's affections from a rival or
overcoming him in the ball play--he has already secured himself from all
attempts by counterspells. It then becomes a serious matter, as, should
he succeed in turning the curse aside from himself, it will return upon
the heads of his enemies.

The shaman and his employer then retire to a lonely spot in the
mountains, in the vicinity of a small stream, and begin a new series of
conjurations with the beads. After constructing a temporary shelter of
bark laid over poles, the two go down to the water, the shaman taking
with him two pieces of cloth, a yard or two yards in length, one white,
the other black, together with seven red and seven black beads. The
cloth is the shaman's pay for his services, and is furnished by his
employer, who sometimes also supplies the beads. There are many formulas
for conjuring with the beads, which are used on almost all important
occasions, and differences also in the details of the ceremony, but the
general practice is the same in all cases. The shaman selects a bend in
the river where his client can look toward the east while facing up
stream. The man then takes up his position on the bank or wades into the
stream a short distance, where--in the ceremonial language--the water is
a "hand length" (*awâ'hilû*) in depth and stands silently with his eyes
fixed upon the water and his back to the shaman on the bank. The shaman
then lays upon the ground the two pieces of cloth, folded into
convenient size, and places the red beads--typical of success and his
client--upon the white cloth, while the black beads--emblematic of death
and the intended victim--are laid upon the black cloth. It is probable
that the first cloth should properly be red instead of white, but as it
is difficult to get red cloth, except in the shape of handkerchiefs, a
substitution has been made, the two colors having a close mythologic
relation. In former days a piece of buckskin and the small glossy seeds
of the Viper's Bugloss (*Echium vulgare*) were used instead of the cloth
and beads. The formulistic name for the bead is *sû'nïkta*, which the
priests are unable to analyze, the ordinary word for beads or coin being
*adélâ*.

The shaman now takes a red bead, representing his client, between the
thumb and index finger of his right hand, and a black bead, representing
the victim, in like manner, in his left hand. Standing a few feet behind
his client he turns toward the east, fixes his eyes upon the bead
between the thumb and finger of his right hand, and addresses it as the
Sû'nïkta Gigäge'ï, the Red Bead, invoking blessings upon his client and
clothing him with the red garments of

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

success. The formula is repeated in a low chant or intonation, the voice
rising at intervals, after the manner of a revival speaker. Then turning
to the black bead in his left hand he addresses it in similar manner,
calling down the most withering curses upon the head of the victim.
Finally looking up he addresses the stream, under the name of
Yû'<sup>n</sup>wï Gûnahi'ta, the "Long Person," imploring it to protect
his client and raise him to the seventh heaven, where he will be secure
from all his enemies. The other, then stooping down, dips up water in
his hand seven times and pours it upon his head, rubbing it upon his
shoulders and breast at the same time. In some cases he dips completely
under seven times, being stripped, of course, even when the water is of
almost icy coldness. The shaman, then stooping down, makes a small hole
in the ground with his finger, drops into it the fatal black bead, and
buries it out of sight with a stamp of his foot. This ends the ceremony,
which is called "taking to water."

While addressing the beads the shaman attentively observes them as they
are held between the thumb and finger of his outstretched hands. In a
short time they begin to move, slowly and but a short distance at first,
then faster and farther, often coming down as far as the first joint of
the finger or even below, with an irregular serpentine motion from side
to side, returning in the same manner. Should the red bead be more
lively in its movements and come down lower on the finger than the black
bead, he confidently predicts for the client the speedy accomplishment
of his desire. On the other hand, should the black bead surpass the red
in activity, the spells of the shaman employed by the intended victim
are too strong, and the whole ceremony must be gone over again with an
additional and larger quantity of cloth. This must be kept up until the
movements of the red beads give token of success or until they show by
their sluggish motions or their failure to move down along the finger
that the opposing shaman can not be overcome. In the latter case the
discouraged plotter gives up all hope, considering himself as cursed by
every imprecation which he has unsuccessfully invoked upon his enemy,
goes home and--theoretically--lies down and dies. As a matter of fact,
however, the shaman is always ready with other formulas by means of
which he can ward off such fatal results, in consideration of a
sufficient quantity of cloth.

Should the first trial, which takes place at daybreak, prove
unsuccessful, the shaman and his client fast until just before sunset.
They then eat and remain awake until midnight, when the ceremony is
repeated, and if still unsuccessful it may be repeated four times before
daybreak (or the following noon?), both men remaining awake and fasting
throughout the night. If still unsuccessful, they continue to fast all
day until just before sundown. Then they eat again and again remain
awake until midnight, when the previous night's

programme is repeated. It has now become a trial of endurance between
the revengeful client and his shaman on the one side and the intended
victim and his shaman on the other, the latter being supposed to be
industriously working countercharms all the while, as each party must
subsist upon one meal per day and abstain entirely from sleep until the
result has been decided one way or the other. Failure to endure this
severe strain, even so much as closing the eyes in sleep for a few
moments or partaking of the least nourishment excepting just before
sunset, neutralizes all the previous work and places the unfortunate
offender at the mercy of his more watchful enemy. If the shaman be still
unsuccessful on the fourth day, he acknowledges himself defeated and
gives up the contest. Should his spells prove the stronger, his victim
will die within seven days, or, as the Cherokees say, seven nights.
These "seven nights," however, are frequently interpreted, figuratively,
to mean seven years, a rendering which often serves to relieve the
shaman from a very embarrassing position.

With regard to the oracle of the whole proceeding, the beads do move;
but the explanation is simple, although the Indians account for it by
saying that the beads become alive by the recitation of the sacred
formula. The shaman is laboring under strong, though suppressed,
emotion. He stands with his hands stretched out in a constrained
position, every muscle tense, his breast heaving and voice trembling
from the effort, and the natural result is that before he is done
praying his fingers begin to twitch involuntarily and thus cause the
beads to move. As before stated, their motion is irregular; but the
peculiar delicacy of touch acquired by long practice probably imparts
more directness to their movements than would at first seem possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This Concerns the Ball Play--To Take Them to Water With
it](sfoc54)
