[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc15)  [Next](sfoc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## NEGLECT OF SANITARY REGULATIONS.

No rules are ever formulated as to fresh air or exercise, for the
sufficient reason that the door of the Cherokee log cabin is always
open, excepting at night and on the coldest days in winter, while the
Indian is seldom in the house during his waking hours unless when
necessity compels him. As most of their cabins are still built in the
old Indian style, without windows, the open door furnishes the only
means by which light is admitted to the interior, although when closed
the fire on the hearth helps to make amends for the deficiency. On the
other hand, no precautions are taken to guard against cold, dampness, or
sudden drafts. During the greater part of the year whole families sleep
outside upon the ground, rolled up in an old blanket. The Cherokee is
careless of exposure and utterly indifferent to the simplest rules of
hygiene. He will walk all day in a pouring rain clad only in a thin
shirt and a pair of pants. He goes barefoot and frequently bareheaded
nearly the entire year, and even on a frosty morning in late November,
when the streams are of almost icy coldness, men and women will
deliberately ford the river where the water is waist deep in preference
to going a few hundred yards to a foot-log. At their dances in the open
air men, women, and children, with bare feet and thinly clad, dance upon
the damp ground from darkness until daylight, sometimes enveloped in a
thick mountain fog which makes even the neighboring treetops invisible,

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

while the mothers have their infants laid away under the bushes with
only a shawl between them and the cold ground. In their ball plays also
each young man, before going into the game, is subjected to an ordeal of
dancing, bleeding, and cold plunge baths, without food or sleep, which
must unquestionably waste his physical energy.

In the old days when the Cherokee was the lord of the whole country from
the Savannah to the Ohio, well fed and warmly clad and leading an active
life in the open air, he was able to maintain a condition of robust
health notwithstanding the incorrectness of his medical ideas and his
general disregard of sanitary regulations. But with the advent of the
white man and the destruction of the game all this was changed. The East
Cherokee of to-day is a dejected being; poorly fed, and worse clothed,
rarely tasting meat, cut off from the old free life, and with no
incentive to a better, and constantly bowed down by a sense of helpless
degradation in the presence of his conqueror. Considering all the
circumstances, it may seem a matter of surprise that any of them are
still in existence. As a matter of fact, the best information that could
be obtained in the absence of any official statistics indicated a slow
but steady decrease during the last five years. Only the constitutional
vigor, inherited from their warrior ancestors, has enabled them to
sustain the shock of the changed conditions of the last half century.
The uniform good health of the children in the training school shows
that the case is not hopeless, however, and that under favorable
conditions, with a proper food supply and a regular mode of living, the
Cherokee can hold his own with the white man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sweat Bath-Bleeding--Rubbing--Bathing](sfoc17)
