[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc28)  [Next](sfoc30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HIÄ-NÛ' NASGWÛ' DIDÛ<sup>n</sup>LË'SKÏ ADÂNÛ'<sup>n</sup>WÂTÏ.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="7" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Asga'ya yûkanû'<sup>n</sup>wï<br />
<em>Agë`ya Giagage'ï</em> atätï';<br />
agë'`ya-nû yûkanû'<sup>n</sup>wï<br />
<em>Asga'ya Gigage'ï</em> atätï'.</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Yû! Higë'`ya Gigage'ï tsûdante'lûhï gese'ï. Ulsge'ta hi'tsanu'y`tani'leï'. Ha-Nû<sup>n</sup>dâgû'<sup>n</sup>yï nû<sup>n</sup>ta'tsûdälenû'hï gese'ï. Gasgilâ' gigage'ï tsusdi'ga tetsadï'ilë' detsala'siditë-gë'ï. Hanâ'gwa usïnuli'yu detsaldisi'yûï.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Utsï(nä')wa nu'tatanû'<sup>n</sup>ta. Usû'hita nutanû'na. Utsïnä'wa-gwû
nigû<sup>n</sup>tisge'stï.

(Degâ'sisisgû'<sup>n</sup>ï)--Hiä-gwû' nigaû' kanâhe'ta. Nû'\`kiha
nagû'n-kw?tisgâ' dagû'<sup>n</sup>stiskû'ï. Sâ'gwa
nû<sup>n</sup>skwiû'ta gûnstû'<sup>n</sup>ï agûnstagi's-kâï
hû<sup>n</sup>tsatasgâ'ï nû'\`kine-\`nû û<sup>n</sup>skwû'ta nû'\`kï
nû<sup>n</sup>tsâtasgâ'ï. Hiâ\`nû' nû<sup>n</sup>wâtï:
Egû'<sup>n</sup>lï, Yâ'na-\`nû Utsësdâ'gï, (U)wa'sgilï tsïgï'
Egû'<sup>n</sup>lï, tä'lï tsinu'dalë'ha, Kâ'ga-\`nû
Asgû'<sup>n</sup>tagë tsiû<sup>n</sup>nâ'sehâ'ï, Da'yï-\`nû Uwâ'yï
tsiû<sup>n</sup>nâ'sehâ'ï. Su'talï iyutale'gï unaste'tsa agâ'tï,
uga'nawû-\`nû' dagûnsta'\`tisgâ'ï nû'<sup>n</sup>wâtî
asû<sup>n</sup>ga\`la'ï. Usû'hï adanû'<sup>n</sup>wâtï. nu'\`kï
tsusû'hita dulsi'nisû'<sup>n</sup> adanû'<sup>n</sup>wâtï.
Ä\`nawa'gi-\`nû dilasula'gï gesû'<sup>n</sup>ï ûlë' tsïkani'kaga'ï
gûw\`sdi'-gwû utsawa'ta ä\`nawa'-gwû-nû'.

Hiä-nû' gaktû'<sup>n</sup>ta gûlkwâ'gï tsusû'hita.
Gû'<sup>n</sup>wädana'datlahistï' nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na--Salâ'lï,
gi\`li-\`nû, wë'sa-'nû, ä'tatsû-nû', a'mä-'nû', ani-gë'\`ya-nû. Uda\`lï'
ya'kanû<sup>n</sup>wi'ya nû'\`kiha tsusû'hita unädanä'lâtsi-tustï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Gasgilâ'gi-\`nû uwä'su<sup>n</sup>-gwû'
u'skïladi'stï uwä'sû nû'\`kï tsusû'hitä'. Disâ'i-\`nû dega'sgilâ
û'<sup>n</sup>tsa nû\`nä' uwa'\`tï yigesûï nû'\`kï tsusû'hita.

#### Translation.

### AND THIS ALSO IS FOR TREATING THE CRIPPLER.

Yû! O Red Woman, you have caused it. You have put the intruder under
him. Ha! now you have come from the Sun Land. You have brought the small
red seats, with your feet resting upon them. Ha! now they have swiftly
moved away from you. Relief is accomplished. Let it not be for one night
alone. Let the relief come at once.

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

(Prescription)--(*corner note at top.*) If treating a man one must say
*Red Woman*, and if treating a woman one must say *Red Man*.

This is just all of the prayer. Repeat it four times while laying on the
hands. After saying it over once, with the hands on (the body of the
patient), take off the hands and blow once, and at the fourth repetition
blow four times. And this is the medicine. Egû'<sup>n</sup>lï (a species
of fern). Yâ'-na-Utsë'sta ("bear's bed," the Aspidium acrostichoides or
Christmas fern), *two* varieties of the soft-(leaved) Egû'<sup>n</sup>lï
(one, the small variety, is the Cinnamon fern, Osmunda cinnamonea), and
what is called Kâ'ga Asgû'<sup>n</sup>tagë ("crow's shin," the Adiantum
pedatum or Maidenhair fern) and what is called Da'yï-Uwâ'yï ("beaver's
paw"--not identified). Boil the roots of the six varieties together and
apply the hands warm with the medicine upon them. Doctor in the evening.
Doctor four consecutive nights. (The pay) is cloth and moccasins; or, if
one does not have them, just a little dressed deerskin and some cloth.

And this is the tabu for seven nights. One must not touch a squirrel, a
dog, a cat, the mountain trout, or women. If one is treating a married
man they (sic) must not touch his wife for four nights. And he must sit
on a seat by himself for four nights, and must not sit on the other
seats for four nights.

#### Explanation.

The treatment and medicine in this formula are nearly the same as in
that just given, which is also for rheumatism, both being written by
Gahuni. The prayer differs in several respects from any other obtained,
but as the doctor has been dead for years it is impossible to give a
full explanation of all the points. This is probably the only formula in
the collection in which the spirit invoked is the "Red Woman," but, as
explained in the corner note at the top, this is only the form used
instead of "Red Man," when the patient is a man. The Red Man, who is
considered perhaps the most powerful god in the Cherokee pantheon, is in
some way connected with the thunder, and is invoked in a large number of
formulas. The change in the formula, according to the sex of the
patient, brings to mind a belief in Irish folk medicine, that in
applying certain remedies the doctor and patient must be of opposite
sexes. The Red Man lives in the east, in accordance with the regular
mythologic color theory, as already explained. The seats also are red,
and the form of the verb indicates that the Red Woman is either standing
upon them (plural) or sitting with her feet resting upon the rounds.
These seats or chairs are frequently mentioned in the formulas, and
always correspond in color with the spirit invoked. It is not clear why
the Red Woman is held responsible for the disease, which is generally
attributed to the revengeful efforts of the game, as already explained.
In agreement with the regular form, the disease is said to be put under
(not into) the patient. The assertion that the chairs "have swiftly
moved away" would seem from analogy to mean that the disease has been
placed upon the seats and thus borne away. The verb implies that the
seats move by their own volition. Immediately

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

afterward it is declared that relief is accomplished. The expression
"usû'hita nutanû'na" occurs frequently in these formulas, and may mean
either "let it not be for one night alone," or "let it not stay a single
night," according to the context.

The directions specify not only the medicine and the treatment, but also
the doctor's fee. From the form of the verb the tabu, except as regards
the seat to be used by the sick person, seems to apply to both doctor
and patient. It is not evident why the mountain trout is prohibited, but
the dog, squirrel, and cat are tabued, as already explained, from the
fact that these animals frequently assume positions resembling the
cramped attitude common to persons afflicted by rheumatism. The cat is
considered especially uncanny, as coming from the whites. Seven, as well
as four, is a sacred number with the tribe, being also the number of
their gentes. It will be noted that time is counted by nights instead of
by days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This is to Treat Them if They are Bitten by a Snake](sfoc30)
