[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc01)  [Next](sfoc03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

# SACRED FORMULAS OF THE CHEROKEES.

## By JAMES MOONEY.

# INTRODUCTION.

The sacred formulas here given are selected from a collection of about
six hundred, obtained on the Cherokee reservation in North Carolina in
1887 and 1888, and covering every subject pertaining to the daily life
and thought of the Indian, including medicine, love, hunting, fishing,
war, self-protection, destruction of enemies, witchcraft, the crops, the
council, the ball play, etc., and, in fact, embodying almost the whole
of the ancient religion of the Cherokees. The original manuscripts, now
in the possession of. the Bureau of Ethnology, were written by the
shamans of the tribe, for their own use, in the Cherokee characters
invented by Sikwâ'ya (Sequoyah) in 1821, and were obtained, with the
explanations, either from the writers themselves or from their surviving
relatives.

Some of these manuscripts are known to be at least thirty years old, and
many are probably older. The medical formulas of all kinds constitute
perhaps one-half of the whole number, while the love charms come next in
number, closely followed by the songs and prayers used in hunting and
fishing. The great number of love charms will doubtless be a surprise to
those who have been educated in the old theory that, the Indian is
insensible to the attractions of woman. The comparatively small number
of war formulas is explained by the fact that the last war in which the
Cherokees, as a tribe, were engaged on their own account, closed with
the Revolutionary period, so that these things were well nigh forgotten
before the invention of the alphabet, a generation later. The Cherokees
who engaged in the Creek war and the late American civil war fought in
the interests of the whites, and their leaders were subordinated to
white officers, hence there was not the same opportunity for the
exercise of shamanistic rites that there would have been had Indians
alone been concerned. The prayers for hunting, fishing, and the ball
play being in more constant demand, have been better preserved,

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

These, formulas had been handed down orally from a remote antiquity
until the early part of the present century, when the invention of the
Cherokee syllabary enabled the priests of the tribe to put them into
writing. The same invention made it possible for their rivals, the
missionaries, to give to the Indians the Bible in their own language, so
that the opposing forces of Christianity and shamanism alike profited by
the genius of Sikwâya. The pressure of the new civilization was too
strong to be withstood, however, and though the prophets of the old
religion still have much influence with the people, they are daily
losing ground and will soon be without honor in their own country.

Such an exposition of the aboriginal religion could be obtained from no
other tribe in North America, for the simple reason that no other tribe
has an alphabet of its own in which to record its sacred lore. It is
true that the Crees and Micmacs of Canada and the Tukuth of Alaska have
so-called alphabets or ideographic systems invented for their use by the
missionaries, while, before the Spanish conquest, the Mayas of Central
America were accustomed to note down their hero legends and priestly
ceremonials in hieroglyphs graven upon the walls of their temples or
painted upon tablets made of the leaves of the maguey. But it seems
never to have occurred to the northern tribes that an alphabet coming
from a missionary source could be used for any other purpose than the
transcription of bibles and catechisms, while the sacred books of the
Mayas, with a few exceptions, have long since met destruction at the
hands of fanaticism, and the modern copies which have come down to the
present day are written out from imperfect memory by Indians who had
been educated under Spanish influences in the language, alphabet and
ideas of the conquerors, and who, as is proved by an examination of the
contents of the books themselves, drew from European sources a great
part of their material. Moreover, the Maya tablets were so far hieratic
as to be understood, only by the priests and those who had received a
special training in this direction, and they seem therefore to have been
entirely unintelligible to the common people.

The Cherokee alphabet, on the contrary, is the invention or adaptation
of one of the tribe, who, although he borrowed most of the Roman
letters, in addition to the forty or more characters of his own
devising, knew nothing of their proper use or value, but reversed them
or altered their forms to suit his purpose, and gave them a name and
value determined by himself. This alphabet was at once adopted by the
tribe for all purposes for which writing can be used, including the
recording of their shamanistic prayers and ritualistic ceremonies. The
formulas here given, as well as those of the entire collection, were
written out by the shamans themselves--men who adhere to the ancient
religion and speak only their native language in order that their sacred
knowledge might be preserved in a systematic

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

manner for their mutual benefit. The language, the conception, and the
execution are all genuinely Indian, and hardly a dozen lines of the
hundreds of formulas show a trace of the influence of the white man or
his religion. The formulas contained in these manuscripts are not
disjointed fragments of a system long since extinct, but are the
revelation of a living faith which still has its priests and devoted
adherents, and it is only necessary to witness a ceremonial ball play,
with its fasting, its going to water, and its mystic bead manipulation,
to understand how strong is the hold which the old faith yet has upon
the minds even of the younger generation. The numerous archaic and
figurative expressions used require the interpretation of the priests,
but, as before stated, the alphabet in which they are written is that in
daily use among the common people.

In all tribes that still retain something of their ancient organization
we find this sacred knowledge committed to the keeping of various secret
societies, each of which has its peculiar ritual with regular initiation
and degrees of advancement. From this analogy we may reasonably conclude
that such was formerly the case with the Cherokees also, but by the
breaking down of old customs consequent upon their long contact with the
whites and the voluntary adoption of a civilized form of government in
1827, all traces of such society organization have long since
disappeared, and at present each priest or shaman is isolated and
independent, sometimes confining himself to a particular specialty, such
as love or medicine, or even the treatment of two or three diseases, in
other cases broadening his field of operations to include the whole
range of mystic knowledge.

It frequently happens, however, that priests form personal friendships
and thus are led to divulge their secrets to each other for their mutual
advantage. Thus when one shaman meets another who he thinks can probably
give him some valuable information, he says to him, "Let us sit down
together." This is understood by the other to mean, "Let us tell each
other our secrets." Should it seem probable that the seeker after
knowledge can give as much as he receives, an agreement is generally
arrived at, the two retire to some convenient spot secure from
observation, and the first party begins by reciting one of his formulas
with the explanations. The other then reciprocates with one of his own,
unless it appears that the bargain is apt to prove a losing one, in
which case the conference comes to an abrupt ending.

It is sometimes possible to obtain a formula by the payment of a coat, a
quantity of cloth, or a sum of money. Like the Celtic Druids of old, the
candidate for the priesthood in former times found it necessary to
cultivate a long memory, as no formula was repeated more than once for
his benefit. It was considered that one who failed to remember after the
first hearing was not worthy to be accounted a shaman. This task,
however, was not so difficult as might appear on

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

first thought, when once the learner understood the theory involved, as
the formulas are all constructed on regular principles, with constant
repetition of the same set of words. The obvious effect of such a
regulation was to increase the respect in which this sacred knowledge
was held by restricting it to the possession of a chosen few.

Although the written formulas can be read without difficulty by any
Cherokee educated in his own language, the shamans take good care that
their sacred writings shall not fall into the hands of the laity or of
their rivals in occult practices, and in performing the ceremonies the
words used are uttered in such a low tone of voice as to be
unintelligible even to the one for whose benefit the formula is
repeated. Such being the case, it is in order to explain how the
formulas collected were obtained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Formulas Were Obtained](sfoc03)
