[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc09)  [Next](sfoc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHARACTER OF THE FORMULAS--THE CHEROKEE RELIGION.

It is impossible to overestimate the ethnologic importance of the
materials thus obtained. They are invaluable as the genuine production
of the Indian mind, setting forth in the clearest light the state of the
aboriginal religion before its contamination by contact with the whites.
To the psychologist and the student of myths they are equally precious.
In regard to their linguistic value we may quote the language of
Brinton, speaking of the sacred books of the Mayas, already referred to:

Another value they have, \* \* \* and it is one which will be properly
appreciated by any student of languages. They are, by common consent of
all competent authorities, the genuine productions of native minds, cast
in the idiomatic forms of the native tongue by those born to its use. No
matter how fluent a foreigner becomes in a language not his own, he can
never use it as does one who has been familiar with it from childhood.
This general maxim is tenfold true when we apply it to a European
learning an American language. The flow of thought, as exhibited in
these two linguistic families, is in such different directions that no
amount of practice can render one equally accurate in both. Hence the
importance of studying a tongue as it is employed by natives; and hence
the very high estimate I place on these "Books of Chilan Balam" as
linguistic material--an estimate much increased by the great rarity of
independent compositions in their own tongues by members of the native
races of this continent.\[1\]

The same author, in speaking of the internal evidences of authenticity
contained in the Popol Vuh, the sacred book of the Kichés, uses the
following words, which apply equally well to these Cherokee formulas:

To one familiar with native American myths, this one bears undeniable
marks of its aboriginal origin. Its frequent puerilities and inanities,
its generally low and coarse range of thought and expression, its
occasional loftiness of both, its strange metaphors and the prominence
of strictly heathen names and potencies, bring it into unmistakable
relationship to the true native myth.\[2\]

These formulas furnish a complete refutation of the assertion so
frequently made by ignorant and prejudiced writers that the Indian had
no religion excepting what they are pleased to call the meaning less
mummeries of the medicine man. This is the very reverse of the truth.
The Indian is essentially religious and contemplative,

\[1. Brinton, D. G.: The books of Chilan Balam 10, Philadelphia, n. d.,
(1882).

2\. Brinton, D. G: Names of the Gods in the Kiche Myths, in Proc. Am.
Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, 1881, vol. 19, p. 613.\]

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

and it might almost be said that every act of his life is regulated and
determined by his religious belief. It matters not that some may call
this superstition. The difference is only relative. The religion of
to-day has developed from the cruder superstitions of yesterday, and
Christianity itself is but an outgrowth and enlargement of the beliefs
and ceremonies which have been preserved by the Indian in their more
ancient form. When we are willing to admit that the Indian has a
religion which he holds sacred, even though it be different from our
own, we can then admire the consistency of the theory, the particularity
of the ceremonial and the beauty of the expression. So far from being a
jumble of crudities, there is a wonderful completeness about the whole
system which is not surpassed even by the ceremonial religions of the
East. It is evident from a study of these formulas that the Cherokee
Indian was a polytheist and that the spirit world was to him only a
shadowy counterpart of this. All his prayers were for temporal and
tangible blessings--for health, for long life, for success in the chase,
in fishing, in war and in love, for good crops, for protection and for
revenge. He had no Great Spirit, no happy hunting ground, no heaven, no
hell, and consequently death had for him no terrors and he awaited the
inevitable end with no anxiety as to the future. He was careful not to
violate the rights of his tribesman or to do injury to his feelings, but
there is nothing to show that he had any idea whatever of what is called
morality in the abstract.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin of Disease and Medicine](sfoc11)
