[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi14)  [Next](twi16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

# REGINA, REGINA PIGMEORUM, VENI

ONE night a middle-aged man, who had lived all his life far from the
noise of cab-wheels, a young girl, a relation of his, who was reported
to be enough of a seer to catch a glimpse of unaccountable lights moving
over the fields among the cattle, and myself, were walking along a far
western sandy shore. We talked of the Forgetful People as the faery
people are sometimes called, and came in the midst of our talk to a
notable haunt of theirs, a shallow cave amidst black rocks, with its
reflection under it in the wet sea sand. I asked the young girl if she
could see anything, for I had quite a number of things to ask the
Forgetful People. She stood still for a few minutes, and I saw that she
was passing into a kind of waking trance, in which the cold sea breeze
no longer troubled her, nor the dull boom of the sea distracted her
attention. I then called

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

aloud the names of the great faeries, and in a moment or two she said
that she could hear music far inside the rocks, and then a sound of
confused talking, and of people stamping their feet as if to applaud
some unseen performer. Up to this my other friend had been walking to
and fro some yards off, but now he passed close to us, and as he did so
said suddenly that we were going to be interrupted, for he heard the
laughter of children somewhere beyond the rocks. We were, however, quite
alone. The spirits of the place had begun to cast their influence over
him also. In a moment he was corroborated by the girl, who said that
bursts of laughter had begun to mingle with the music, the confused
talking, and the noise of feet. She next saw a bright light streaming
out of the cave, which seemed to have grown much deeper, and a quantity
of little people, <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) in various coloured

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

dresses, red predominating, dancing to a tune which she did not
recognize.

I then bade her call out to the queen of the little people to come and
talk with us. There was, however, no answer to her command. I therefore
repeated the words aloud myself, and in a moment a very beautiful tall
woman came out of the cave. I too had by this time fallen into a kind of
trance, in which what we call the unreal had begun to take upon itself a
masterful reality, and was able to see the faint gleam of golden
ornaments, the shadowy blossom of dim hair. I then bade the girl tell
this tall queen to marshal her followers according to their natural
divisions, that we might see them. I found as before that I had to
repeat the command myself. The creatures then came out of the cave, and
drew themselves up, if I remember rightly, in four bands. One of these
bands carried quicken

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

boughs in their hands, and another had necklaces made apparently of
serpents' scales, but their dress I cannot remember, for I was quite
absorbed in that gleaming woman. I asked her to tell the seer whether
these caves were the greatest faery haunts in the neighbourhood. Her
lips moved, but the answer was inaudible. I bade the seer lay her hand
upon the breast of the queen, and after that she heard every word quite
distinctly. No, this was not the greatest faery haunt, for there was a
greater one a little further ahead. I then asked her whether it was true
that she and her people carried away mortals, and if so, whether they
put another soul in the place of the one they had taken? 'We change the
bodies,' was her answer. 'Are any of you ever born into mortal life?'
'Yes.' 'Do I know any who were among your people before birth?' 'You
do.' 'Who are they?' 'It would not be lawful for you to know.' I then
asked whether she and her people were

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

not 'dramatizations of our moods'? 'She does not understand,' said my
friend, 'but says that her people are much like human beings, and do
most of the things human beings do.' I asked her other questions, as to
her nature, and her purpose in the universe, but only seemed to puzzle
her. At last she appeared to lose patience, for she wrote this message
for me upon the sands--the sands of vision, not the grating sands under
our feet--'Be careful, and do not seek to know too much about us.'
Seeing that I had offended her, I thanked her for what she had shown and
told, and let her depart again into her cave. In a little while the
young girl awoke out of her trance, and felt again the cold wind of the
world, and began to shiver.

I tell these things as accurately as I can, and with no theories to blur
the history. Theories are poor things at the best, and the bulk of mine
have perished long ago. I love better than any theory the sound of the
Gate of Ivory, turning upon its hinges,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

and hold that he alone who has passed the rose-strewn threshold can
catch the far glimmer of the Gate of Horn. It were perhaps well for us
all if we would but raise the cry Lilly the astrologer raised in Windsor
Forest, 'Regina, Regina Pigmeorum, Veni,' and remember with him, that
God visiteth His children in dreams. Tall, glimmering queen, come near,
and let me see again the shadowy blossom of thy dim hair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[92:1](twi15.htm#fr_5) The people and faeries in
Ireland are sometimes as big as we are, sometimes bigger, and sometimes,
as I have been told, about three feet high. The <span id="page_93">p.
93</span> Old Mayo woman I so often quote, thinks that it is something
in our eyes that makes them seem big or little.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 'And Fair, Fierce Women'](twi16)
