[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi27)  [Next](twi29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

# THE THREE O'BYRNES AND THE EVIL FAERIES

IN the dim kingdom there is a great abundance of all excellent things.
There is more love there than upon the earth; there is more dancing
there than upon the earth; and there is more treasure there than upon
the earth. In the beginning the earth was perhaps made to fulfil the
desire of man, but now it has got old and fallen into decay. What wonder
if we try and pilfer the treasures of that other kingdom!

A friend was once at a village near Sleive League. One day he was
straying about a rath called 'Cashel Nore.' A man with a haggard face
and unkempt hair, and clothes falling in pieces, came into the rath and
began digging. My friend turned to a peasant who was working near and
asked who the man was. 'That is the third O'Byrne,' was the answer. A
few days after he learned this story: A great quantity of treasure had

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

been buried in the rath in pagan times, and a number of evil faeries set
to guard it; but some day it was to be found and belong to the family of
the O'Byrnes. Before that day three O'Byrnes must find it and die. Two
had already done so. The first had dug and dug until at last he had got
a glimpse of the stone coffin that contained it, but immediately a thing
like a huge hairy dog came down the mountain and tore him to pieces. The
next morning the treasure had again vanished deep into the earth. The
second O'Byrne came and dug and dug until he found the coffer, and
lifted the lid and saw the gold shining within. He saw some horrible
sight the next moment, and went raving mad and soon died. The treasure
again sank out of sight. The third O'Byrne is now digging. He believes
that he will die in some terrible way the moment he finds the treasure,
but that the spell will be broken, and the O'Byrne family made rich for
ever, as they were of old.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

A peasant of the neighbourhood once saw the treasure. He found the
shin-bone of a hare lying on the grass. He took it up; there was a hole
in it; he looked through the hole, and saw the gold heaped up under the
ground. He hurried home to bring a spade, but when he got to the rath
again he could not find the spot where he had seen it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Drumcliff And Rosses](twi29)
