[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi22)  [Next](twi24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

# THE UNTIRING ONES

IT is one of the great troubles of life that we cannot have any unmixed
emotions. There is always something in our enemy that we like, and
something in our sweetheart that we dislike. It is this entanglement of
moods which makes us old, and puckers our brows and deepens the furrows
about our eyes. If we could love and hate with as good heart as the
faeries do, we might grow to be long-lived like them. But until that day
their untiring joys and sorrows must ever be one-half of their
fascination. Love with them never grows weary, nor can the circles of
the stars tire out their dancing feet. The Donegal peasants remember
this when they bend over the spade, or sit full of the heaviness of the
fields beside the griddle at nightfall, and they tell stories about it
that it may not be forgotten. A short while ago, they say, two faeries,
little creatures, one like a young man, one

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

like a young woman, came to a farmer's house, and spent the night
sweeping the hearth and setting all tidy. The next night they came
again, and while the farmer was away, brought all the furniture
up-stairs into one room, and having arranged it round the walls, for the
greater grandeur it seems, they began to dance. They danced on and on,
and days and days went by, and all the country-side came to look at
them, but still their feet never tired. The farmer did not dare to live
at home the while; and after three months he made up his mind to stand
it no more, and went and told them that the priest was coming. The
little creatures when they heard this went back to their own country,
and there their joy shall last as long as the points of the rushes are
brown, the people say, and that is until God shall burn up the world
with a kiss.

But it is not merely faeries who know untiring days, for there have been
men and women who, falling under their enchantment,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

have attained, perhaps by the right of their God-given spirits, an even
more than faery abundance of life and feeling. It seems that when
mortals have gone amid those poor happy leaves of the Imperishable Rose
of Beauty, blown hither and thither by the winds that awakened the
stars, the dim kingdom has acknowledged their birthright, perhaps a
little sadly, and given them of its best. Such a mortal was born long
ago at a village in the south of Ireland. She lay asleep in a cradle,
and her mother sat by rocking her, when a woman of the Sidhe (the
faeries) came in, and said that the child was chosen to be the bride of
the prince of the dim kingdom, but that as it would never do for his
wife to grow old and die while he was still in the first ardour of his
love, she would be gifted with a faery life. The mother was to take the
glowing log out of the fire and bury it in the garden, and her child
would live as long as it remained unconsumed. The

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

mother buried the log, and the child grew up, became a beauty, and
married the prince of the faeries, who came to her at nightfall. After
seven hundred years the prince died, and another prince ruled in his
stead and married the beautiful peasant girl in his turn; and after
another seven hundred years he died also, and another prince and another
husband came in his stead, and so on until she had had seven husbands.
At last one day the priest of the parish called upon her, and told her
that she was a scandal to the whole neighbourhood with her seven
husbands and her long life. She was very sorry, she said, but she was
not to blame, and then she told him about the log, and he went straight
out and dug until he found it, and then they burned it, and she died,
and was buried like a Christian, and everybody was pleased. Such a
mortal too was Clooth-na-bare, <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) who
went all

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

over the world seeking a lake deep enough to drown her faery life, of
which she had grown weary, leaping from hill to lake and lake to hill,
and setting up a cairn of stones wherever her feet lighted, until at
last she found the deepest water in the world in little Lough Ia, on the
top of the Birds' Mountain at Sligo.

The two little creatures may well dance on, and the woman of the log and
Clooth-na-bare sleep in peace, for they have known untrammelled hate and
unmixed love, and have never wearied themselves with 'yes' and 'no,' or
entangled their feet with the sorry net of 'maybe' and 'perhaps.' The
great winds came and took them up into themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[133:1](twi23.htm#fr_8) Doubtless Clooth-na-bare
should be Cailleac Bare, which would mean the old Woman Bare. <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> Bare or Bere or Verah or Dera or Dhera was a
very famous person, perhaps the mother of the Gods herself. A friend of
mine found her, as he thinks frequenting Lough Leath, or the Grey Lake
on a mountain of the Fews. Perhaps Lough Ia is my mishearing, or the
storyteller's mispronunciation of Lough Leath, for there are many Lough
Leaths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Earth, Fire And Water](twi24)
