[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi34)  [Next](twi36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

# THE GOLDEN AGE

A WHILE ago I was in the train, and getting near Sligo. The last time I
had been there something was troubling me, and I had longed for a
message from those beings or bodiless moods, or whatever they be, who
inhabit the world of spirits. The message came, for one night I saw with
blinding distinctness a black animal, half weasel, half dog, moving
along the top of a stone wall, and presently the black animal vanished,
and from the other side came a white weasel-like dog, his pink flesh
shining through his white hair and all in a blaze of light; and I
remembered a pleasant belief about two faery dogs who go about
representing day and night, good and evil, and was comforted by the
excellent omen. But now I longed for a message of another kind, and
chance, if chance there is, brought it, for a man got into the carriage
and began to play on a fiddle made apparently of an old

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

blacking-box, and though I am quite unmusical the sounds filled me with
the strangest emotions. I seemed to hear a voice of lamentation out of
the Golden Age. It told me that we are imperfect, incomplete, and no
more like a beautiful woven web, but like a bundle of cords knotted
together and flung into a comer. It said that the world was once all
perfect and kindly, and that still the kindly and perfect world existed,
but buried like a mass of roses under many spadefuls of earth. The
faeries and the more innocent of the spirits dwelt within it, and
lamented over our fallen world in the lamentation of the wind-tossed
reeds, in the song of the birds, in the moan of the waves, and in the
sweet cry of the fiddle. It said that with us the beautiful are not
clever and the clever are not beautiful, and that the best of our
moments are marred by a little vulgarity, or by a pin-prick out of sad
recollection, and that the fiddle must ever lament about it all. It said
that if

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

only they who live in the Golden Age could die we might be happy, for
the sad voices would be still; but alas! alas! they must sing and we
must weep until the Eternal gates swing open.

We were now getting into the big glass-roofed terminus, and the fiddler
put away his old blacking-box and held out his hat for a copper, and
then opened the door and was gone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Remonstrance with Scotsmen for Having Soured the Disposition of
Their Ghosts and Faeries](twi36)
