[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odd22)  [Next](odd24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XIX.

# MUCHIE-LAL.

<span id="img_40"></span> ![](img/40.jpg)

ONCE upon a time there were a Rajah and Ranee who had no children. Long
had they wished and prayed that the gods would send them a son; but it
was all in vain, their prayers were not granted. One day a number of
fish were brought into the royal kitchen to be cooked for the Rajah's
dinner, and amongst them was one little fish that was not dead; but all
the rest were dead. One of the palace maid-servants, seeing this, took
the little fish and put him in a basin of water. Shortly afterwards the
Ranee saw him, and thinking him very pretty, kept him as a pet; and
because she had no children she lavished all her affection on the fish,
and loved him as a son; and the people called him Muchie-Rajah (the Fish
Prince). In a little while Muchie-Rajah had grown too long to live in
the small basin, so they put him in a larger one; and then (when he grew
too long for that) into a big tub. In time, however, Muchie-Rajah became
too large for even the big tub to hold him; so the Ranee had a tank made
for him in which he lived very happily, and twice a day she fed him with
boiled rice. Now, though the people fancied Muchie-Rajab was only a
fish, this was not the case. He was, in truth, a young Rajah who had
angered the gods, and been by them turned into a fish and thrown into
the river as a punishment.

One morning when the Ranee brought him his daily meal of boiled rice,
Muchie-Rajah called out to her and said, 'Queen Mother, Queen Mother, I
am so lonely here all by myself Can not you get me a wife?' The Ranee
promised to try, and sent messengers to all the people she knew, to ask
if they would allow one of their children to marry her son, the Fish
Prince. But they all answered, 'We cannot give one of our dear little
daughters to be devoured by a great fish, even though he is the
Muchie-Rajah and so high in your Majesty's favour.'

At news of this the Ranee did not know what to do. She was so foolishly
fond of Muchie-Rajah, however, that she resolved to get him a wife at
any cost. Again she sent out messengers; but this time she gave them a
great bag containing a lac of gold mohurs,  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) and said to them, 'Go into every land
until you find a wife for my Muchie-Rajah, and to whoever will give you
a child to be the Muchie-Ranee,  <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) you
shall give this bag of gold mohurs.' The messengers started on their
search, but for some time they were unsuccessful: not even the beggars
were to be tempted to sell their children, fearing the great fish would
devour them. At last one day the messengers came to a village where
there lived a Fakeer, who had lost his first wife and married again. His
first wife had had one little daughter, and his second wife also had a
daughter. As it happened, the Fakeer's second wife hated her little
step-daughter, always gave her the hardest work to do, and the least
food to eat, and tried by every means in her power to get her out of the
way, in order that the child might not rival her own daughter. When she
heard of the errand on which the messengers had come, she sent for them
when the Fakeer was out, and said to them, 'Give me the bag of gold
mohurs and you shall take my little daughter to marry the Muchie-Rajah'
(for, she thought to herself. 'The great fish will certainly eat the
girl, and she will thus trouble us no more '). Then, turning to her
step-daughter, she said, 'Go down to the river and wash your saree, that
you may be fit to go with these people, who will take you to the Ranee's
court.' At these words the poor girl went down to the river very
sorrowful, for she saw no hope of escape, as her father was from home.
As she knelt by the river-side, washing her saree and crying bitterly,
some of her tears fell into the hole of an old Seven-headed Cobra who
lived in the river-bank. This Cobra was a very wise animal, and seeing
the maiden he put his head out of his hole, and said to her, 'Little
girl, why do you cry? '--' O sir,' she answered, 'I am very unhappy, for
my father is from home, and my stepmother has sold me to the Ranee's
people to be the wife of the Muchie-Rajah, that great fish, and I know
he will eat me up.'--' Do not be afraid, my daughter,' said the Cobra,
'but take with you these three stones and tie them up in the corner of
your saree.' And so saying he gave her three little round pebbles. 'The
Muchie-Rajah, whose wife you are to be, is not really a fish, but a
Rajah who has been enchanted. Your home will be a little room which the
Ranee has had built in the tank-wall. When you are taken there, wait,
and be sure you don't go to sleep, or the Muchie-Rajah will certainly
come and eat you up. But as you hear him coming rushing through the
water, be prepared, and as soon as you see him, throw this first stone
at him; he will then sink to the bottom of the tank. The second time he
comes, throw the second stone, when the same thing will happen. The
third time he comes, throw this third stone, and he will immediately
resume his human shape.' So saying, the old Cobra dived down again into
his hole. The Fakeer's daughter took the stones, and determined to do as
the Cobra had told her, though she hardly believed it would have the
desired effect.

When she reached the palace, the Ranee spoke kindly to her, and said to
the messengers, 'You have done your errand well--this is a dear little
girl.' Then she ordered that she should be let down the side of the tank
in a basket, to a little room which had been prepared for her. When the
Fakeer's daughter got there, she thought she had never seen such a
pretty place in her life (for the Ranee had caused the little room to be
very nicely decorated for the wife of her favourite), and she would have
felt very happy away from her cruel step-mother and all the hard work
she had been made to do, had it not been for the dark water that lay
black and unfathomable below the door, and the fear of the terrible
Muchie-Rajah.

After waiting some time she heard a rushing sound, and little waves came
dashing against the threshold; faster they came and faster, and the
noise got louder and louder, until she saw a great fish's head above the
water--the Muchie-Rajah was coming towards her open-mouthed. The
Fakeer's daughter seized one of the stones that the Cobra had given her
and threw it at him, and down he sank to the bottom of the tank; a
second time he rose and came towards her, she threw the second stone at
him, and he again sank down; a third time he came, more fiercely than
before, when, seizing the third stone, she threw it with all her force.
No sooner did it touch him than the spell was broken, and there, instead
of a fish, stood a handsome young Prince. The poor little Fakeer's
daughter was so startled that she began to cry. But the Prince said to
her, 'Pretty maiden, do not be frightened. You have rescued me from a
horrible thraldom, and I can never thank you enough; but if you will be
the Muchie-Ranee, we will be married to-morrow.' Then he sat down on the
door-step thinking over his strange fate, and watching for the dawn.

Next morning early, several inquisitive people came to see if the
Muchie-Rajah had eaten up his poor little wife, as they feared he would;
what was their astonishment, on looking over the tank wall, to see, not
the Muchie-Rajah, but a magnificent Prince! The news soon spread to the
palace. Down came the Rajah, down came the Ranee, down came all their
attendants and dragged Muchie-Rajah and the Fakeer's daughter up the
side of the tank in a basket; and when they heard their story, there
were great and unparalleled rejoicings. The Ranee said, 'So I have
indeed found a son at last!' And the people were so delighted, so happy,
and proud of the new Prince and Princess, that they covered all their
path with damask from the tank to the palace, and cried to their
fellows, 'Come and see our new Prince and Princess! Were ever any so
divinely beautiful? Come; see a right royal couple! A pair of mortals
like the gods!' And when they reached the palace the Prince was married
to the Fakeer's daughter.

There they lived very happily for some time. When the Muchie-Ranee's
stepmother heard what had happened, she came often to see her
step-daughter, and pretended to be delighted at her good fortune; and
the Ranee was so good that she quite forgave all her stepmother's former
cruelty, and always received her very kindly. At last, one day, the
Muchie-Ranee said to her husband, 'It is a weary while since I saw my
father. If you will give me leave, I should much like to visit my native
village and see him again.'--' Very well,' he replied, 'you may go. But
do not stay away long; for there can be no happiness for me till you
return.' So she went, and her father was delighted to see her; but her
stepmother, though she pretended to be very kind, was, in reality, only
glad to think she had got the Ranee into her power, and determined, if
possible, never to allow her to return to the palace again. One day,
therefore, she said to her own daughter, 'It is hard that your
step-sister should have become Ranee of all the land, instead of being
eaten up by the great fish, while we gained no more than a lac of gold
mohurs. Do now as I bid you, that you may become Ranee in her stead.'
She then went on to instruct her how that she must invite the Ranee down
to the riverbank and there beg her to let her try on her jewels, and
whilst putting them on, give her a push and drown her in the river.

The girl consented, and standing by the river-bank said to her
step-sister, 'Sister, may I try on your jewels? how pretty they
are!'--'Yes,' said the Ranee, 'and we shall be able to see in the river
how they look.' So, undoing her necklaces she clasped them round the
other's neck; but whilst she was doing so, her stepsister gave her a
push, and she fell backwards into the water. The girl watched to see
that the body did not rise, and then, run-fling back, said to her
mother, 'Mother, here are all the jewels; and she will trouble us no
more.' But it happened that just when her step-sister pushed the Ranee
into the river, her old friend the Seven-headed Cobra chanced to be
swimming across it, and seeing the little Ranee like to be drowned, he
carried her on his back until he reached his hole, into which he took
her safely. Now this hole, in which the Cobra and his wife and all his
little ones lived, had two entrances--the one under water and leading to
the river, and the other above water, leading out into the open fields.
To this upper end of his hole the Cobra took the Muchie-Ranee, and there
he and his wife took care of her; and there she lived with them for some
time. Meanwhile the wicked Fakeer's wife, having dressed up her own
daughter in all the Ranee's jewels, took her to the palace, and said to
the Muchie-Rajah, 'See, I have brought your wife, my dear daughter, back
safe and well.' The Rajah looked at her, and thought, 'This does not
look like my wife.' However, the room was dark, and the girl cleverly
disguised, and he thought he might be mistaken. Next day he said again,
'My wife must be sadly changed, or this cannot be she; for she was
always bright and cheerful. She had pretty loving ways and merry words;
while this woman never opens her lips.' Still he did not like to seem to
mistrust his wife, and comforted himself by saying, 'Perhaps she is
tired with the long journey.' On the third day, however, he could bear
the uncertainty no longer, and tearing off her jewels saw, not the face
of his own little wife, but another woman. Then he was very angry, and
turned her out of doors, saying, 'Begone! since you are but the wretched
tool of others, I spare your life.' But of the Fakeer's wife he said to
his guards, 'Fetch that woman here instantly; for unless she can tell me
where my wife is, I will have her hanged!' It chanced, however, that the
Fakeer's wife had heard of the Muchie-Rajah having turned her daughter
out of doors; so, fearing his anger, she hid herself, and was not to be
found.

Meantime, the Muchie-Ranee, not knowing how to get home, continued to
live in the great Seven-headed Cobra's hole, and he and his wife and all
his family were very kind to her, and loved her as if she had been one
of themselves; and there her little son was born, and she called him
Muchie-Lal  <span id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71) after the Muchie Rajah,
his father. Muchie-Lal was a lovely child, merry and brave, and his
playmates all day long were the young Cobras.  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[4](#fn_72) When he was about three years old, a
Bangle-seller came by tha way, and the Muchie-Ranee bought some bangles
from him and put them on her boy's wrists and ankles; but by next day,
in playing, he had broken them all. Then, seeing the Bangle-seller the
Ranee called him again and bought some more, and so on every day, until
the Bangle-seller got quite rich from selling so many bangles for the
Muchie-Lal; for the Cobra's hole was full a treasure, and he gave the
Muchie-Ranee as much money to spend every day as she liked. There was
nothing she wished for he did not give her, only he would not let her
try to get home to he husband, which she wished more than all. When she
asked him he would say, 'No, I will not let you go. If your husband come
here and fetches you, it is well; but I will not allow you to wander in
search of him through the land alone.'

And so she was obliged to stay where she was.

All this time the poor Muchie-Rajah was hunting in every part of the
country for his wife, but he could learn no tidings of her For grief and
sorrow at losing her he had gone well nigh distracted, and did nothing
but wander from place to place crying 'She is gone! she is gone!' Then,
when he had long inquire without avail of all the people in her native
village about her, he one day met a Bangle-seller, and said to him,
'Whence do you come?' The Bangle-seller answered, 'I have just been
selling bangles to some people who live in a Cobra's hole in the river
bank.'--' People! what people?' asked the Rajah. 'Why,' answered the
Bangle-seller, 'a woman and a child--the child is the most beautiful I
ever saw. He is about three years old, and, of course, running about, is
always breaking his bangles, and his mother buys him new ones every
day!'--' Do you know what th child's name is?' said the Rajah. 'Yes,'
answered the Bangle-seller carelessly, 'for the lady always calls him
her Muchie-Lal.

--'Ah!' thought the Muchie-Rajah, 'this must be my wife.' Then he said
to him again, 'Good Bangle-seller, I would see these strange people of
whom you speak; cannot you take me there?'--' No l to-night,' replied
the Bangle-seller; 'daylight has gone, and we should only frighten them;
but I shall be going there again to morrow, and then you may come too.
Meanwhile, come and reside at my house for the night, for you look faint
and weary.' The Rajah consented. Next morning, however, very early, he
woke the Bangle-seller, saying, 'Pray let us go now and see the people
you spoke about yesterday.'--'Stay,' said the Bangle-seller; 'it is much
too early. I never go till after breakfast.' So the Rajah had to wait
till the Bangle-seller was ready to go. At last they started off and
when they reached the Cobra's hole, the first thing the Rajah saw was a
fine little boy playing with the young Cobras.

As the Bangle-seller came along, jingling his bangles, a gentle voice
from inside the hole called out, 'Come here, my Muchie-Lal, and try on
your bangles.' Then the Muchie-Rajah, kneeling down at the mouth of the
hole, said, 'O Lady, show your beautiful face to me.' At the sound of
his voice the Ranee ran out, crying, 'Husband, husband! have you found
me again?' And she told him how her sister had tried to drown her, and
how the good Cobra had saved her life, and taken care of her and her
child. Then he said, 'And will you now come home with me?' And \~he told
him how the Cobra would never let her go, and said, 'I will first tell
him of your coming; for he has been as a father to me.' So she called
out, 'Father Cobra, Father Cobra, my husband has come to fetch me; will
you let me go? '--' Yes,' he said, 'if your husband has come to fetch
you, you may go.' And his wife said, 'Farewell, dear Lady, we are loath
to lose you, for we have loved you as a daughter.' And all the little
Cobras were very sorrowful to think that they must lose their
playfellow, the young Prince. Then the Cobra gave the Muchie-Rajah and
the Muchie-Ranee, and Muchie-Lal, all the most costly gifts he could
find in his treasure-house; and so they went home, where they lived very
happy ever after, and so may you be happy too.

<span id="img_41"></span> ![](img/41.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[1](odd23.htm#fr_69) A lac of gold mohurs is
equal to £150,000.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[2](odd23.htm#fr_70) Fish Queen.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[3](odd23.htm#fr_71) Little ruby fish.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[4](odd23.htm#fr_72) See Notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Chundun Rajah](odd24)
