[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc04)  [Next](cc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

#### *THE ADMIRABLE EFFICACY*

#### *AND ALMOST INCREDIBLE VIRTUE*

###### OF TRUE

### OIL WHICH IS MADE OF SULPHUR VIVE SET ON FIRE

###### AND COMMONLY CALLED

# OIL OF SULPHUR

##### *PER CAMPANAM.*

###### BY

##### GEORGE STARKEY.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### THE OIL OF SULPHUR.

Of this most noble liquor, and not vulgar medicine, the noble Helmont
writeth thus, in his excellent discourse concerning THE TREE OF LIFE. In
the year 1600 a certain man belonging to the camp, whose office was to
keep account of the provision of victuals which was made for the army,
being charged with a numerous family of small children unable to shift
for themselves, himself being then fifty-eight years of age, was very
sensible of the great care and burden which lay upon him to provide for
them while he lived, and concluded that, should he die, they must be
enforced to beg their bread from door to door: whereupon he came (saith
Helmont) and desired of me something for the preservation of his life. I
then (being a young man) pitied his sad condition, and thus thought

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

with myself: The fume of burning sulphur is, by experience, found
powerfully effectual to preserve wines from corruption. Then I,
recollecting my thoughts, concluded that the acid liquor of oil, which
is made of sulphur vive, set on fire, doth of necessity contain in
itself this fume; yea, and the whole odour of the sulphur, inasmuch as
it is indeed nothing else but the very sulphureous fume imbibed, or
drunk up in its mercurial salt, and so becomes a condensed liquor. Then
I thought with myself: Our blood being (to us) no other than, as it
were, the very wine of our life, that being preserved, if it prolong not
the life, at least it will keep it sound from those many diseases which
proceed originally from corruption: by which means the life being sound,
and free from diseases, and defended from pains and griefs, might be in
some sort spun out into a further length than otherwise. Upon which
meditated resolution I gave him a vial glass, with a small quantity of
this oil, distilled from sulphur vive burning,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

and taught him (moreover) how to make it as he should afterwards need
it. I advised him of this liquor he should take two drops before each
meal in a small draught of beer, and not, ordinarily, to exceed that
dose, nor to intermit the use of it, taking for granted that two drops
of that oil, contained a large quantity of the fume of sulphur. The man
took my advice, and at this day, in the year 1641, he is lusty and in
good health, walks the streets at Brussels without complaint, and is
likely longer to live; and that which is most remarkable, in this whole
space of forty-one years he was not so much as ill, so as to keep his
bed; yea, although (when of great age) in the depth of winter, he broke
his leg, near to his ankle bone, by a fall upon the ice, yet with the
use of the oil he recovered, without the least symptom of a fever; and
although in his old age poverty had reduced him to great straits and
hardship, and made him feel much want of things necessary for the
comfort and conveniency

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

of life, yet he lives, healthy and sound, though spare and lean. The old
man's name is John Moss, who waited upon Rithovius, Bishop of Ypres, in
his chamber, where the Earls of Horne and Egmondon were beheaded by the
Duke of Alva; and he was then twenty-five years of age, so that now he
is complete ninety-nine years of age, healthy and lusty, and still
continues the use of that liquor daily. Thus far Helmont, which
relation, as it is most remarkable, so it gives the philosophical reason
of his advice, on which it was grounded. And elsewhere the same author
relates how by this liquor he cured many dangerous, deplorable fevers,
which by other doctors had been given over for desperate. And in other
places he commends it as a peerless remedy to assuage the intolerable
thirst which accompanies most fevers.

To which relation and testimony of this most learned doctor and acute
philosopher I shall add my own experience.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

I find it a rare preservative against corruption, not only in living
creatures, but even in dead flesh, beer, wine, ale, etc.; a recoverer of
dying beer and wines that are decayed, a cure for beer when sick and
roping. Flesh by this means may be preserved so incorruptible as no
embalming in the world can go beyond it for the keeping of a dead
carcase, nor salting come near its efficacy; as to the conserving meat,
or fowls, or fish, which by this means are not only kept from
corruption, but made a mumial balsam, which is itself a preservative
against corruption of such as shall eat thereof; which being a curious
rarity, and too costly to be made a vulgar experiment, I shall pass it
over, and come to those cases which are most beneficial and desirable.

It is an excellent cleanser of the teeth: being scoured with it, they
will become as white as the purest ivory, and the mouth being washed
with oil dropped in water or white wine, so as to make it only of the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

sharpness of vinegar, it prevents the growing of that yellow scale which
usually adheres to the teeth, and is the forerunner of their
putrefaction; it prevents their rottenness for the future, and stops it
(being begun) from going further, takes away the pain of the teeth,
diverts rheums, and is a pure help for the savour of the breath, making
it very sweet. In a word, there is not a more desirable thing can be
found for such who would have clear or sound teeth, or sweet breath, or
to be free from rheums: for which use let the water be made by dropping
this oil into it, as sharp as vinegar, as I said before.

Against a tickling cough, or hoarseness, it is a rare remedy, not only
taken two or three drops twice a day inwardly, in the usual drink one
useth before each meal, but also by gargling the throat with it; and (so
used) it is excellent against swelled throats, anginas, strumas, palates
of the mouth inflamed, or the uvula of the throat, or the almonds of the
ears, which are

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (usually said then
to be) fallen. It is excellent also against the headache, and to divert
rheums from the eyes, to wash the temples therewith; likewise to take
away tetters, morphew, or scabs, this dropped into water is a pleasant,
safe, and effectual remedy.

Besides which outward applications, it is a Lord internally taken,
preventing corruption, rooting out the seeds thereof, though never so
deeply concealed in the body, and, upon that score, opening inveterate
obstructions, eradicating old pains, and preventing otherwise usual
relapses into stranguretical, colical, or arthritical pains: it is
abstersive, cleansing all excrementitious, settlings in the mesaraic or
mesenterial vessels, and so cutting off the original source, and taking
away the cause of putrefactive corruption, which is the productive
beginner of very many diseases.

On this score it lengthens the life, and frees the body from many pains
and ails to which it otherwise would be subject.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

It is a pleasant remedy, having only a little sharpness, which to the
palate is most grateful; and yet this acidity is contradistinct from
that acidity which is the forerunner of putrefaction, which it kills and
destroys, as the acidity of the spirit of vitriol is destroyed by the
fixed acrimony of its own *caput mortuum*, or that of vinegar by the
touch of ceruse or minium.

Preternatural heat and thirst in fevers are in no way allayed so
speedily, and easily, as by this, nor is there anything which for a
constant continuance may be more safely and profitably taken. Spirit of
salt (such as the noble Helmont speaks of) alone may be joined with
this, for its safety and continual use with profit, especially in
nephritical distempers, and the heat or sharpness of urine.

Now, as this is so noble a medicine, so there is none in the world more
basely adulterated and counterfeited, our wise doctors commending for it
(*quid pro quo*) an adulterated mineral acidity of vitriol,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

distilled in a retort from vulgar sulphur, which the apostate chemists
prepare and sell for, and the knavish apothecaries use and give to their
patients, instead of this true spirit, which if sincere is clear as
water, ponderous, and exquisitely acid, made of sulphur vive only, set
on fire without any other mixture, and the fumes received in a broad
glass, fitted for the purpose, vulgarly called a campana or bell, from
its shape or likeness.

Most sottish is that maxim of the doctors, that spirit of sulphur and
vitriol are of one nature, when experience teacheth that mere acetosity
of vitriol (which brings over nothing of its excellent virtue) will
dissolve argent vive, which the strongest spirit of sulphur, truly and
not sophistically made, will not touch, nor will that recover beer or
wines, or preserve them, as this will do: one, therefore, is an unripe
esurine acetosity, of little virtue; the other a balsam of antidotary
virtue, a preservative against corruption,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

and, upon that score, nothing can be used more effectually as a
preservative against, or a remedy in, contagious fevers, small-pox,
measles, or pestilence than this, nor more ridiculously than the other,
which being drawn from the vulgar sulphur, that hath an infection of
malignity mixed with it (which it took from the arsenical nature of the
minerals from which it was melted), adds nothing to the virtue of the
crude vitriolate spirits, but only that which was before of little
virtue, to become a medicine of more danger and hazard, but not a jot
more goodness than it was, when first wandr (sic—JBH) from the vitriol;
which being of itself clear and crude, is for to deceive the ignorant
(by its colour) tinctured with some root or bark. Thus the credulous
world is imposed upon and cheated, while, instead of most noble remedies
(in name promised), adulterated trifles are produced, to the
disparagement of art, and the scandal and reproach of the professor's
medicine.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

To discover which abuses and vindicate the art, I have made my
preludium, concerning this oil or spirit of sulphur, the virtues of
which (if truly and faithfully made) are so eminently remarkable, and
almost incredibly efficacious, that I thought it not unworthy my pains
in a few lines to communicate to the studious reader both what real
benefit is to be expected from the true and what injury is clone to the
deluded (at least), if not destroyed, patients by the sophisticate oil
of sulphur.

*Postscript*.

That those who desire this so pleasant, so efficacious, and profitable a
remedy may not be abused by the base counterfeit oil of vitriol,
corruptly called oil of sulphur, because it has been once distilled from
common unwholesome brimstone, and tincted with some bark or root of
which the town is full, and all apothecaries’ shops, to the great abuse
of art, but much greater of those who make use of it instead of the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

true, when indeed it hath not one quality like thereto; let the reader
be informed that at George Starkey's house, in St. Thomas Apostle's,
next door to Black Lion Court; and at Richard Johnson's, at the Globe in
Montague Close, in Southwark, the true is to be had, drawn from sulphur
vive (set on fire), without any addition but the sulphur itself, which
is easily known by its clearness, sharpness, weight, not working on
quicksilver, turning bitter like to gall on the filings of silver,
preserving wine and beer from corruption, restoring then when decayed,
and, in a word, by its quenching feverish heat and thirst, etc. As
before hath been rehearsed at large, it may by anyone be distinguished
from that which is false and sophisticate. However, at those two places
he may be confident of that which is real and true. And likewise at
Richard Johnson's house in Montague Close, in Southwark, aforesaid, you
may have any chemical salts, oils, and spirits. Besides which oil or
spirit of sulphur,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

several other rare and admirably effectual medicinal secrets for the
certain, safe, and speedy cure of most, if not all diseases, as hath
been proved by many hundred patients (adjudged rather incurable or
desperately dangerous by other doctors), are there to be had, being more
than ordinary secrets and preparations of George Starkey, who entitles
himself a Philosopher by the Fire.

And in particular that pill, or antidote injuriously challenged as an
invention of Richard Matthews, who, in truth, had that preparation (for
which he hath since been so famous) from the said George Starkey, the
true author thereof, who had it from God, by studious search, without
help of book or master; and which preparation he hath since amended and
advanced in virtue beyond comparison of that which Mr. Matthews had from
him, as hath been, and is daily, confirmed by the experience of able
men.

Concerning which antidote, or pill, or

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

rather anodinous elixir, its virtues and advancement, to almost a true
universality, by four variations thereof, which the first author of the
thing (by long experience) found out, he hath wrote, particularly, and
at large, with the way of administering it and how to order the patient,
by one and all of these preparations, for his recovery out of any of the
most desperately acute, or fixed chronical diseases; which book being
now ready for the press, in a few days, God willing, shall sec the
light. It is called "A Brief Examination and Censure of Several
Medicines, etc."

For the undeceiving of such as have been injuriously and falsely
persuaded that only Mr. Richard Matthews and Paul Hobson have that
medicine truly prepared, condemning all others as counterfeit, to the
disparagement and palpable injury of the first inventor, who counts it
unreasonable that he who learned what he had from him should censure
himself as a counterfeit, unless he bind himself up to his preparation,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

which, though it be a true one, yet is the most inferior in virtue of
all the author knows, and called by him his "Elixir Diaphoretick
Commune." Of which able, judicious practitioners (having once bought his
more effectual and higher graduated preparations in the same kind) have
so low an esteem (comparatively to these others) that they desire no
more thereof. Farewell.

GEORGE STARKEY.

When this treatise and the postscript were written, Mr. Starkey then
lived in the place therein specified; but he died, as I have been
informed, of the sickness, Anno. Dom. 1665, by venturing to anatomise a
corpse dead of the plague, as Mr. Thomson, the chemist, had done before
him, and lived many years after; but Mr. Starkey's adventure cost him
his life. However, the medicine, truly made and prepared from the
mineral sulphur, called sulphur vive, may now be had of very many
chemists in and about London; nay,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the difficulty in making thereof is not so great but that you may make
it yourself if you please, and if you do but wait the time and
opportunity to buy the mineral sulphur (not common brimstone), for the
mineral is not to be had at all times.

The process and shape for the glass bell, and the manner of making and
rectifying this spirit from the mineral sulphur, or sulphur vive, as it
comes stone-like out of the earth, may be seen in the chemical works of
Hartman and Crollius, called "ROYAL CHYMISTRY," Chara's "Royal
Pharmacopæa," Lefehure, Thibault, Lemery, Glaser, Shroder's
"Dispensatory," and many others, unto whom I refer you.—W. C. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](cc06.md)
