[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc09)  [Next](cc11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

*Of the Vegetable Tincture, or the Process called the Lesser
Circulation*.

VERY few of the true philosophers have touched upon this subject, for it
seemed

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

trifling in respect to the great work, as the process in metals is
generally termed; but there is a modern publication in English, a small
thin duodecimo, without any author's name, having for its title
"*Aphorisms, seu Circulus majus et Circulus minus*," wherein the whole
process is plainly laid down.

This book is written by an undoubted master in the art; and no treatise,
ancient or modern, is so explicit in the directions for conducting the
great work. The directions are very short, but much to the purpose,
provided the reader has an idea what part of the work is alluded to. The
author, agreeable to his title, delivers his doctrine by way of
aphorisms. But to return from this digression.

We proposed in this chapter to lay open the vegetable process, as a clue
to the more important work in the mineral kingdom. A certain person, who
is now living, and advertises balsam of honey, tincture of sage, etc.,
has turned his studies this way; and from his great abilities as a
professed

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

physician and botanist, has convinced all unprejudiced persons that
noble tinctures may be extracted from vegetables. We hope this gentleman
will not despise our free communication, both to him and the public, if
we show the insufficiency of his method, though it is ingenious, while
we establish the rationale of ours on the never-failing ground of truth
and philosophy.

He observes, with a precision which can only result from numerous
trials, that different herbs impart their tinctures in such proportions
of alcohol as he has found out. It is allowed that the volatile spirit
and balsamic sulphur are thus extracted; but there are the essential, or
fixed, salt and sulphur of the herb yet left in the process. These
require another management to extract, which he is either ignorant of,
or is so disingenuous as to conceal from the public; but that so noble a
secret may lie open to all for a general advantage, here follows a plain
account of the vegetable work.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Take any herb which is potent in medicine, and either extract the
tincture with spirit of wine, or distil in the common way; reserve the
distilled water, or tincture, when separated from the fæces, for use.
Then take the feces, or *Caput Mortuum*, and calcine it to a calx. Grind
this to powder. That done, take the water, or tincture, and mix them
together; distil again, and calcine, forcing the moisture over by a
retort, in a wary process, calcining and cohobating the spirit on the
salt till it attains a perfect whiteness and oily nature, like the
finest alkali, commonly called Flemish. As your salt requires it in the
process, have in readiness more of the extracted tincture, or distilled
spirit, that you may not work it, viz., the salt, too dry; and yet
proceed cautiously, not adding too much of the moisture, so that the
dealbation, or whitening, may keep visibly heightening at every
repetition of the process. Frequent experiments may enable you to push
it on to a redness, but

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

a fine yellow is the best of all; for the process tends, in its
perfection at this period, to a state of dryness, and must be managed
with a strong fire. By following these directions, you have here the two
tinctures in the Vegetable Kingdom, answering to the white and red
tinctures in the mineral.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of the Uses of the Vegetable Tinctures](cc11.md)
