[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc10)  [Next](cc12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

*Of the Uses of the Vegetable Tinctures, with some general remarks on
their great efficacy in medicine*.

You have, by carefully following our directions above, procured the
tinctures, white or yellow, in the Vegetable Kingdom. The yellow is more
efficacious if the work is well performed; either of them, by being
exposed in the air, will soon run into a thick, essential oil, smelling
very strong of the plant, and the virtues of any quantity may be
concentered by often repeating the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

circulation. But you have no need of this, unless for curiosity, there
being in your tinctures a real permanent power to extract the essential
virtues of any herb you may require on immersion only, where the
essential salt and volatile spirit, together with the sulphureous oil,
are all conjoined, floating on they-top of your tincture, and the
terrestrial feces precipitated to the bottom; not as in distillation, or
extraction of the tincture with alcohol, while the stalk and texture of
the plant are entire; no, this Vegetable Tincture devours the whole
substance of the plant, and precipitates only the earthy particles
acquired in its vegetation, which no degree of calcination could push to
an alkali, without its essential salt. Such is the virtue of our
Vegetable Tincture; and if the operation be never so often repeated with
different herbs, it loses nothing of its virtue, or quantity or quality,
casting up the virtues of whatever herb is immersed, and precipitating
the earth as before, when both are easily separated and the medicine
preserved for use.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

Let a medicine, thus prepared, be examined, and the principles by which
it is extracted, with the general methods of preparation; if the
distilled water, for instance, of any aromatical or balsamic herb, be
took, common experience will convince us that nothing but its volatile
parts come over the head; but take the *Caput Mortuum*, and it will
calcine after this process, and afford an alkali, which proves itself to
be an essential salt by its pungency, and will, in the air, run to an
oil, which is its essential sulphur. If you take the tincture extracted
with alcohol, it is the same, only the more resinous parts of sonic
herbs may enrich the extract, and the volatile sulphur giving the colour
and scent, be retained, which escapes in distillation; but the potent
virtue or soul of the herb, if we may be allowed the expression, goes to
the dunghill. It is the same if the expressed juice of the herb is used;
and if taken in powder, or substance, as it is sometimes prescribed, but
little of its

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

virtue, beyond its nourishing quality, can be communicated to the
patient, except as a bitter or a vermifuge, in which cases, perhaps, it
is best by way of infusion.

Let none despise the operation above laid down, because it is not to be
found in the ordinary books of chemistry; but consider the possibility
of Nature, who brings about wonderful effects by the most simple causes:
neither let any imagine this process so easy as to perform it without
some trials, patiently attending to her operations and endeavouring to
account for any deficiency in the course of his work. For this reason it
will be proper that the artist forms to himself an idea what the
intention is to procure, how far Nature has prepared his matter to work
upon, in what state she has left it, and how far it may be exalted above
the ordinary point of virtue, which it could attain in the crude air,
and this by the Philosophic Art assisting Nature, as a handmaid, with an
administration of due heat, which is nutritive and not corrosive

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A recapitulation
of the foregoing process, with some remarks on the different stages,
will be sufficient here to explain our meaning above, and prepare the
reader for what follows concerning the metallic tincture, or Stone of
the Philosophers.

The virtues of herbs and simples are confessedly great and manifold;
among these, some are poisonous and narcotic, yet of great use in
medicine; none of them but want some preparation or correction. Now the
common ways of doing this are defective; neither preserving the virtue
entire, nor furnishing any menstruum capable of doing it with expedition
and certainty. Alcohol, as was before observed, will extract a tincture
and distillation a spirit. We reject neither of these methods in our
work, as they are useful to decompound the subject; but we are not
content with a part of its virtues.

To speak philosophically, we would have its soul, which is its Essential
Salt, and its spirit, which is the inflammable

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

sulphur. The body in which these resided we are not concerned for; it is
mere earth, and must return from whence it came: whereas the soul and
spirit are paradisiacal, if the artist can free them from their earthy
prison without loss; but this can only be done by death. Understand us
aright. Philosophically speaking, no more is meant than decomposition of
the subject into its first principles, as the uniting them more
permanently with an increase of virtue is most emphatically called a
resurrection and regeneration. Now this decompounding is to be done with
judgment, so as not to corrode or destroy, but divide the matter into
its integral parts. At this period of the work the artist will consider
what is further intended, keeping Nature in view, who, if she is
properly assisted in her operations, produces from the dissolution of
any subject something more excellent, as in a grain of corn, or any
vegetable seed, which by cultivation may be pushed to a

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

surprising produce; but then it must die first, as our Blessed Saviour
very emphatically observes: and let this saying dwell upon the artist's
imagination, that he may know what he generally intends; for the whole
philosophical work, both in vegetables and minerals, is only a
mortifying of the subject, and reviving it again to a more excellent
life.

Now if the intention in the foregoing process was to increase simply any
vegetable in its kind, the destruction and revivification must follow
the ordinary course of vegetation by the medium of seed; and Nature can
only be assisted by fertilising the soil, together with a proper
distribution of heat and moisture. Yet there are not wanting authors,
and particularly Paracelsus, who boldly describe processes wherein the
vital quality of the seed has been destroyed by calcination, and yet
brought to life again at the pleasure of an artist. Such reveries are a
scandal to philosophy, and a snare to the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

superficial reader, who is generally more struck with impossibilities,
roundly asserted, than the modesty of true artists. These confess their
operations are within the bounds of Nature, whose limits they cannot
surpass.

The reader, then, will consider that our intention here is not to
increase the seminal quality, but to concentre, in a little compass, the
medicinal virtues of a herb. Nature is desirous of this in all her
productions, but can only rise to such a point of perfection, in her
ordinary course, through the crudity of the air and fixing power of the
elements. Now if we take the vegetables at that point of perfection to
which she has pushed them, and farther assist her in decompounding,
purifying, uniting, and reviving the subject, we obtain, what she could
not otherwise produce, a real permanent tincture, the quintessence, as
it is called, or such a harmonious mixture of the four elementary
qualities as constitutes a fifth, from thenceforth

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

indissoluble, and not to be debased with any impurity.

But the virtue of this Vegetable Tincture is capable of improvement *ad
infinitum*, in its own kind, by adding more of its spirit or extracted
[tincture](errata.htm#2.md), and repeating the circulation, which is every
time more speedily finished, as there is a magnetical quality in the
fixed salt, and essential oil, which assimilates to itself all the real
virtues of what is added, only rejecting the feculent, earthy qualities;
so that in a grain of the tincture much virtue may be concentered, not
at all corrosive or ardent, but friendly to the animal life, and most
powerful as a medicine for disorders which the herb is appropriated to
cure. Nay, something of this nature was still sought for by the
distillers of ardent spirits, when phlegm has been drawn away from the
volatile sulphur, till it became proof spirit, as it is termed, which
will burn dry, a plain indication that it contained nothing essential in
it from the subject out of which it was extracted;

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

for that which is essential cannot be destroyed by the fire, but is
reddened to an alkaline salt, having in its centre an Incombustible
Sulphur, which, on exposing to the air, manifests itself both to the
sight and touch. Now, if this Salt and Sulphur are purified
sufficiently, and the distilled spirit, or extracted tincture, added,
Nature finds a subject wherein she can carry her operations to the
highest limit, if an artist furnishes her with proper vessels, and a
degree of heat suitable to her intentions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Of the Metallic Tincture](cc12.md)
