[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc12)  [Next](cc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

*Of the Second Matter, or Seed in Metals*.

ALL philosophers affirm, with one consent, that metals have a seed by
which they are increased, and that this seminal quality is the same in
all of them; but it is perfectly ripened in gold only, where the bond of
union is so fixed that it is most difficult to decompound the subject,
and procure it for the Philosophical Work. But some, who were adepts in
the art, have by painful processes taken gold for their male, and the
mercury, which they knew how to rextact from the less compacted metals,
for a female: not as an easier process, but to

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

find out the possibility of making the stone this way; and have
succeeded, giving this method more openly to conceal the true
confection, which is most easy and simple. We shall, therefore, set
before the reader a landmark, to keep him from splitting on this
difficulty, by considering what is the seed wherein the metals are
increased, that the artist may be no longer at a loss where to seek for
it, keeping in view the writings of our learned predecessors on this
subject.

The seed of metals is what the Sons of Wisdom have called their mercury,
to distinguish it from quicksilver, which it nearly resembles, being the
radical moisture of metals. This, when judiciously extracted, without
corrosives, or fluxing, contains in it a seminal quality whose perfect
ripeness is only in gold; in the other metals it is crude, like fruits
which are yet green, not being sufficiently digested by the heat of the
sun and action of the elements. We observed that the radical moisture
contains the seed, which is true: yet it is not the seed,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

but the sperm only, in which the vital principle floats, being invisible
to the eye. But the mind perceives it, in a true artist, as a central
point of condensed air, wherein Nature, according to the will of God,
has included the first principles of life in everything, as well animal
and vegetable as mineral; for in animals the sperm may be seen, but not
the included principle of impregnation: this is a concentered point, to
which the sperm serves only as a vehicle, till, by the action and
ferment of the matrix, the point wherein Nature has included a vital
principle expands itself, and then it is perceivable in the rudiments of
an animal. So in any esculent fruit (as, for instance, in an apple), the
pulp or sperm is much more in proportion than the seed included; and
even that which appears to be seed is only a finer concoction of sperm,
including the vital stamina; as also in a grain of wheat, the flour is
only the sperm, the point of vegetation is an included air. which is
kept by its sperm from the extremes of cold and heat, till it finds a

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

proper matrix, where the husk being softened with moisture, and warmed
by the heat, the surrounding sperm putrefies, making the seed, or
concentered air, to expand and to burst the husk, carrying along in its
motion a milky substance, assimulated to itself from the putrefied
sperm. This the condensing quality of the air includes in a film and
hardens into a germ, all according to the purpose of Nature.

If this whole process of Nature, most wonderful in her operations, was
not constantly repeated before our eyes, the simple process of
vegetation would be equally problematical with that of the philosophers;
yet how can the metals increase, nay, how can anything be multiplied
without seed? The true artists never pretended to multiply metals
without it, and can it be denied that Nature still follows her first
appointment? She always fructifies the seed when it is put into a proper
matrix. Does not she obey an ingenious artist, who knows her operations,
with her possibilities,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

and attempts nothing beyond them? A husbandman meliorates his ground
with compost, burns the weeds, and makes use of other operations. He
steeps his seed in various preparations, only taking care not to destroy
its vital principle; indeed, it never comes into his head to roast it,
or to boil it, in which he shows more knowledge of Nature than some
would-be philosophers do. Nature, like a liberal mother, rewards him
with a more plentiful harvest, in proportion as he has meliorated her
seed and furnished a more suitable matrix for its increase.

The intelligent gardener goes farther; he knows how to shorten the
process of vegetation, or retard it. He gathers roses, cuts salads, and
pulls green peas in winter. Are the curious inclined to admire plants
and fruits of other climates? He can produce them in his stoves to
perfection. Nature follows his directions unconstrained, always willing
to obtain her end, viz., the perfection of her offspring.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

Open your eyes here, ye studious searchers of Nature! Is she so liberal
in her perishing productions, how much more in those which are
permanent, and can subsist in the fire? Attend, then, to her operations;
if you procure the metallic seed, and ripen that by art which she is
many ages in perfecting, it cannot fail but she will reward you with an
increase proportioned to the excellency of your subject.

The reader will be apt to exclaim here: "Very fine! All this is well;
but how shall the seed of metals be procured, and whence comes it that
so few know how to gather it?" To this it is answered that the
philosophers have hitherto industriously kept that a profound secret;
some out of a selfish disposition, though otherwise good men. Others,
who wished only for worthy persons to whom they might impart it, could
not write of it openly, because covetousness and vanity have been
governing principles in the world;

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

and, being wise men, they knew that it was not the will of the Most High
to inflame and cherish such odious tempers, the genuine offspring of
pride and self-love, but to banish them out of the earth, wherefore they
have been withheld hitherto. But we, finding no restraint on our mind in
that respect, shall declare what we know: and the rather because we
judge the time is come to demolish the golden calf, so long had in
veneration by all ranks of men, insomuch that worth is estimated by the
money a man possesses; and such is the inequality of possessions that
mankind are almost reducible to the rich, who are rioting in
extravagance, and the poor, who are in extreme want, smarting under the
iron hand of oppression. Now the measure of iniquity among the rich
hastens to its limit, and the cry of the poor is come before the Lord:
"*Who will give them to eat till they shall be satisfied?*" Hereafter
the rich will see the vanity of their possessions when compared with the
treasures communicated

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

by this secret; for the riches it bestows are a blessing from God, and
not the squeezing of oppression. Besides, its chief excellence consists
in making a medicine capable of healing all diseases to which the human
body is liable, and prolonging life to the utmost limits ordained by the
Creator of all things.

There want not other reasons for the manifestation of the process; for
scepticism has gone hand in hand with luxury and oppression, insomuch
that the fundamental truths of all revealed religion are disputed. These
were always held in veneration by the possessors of this art, as may be
seen from what they have left upon record in their books: and, indeed,
the first principles of revealed religion are demonstrated from the
whole process, for the seed of metals is sown in corruption, and raised
in incorruption; it is sown a natural body, and raised a spiritual body;
it is known to partake of the curse which came upon the earth for man's
sake, having in its composition

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

a deadly poison, which can only be separated by a regeneration in water
and fire; it can, when it is throughly purified and exalted, immediately
tinge imperfect metals and raise them to a state of perfection, being in
this respect a lively emblem of that seed of the woman, the Serpent
Bruiser, who, through His sufferings and death, bath entered into glory,
having thenceforth power and authority to redeem, purify, and glorify
all those who come unto Him as a mediator between God and mankind.

Such being our motives, we can no longer be silent concerning the seed
of metals, but declare that it is contained in the ores of metals, as
wheat is in the grain; and the sottish folly of alchemists has hindered
them from adverting to this, so that they have always sought it in the
vulgar metals, which are factitious and not a natural production, herein
acting as foolishly as if a man should sow bread and expect corn from
it, or from an egg which

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

is boiled hope to produce a chicken. Nay, though the philosophers have
said many times the vulgar metals are dead, not excepting gold, which
passes the fire, they could never imagine a thing so simple as that the
seed of metals was contained in their ores, where alone it ought to be
expected; so bewildered is human ingenuity, when it leaves the beaten
track of truth and Nature, to entangle itself in a multiplicity of
fine-spun inventions.

The searcher of Nature will rejoice greatly in this discovery, as
grounded in reason and sound philosophy; but to fools it would be in
vain, should even Wisdom herself cry out in the streets. Wherefore,
leaving such persons to hug themselves in their own imaginary
importance, we shall go on to observe that the ores of metals are our
First Matter, or sperm, wherein the seed is contained, and the key of
this art consists in a right dissolution of the ores into a water, which
the philosophers call their mercury, or water of life, and an

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

earthy substance, which they have denominated their sulphur. The first
is called their woman, wife, Luna, and other names, signifying that it
is the feminine quality in their seed; the other they have denominated
their man, husband, Sol, etc., to point out its masculine quality. In
the separation and due conjunction of these with heat, and careful
management, there is generated a noble offspring, which they have for
its excellency called the quintessence, or a subject wherein the four
elements are so completely harmonised as to produce a fifth subsisting
in the fire, without waste of substance, or diminution of its virtue,
wherefore they have given it the titles of Salamander, Phoenix, and Son
of the Sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the Dissolution and Extraction of the Seed in
Metals](cc14)
