[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc15)  [Next](cc17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

*Of the Union or Mystical Marriage in the Philosophical Process*.

THE seed and its earth being thus prepared, nothing remains but a
judicious conjunction of them together; for if too much moisture
prevails, the philosophical egg may be burst before it can go through
the heat necessary for its hatching. To speak

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

without a figure. Our subject must now be enclosed in a small glass
vial, made strong enough to bear a due heat, which is to be raised
gradually to the highest degree: the best form for this vessel being
that of an oil flask, with a long neck; but these are much too thin in
substance for this operation. In such a vessel the mixture is to be
sealed hermetically, and digested so long till it is fixed into a dry
concretion; but, if, as we observed, the moisture should predominate,
there is great danger of the vessel bursting, with a vapour which cannot
be concentered by the fixing quality in the matter. The intention is,
nevertheless, to fix our subject in the heat, and so render its future
destruction impossible.

On the other hand, if the dry, fixing quality of the sulphur exceeds so
as not to suffer an alternate resolution of its substance into vapours,
and a re-manifestation of its fixing quality, by causing the whole to
subside in the bottom of the vessel till

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the matter again liquefies and sublimes (which Ripley has well
described), there is danger of the whole vitrifying; and thus you shall
have only glass instead of the noble tincture. To avoid these two
extremes it is very proper that the purified earth be reduced by manual
operation to an impalpable fineness, and then its acuated mercury must
be added, incorporating both together till the earth will imbibe no
more. This operation will require time, with some degree of the artist's
patience; for however the humidity may seem disproportionate, on letting
it rest awhile, a dryness on the surface of your matter will show that
it is capable of imbibing more, so that the operation is to be repeated
till it is fully saturated, which may be known from its bearing the air
without any remarkable change of surface from dry to humid; or, on the
contrary, if so, the conjunction is well made, which is farther
confirmed if a small portion be spread upon a thin plate of iron, heated
till it flows

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

gently like wax, casting forth the moisture with heat and again
absorbing it when cold, so as to return to the former consistence; but
if a clamminess ensues it is a sign you have exceeded in the quantity of
humidity, which must be extracted by distilling again and repeating the
process till it is right.

Your sulphur and mercury being thus united, put them into a glass vial,
before described, in such a quantity as to take up one-third of its
contents, leaving two-thirds, including the neck, for the circulation of
your matter. Secure the neck of your vial with a temporary luting at the
first, and give a gentle heat, observing whether it sublimes and fixes
alternately. If it easily sublimes and shows a disposition, at
intervals, to subside at the bottom of the vessel, all is well conducted
hitherto; for the moisture will first be predominant, which the sulphur
can only perfectly absorb as the heat is increased for the perfect
ripening of our Paradisaical Fruit.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Therefore, if it
manifests a too early disposition for fixing, add more of the acuated
mercury till Luna rises resplendent in her season; she will give place
to the Sun in his turn. This would be the language of an adept on this
occasion, only suggesting that the female quality in our prepared seed
is first active, while the male is passive, and that it is afterwards
passive while the male is active, such being the case in all vegetation;
for every germ which is the first rudiments of a herb or tree, is
predominant in moisture, and then only becomes fixed when it is fully
concocted in the seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Of the Further Treatment and Ripening of our
Seed](cc17.md)
