[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc16)  [Next](cc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

*Of the Further Treatment and Ripening of our Seed*.

THIS is deservedly called the Great Work of the Philosophers; and the
artist having done his part hitherto, must seal up his glass
hermetically, an operation which every maker of barometers knows how to
perform.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

The glass is then to be put into a furnace with a proper nest contrived
for its reception, so as to give a continual heat from the first to the
fourth degree, and to afford the artist an opportunity, from time to
time, of inspecting every change which his matter assumes during the
process, without danger of damping the heat and putting a stop to its
perfect circulation. A heat of the first degree is sufficient at the
first, for some months, in which method much time may be lost by a young
practitioner, till he knows how to handle his matter from experience;
but then he is not so liable to be disappointed with the bursting of his
vessel or the matter vitrifying.

Thus you have arrived at the desired seed-time in our Philosophical
Work, which, though it may appear in the artist's power to ripen,
depends no less on the Divine blessing than the harvest, which a painful
husbandman has not the presumption to expect otherwise than from God's
beneficence.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

There are many requisites to entitle anyone to the possession of our
philosophical harvest, and the true labourers in it have sought for such
persons to whom they might communicate it, by evident testimony of the
senses, after which they account the confection of our Stone an easy
process, manageable by women and children; but without such a
communication, there is a necessity that those who would undertake it
are endowed by Nature with an ingenious mind, patient to observe and
accurate to investigate her ordinary appearances which, from their
commonness, are less noticed than such phenomena as are more curious
though of less importance; yet these for the most part employ the
precious time of those egregious triflers, the modern virtuosi. These
smatterers in philosophy are in raptures upon the discovery of a shell
or butterfly differently streaked from those of the same kind: and all
the while water, air, earth, fire, with their continual changes and
resolutions into

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

one another, by the medium of our atmosphere, through the efficacy of
the central and solar heat, are unstudied by these would-be
philosophers; so that a sensible rustic has more real knowledge, in this
respect, than a collector of natural rarities, and makes a much wiser
use of what experience he has acquired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of the Further Process to the Ripening of our Noble
Seed](cc18)
