[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc17)  [Next](cc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

*Of the Further Process to the Ripening of our Noble Seed*.

SUPPOSING such dispositions in the artist as have been previously laid
down, and the work well performed hitherto, for his direction herein we
shall describe the changes which our subject undergoes during the second
part of the process, commonly called the Great Work of the Philosophers.

Our vessel being warily heated at the first for fear of its cracking, an
ebullition of the contained matter is brought on, so that the moisture
is alternately circulated in

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

white fumes above, and condensed below, which may continue for a month
or two, nay longer, increasing the heat gradually to another degree, as
your matter discovers a disposition for fixing, by the vapour continuing
at longer intervals condensed, and rising in a lesser quantity, of an
ash colour, or other dark shades, which it will assume as a medium to
perfect blackness, the first desirable stage in our harvest. Other
colours may be exhibited in this part of the work without danger, if
they pass transiently; but if a faint redness, like that of the corn
poppy, continues, the matter is in danger of vitrifying, either from an
impatient urging of the fire, or the moisture not being sufficiently
predominant. An ingenious artist can remedy this by opening his vessel
and adding more of the acuated mercury, sealing it up as before; but a
novice would do much better to prevent it by governing his fire
according to the appearances of his matter, with judgment and patience,
increasing it

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

if the moisture manifests its predominancy too long, and slacking if the
dry prevails, till such time as the vapours become dark; and after they
have continued for some time at rest, a pellicle or film on the matter
shows its disposition for fixing, retaining the vapour captive for some
time, till it breaks through at different places on its surface (much
like the bituminous substance of coal in a soldering fire), with darker
clouds, but quickly dissipated, and growing less in quantity, till the
whole substance resembles molten pitch, or the aforesaid bituminous
substance, bubbling less and less, resting in one entire black substance
at the bottom of your glass. This is called the blackness of black, the
head of the crow, etc., and is esteemed a desirable stage in our
philosophical generation, being the perfect putrefaction of our seed,
which will ere long show its vital principle by a glorious manifestation
of Seminal Virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. A Further Description of the Process](cc19)
