[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc20)  [Next](cc22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII.

*Of the Transmutation*.

IT is much to be lamented that the seekers of natural knowledge in this
art propose, principally, the Science of Transmutation as their ultimate
view, and overlooking the chief excellency of our Stone as a medicine.
Notwithstanding this grovelling spirit, we shall commit the issue to His
Providence, and declare the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Transmutation
(which, indeed, the philosophers do) openly, after which we shall
describe the further circulation of our Stone for an increase of its
virtues, and then make an end of our treatise.

When the artist would transmute any metal—for instance, lead—let a
quantity be melted in a clean crucible, to which let a few grains of
gold in filings be cast; and when the whole is melted, let him have in
readiness a little of the powder, which will easily scrape off from his
"stone," the quantity inconsiderable, and cast it on the metal while in
fusion. Immediately there will arise a thick fume, which carries off
with it the impurities contained in the lead, with a crackling noise,
and leaves the substance of the lead transmuted into most pure gold,
without any kind of sophistication; the small quantity of gold added,
previous to projection, serves only as a medium to facilitate the
transmutation, and the quantity of your tincture is best ascertained by
experience, as its virtue is proportioned to the number

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of circulations you have given after the first has been completed.

For instance: when you have finished the stone, dissolve it in our
mercury again, wherein you have previously dissolved a few grains of
pure gold. This operation is done without trouble, both substances
readily liquefying. Put it into your vessel, as before, and go through
the process. There is no danger in the management, but breaking your
vessel; and every time it is thus treated its virtues are increased, in
a ratio of ten to one hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, etc., both in
medicinal and transmuting qualities; so that a small quantity may
suffice for the purposes of an artist during the remaining term of his
life.

END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bosom Book of Sir George Ripley](cc22)
