[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc21)  [Next](cc23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

###### THE

# BOSOM BOOK

###### OF

# SIR GEORGE RIPLEY,

*Canon of Bridlington:*

###### CONTAINING

His Philosophical Accurtations in Making the Philosopher's Mercury and
Elixirs.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### THE BOSOM BOOK OF SIR GEORGE RIPLEY.

*The whole work of the composition of the Philosophical Stone of the
great elixir and of the first solution of the gross body*.

FIRST take thirty pounds weight of sericon, or antimony, which will make
twenty-one pounds weight of gum, or near thereabouts, if it be well
dissolved and the vinegar is very good; and dissolve each pound thereof
in a gallon of twice distilled vinegar. When cold again, and, as it
standeth in dissolution in a fit glass vessel, stir it about with a
clean stick very often every day, the oftener the better; and when it is
well molten to the bottom, then filter over the said liquors three
several times, which keep close covered, and cast away the fæces, for
that is superfluous filth which

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

must be removed and entereth not into the work, but is called *Terra
damnata*.

*The making of our Gum, or Green Lion*.

Then put all these cold liquors, thus filled, into a fit glass vessel
and set it in *Balneo Mariæ* to evaporate in a temperate heat; which
done, our sericon will be coagulated into a green gum called our Green
Lion; which gum dry well, yet beware thou burn not his flowers, nor
destroy his greenness.

*The extraction of our Menstruum or Blood of our Green Lion*.

Then take out the said gum and put it into a strong retort of glass,
very well luted, and place it in your furnace, and under that, at the
first, make sober fire, and anon you sec a white smoke or fume issue.
Then put, too, a receiver of glass, which must have a very large belly
and the mouth no wider than it may well receive into that the neck of
the retort, which

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

close well together, that no fume issue forth of the receiver. Then
increase your fire by little and little, till the fume which issueth be
reddish; then continue the greater fire, until drops like blood come
forth, and no more fume will issue forth; and when that leaveth
bleeding, let it cool, or assuage the fire by little and little; and
when all things are cold then take away the receiver, and close it fast
suddenly, that the spirits vanish not away, for this liquor is called
our blessed liquor: which liquor keep close stopped in a glass till
hereafter. Then look into the neck of the retort, and therein you will
find a white hard rime, as it were the congelation of a frosty vapour,
or much like sublimate, which gather with diligence and keep it apart,
for therein are contained great secrets which shall be showed hereafter,
after the great work is ended.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

*The Creation of our Basis*.

Then take out all the fæces which remain in the retort, and arc blackish
like unto soot, which feces are called our Dragon, of which fæces
calcine one pound or more at your pleasure in a fervent hot fire, in a
potter's or glass-maker's furnace, or in a furnace of vent (or a wind
furnace), until it become a white calx, as white as snow; which white
calx keep well and clean by itself, for it is called the basis and
foundation of the work, and is now called Mars, and our White Fixed
Earth, or *Ferrum Philosophorum*.

*The Calcination of the Black Fæces, called our Black Dragon*.

Then take all the rest of the aforesaid black fæces, or Black Dragon,
and spread them somewhat thin upon a clean marble, or other fit stone,
and put into the one side thereof a burning coal, and the fire will
glide through the fæces within half-an-hour,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

and calcine them into a citrine colour very glorious to behold.

*The Solution of the said Fæces*.

Then dissolve those citrine fæces in such distilled vinegar as you did
before, and then filter it likewise three times as before, and after
make or evaporate it into a gum again, and then draw out of it more of
our menstruum, called now Dragon's Blood, and iterate this work in all
points as afore until you have either brought all or the most part of
the fæces into our natural and blessed liquor: all which liquor put to
the first liquor or menstrue called the Green Lion's blood, and set that
liquor altogether in one vessel of glass fourteen days in putrefication;
and after proceed to the separation of elements, for now have you all
the fire of the stone in this our blessed liquor, which before lay
hidden in the fæces; which secret all the philosophers do marvellously
hide.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

*The Separation of the Elements whereof the first is the Air, and is
also counted our Ardent Water and our Water Attractive*.

Then put all the said putrefied menstruum into a still of fine Venice
glass, fit for the quantity thereof; put on the limbeck, and close it to
the still with a fine linen cloth dipped in the white of an egg, and
then set it in *Balneo Mariæ*, put to the receiver, which must be of
great length, that the spirit respire not out again; and with a very
temperate heat separate the elements one from another, and then the
element of air will issue forth first, which is an oil.

*Our Ardent Water or Water Attractive is thus made*.

When all the first element is distilled, then in another still, fit for
it, rectify it: that is to say, distil it over seven several times, and
until it will burn a linen cloth clean up that is dipped into it, when
it is put to the flame, which is then called our

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ardent Water
rectified and is also called our Water Attractive; which keep very close
stopped, for otherwise the spirit thereof, which is very subtle, will
vanish away. By often rectifying the ardent water, there will come air
in a white oil swimming above the water, and there will remain behind a
yellow oil, which with a stronger fire will also come over. Put
sublimate, beaten small, upon a plate of iron, and in the cold it will
dissolve into water, and will draw to itself all the mercury in the form
of a green oil swimming aloft; which separate and put into a retort, and
distil first a water, and afterward will come a green thick oil, which
is the oil of mercury.

*The Flood or Water of the Stone*.

Then draw out the flood or water of the stone by itself in another
receptory, which liquor will be somewhat white, and draw it with a very
gentle fire of Balneum, until there remain in the bottom of the still a
thick oily substance, like unto liquid pitch;

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

keep this water by itself in a fit glass, very close stopped.

NOTE.—When the liquor cometh white you must put on another receiver, for
then all that element is come over; two or three drops of this black
liquid oil given in spirit of wine cureth all poison taken inwardly.

*Our Man's Blood is thus taken and rectified*.

Then put our ardent water upon that matter black and liquid; stir them
well together, and let it so stand well covered for three hours; then
decant and filter it; put on fresh ardent water, and repeat this
operation three times, and then distil it again with a moist lent fire
of Balneum; and so do three times, and then it is called Man's Blood
rectified, which the workers in the secrets of Nature do seek, and so
thou hast the elements exalted in the virtue of their quintessence,
namely, the flood that is water and the air. Let this blood be kept for
a season.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

*The Oil or Fire, as the Earth of the Stone*.

Then put up the flood, or water, upon the black and soft matter or earth
of the stone; let them be well mingled together, and then distil the
whole till there remain in the bottom an earth most dry and black, which
is the earth of the stone; save the oil with the water for a season,
close stopped in any wise.

*The Fiery Water*.

Then beat this black earth into powder, and mingle it with man's blood,
and so let it stand three hours; after that distil it on ashes with a
good fire, and reiterate this work three times; and then it shall be
water of the fire rectified, and so hast thou three of the elements
exalted into the virtue of the quintessence, namely water, air, and
fire.

*The Earth*.

Then calcine the earth black and dry in

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

a furnace of reverberation, until it become a very fine white calx.

*The Water of Life, which is our Mercury and our Lunary*.

Then mingle with this white calx the fiery water, and distil it with a
strong fire all off as before, and calcine the earth again that
remaineth in the bottom of the still, and then distil it again with a
strong fire as before, and again calcine it, and thus distil and calcine
it seven times, until all the substance of the calx be lifted up by the
limbec: and then thou hast the water of life rectified and made indeed
spiritual; and so hast thou the four elements exalted in the virtue of
their quintessence. This water will dissolve all bodies, and putrefy
them, and purge them: and this is our Mercury and our Lunary; and
whosoever thinketh there is any other water than this is an ignorant and
a fool, and shall never be able to come to the effect.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

*Ripley's .Secret Accurtation for the help of those who have the
Philosopher's Mercury, and are unable to proceed to either the Red or
White Elixir*.

Take the cerus, or cream, of the finest and purest Cornish tin molten,
reduce it into fine white calx, put it into a fit glass still, and there
upon pour a convenient quantity of our, when it is our Lunary perfect;
then distil that mercury from the calx again; imbibe it again therewith,
and again distil; reiterate this work until the calx is become subtle
and oily, yea, so subtle indeed that it will flow upon a plate of
copper, fiery hot as wax, and not evaporate, which then will convert
copper into fine silver, for the softness and neshness of the tin is
taken away by the benefit of our ☿, confixed unto it, by the virtue of
which it is made indurate and clean, that it may agree with hard bodies
in fusion and in malleation, even as pure silver. This work is very
gainful and easy to be dealt withal; use it therefore until thou be
rich, and then, I pray thee, for Our

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord's sake, go to
the great work, which is here truly set forth unto thee, according as by
practice I have wrought and proved the same. For the which thank God.

*The Oil which is the Element of Fire and our Red Mercury*.

The flood, with the oil afore reserved, shall be distilled with a most
lent fire *in Balneo*, and the red oil which remaineth in the bottom
shall be diligently kept by itself, for it is the Element of Fire; the
water shall be rectified again, and the same work iterated, until no
more of our said red Lunary will remain in it.

*The Work of Putrefication*.

When all your Elements be thus separated, then take the white calcined
*Fæces* first of all reserved, called *Mars*, and put so much thereof
into a chymia as will scarcely fill half the glass, and thereupon pour
so much of our Ardent Water rectified as may but well cover the *calx;*
which

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

done, incontinent stop close the glass with a blind head, and set it
into a cold place, until the calx have drunk up all the liquor, which it
will do in eight days. Then imbibe it again with the like quantity of
the same water, and let it stand eight days more, and so reiterate the
work, from eight days to eight days, until the same calx will drink no
more, but stand liquid still; then seal up the glass with Hermes' seal
and set it in *Balneo Mariæ* in a temperate heat to putrefaction.

*The Digestion of the White Stone*.

Then in that temperate *Balneum* let your glass stand unremoved by the
space of fully 150 days, and until the stone within the glass become
first russet and after whitish green, and after that very white, like
unto the eyes of fishes, which then is Sulphur of Nature flowing, and
not evaporating in fire, and our white stone ready to be fermented.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

*Another Secret Accurtation of Sir George Ripley*.

Take the above said Sulphur of Nature, and project a quantity upon a
plate of glass fiery hot, and the glass shall be converted into a silver
colour, and that colour shall not be removed by any art.

*The Digestion of the Red Stone*.

Then take out the white stone and divide it into two, and know the true
weight of each half: the one half reserve to the white work, the other
half put into the glass, and seal it up again with Hermes’ seal, and
then remove the glass into a cinerition, which is somewhat a hotter
fire, and let it stand there likewise unremoved in that digestion, until
it become red, and of a purple colour, so have you the red stone also
ready to be fermented.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

*The Preparation of the Ferment to the White Stone*.

Then take silver, well purged from all metals and other filth that may
be joined with it, and dissolve it in as much of our Lunary, which is
our ☿, as the quantity of your silver is (and in no greater quantity, as
near as you may), and set it upon warm ashes close covered, and when it
is throughly dissolved, the whole liquor will be green; then rectify our
☿, clean from it again twice or thrice, so that no drop of our ☿ be left
with it, then seal up the oil of *Luna* in a *Chemia*, and set it in
*Balneo* to putrefy until it show all colours, and at the last come to
be crystalline white, which then is the white Ferment of Ferments.

*The Fermentation of the White Stone*.

Then put that half of the white stone, before reserved, for the white
work into a fit glass, and know his weight, and put so much of the
foresaid Lune ferment into

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

the glass with the stone as may contain the fourth part of the said
stone; and in the said glass, well kited, fix them together, in a
fixatory vessel under the fire, which will be well done in two or three
days.

*The Inceration of the White Stone*.

When they are thus fixed together, and become one very fine powder,
incerate, that is to say, imbibe it with the white oil of our stone,
which is our Lunary, by pouring on, as it were, drop after drop, until
the stone be oilish; then congeal it, and again imbibe it, and in this
manner iterate this work, until this stone will flow in fire like wax,
when it is put upon a plate of copper fiery hot, and not evaporate, and
congeal it up until it be hard, white, and transparent clear as crystal;
then it is the Medicine of the Third Degree, and the Perfect White
Stone, transmuting all metalline bodies, and chiefly copper and iron,
into pure and perfect silver.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

*The Preparation of the Red Ferment*.

Then likewise take gold, very purely first purged from all other metals
that may be joined with it, with ten parts of antimony, and then
dissolve it in our, or liquor solutive, as before you did the Lune; and
when it is perfectly dissolved the liquor will be citrine; then, in like
manner rectify from it again our ☿, or liquor solutive, and then seal up
the oil of Gold Ferment in a *Chemia* fit for it, and set it in *Balneo*
to putrefy, which likewise will become black, and must stand still
unremoved in digestion, until it become white, which then remove into a
stronger fire, without opening the glass, and then keep it until it
change colours and become citrine, which then is also Ferment of
Ferments for the Red Work.

*The Fermentation of the Red Stone*.

Then to the other half of the stone before rubefied, digested, and
reserved for the Red

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Work, put so much
of the foresaid Gold Ferment as may contain the fourth part of the said
stone; and then fix them as you did the white stone, under fire in a
fixatory vessel, which will be then very well done in two or three days.

*The Work of Inceration for the Red*.

When they are thus fixed together, and thereby become one very fine
powder, incerate, that is imbibe it, with the Red Oil of our stone; then
congeal it again, and again imbibe and congeal, and iterate this work so
often until it will flow in fire as wax, but not evaporate when it is
put upon a plate of copper fiery hot; which then congeal up until it be
clear, transparent, hard, red in colour, like a ruby or jacinth, which
then is the Medicine of the Third Degree, and the Perfect Red Stone,
transmuting all bodies, and especially ☿, ♄, and ☽ into as pure ☉ as any
of the natural mine.

Thus have you the making of the Philosopher's

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stones, both white
and red, which is the Great Secret of Philosophers. These stones must be
kept by themselves, in several glasses, or fair boxes, in a warm place,
or dry at the least, as you would keep sugar, because they are of so
tender and oily substance, as they are apt to dissolve in every moist
place, which therefore preserve as is here showed.

*The Multiplication or Increase of the Virtue and Goodness of the
aforesaid White and Red Stone*.

If you list to exalt your medicine, or stone, in quantity or goodness,
then put your aforesaid white or red stone, or part of each, into a
several vial of glass fit for the quantity; close well the vial, then
hang your glass or glasses in *Balneo Mariæ vaporoso*, so that it touch
not the water; in this warm fume or breath, the stone, which was
congealed before in the glass, will now be dissolved, which then congeal
again upon warm ashes, and again thus

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

dissolve and congeal, and so iterate this work of dissolution and
congelation until at last the stone within the glass dissolved will be
congealed, as soon as he cometh out of the pot or Balneum, and feeleth
the cold air, without any other manner of congelation to be used: and
note that how often in this work you dissolve and congeal your said
medicine or stone, so many times doth he increase his virtue ten times
in projection; so that if at the first one ounce will convert one
hundred ounces, after the second solution the same one shall convert one
thousand, after the third ten thousand, after the fourth one hundred
thousand, and after the fifth one million parts of any imperfect metal
into pure and true gold and silver, in all examinations, as any of the
natural mine.

*The Way of Projection*.

Because it is very cumbersome to melt a thousand thousand parts of any
body, when you will make projection thus do:

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

Take one hundred ounces of ☿, first washed with salt and vinegar, and
put it into a crucible, and set it over the fire; and when that cloth
begin to wax hot, put in one ounce of your elixir, or medicine, thus
prepared as afore taught you, upon those one hundred parts of the
cleansed ☿; and all the said ☿ shall become medicine; project one ounce
of that medicine upon another hundred ounces, of other washed ☿ and it
shall all also be converted into medicine. Again the third time project
one ounce of this congealed ☿, upon another hundred ounces of washed ☿,
and all shall be converted into medicine; then project, the fourth time,
one ounce of this, last congealed ☿, upon another hundred ounces of
other washed ☿, and all that shall be converted into gold or silver,
according as your stone was prepared, to the white or red. Praised be
God.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

*Accurtation of the Great Work which saveth half the Work and Labour in
the Work revealed by Sir George Ripley*

The white frosty rime, or powder, whereof I told you in the beginning,
being found in the neck of the retort, after the drawing of the
menstruum, is like sublimate, and is perfect Sulphur of Nature, and
therefore needeth neither putrefaction nor digestion into white. Of this
sulphur take either the half, or the whole if you list, and also take so
much of Lune Ferment, when it is Ferment of Ferments, as may contain the
fourth part of the said Sulphur. Seal them up both together in a chemia,
and fix them together under the fire in a fixatory vessel, which will be
well done in three days; and when they are become one very fine white
powder, then incerate, that is to say, imbibe it, with the White Oil of
our Stone, which is our ☿, congealed; and imbibe and iterate this work,
and in all points do as

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

you did in the white work, in the great *Elixir* before; for this
sulphur is of the sane nature, and thus shall you have the white work
perfectly made, and the Stone, in half the time, and with half the
labour, which is not only a precious jewel, but a great secret also.

*The like Accurtation of the Red Work done by the aforesaid Sulphur*.

Take either the one half or the whole of this above said Sulphur of
Nature, and dissolve it once with our red Mercury. Congeal it again, and
then seal it up in a *Chemia* and set it in cinerition (or ashes) till
it be throughly digested, and until it hath put on the Purple Colour or
Fiery Chariot. Then put thereunto so much of the Ferment of *Sol*, when
it is Ferment of Ferments, as may contain the fourth part of the said
sulphur; then fix them together under a fire in a fixatory vessel, which
will be well done in three days, and when they become one very fine Red
Powder, then incerate

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

that is, imbibe it with the red oil of our stone, which is our Red and
Red Lunary, and Fire of the Stone, and continue in doing in all points
as in the great work aforesaid until the stone be hard, transparent, in
colour like a ruby or jacinth flowing in fire, and not evaporating; then
have you, with less labour and expense of time, the perfect Red Stone,
for which thank God.

This is the pleasant and dainty Garden of the Philosophers, which
beareth the sweet smelling roses white and red, abbreviated out of all
the Work of the Philosophers, containing in it nothing superfluous or
diminished, teaching to make infinitely gold and silver according as the
medicine was prepared, having virtue to heal all griefs and sicknesses,
as well proceeding of cold as of hot causes, through the subtlety of its
nature, above all other medicines of physicians: for it comforteth the
healthy, strengtheneth the weak, and maketh the aged seem young, and
driveth

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

away all grief, and putteth venom from the heart; it moisteneth the
arteries and joints; it dissolveth all things in the lungs; it cleanseth
the blood; it purgeth the pipes, and keepeth them clean; and if the
sickness be of one month's continuance, it healeth it in one day, if of
one year's continuance, it healeth it in twelve days, and if the grief
be very old, it healeth it in one month. To conclude, whosoever hath
this medicine, he hath an incomparable medicine above all treasures of
the world. Praise God.

FINIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preparations of the Sophic Mercury](cc23.md)
