[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu03)  [Next](yfhu05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index.md)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### HOW WE GOVERN THE FORCES WE POSSESS

Whenever you think or whenever you feel, whenever you speak, whenever
you act, or whatever may be taking place in your life, your supreme idea
should be that you are above it all, superior to it all, and have
control of it all. You simply must take this higher ground in all
action, thought and consciousness before you can control yourself and
direct, for practical purposes, the forces you possess. Therefore, what
has been said in connection with the **“I Am,”** the soul and the
individuality as being one, and as standing at the apex of human
existence, is just as important as anything that may be said hereafter
in connection with the application of the forces in man to practical
action. And though this phase of the subject may appear to be somewhat
abstract, we shall find no difficulty in understanding it more fully as
we apply the ideas evolved. In fact, when we learn to realize that we,
by nature, occupy a position that is above mind and body, this part of
the subject will be found more interesting than anything else, and its
application more profitable.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

We can define individuality more fully by stating that it is the
invisible man and that everything in man that is invisible belongs to
his individuality. It is the individuality that initiates, that controls
or directs. Therefore to control and use a force in your own system, you
must understand and develop individuality. Your individuality must be
made distinct, determined and positive. You must constantly know what
you are and what you want, and you must constantly be determined to
secure what you want. It is individuality that makes you different from
all other organized entities, and it is a highly developed individuality
that gives you the power to stand out distinct above the mass, and it is
the degree of individuality that you possess that determines largely
what position you are to occupy in the world.

Whenever you see a man who is different, who seems to stand out
distinct, and who has something vital about him that no one else seems
to possess, you have a man whose individuality is highly developed, and
you also have a man who is going to make his mark in the world. Take two
men of equal power, ability and efficiency, but with this difference. In
the one individuality is highly developed, while in the other it is not.
You know at once which one of these two is going to reach the highest
places in the world of achievement; and the reason is that the one who
possesses individuality, lives above mind and body, thereby being able
to control and direct the forces

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and powers of mind and body. The man, however, whose individuality is
weak, lives more or less down in mind and body, and instead of
controlling mind and body, is constantly being influenced by everything
from the outside that may enter his consciousness.

Whenever you find a man or a woman who is doing something worth while,
who is creating an impression upon the race, who is moving forward
towards greater and better things, you find the individuality strong,
positive and highly developed. It is therefore absolutely necessary that
you give your best attention to the development of a strong, positive
individuality if you wish to succeed in the world and make the best use
of the forces in your possession. A negative or weak individuality
drifts with the stream of environment, and usually receives only what
others choose to give, but a firm, strong, positive, well-developed
individuality, actually controls the ship of his life and destiny, and
sooner or later will gain possession of what he originally set out to
secure. A positive individuality has the power to take hold of things
and turn them to good account. This is one reason why such an
individuality always succeeds. Another reason is that the more fully
your individuality is developed, the more you are admired by everybody
with whom you may come in contact. The human race loves power, and
counts it a privilege to give lofty positions to those who have power.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and every man or woman, whose individuality is highly developed, does
possess power—usually exceptional power.

To develop individuality, the first essential is to give the **“I Am”**
its true and lofty position in your mind. The **“I Am”** is the very
center of individuality, and the more fully conscious you become of the
**“I Am”** the more of the power that is in the **“I Am”** you arouse,
and it is the arousing of this power that makes individuality positive
and strong. Another essential is to practice the idea of feeling or
conceiving yourself as occupying the masterful attitude. Whenever you
think of yourself, think of yourself as being and living and acting in
the masterful attitude. Then in addition, make every desire positive,
make every feeling positive, make every thought positive, and make every
action of mind positive. To make your wants distinct and positive, that
is, to actually and fully know what you want and then proceed to want
what you want with all the power that is in you, will also tend to give
strength and positiveness to your individuality; and the reason is that
such actions of mind will tend to place in positive, constructive action
every force that is in your system.

A most valuable method is to picture in your mind your own best idea of
what a strong, well-developed individuality would necessarily be, and
then think of yourself as becoming more and more like that picture. In
this connection it is well to remember that we

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

gradually grow into the likeness of that which we think of the most.
Therefore, if you have a very clear idea of a highly developed
individuality, and think a great deal of that individuality with a
strong, positive desire to develop such an individuality, you will
gradually and surely move towards that lofty ideal.

Another valuable method is to give conscious recognition to what may be
called the bigger man on the inside. Few people think of this greater
man that is within them, but we cannot afford to neglect this interior
entity for a moment. This greater or larger man is not something that is
separate and distinct from ourselves. It is simply the sum-total of the
greater powers and possibilities that are within us. We should recognize
these, think of them a great deal, and desire with all the power of
heart and mind and soul to arouse and express more and more of these
inner powers. Thus we shall find that the interior man, our real
individuality, will become stronger and more active, and our power to
apply our greater possibilities will increase accordingly. The value of
individuality is so great that it cannot possibly be overestimated.
Every known method that will develop individuality, therefore, should be
applied faithfully, thoroughly and constantly. In fact, no one other
thing we can do will bring greater returns.

The personality is the visible man. Everything that is visible in the
human entity belongs to the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

personality, but it is more than the body. To say that some one has a
fine personality may and may not mean that that personality is
beautiful, in the ordinary sense of the term. There might be no physical
beauty and yet the personality might be highly developed. There might be
nothing striking about such a personality, and yet there would be
something extremely attractive, something to greatly admire. On the
other hand, when the personality is not well developed, there is nothing
in the visible man that you can see, besides ordinary human clay.
Everything existing in such a personality is crude and even gross; but
there is no excuse for any personality being crude, unrefined or
undeveloped. There is not a single personality that cannot be so refined
and perfected as to become strikingly attractive, and there are scores
of reasons why such development should be sought. The most important
reason is that all the forces of man act through the personality, and
the finer the personality, the more easily can we direct and express the
forces we possess. When the personality is crude, we find it difficult
to apply in practical life the finer elements that are within us, and
here we find one reason why talent or ability so frequently fails to be
its best. In such cases the personality has been neglected, and is not a
fit instrument through which finer things and greater things can find
expression. The personality is related to the individual as the piano is
to the musician. If the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

piano is out of tune, the musician will fail, no matter how much of a
musician he may be; and likewise, if the piano or instrument is crude in
construction, the finest music cannot be expressed through it as a
channel. To develop the personality, the principal essential is to learn
how to transmute all the creative energies that are generated in the
human system, a subject that will be given thorough attention in another
chapter.

When we proceed to apply the forces within us, we find three fields of
action. The first is the conscious field, the field in which the mind
acts when we are awake. The second field is the subconscious, that field
in which the mind acts when it goes beneath consciousness. It is also
the field in which we act when asleep. The term, "falling asleep," is
therefore literally true, as when we go to sleep, the ego goes down, so
to speak, into another world—a world so vast, that only portions of it
have thus far been explored. The third field is the superconscious, the
field in which the mind acts when it touches the upper realm, and it is
when acting in this field that we gain real power and real inspiration;
in fact, when we touch the superconscious, we frequently feel as if we
have become more than mere man. To know how to act in the superconscious
field, is therefore highly important, even though the idea may at first
sight seem to be vague and somewhat mystical.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

We are constantly in touch, however, with the superconscious, whether we
know it or not. We frequently enter the superconscious when we listen to
inspiring music, when we read some book that touches the finer
intellect, when we listen to someone who speaks from what may be termed
the inner throne of authority, when we witness some soul-stirring scene
in nature. We also touch the superconscious when we are carried away
with some tremendous ambition, and herein we find practical value in a
great measure. When men of tremendous ambition are carried away, so to
speak, with the power of that ambition, they almost invariably reach the
higher and finer state of mind—a state where they not only feel more
power and determination than they ever felt before, but a state in which
the mind becomes so extremely active that it almost invariably gains the
necessary brilliancy to work out those plans or ideas that are required
in order that the ambition may be realized.

It can readily be demonstrated that we get our best ideas from this
lofty realm, and it is a well-known fact that no one ever accomplishes
great or wonderful things in the world, without touching frequently this
sublime inspiring state. When we train the mind to touch the
superconscious at frequent intervals, we always find the ideas we want.
We always succeed in providing the ways and means required. No matter
what the difficulties may be, we

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

invariably discover something by which we may overcome and conquer
completely.

Whenever you find yourself in what may be termed a difficult position,
proceed at once to work your mind up into higher and higher attitudes,
until you touch the superconscious, and when you touch that lofty state
you will soon receive the ideas or the methods that you need. But this
is not the only value connected with the superconscious. The highest
forces in man are the most powerful, but we cannot use those higher
forces without acting through the superconscious field. Therefore, if
you want to understand and apply all the forces you possess, you must
train the mind to act through the superconscious as well as the
conscious and the subconscious.

However, we must not permit ourselves to live exclusively in this lofty
state; though it is the source of the higher forces in man, those forces
that are indispensable to the doing of great and important things;
nevertheless, those forces cannot be applied unless they are brought
down to earth, so to speak, and united with practical action. He who
lives exclusively in the superconscious, will dream wonderful dreams,
but if he does not unite the forces of the superconscious with practical
action, he will do nothing else but dream dreams, and those dreams will
not come true. It is when we combine mental action in the conscious,
subconscious and superconscious that we get the results we desire. In
brief, it is the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

full use of all the forces in mind through all the channels of
expression that leads to the highest attainment and the greatest
achievements.

When we proceed with the practical application of any particular force,
we shall not find it necessary to cause that force to act through what
may be termed the psychological field, and the reason is that the
psychological field in man is the real field of action. It is the field
through which the undercurrents flow, and we all understand that it is
these undercurrents that determine, not only the direction of action,
but the results that follow action. This idea is well illustrated in the
following lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Straws upon the surface flow;  
He who would seek for pearls must dive below."</span>

</div>

The term "below" as applied to the life and consciousness of man, is
synonymous with the psychological field, or the field of the
undercurrents. Ordinary minds skim over the surface. Great minds
invariably sound these deeper depths, and act in and through the
psychological field. Their minds dive below into the rich vastness of
what may be termed the gold mines of the mind, and the diamond fields of
the soul.

When we enter the psychological field of any force, which simply means
the inner and finer field of action of that force, we act through the
undercurrents, and thereby proceed to control those currents. It is in
the field of the undercurrents that we find both the origin

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and the action of cause, whether physical or mental. It is these
currents, when acted upon intelligently, that remove what we do not want
and produce those changes that we do want. They invariably produce
effects, both physical and mental, according to the action that we give
to them, and all those things that pertain to the personality will
respond only to the actions of those currents; that is, you cannot
produce any effect in any part of the mind or body unless you first
direct the undercurrents of the system to produce those effects. To act
through the undercurrents therefore is absolutely necessary, no matter
what we may wish to do, or what forces we may wish to control, direct or
apply; and we act upon those undercurrents only when we enter the
psychological field.

In like manner, we can turn to good account all things in practical
everyday life only when we understand the psychology of those things.
The reason is, that when we understand the psychology of anything, we
understand the power that is back of that particular thing, and that
controls it and gives it definite action. In consequence, when we
understand the psychology of anything in our own field of action or in
our own environment, we will know how to deal with it so as to secure
whatever results that particular thing has the power to produce. But
this law is especially important in dealing with forces within
ourselves, whether those forces act through the mind

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

or through any one of the faculties, through the personality or through
the conscious, subconscious or superconscious fields. In brief, whatever
we do in trying to control and direct the powers we possess, we must
enter the deeper life of those powers, so that we can get full control
of the undercurrents. It is the way those undercurrents flow that
determines results, and as we can direct those currents in any way that
we desire, we naturally conclude that we can secure whatever results we
desire.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Man lives to move forward. To move forward is to live more. To live
more is to be more and do more; and it is being and doing that
constitutes the path to happiness. The more you are and the more you do,
the richer your life, the greater your joy. But being and doing must
always live together as one. To try to be much and not try to do much,
is to find life a barren waste. To try to do much and not try to be
much, is to find life a burden too heavy and wearisome to bear. The
being of much gives the necessary inspiration and the necessary power to
the doing of much. The doing of much gives the necessary expression to
the being of much. And it is the bringing forth of being through the act
of doing that produces happiness that is happiness. Being much gives
capacity for doing much. Doing much gives expression to the richest and
the best that is within us. And the more we increase the richness of
that which is within us, the more we increase our happiness, provided we
increase, in the same proportion, the expression of that greater
richness. The first essential is provided for by the being of much; the
second, by the doing of much; and the secret of both may be found by him
who lives to move forward*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Use of Mind In Practical Action](yfhu05.md)
