[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu01)  [Next](yfhu03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### FOREWORD

"There are a million energies in man. What may we not become when we
learn to use them all." This is the declaration of the poet; and though
poetry is usually inspired by transcendental visions, and therefore more
or less impressed with apparent exaggerations, nevertheless there is in
this poetic expression far more actual, practical truth than we may at
first believe.

How many energies there are in man, no one knows; but there are so many
that even the keenest observers of human activity have found it
impossible to count them all. And as most of these energies are
remarkable, to say the least, and some of them so remarkable as to
appear both limitless in power and numberless in possibilities, we may
well wonder what man will become when he learns to use them all.

When we look upon human nature in general we may fail to see much
improvement in power and worth as compared with what we believe the race
has been in the past; and therefore we conclude that humanity will
continue to remain about the same upon this planet until the end of
time. But when we investigate the lives of such individuals as have
recently tried to apply more intelligently the greater powers within
them, we come to a different conclusion. We then discover that there is
evidence in thousands

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of human lives of a new and superior race of people—a race that will
apply a much larger measure of the wonders and possibilities that exist
within them.

It is only a few years, not more than a quarter of a century, since
modern psychology began to proclaim the new science of human thought and
action, so that we have had but a short time to demonstrate what a more
intelligent application of our energies and forces can accomplish. But
already the evidence is coming in from all sources, revealing results
that frequently border upon the extraordinary. Man can do far more with
himself and his life than he has been doing in the past; he can call
into action, and successfully apply, far more ability, energy and worth
than his forefathers ever dreamed of. So much has been proven during
this brief introductory period of the new age. Then what greater things
may we not reasonably expect when we have had fifty or a hundred years
more in which to develop and apply those larger possibilities which we
now know to be inherent in us all.

It is the purpose of the following pages, not only to discuss these
greater powers and possibilities in man, but also to present practical
methods through which they may be applied. We have been aware of the
fact for centuries that there is more in man than what appears on the
surface, but it is only in recent years that a systematic effort has
been made to understand the nature and practical use of this "more,"

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

as well as to work out better methods for the thorough and effective
application of those things on the surface which we have always
employed. In dealing with a subject that is so large and so new,
however, it is necessary to make many statements that may, at first
sight, appear to be unfounded, or at least exaggerations. But if the
reader will thoroughly investigate the basis of such statements as he
goes along, he will not only find that there are no unfounded statements
or exaggerations in the book, but will wish that every strong statement
made had been made many times as strong.

When we go beneath the surface of human life and learn what greater
things are hidden beneath the ordinary layers of mental substance and
vital energy, we find man to be so wonderfully made that language is
wholly inadequate to describe even a fraction of his larger and richer
life. We may try to give expression to our thoughts, at such times, by
employing the strongest statements and the most forceful adjectives that
we can think of; but even these prove little better than nothing; so
therefore we may conclude that no statement that attempts to describe
the "more" in man can possibly be too strong. Even the strongest fails
to say one thousandth of what we would say should we speak the whole
truth. We shall all admit this, and accordingly shall find it advisable
not to pass judgment upon strong statements but to learn to understand
and apply those greater powers within

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

ourselves that are infinitely stronger than the strongest statement that
could possibly be made.

Those minds who may believe that the human race is to continue weak and
imperfect as usual, should consider what remarkable steps in advance
have recently been taken in nearly all fields of human activity. And
then they should remember that the greater powers in man, as well as a
scientific study of the use of his lesser powers, have been almost
wholly neglected. The question then that will naturally arise is, what
man might make of himself if he would apply the same painstaking science
to his own development and advancement as he now applies in other
fields. If he did, would we not, in another generation or two, witness
unmistakable evidence of the coming of a new and superior race, and
would not strong men and women become far more numerous than ever before
in the history of the world?

Each individual will want to answer these questions according to his own
point of view, but whatever his answer may be, we all must agree that
man can be, become and achieve far more than even the most sanguine
indications of the present may predict. And it is the purpose of the
following pages to encourage as many as possible to study and apply
these greater powers within them so that they may not only become
greater and richer and more worthy as individuals, but may also become
the forerunners of that higher and more wonderful race of which we all
have so fondly dreamed.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

#### PROMISE YOURSELF

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*To be so strong that nothing can disturb your peace of mind.  
To talk health, happiness and prosperity to every person you meet.  
To make all your friends feel that there is something in them.  
To look at the sunny side of everything and make your optimism come
true.  
To think only of the best, to work only for the best, and to expect only
the best.  
To be just as enthusiastic about the success of others as you are about
your own.  
To forget the mistakes of the past and press on to the greater
achievements of the future.  
To wear a cheerful countenance at all times and give every living
creature you meet a smile.  
To give so much time to the improvement of yourself that you have no
time to criticise others.  
To be too large for worry, too noble for anger, too strong for fear; and
too happy to permit the presence of trouble.  
To think well of yourself and to proclaim this fact to the world, not in
loud words but in great deeds.  
To live in the faith that the whole world is on your side so long as you
are true to the best that is in you*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Ruling Principle In Man](yfhu03)
