[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu05)  [Next](yfhu07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index.md)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### THE FORCES OF THE SUBCONSCIOUS

In using the power of the mind, the deeper the action of thought, will
and desire, the greater the result. Accordingly, all mental action to be
strong and effective, must be subconscious; that is, it must act in the
field of the mental undercurrent as it is in this field that things are
actually done. Those forces that play upon the surface of mind may be
changed and turned from their course by almost any outside influence,
and their purpose thus averted. But this is never true of the
undercurrents. Anything that gets into the mental undercurrents will be
seen through to a finish, regardless of external circumstances or
conditions; and it is with difficulty that the course of these currents
is changed when once they have been placed in full positive action. It
is highly important therefore that we permit nothing to take action in
these undercurrents that we do not wish to encourage and promote; and
for the same reason, it is equally important that we cause everything to
take action in these currents that we do wish to encourage and promote.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

These undercurrents, however, act only through the subconscious, and are
controlled by the subconscious. In consequence, it is the subconscious
which we must understand and act upon if we want the power of mind to
work with full capacity and produce the greatest measure possible of the
results desired.

In defining the subconscious mind, it is first necessary to state that
it is not a separate mind. There are not two minds. There is only one
mind in man, but it has two phases—the conscious and the subconscious.
We may define the conscious as the upper side of the mentality, and the
subconscious as the under side. The subconscious may also be defined as
a vast mental field permeating the entire objective personality, thereby
filling every atom of the personality through and through. We shall come
nearer the truth, however, if we think of the subconscious as a finer
mental force, having distinct powers, functions and possibilities, or as
a great mental sea of life, energy and power, the force and capacity of
which has never been measured.

The conscious mind is on the surface, and therefore we act through the
conscious mind whenever mental action moves through the surface of
thought, will or desire, but whenever we enter into deeper mental action
and sound the vast depths of this underlying mental life, we touch the
subconscious, though we must remember that we do not become

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

oblivious to the conscious every time we touch the subconscious, as the
two are inseparably united.

That the two phases of the mind are related can be well illustrated by
comparing the conscious mind with a sponge, and the subconscious with
the water permeating the sponge. We know that every fiber of the sponge
is in touch with the water, and/ in the same manner, every part of the
conscious mind, as well as every atom in the personality is in touch
with the subconscious, and completely filled, through and through, with
the life and the force of the subconscious.

It has frequently been stated that the subconscious mind occupies the
Fourth Dimension of space, and though this is a matter that cannot be
exactly demonstrated, nevertheless, the more we study the nature of the
subconscious, as well as the Fourth Dimension, the more convinced we
become that the former occupies the field of the latter. This, however,
is simply a matter that holds interest in philosophical investigation.
Whether the subconscious occupies the Fourth Dimension or some other
dimension of space will make no difference as to its practical value.

In order to understand the subconscious, it is well at the outset to
familiarize ourselves with its natural functions, as this will convince
ourselves of the fact that we are not dealing with something that is
beyond normal, mental action. The subconscious mind controls all the
natural functions of the body, such as

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the circulation, respiration, digestion, assimilation, physical repair,
etc. It also controls all the involuntary actions of the body, and all
those actions of mind and body that continue their natural movements
without direction from the will. The subconscious perpetuates
characteristics, traits and qualities that are peculiar to individuals,
species or races. What is called heredity therefore is altogether a
subconscious process. The same is true of what is called second nature.
Whenever anything has been repeated a sufficient number of times to have
become habitual, it becomes second nature, or rather a subconscious
action. It frequently happens, however, that a conscious action may
become a subconscious action without repetition, and thus becomes second
nature almost at once.

When we examine the nature of the subconscious, we find that it responds
to almost anything the conscious mind may desire or direct, though it is
usually necessary for the conscious mind to express its desire upon the
subconscious for some time before the desired response is secured. The
subconscious is a most willing servant, and is so competent that thus
far we have failed to find a single thing along mental lines that it
will not or cannot do. It submits readily to almost any kind of
training, and will do practically anything that it is directed to do,
whether the thing is to our advantage or not.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

In this connection, it is interesting to learn that there are a number
of things in the human system usually looked upon as natural, and
inevitable, that are simply the results of misdirected subconscious
training in the past. We frequently speak of human weaknesses as
natural, but weakness is never natural. Although it may appear, it is
invariably the result of imperfect subconscious training. It is never
natural to go wrong, but it is natural to go right, and the reason why
is simple. Every right action is in harmony with natural law, while
every wrong action is a violation of natural law.

It has also been stated that the aging process is natural, but modern
science has demonstrated that it is not natural for a person to age at
sixty, seventy, or eighty years. The fact that the average person does
manifest nearly all the conditions of old age at those periods of time,
or earlier, simply proves that the subconscious mind has been trained
through many generations to produce old age at sixty, seventy, eighty or
ninety, as the case may be; and the subconscious always does what it has
been trained to do. It can just as readily be trained, however, to
produce greater physical strength and greater mental capacity at ninety
than we possess at thirty or forty. It can also be trained to possess
the same virile youth at one hundred as the healthiest man or woman of
twenty may possess. In fact, practically every condition that appears in
the mind, the character and

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the personality of the human race, is the result of what the
subconscious mind has been directed to do during past generations. It is
therefore evident that as the subconscious is directed to produce
different conditions in mind, character and personality—conditions that
are in perfect harmony with the natural law of human development, such
conditions will invariably appear in the race. Thus we understand how a
new race or a superior race may appear upon this planet.

There are a great many people who are disturbed over the fact that they
have inherited certain characteristics or ailments from their parents,
but what they have inherited is simply subconscious tendencies in that
direction, and those tendencies can be changed absolutely. What we
inherit from our parents can be eliminated so completely that no one
would ever know it had been there. In like manner, we can improve so
decidedly upon the good qualities that we have inherited from our
parents that any similarity between parent and child in those respects
would disappear completely. The subconscious mind is always ready,
willing and competent to make any change for the better in our physical
or mental makeup that we may desire, though it does not work in some
miraculous manner, nor does it usually produce results instantaneously.
In most instances its actions are gradual, but they invariably produce
the results intended if the proper training continues.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

The subconscious mind will respond to the directions of the conscious
mind so long as those directions do not interfere with the absolute laws
of nature. The subconscious never moves against natural law, but it has
the power to so use natural law that improvement along any line can be
secured. It will reproduce in mind and body any condition that is
thoroughly impressed and deeply felt by the conscious mind. It will
bring forth undesirable conditions when directed to produce such
conditions, and it will bring forth health, strength, youth and added
power when so directed. If you continue to desire a strong physical
body, and fully expect the subconscious to build for you a stronger
body, you will find that this will gradually or finally be done. You
will steadily grow in physical strength. If you continue to desire
greater ability along a certain line and expect the subconscious to
produce greater mental. power along that line, your ability will
increase as expected, but it is necessary in this connection to be
persistent and persevering. To become enthusiastic about these things
for a few days is not sufficient. It is when we apply these laws
persistently for weeks, months and years that we find the results to be,
not only what we expected, but frequently far greater.

Everything has a tendency to grow in the subconscious. Whenever an
impression or desire is placed in the subconscious, it has a tendency to
become larger and therefore the bad becomes worse

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

when it enters the subconscious, while the good becomes better. We have
the power, however, to exclude the bad from the subconscious and cause
only the good to enter that immense field. Whenever you say that you are
tired and permit that feeling to sink into the subconscious, you will
almost at once feel more tired. Whenever you feel sick and permit that
feeling to enter the subconscious, you always feel worse. The same is
true when you are weak, sad, disappointed or depressed. If you let those
feelings sink into your subconscious, they will become worse. On the
other hand, when we feel happy, strong, persistent and determined, and
permit those feelings to enter the subconscious, we always feel better.
It is therefore highly important that we positively refuse to give in to
any undesirable feeling. Whenever we give in to any feeling, it becomes
subconscious, and if that feeling is bad, it becomes worse; but so long
as we keep undesirable feelings on the outside, so to speak, we will
hold them at bay, until nature can readjust itself or gather reserve
force and thus put them out of the way altogether.

We should never give in to sickness, though that does not mean that we
should continue to work as hard as usual when not feeling well, or cause
mind and body to continue in their usual activities. When we find it
necessary, we should give ourselves a complete rest, but we should never
give in to the feeling of sickness. The rest that may be taken will help

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the body to recuperate, and when it does the threatening ailment will
disappear. When you feel tired or depressed, do not admit it, but turn
your attention at once upon something that is extremely
interesting—something that will completely turn your mind towards the
pleasing, the more desirable or the ideal. Persist in feeling the way
you want to feel, and permit only wholesome feelings to enter the
subconscious. Thus wholesome feelings will live and grow, and after
awhile your power to feel good at all times will have become so strong
that you can put out of the way any adverse feeling that may threaten at
any time.

In this connection, we may mention something that holds more than usual
interest. It has been stated by those who are in a position to know,
that no one dies until he gives up; that is, gives in to those adverse
conditions that are at work in his system, tending to produce physical
death. So long as he refuses to give in to those conditions, he
continues to live. How long a person could refuse to give in even under
the most adverse circumstances is a question, but one thing is certain,
that thousands and thousands of deaths could be prevented every year if
the patient in each case refused to give in. In many instances, the
forces of life and death are almost equally balanced. Which one is going
to win depends upon the mental attitude of the patient. If he gives over
his mind and his will to the side of the forces of life, those

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

forces are most likely to win, but if he permits the mind to act with
death, the forces of death are most certain to win. So long as he
continues to persist in living, refusing absolutely to give in to death,
he is throwing the full power of mind, thought and will on the side of
life. He thereby increases the power of life, and he may increase that
power sufficiently to overcome death. Again we say that it is a question
how many times a person could overcome death by this method, but the
fact remains that this method alone can save life repeatedly in a
majority of cases; and all will admit after further thought on this
subject that the majority will be very large. This is a method,
therefore, that deserves the best of attention in every sickroom. No
person should be permitted to die until all available methods for
prolonging life have been exhausted, and this last mentioned method is
one that will accomplish far more than most of us nay expect; and its
secret is found in the fact that whenever we give in to any condition or
action, it becomes stronger, due to the tendency of the subconscious to
enlarge, increase and magnify whatever it receives. Give in to the
forces of death, and the subconscious mind will increase the powers of
that force. Give in to the forces of life, and the subconscious mind
will increase the power of your life and you will continue to live.

Concerning the general possibilities of the subconscious, we should
remember that every faculty has a

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

subconscious side, and that it becomes larger and. more competent as
this subconscious side is developed. This being true, it is evident that
ability and genius might be developed in any mind even to a remarkable
degree, as no limit has been found to the subconscious in any of its
forces. In like manner, every cell in your body has a subconscious side,
and therefore, if the subconscious side of the personality were
developed, we can realize what improvement would become possible in that
field. There is a subconscious side to all the faculties in human
nature, and if these were developed, we understand how man could become
ideal, even far beyond our present dreams of a new race.

It is not well however to give the major portion of our attention to
future possibilities. It is what is possible now that we should aim to
develop and apply, and present possibilities indicate that improvement
along any line, whether it be in working capacity, ability, health,
happiness and character can be secured without fail if the subconscious
is properly directed.

To direct the subconscious along any line, it is only necessary to
desire what you want and to make those desires so deep and so persistent
that they become positive forces in the subconscious field. When you
feel that you want a certain thing give in to that feeling and also make
that feeling positive. Give in to your ambitions in the same manner, and
also to

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

every desire that you wish to realize. Let your thought of all those
things that you wish to increase in any line get into your system,
because whatever gets into your system, the subconscious will proceed to
develop, work out and express.

In using the subconscious, we should remember that we are not using
something that is separated from normal life. The difference between the
man who makes scientific use of the subconscious and the one who does
not, is simply this; the latter employs only a small part of his mind,
while the former employs the whole of his mind. And this explains why
those who employ the subconscious intelligently have greater working
capacity, greater ability and greater endurance. In consequence they
sometimes do the work of two or three men, and do excellent work in
addition. To train the subconscious for practical action is therefore a
matter of common sense. It is a matter of refusing to cultivate only a
small corner of your mental field when you can cultivate the entire
field.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

#### THE PATH TO GREATER THINGS

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Dream constantly of the ideal; work ceaselessly to perfect the real.*

*Believe in yourself; believe in everybody; believe in all that has
existence.*

*Give the body added strength; give the mind added brilliancy; give the
soul added inspiration.*

*Do your best under every circumstance, and believe that every
circumstance will give its best to you.*

*Live for the realization of more life and for the more efficient use of
everything that proceeds from life.*

*Desire eternally what you want; expect eternally what you desire; and
act always as if every expectation were coming true*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Training the Subconscious For Special Results](yfhu07.md)
