[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu09)  [Next](yfhu11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### THE ART OF CHANGING FOR THE BETTER

Personal man gradually but surely grows into the likeness of that which
he thinks of the most, and man thinks the most of what he loves the
best. This is the law through which man has become what he is, and it is
through the intelligent use of this law that man may change for the
better and improve in any way desired. The thought you think not only
effects your character, your mind and your body, but also produces the
original cause of every characteristic, every habit, every tendency,
every desire, every mental quality and every physical condition that
appears in your system. Thought is the one original cause of the
conditions, characteristics and peculiarities of the human personality,
and everything that appears in the personality is the direct or indirect
effect of the various actions of thought. It is therefore evident that
man naturally grows into the likeness of the thought he thinks, and it
also evident that the nature of his thought would be determined by that
which he thinks of the most.

The understanding of this fact will reveal to all minds the basic law of
change, and though it is basic,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

its intelligent use may become simplicity itself. Through the
indiscriminate use of this law, man has constantly been changing,
sometimes for the better, sometimes not, but by the conscious,
intelligent, use of this law he may change only for the better and as
rapidly as the sum total of his present ability will permit.

The fact that mental conditions and dispositions may be changed through
the power of thought, will readily be accepted by every mind, but that
mental qualities, abilities, personal appearances and physical
conditions may be changed in the same way all minds may not be ready to
accept. Nevertheless, that thought can change anything in the human
system, even to a remarkable degree, is now a demonstrated fact. We have
all seen faces change for the worse under the influence of grief, worry
and misfortune, and we have observed that all people grow old who expect
to do so, regardless of the fact that the body of the octogenarian is
not a day older than the body of a little child. We have unlimited
evidence to prove that ability will improve or deteriorate according to
the use that is made of the mind. A man's face reveals his thought, and
we can invariably detect the predominating states of the mind that lives
in a groove. When a person changes his mental states at frequent
intervals, no one state has the opportunity to produce an individual,
clear-cut expression, and therefore cannot be so readily detected,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

but where one predominating state is continued in action for weeks or
months or years, any one can say what that state is, by looking at the
face of him who has it. Thus we can detect different kinds of
disposition, different grades of mind, different degrees of character
and different modes of living, and convince ourselves at the same time,
that man in general, looks, acts and lives the way he thinks.

The fact that every mental state will express its nature in body, mind
and character, proves that we can, through the intelligent use of mental
action, cause the body to become more beautiful, the mind more
brilliant, character more powerful and the soul life more ideal. To
accomplish these things, however, it is necessary to apply the law
continuously in that direction where we desire to secure results. When a
person thinks of the ordinary for a few weeks, he invariably begins to
look ordinary. Then when something impels him to think for a while of
the ideal, the true and the beautiful, he begins to look like a new
creature; but if reverses threaten, he will feel worried, dejected and
afraid, and everybody observes that he looks bad. Then if the tide turns
in his favor, he will begin to look content, and if something should
suggest to his mind the thought of the wholesome, the sound and the
harmonious, he will begin to look remarkably well. In this manner he is
daily using the law of change, but never intelligently. He does not take
the law into

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

his own hands, but uses the law only as suggestions from his environment
may direct. He advances one day and falls back the next. One week his
physical mansion is painted with colors of health and beauty; the next
week only the conditions of age and disease are in evidence. He plants a
flower seed today, and tomorrow hoes it up to plant a weed in its place.
Thus the average person continues to live, and every change comes from
the unconscious, indiscriminate use of the power of his thought. This
power, however, can be employed more wisely, and when the many begin to
do so, the progress of the race will be remarkable indeed.

The basic law of change must be taken into our own hands, and must be
employed directly for producing the change we have in view; and to
accomplish this the love nature must be so trained that we shall love
only what we want to love, only what is greater and better than that
which we have realized up to the present time. In this respect strong,
highly developed souls will have no difficulty, because they have the
power to see the great, the beautiful and the ideal in all things, but
those who have not as yet acquired that power, must train their feelings
with care, lest love frequently turns thought upon the low, the common
or the ordinary.

What you admire in others will develop in yourself. Therefore, to love
the ordinary in any one is to become ordinary, while to love the noble
and the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

lofty in all minds is to grow into the likeness of that which is noble
and lofty. When we love the person of someone who is in the earth
earthy, we tend to keep ourselves down in the same place. We may give
our kindness and our sympathies to all, but we must not love anything in
any one that is not ideal. It is a misdirection of love to love
exclusively the visible person. It is the ideal, the true and the
beautiful in every person that should be loved, and as all persons have
these qualities, we can love everybody with a whole heart in this more
sublime manner.

In this connection a great problem presents itself to many men and women
who aspire to a life of great quality. These people feel that they
cannot give their personal love to husbands, wives, relatives or friends
that persist in living in the mere animal world; but the problem is
easily solved. We must not love what is ordinary in any one; in fact,
the ordinary must not be recognized, but we can love the real life in
every one, and if we will employ our finer perceptions we will find that
this real life is ideal in every living creature in the world. We need
not love the perversions of a person, but we can love the greater
possibilities and the superior qualities that are inherent in the
individual. It is not the imperfections or appearances that should be
loved, but the greatness that is within; and what we love in

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

others we not only awaken in others, but we develop those very things
more or less in ourselves.

To promote the best welfare of individuals under all sorts of
circumstances, personal loves should be exchanged only by persons who
live in the same world. When the woman has found the superior world, the
man must not expect her personal love unless he also goes up to live in
the same world. It is simply fair that he should do so. The woman who
lives in a small world must not expect the love of a man who lives in a
great world. He would lose much of his greatness if he should give his
personal love to such a woman.

The tendency of all life is onward and upward. Therefore, to ask
anything to come down is to violate the very purpose of existence. If we
wish to be with the higher, the greater and the superior, we must change
ourselves and become higher, greater and superior; and this we all can
do.

In the application of the basic law of change, no factor is more
important than that of pleasure. We are controlled to a great extent by
the pleasures we enjoy, ofttimes so much so that they may even determine
our destiny. The reason why is found in the fact that we deeply love
what we thoroughly enjoy, and since we think the most of what we love
the best, we naturally become like the pleasures we thoroughly enjoy,
because man gradually grows into the likeness of his predominating
thought. It is therefore

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

unwise to permit ourselves to enjoy anything that is beneath our most
perfect conception of the ideal, and it is likewise unwise to associate
personally with people who care only for the ordinary and the common.
What we enjoy becomes a part of ourselves, and for the good of
everybody, we cannot afford to go down; but when we love only those
pleasures that are as high as our own ideal of joy, then we are truly on
the great ascending path.

To overlook the wrongs, the defects and the perversions of life, and to
look only for that beautiful something in every soul that we simply want
to love, even without trying, is one of the greatest things that we can
do; but we must not permit our conception of the beautiful within to
become a mere, cold abstraction. It is most important that we be as
emotional as we possibly can without permitting ourselves to be
controlled by our emotions. The heart should be most tender and warm,
and every feeling constantly on fire; but if all such feelings are
turned into the secret realms of soul life, we shall find that the
forces of love are drawn insistently towards the highest, the truest,
the most noble and the most beautiful that our inspired moments have
revealed. When this is done we can readily love with the whole heart any
noble quality, or high art, or great work upon which we may direct our
attention, and what we can love at will, that we can think of as deeply
and as long as we may desire.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

When we have formulated in our minds what changes we wish to make, the
course to pursue is to love the ideal that corresponds to those changes.
This love must be deep and strong, and must be continued until the
desired change has actually taken place. Know what better qualities you
want; then love those qualities with all your mind and heart and soul.

To love the higher and the greater qualities of life is to cause the
creative qualities of mind to produce those same qualities in our own
nature; and in consequence, we steadily grow into the likeness of that
which we constantly love. This is the great law—the law that governs all
change for the better. But to use this law intelligently the power of
love must cease to respond to every whim or notion that the
suggestibility of environment may present to the mind.

The power of love is the greatest power in the world, but it can cause
persons or nations to fall to the lowest state, as well as rise to the
highest state. Every fall in the history of the race has been caused
largely by the misdirection of love, while every step in advance has
been prompted largely by the power of love turned upon better things. To
misdirect love is to love that which is beneath our present stage in
advancement; it is turning the forces of life backward, and
retrogression must inevitably follow.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

In the average person, love is directed almost exclusively upon the
personal side of life. In consequence, the love nature becomes so
personal, so limited and so superficial, that materialism follows. In
many other minds, it is mere appearances that attract the power of
admiration, and the finer things in mind, soul and character are wholly
ignored. The result is that the finer qualities of such people gradually
disappear, and grossness, both in thought and in appearance naturally
follow. But we must not conclude in this connection that it is wrong to
admire the beautiful wherever it may be seen in the external world. We
should love the beautiful everywhere, no matter where it may be found;
we should admire the richness of life, both in the external and in the
internal; and by living a complete life, we shall enjoy more and more of
the richness and the beautiful in life, in the within as well as in the
without. But the power of love must direct the greater part of its
attention upon that which is rich and beautiful in mind and soul. It is
that which is finer than the finest of external things that must be
loved if man is to grow into the likeness of the great, the superior and
the ideal, because man is as he thinks, and he thinks the most of what
he loves the best.

When any individual begins to love the finer qualities in life, and
gives all the power of mind and soul to that love, he has taken the
first step in the changing of his destiny. He is laying the foundation
for

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

a great and a better future, and if he continues as he has begun, he
will positively reach the loftiest goal that he may have in view. There
are many laws to apply in the beginning of a great life, but the law
that lies at the foundation of them all is the law of love. It is love
that determines what we are to think, what we are to work for, where we
are to go, and what we are to accomplish. Therefore, among all great
essentials, the principal one is to know how to love.

To apply this essential for all practical purposes, the secret is to
love the great, the beautiful and the ideal in everybody and in
everything; and to love with such a strong, passionate love that its
ascending power becomes irresistible. The whole of life will thus change
and go up with the power of love into the great, the superior and the
ideal; everything, both in the being of man and in his environment will
advance and change accordingly, and the dreams of the soul will come
true. The ideal will become real, the desires of the heart will be
granted, and what man has hoped to make his own will be absent no more.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*When failure comes be more determined than ever to succeed.*

*The more feeling there is in your thought the greater its power.*

*You steadily and surely become in the real what you constantly and
clearly think that you are in the ideal.*

*The more you believe in yourself the more of your latent powers and
possibilities you place in action. And the more you believe in your
purpose the more of your power you apply in promoting that purpose.*

*To him who thinks he can everything is an opportunity.*

*Depend only upon yourself, but work in harmony with all things. Thus
you call forth the best that is in yourself and secure the best that
external sources have to give*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. He Can Who Thinks He Can](yfhu11)
