[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu16)  [Next](yfhu18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

### CHAPTER XV

#### THE ART OF BUILDING CHARACTER

Character is developed by training all the forces and elements of life
to act constructively in those spheres for which they were created, and
to express themselves in those actions only that promote the original
purpose of the being of man.

Every part of the human system has a purpose of its own—a purpose that
it was created to fulfill. When those elements that belong to each part
express themselves in such a way that the purpose of that part is
constantly promoted, all actions are right; and it is character that
causes those actions to be right. Character is therefore indispensable,
no matter what one's object in life may be. Character is the proper
direction of all things, and the proper use of all things in the human
system. And the proper use of anything is that use that promotes the
purpose for which that particular thing was created.

To develop character it is therefore necessary to know what life is for,
to know what actions promote the purpose of that life, and to know what
actions

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

retard that purpose. When the secret of right action is discovered, and
every part of man is steadily trained in the expression of right action,
character may be developed. But whatever is done, character must be
applied in its fullest capacity. It is only through this full use, right
use and constant use that anything may be perpetuated or developed.

Character develops through a constant effort to cause every action in
the human system to be a right action; that is, a constructive action,
or an action that promotes the purpose of that part of the system in
which the action takes place. This is natural because since character is
the power of right action, every effort to extend the scope of right
action will increase the power of character. To have character is to
have the power to promote what you know to be the purpose of life, and
to be able to do the right when you know the right. To have character is
to know the right, and to be so well established in the doing of the
right that nothing in the world can turn you into the wrong.

The first essential is therefore to know the right; to be able to select
the right; to have that understanding that can instinctively choose the
proper course of action, and that knows how each force and element of
life is to be directed so that the original purpose of human life will
be fulfilled. The understanding of the laws of life will give this first
essential in an intellectual sense, and this is necessary in

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

the beginning; but when character develops, one inwardly knows what is
right without stopping to reason about it. The development of character
enables one to feel what is right and what course to pursue regardless
of exterior conditions or intellectual evidence. The intellect discerns
that the right is that which promotes growth and development; character
inwardly feels that the right leads to greater things and to better
things, and that the wrong leads invariably to the inferior and the
lesser.

The presence of character produces a consciousness of growth throughout
the system; and the stronger the character, the more keenly one can feel
that everything is being reconstructed, refined, perfected and developed
into something superior. This is but natural because when the character
is strong, everything in the system is expressed in right action, and
the right action of anything causes the steady development of that
particular thing.

To distinguish between the right and the wrong becomes simplicity itself
when one knows that the right promotes growth, while the wrong retards
growth. Continuous advancement is the purpose of life; therefore, to
live the right life is to live that life that promotes progress and
growth, development and advancement in everything that pertains to life.
For this reason, that action that promotes growth is in harmony with
life itself, and must consequently be right. But that action that
retards growth is at variance

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

with life; therefore it is wrong; and wrong for that reason alone.
Everything that promotes human advancement is right. Everything that
interferes with human advancement is wrong. Here we have the basis of a
system of ethics that is thoroughly complete, and so simple to live that
no one need err in the least.

An intellectual understanding of the laws of life will enable any one to
know what action promotes growth and what action retards growth, but as
character develops, one can feel the difference between right and wrong
action in his own system, because the consciousness of right becomes so
keen that anything that is not right is discerned at once. It is
therefore evident that the power to distinguish the right from the wrong
in every instance will come only through the development of character.
No matter how brilliant one may be intellectually, he cannot truly know
the right until he has a strong character. The external understanding of
the right can be misled, but the consciousness of the right is never
mistaken; and this consciousness develops only as character develops.

The second essential is to create a subconscious desire for the right—a
desire so deep and so strong that nothing can tempt the mind to enter
into the wrong. When this desire is developed, one feels a natural
preference for the right; to prefer the right, under all circumstances
becomes second nature, while

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

every desire for the wrong will disappear completely. When every atom in
one's being begins to desire the right, the entire system will establish
itself in the right attitude, and right action will become the normal
action in every force, function and faculty. In addition, this same
desire will produce mental tendencies that contain the power of right
action, which always means constructive action.

It is a well known fact that all the forces and energies of the system,
and all the movements of mind follow mental tendencies; therefore, when
the mental tendencies are right actions, everything that takes place in
the system will produce right action; and everything will be properly
directed.

The desire for the right may be developed by constantly thinking about
the right with deep feeling. Every thought that has depth, therefore,
will impress itself upon the subconscious, and when that thought is
inspired with a strong desire for the right, the conscious impression
will convey the right to the subconscious. Every impression that enters
the subconscious will cause the subconscious to bring forth a harvest of
that which the impression conveyed; therefore, when the right is
constantly held in mind with deep feeling, the right thought will soon
become the strongest in the mind; and our desires are the results of our
strongest thoughts.

You always desire that which is indicated in your strongest thought. You
can therefore change those

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

desires completely by thinking with deep feeling about that which you
want to desire. No desire should be destroyed. All desires should be
transmuted into the desire for the right, and when you subconsciously
desire the right, every action in your being will be a right action.

The two fundamental essentials, therefore, to the development of
character are to know the right and to desire the right, but the term
"right" as employed here must not be confounded with that conception of
right which includes only a few of the moral laws. To be right,
according to the viewpoint of completeness, is to be in harmony with all
the principles of life, and all the laws of the present sphere of human
existence. To know the right, it is necessary not simply to memorize
rules that other minds have formulated, but to inwardly discern what
life is for, and what mode of thought and action is conducive to the
realization of that which is in life. To desire the right, according to
this view of the right, the mind must actually feel the very soul of
right action, and must be in such perfect touch with the universal
movement of right action, that all lesser and imperfect desires are
completely swallowed up in the one desire—the desire that desires all
that is in life, and all that is in perfect harmony with that which is
in life.

It is the truth, that when we come into perfect touch with the greater,
we cease to desire the lesser,

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

and the closer we get to the one real desire, the less we care for our
mistaken desires. Therefore, to remove an undesirable desire, the course
is not to resist that desire, but to cultivate a greater and a better
desire along the same line. In this connection, we must remember that
the adoption of a greater desire does not compel us to sacrifice those
things that we gain from the lesser desires. He who adopts the greater
loses nothing, but is on the way to the gaining of everything.

To know the right and to desire the right, according to the complete
significance of the right, we must interiorly discern the very right
itself. We cannot depend upon another's definition of the right, but
must know fully the spirit of the right with our own faculties. That
faculty that knows and feels the right, and that naturally knows and
desires the right is character. Therefore, it is through the development
of character that each individual will know for himself how to live,
think and act in perfect harmony with the laws of all life.

When the consciousness of right action has been attained, a clear mental
picture should be deeply impressed upon mind and every desire should be
focused upon that picture. This concentration should be made as strong
as possible, so that all the energies of the system are not only
aroused, but caused to move towards the ideal of right action. And by
right action, we mean that action that is thoroughly

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

constructive, that builds for greater things and greater things only.
Everything is right that builds for greater things. If it were not
right, it could not produce the greater.

To clearly picture upon the mind the image of right action, and to
concentrate with strong desire the whole attention upon that mental
image, will cause all the tendencies of mind to move in the same
direction. There will therefore be perfect harmony of mental action, and
that action will be right action, because everything that moves towards
the right must be right. This mental picture of right action should
always be complete; that is, one's mental conception of the right should
not be confined to certain parts of the system only, but should include
every action conceivable in the being of man.

That person who pictures himself as virtuous, but forgets to picture
himself above anger, fear and worry, is not forming a complete picture
or ideal of the right. He is not giving the creative energies of the
system a perfect pattern; the character that those energies are to build
will therefore be one-sided and weak.

First ask yourself what you would have all the energies, powers,
functions and faculties in your system do. Answer that question in the
best manner possible, and upon that answer, base your picture of right
action. Whenever a new line of action is undertaken, the mind should
continue in that original

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

line of action until the object in view has been reached. To do this in
all things, even in trivial matters, will not only cause every action to
produce the intended results, but real character will steadily be made
stronger thereby.

The habit of giving up when the present task is half finished and try
something else is one of the chief causes of failure. The development of
a strong character, however, will remove this habit completely. To
constantly think of the highest and the greatest results that could
possibly follow the promotion of any undertaking or line of action will
aid remarkably in causing the mind to keep on. To expect much from what
we are doing now is to create a strong desire to press on towards the
goal in view. To press on towards the goal in view is to reach the goal,
and to reach the goal is to get what we expected.

An essential of great importance in the building of character is the
proper conception of the ideal. No mind can rise higher than its ideals,
but every mind can realize its ideals no matter how high they may be.
Our ideals therefore cannot be too high. The ideal should not only be a
little better than the present real, but should be perfection itself.
Have nothing but absolute perfection in all things as the standard and
the goal, and never think of your goal as anything less. Do not simply
aim to improve yourself in just one more degree. Aim to reach absolute

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

perfection in all your attainments and all your achievements, and make
that desire so strong that every atom in your being thrills with its
power.

To form all one's ideals in accordance with one's mental conception of
absolute perfection, will cause the mind to live above the world of the
ordinary, and this is extremely important in the building of character.
A great character cannot be developed so long as the mind continues to
dwell on the ordinary, the trivial or the superficial. Neither can true
quality and true worth find expression so long as thought continues on
the common plane; and the life that does not continue to grow into
higher quality and greater worth has not begun to live. When character
is highly developed, both the personality and the mentality will feel
the stamp of quality and worth. High mental color will be given to every
characteristic, and the nature of man will cease to be simply human. It
will actually be more.

In building character, special attention must be given to hereditary
tendencies or those traits of character that are born in us. But as all
such traits are subconscious, they can be changed or removed by
directing the subconscious to produce the opposite characteristics or
tendencies. It matters not in the least what we may have inherited from
our ancestors. If we want to change those things, we can do so. The
subconscious will not only respond to any direction that we may make,
but is fully capable of doing anything

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

in the world of mind or character that we may desire to have done.
Examine the tendencies of your mind and character, and fix clearly in
consciousness which ones you wish to remove and which ones you wish to
retain. Those that you wish to retain should be made strong by daily
directing the subconscious to give those tendencies more life, more
power and more stability. To remove those tendencies that you do not
wish to retain, forget them. Do not resist them nor try to force them
out of the mind. Simply forget them and direct the subconscious to
create and establish new tendencies that are directly opposite to the
nature of the ones that you wish to remove. Build up those qualities
that constitute real character, and every bad trait that you have
inherited from your ancestors will disappear.

To build up those qualities, picture in your mind the highest
conceptions of those qualities that you can possibly form; then impress
those conceptions and ideas upon the subconscious. Such impressions
should be formed daily, and especially before going to sleep, as the
building process in the subconscious is more perfect during sleep.

By impressing the idea of spotless virtue upon the subconscious every
day for a few months, your moral tendencies will become so strong that
nothing can tempt you to do what you know to be wrong. Not that physical
desire will disappear; we do not want any natural desire to disappear,
but your control of

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

those desires will be so complete that you can follow them or refuse to
follow them just as you choose. And your desire to remain absolutely
free from all wrong will become so strong that nothing can induce you to
do what your finer nature does not wish to have done.

There are millions of people who are morally weak in spite of the fact
that they do not wish to be, but if these people would employ this
simple method, their weakness would soon disappear, because by
impressing the idea of spotless virtue upon the subconscious, the
subconscious will produce and express in the personality the power of
virtue; and if this process is continued for some time, the power of
virtue in the person will become so strong that it can overcome and
annihilate instantly every temptation that may appear.

Impress upon the subconscious the idea of absolute justice, and your
consciousness of justice will steadily develop until you can
discriminate perfectly between the right and the wrong in every
imaginable transaction. Whatever quality you wish to develop in your
character, you can increase its worth and its power steadily by applying
this subconscious law; that is, what is impressed upon the subconscious
will be expressed through the personality, and since the seed can bring
forth ten, thirty, sixty and a hundred fold, one tiny impression,
therefore, may have the power to bring forth a great and powerful
expression.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Everything
multiplies in the subconscious, whether it be good or otherwise.
Therefore, by taking advantage of this law and giving to the
subconscious only those ideas and desires that have quality and worth,
we place ourselves in the path of perpetual increase of everything good
that the heart may desire.

The two predominating factors in character are justice and virtue. The
former gives each element in life its proper place. The latter turns
each element to proper use. The consciousness of justice is developed
through the realization of the fact that nothing can use what is not its
own. To try to use what is not one's own will result in misuse.

When the consciousness of justice is thoroughly developed, everything in
the human system will be properly placed. That very power of the mind
that feels justice—the true placing of things—will cause all things
within man to be properly placed. And when justice rules among all
things in the interior life of man, that man will naturally be just to
all things in the exterior life.

It is not possible for any person to deal justly with men and matters in
the external world until he has attained the consciousness of justice
within himself. He may think he is just, or he may try to be just, but
his dealings will not be absolutely just until he can feel justice in
his own life. To feel justice within oneself is to keep the entire
system in a state of equilibrium.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The mentality will
be balanced and no force or element will be misplaced. It is therefore
something for which we may work with great profit.

To be virtuous in the complete sense of the term, is to use all things
properly, and the proper use of things is that use that works for
greater things. Virtue is therefore applicable to every force, function
and faculty in the being of man, but in its application there must be no
desire or effort to suppress or destroy. Virtue means use—right
use—never suppression.

When things cannot be used in their usual channels, the energies in
action within those things should be turned in their courses and used
elsewhere. When creative energy cannot be properly applied physically,
it should be employed metaphysically; and all energy can be drawn into
mind for the purpose of building up states, faculties, talents or
powers. (Practical methods through which this may be accomplished will
be given in the next chapter.)

When a certain desire cannot be expressed with good results in its
present purpose, the power of that desire should be changed and caused
to desire something else—something of value that can be carried out now.
The power of that desire therefore is not lost, neither is enjoyment
sacrificed, because all constructive forces, give joy to the mind. "And
the greatest of joys shall be the joy of going on."

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

The desire for complete virtue is developed through the realization of
the fact that the greatest good comes only when each part fulfills,
physically and metaphysically, what nature intended. In the application
of virtue, the purpose of nature may be fulfilled metaphysically when
the physical channel does not permit of true expression at the time;
though when physical expression may be secured, the metaphysical action
should always be in evidence, because the greatest results always follow
when physical and metaphysical actions are perfectly combined.

In the building of character, the two principal objects in view should
be the strong and the beautiful. The character that is strong but not
beautiful may have force, but cannot use that force in the building of
the superior. The character that is beautiful but not strong, will not
have sufficient power to carry out its lofty ideals. It is the strong
and the beautiful combined that builds mind and character, and that
brings into being the superior man.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*When the creative energies are daily transmuted, and turned into
muscle, brain and mind, a virtuous life can be lived without
inconvenience. Besides, the body will be healthier, the personality
stronger and the mind more brilliant.*

*Hold yourself constantly in a positive, masterful attitude, and fill
that attitude with kindness. The result will be that remarkable
something that people call personal magnetism.*

*Creative energy when retained in the system will give vigor to the
body, sparkle to the eye and genius to the brain.*

*There is enough power in any man to enable him to realize all his
desires and reach the highest good he has in view. It is only necessary
that all of this power be constructively applied*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Creative Forces In Man](yfhu18)
