[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu04)  [Next](yfhu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### THE USE OF MIND IN PRACTICAL ACTION

In the present age, it is the power of mind that rules the world, and
therefore it is evident that he who has acquired the best use of the
power of mind, will realize the greatest success, and reach the highest
places that attainment and achievement hold in store. The man who wins
is the man who can apply in practical life every part of his mental
ability, and who can make every action of his mind tell.

We sometimes wonder why there are so many capable men and admirable
women who do not reach those places in life that they seem to deserve,
but the answer is simple. They do not apply the power of mind as they
should. Their abilities and qualities are either misdirected or applied
only in part. These people, however, should not permit themselves to
become dissatisfied with fate, but should remember that every
individuality who learns to make full use of the power of his mind will
reach his goal; he will realize his desire and will positively win.

There are several reasons why, though the principal reason is found in
the fact that when the power

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of the mind is used correctly in working out what we wish to accomplish,
the other forces we possess are readily applied for the same purpose,
and this fact becomes evident when we realize that the power of mind is
not only the ruling power in the world, but is also the ruling power in
man himself. All other faculties in man are ruled by the power of his
mind. It is the action of his mind that determines the action of all the
other forces in his possession. Therefore, to secure the results
desired, he must give his first thought to the scientific and
constructive application of mental action.

In a preceding chapter, it was stated that the **“I Am”** is the ruling
principle in man, and from that statement the conclusion may be drawn
that the **“I Am”** is the ruling power as well, but this is not
strictly correct. There is a difference between principle and power,
though for practical purposes it is not necessary to consider the
abstract phase of this difference. All that is necessary is to realize
that the **“I Am”** directs the mind, and that the power of the mind
directs and controls everything else in the human system. It is the mind
that occupies the throne but the **“I Am”** is the power behind the
throne.

This being true, it becomes highly important to understand how the power
of the mind should be used, but before we can understand the use of this
power, we must learn what this power actually is. Generally speaking, we
may say that the power of

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

mind is the sum-total of all the forces of the mental world, including
those forces that are employed in the process of thinking. The power of
mind includes the power of the will, the power of desire, the power of
feeling, and the power of thought. It includes conscious action in all
its phases and subconscious action in all its phases; in fact, it
includes anything and everything that is placed in action through the
mind, by the mind or in the mind.

To use the power of the mind, the first essential is to direct every
mental action toward the goal in view, and this direction must not be
occasional, but constant. Most minds, however, do not apply this law.
They think about a certain thing one moment, and about something else
the next moment. At a certain hour their mental actions work along a
certain line, and at the next hour those actions work along a different
line. Sometimes the goal in view is one thing, and sometimes another, so
the actions of the mind do not move constantly toward a certain definite
goal, but are mostly scattered. We know, however, that every individual
who is actually working himself steadily and surely toward the goal he
has in view, invariably directs all the power of his thought upon that
goal. In his mind not a single mental action is thrown away, not a
single mental force wasted. All the power that is in him is being
directed to work for what he wishes to accomplish, and the reason that
every power responds in this way is because he is not

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

thinking of one thing now and something else the next moment. He is
thinking all the time of what he wishes to attain and achieve. The full
power of mind is turned upon that object, and as mind is the ruling
power, the full power of all his other forces will tend to work for the
same object.

In using the power of mind as well as all the other forces we possess,
the first question to answer is what we really want, or what we really
want to accomplish; and when this question is answered, the one thing
that is wanted should be fixed so clearly in thought that it can be seen
by the mind's eye every minute. But the majority do not know what they
really want. They may have some vague desire, but they have not
determined clearly, definitely and positively what they really want, and
this is one of the principal causes of failure. So long as we do not
know definitely what we want, our forces will be scattered, and so long
as our forces are scattered, we will accomplish but little, or fail
entirely. When we know what we want, however, and proceed to work for it
with all the power and ability that is in us, we may rest assured that
we will get it. When we direct the power of thinking, the power of will,
the power of mental action, the power of desire, the power of ambition,
in fact, all the power we possess on the one thing we want, on the one
goal we desire to reach, it is not difficult to understand why success

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

in a greater and greater measure must be realized.

To illustrate this subject further, we will suppose that you have a
certain ambition and continue to concentrate your thought and the power
of your mind upon that ambition every minute for an indefinite period,
with no cessation whatever. The result will be that you will gradually
and surely train all the forces within you to work for the realization
of that ambition, and in the course of time, the full capacity of your
entire mental system will be applied in working for that particular
thing.

On the other hand, suppose you do as most people do under average
circumstances. Suppose, after you have given your ambition a certain
amount of thought, you come to the conclusion that possibly you might
succeed better along another line. Then you begin to direct the power of
your mind along that other line. Later on, you come to the conclusion
that there is still another channel through which you might succeed, and
you proceed accordingly to direct your mind upon this third ambition.
Then what will happen? Simply this: You will make three good beginnings,
but in every case you will stop before you have accomplished anything.
There are thousands of capable men and women, however, who make this
mistake every year of their lives. The full force of their mental system
is directed upon a certain ambition only for a short time; then it is
directed elsewhere.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They never
continue long enough along any particular line to secure results from
their efforts, and therefore results are never secured.

Then there are other minds who give most of their attention to a certain
ambition and succeed fairly well, but give the rest of their attention
to a number of minor ambitions that have no particular importance. Thus
they are using only a fraction of their power in a way that will tell.
The rest of it is thrown away along a number of lines through which
nothing is gained. But in this age high efficiency is demanded
everywhere in the world's work, and any one who wants to occupy a place
that will satisfy his ambition and desire, cannot afford to waste even a
small part of the power he may possess. He needs it all along the line
of his leading ambition, and therefore should not permit counter
attractions to occupy his mind for a moment.

If you have a certain ambition or a certain desire, think about that
ambition at all times. Keep that ambition before your mind constantly,
and do not hesitate to make your ambition as high as possible. The
higher you aim, the greater will be your achievements, though that does
not necessarily mean that you will realize your highest aims as fully as
you have pictured them in your mind; but the fact is that those who have
low aims, usually realize what is even below their aims, while those who
have high aims usually realize very nearly, if not fully, what

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

their original ambition calls for. The principle is to direct the power
of mind upon the very highest, the very largest and the very greatest
mental conception of that which we intend to achieve. The first
essential therefore, is to direct the full power of mind and thought
upon the goal in view, and to continue to direct the mind in that manner
every minute, regardless of circumstances or conditions.

The second essential is to make every mental action positive. When we
desire certain things or when we think of certain things we wish to
attain or achieve, the question should be if our mental attitudes at the
time are positive or negative. To answer this we only have to remember
that every positive action always goes toward that which receives its
attention, while a negative action always retreats. A positive action is
an action that you feel when you realize that every force in your entire
system is pushed forward, so to speak, and that it is passing through
what may be termed an expanding and enlarging state of feeling or
consciousness. The positive attitude of mind is also indicated by the
feeling of a firm, determined fullness throughout the nervous system.
When every nerve feels full, strong and determined, you are in the
positive attitude, and whatever you may do at the time will produce
results along the line of your desire or your ambition. When you are in
a positive state of mind you are never nervous or disturbed, you are
never agitated or strenuous; in fact,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the more positive you are the deeper your calmness and the better your
control over your entire system.

The positive man is not one who rushes helter-skelter here and there
regardless of judgment or constructive action, but one who is absolutely
calm and controlled under every circumstance, and yet so thoroughly full
of energy that every atom in his being is ready, under every
circumstance, to accomplish and achieve. This energy is not permitted to
act, however, until the proper time arrives, and then its action goes
directly to the goal in view.

The positive mind is always in harmony with itself, while the negative
mind is always out of harmony, and thereby loses the greater part of its
power. Positiveness always means strength stored up, power held in the
system under perfect control, until the time of action; and during the
time of action directed constructively under the same perfect control.
In the positive mind, all the actions of the mental system are working
in harmony and are being fully directed toward the object in view, while
in the negative mind, those same actions are scattered, restless,
nervous, disturbed, moving here and there, sometimes under direction,
but most of the time not. That the one should invariably succeed is
therefore just as evident as that the other should invariably fail.
Scattered energy cannot do otherwise but fail, while positively directed
energy simply must succeed. A positive mind is like a powerful stream of
water that is

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

gathering volume and force from hundreds of tributaries all along its
course. The further on it goes the greater its power, until when it
reaches its goal, that power is simply immense. A negative mind,
however, would be something like a stream, that the further it flows the
more divisions it makes, until, when it reaches its goal, instead of
being one powerful stream, it has become a hundred, small, weak, shallow
streams.

To develop positiveness it is necessary to cultivate those qualities
that constitute positiveness. Make it a point to give your whole
attention to what you want to accomplish, and give that attention
firmness, calmness and determination. Try to give depth to every desire
until you feel as if all the powers of your system were acting, not on
the surface, but from the greater world within. As this attitude is
cultivated, positiveness will become more and more distinct, until you
can actually feel yourself gaining power and prestige. And the effect
will not only be noticed in your own ability to better direct and apply
your talents, but others will discover the change. Accordingly, those
who are looking for men of power, men who can do things, will look to
you as the one to occupy the position that has to be filled.

Positiveness therefore, not only gives you the ability to make a far
better use of the forces you possess, but it also gives you personality,
that much admired something that will most surely cause you to be
selected

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

where men of power are needed. The world does not care for negative
personalities. Such personalities look weak and empty, and are usually
ignored, but everybody is attracted to a positive personality; and it is
the positive personality that is always given the preference. Nor is
this otherwise but right, because the positive personality has better
use of his power, and therefore is able to act with greater efficiency
wherever he is called upon to act.

The third essential in the right use of the mind is to make every mental
action constructive, and a constructive mental action is one that is
based upon a deep seated desire to develop, to increase, to achieve, to
attain—in brief, to become larger and greater, and to do something of
far greater worth than has been done before. If you will cause every
mental action you entertain to have that feeling, constructiveness will
soon become second nature to your entire mental system; that is, all the
forces of your mind will begin to become building forces, and will
continue to build you up along any line through which you may desire to
act.

Inspire your mind constantly with a building desire, and make this
desire so strong that every part of your system will constantly feel
that it wants to become greater, more capable and more efficient. An
excellent practice in this connection is to try to enlarge upon all your
ideas of things whenever you have spare moments for real thought. This
practice

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

will tend to produce a growing tendency in every process of your
thinking. Another good practice is to inspire every mental action with
more ambition. We cannot have too much ambition. We may have too much
aimless ambition, but we cannot have too much real constructive
ambition. If your ambition is very strong, and is directed toward
something definite, every action of your mind, every action of your
personality, and every action of your faculties will become
constructive; that is, all those actions will be inspired by the
tremendous force of your ambition to work for the realization of that
ambition.

Never permit restless ambition. Whenever you feel the force of ambition
direct your mind at once in a calm, determined manner upon that which
you really want to accomplish in, life. Make this a daily practice, and
you will steadily train all your faculties and powers not only to work
for the realization of that ambition, but become more and more efficient
in that direction. Ere long your forces and faculties will be
sufficiently competent to accomplish what you want.

In the proper use of the mind therefore these three essentials should be
applied constantly and thoroughly. First, direct all the powers of mind,
all the powers of thought, and all your thinking upon the goal you have
in view. Second, train every mental action to be deeply and calmly
positive. Third, train every mental action to be constructive, to be

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

filled with a building spirit, to be inspired with a ceaseless desire to
develop the greater, to achieve the greater, to attain the greater. When
you have acquired these three, you will begin to use your forces in such
a way that results must follow. You will begin to move forward steadily
and surely, and you will be constantly gaining ground. Your mind will
have become like the stream mentioned above. It will gather volume and
force as it moves on and on, until finally that volume will be great
enough to remove any obstacle in its way, and that force powerful enough
to do anything you may have in view.

In order to apply these three essentials in the most effective manner,
there are several misuses of the mind that must be avoided. Avoid the
forceful, the aggressive and the domineering attitudes, and do not
permit your mind to become intense, unless it is under perfect control.
Never attempt to control or influence others in any way whatever. You
will seldom succeed in that manner, and when you do, the success will be
temporary; besides, such a practice always weakens your mind. Do not
turn the power of your mind upon others, but turn it upon yourself in
such a way that it will make you stronger, more positive, more capable,
and more efficient, and as you develop in this manner, success must come
of itself. There is only one way by which you can influence others
legitimately, and that is through the giving of instruction, but in that
case, there is no desire to influence.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You desire simply
to impart knowledge and information, and you exercise a most desirable
influence without desiring to do so.

A great many men and women, after discovering the immense power of mind,
have come to the conclusion that they might change circumstances by
exercising mental power upon those circumstances in some mysterious
manner, but such a practice means nothing but a waste of energy. The way
to control circumstances is to control the forces within yourself to
make a greater man of yourself, and as you become greater and more
competent, you will naturally gravitate into better circumstances. In
this connection, we should remember that like attracts like. If you want
that which is better, make yourself better. If you want to realize the
ideal, make yourself more ideal. If you want better friends, make
yourself a better friend. If you want to associate with people of worth,
make yourself more worthy. If you want to meet that which is agreeable,
make yourself more agreeable. If you want to enter conditions and
circumstances that are more pleasing, make yourself more pleasing. In
brief, whatever you want, produce that something in yourself, and you
will positively gravitate towards the corresponding conditions in the
external world. But to improve yourself along those lines, it is
necessary to apply for that purpose, all the power you possess. You
cannot afford to

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

waste any of it, and every misuse of the mind will waste power.

Avoid all destructive attitudes of the mind, such as anger, hatred,
malice, envy, jealousy, revenge, depression, discouragement,
disappointment, worry, fear, and so on. Never antagonize, never resist
what is wrong, and never try to get even. Make the best use of your own
talent and the best that is in store for you will positively come your
way. When others seem to take advantage of you, do not retaliate by
trying to take advantage of them. Use your power in improving yourself,
so that you can do better and better work. That is how you are going to
win in the race. Later on, those who tried to take advantage of you will
be left in the rear. Remember, those who are dealing unjustly with you
or with anybody are misusing their mind. They are therefore losing their
power, and will, in the course of time, begin to lose ground; but if
you, in the mean time, are turning the full power of your mind to good
account, you will not only gain more power, but you will soon begin to
gain ground. You will gain and continue to gain in the long run, while
others who have been misusing their minds will lose mostly everything in
the long run. That is how you are going to win, and win splendidly
regardless of ill treatment or opposition.

A great many people imagine that they can promote their own success by
trying to prevent the success of others, but it is one of the greatest
delusions

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

in the world. If you want to promote your own success as thoroughly as
your capacity will permit, take an active interest in the success of
everybody, because this will not only keep your mind in the success
attitude and cause you to think success all along the line, but it will
enlarge your mind so as to give you a greater and better grasp upon the
fields of success. If you are trying to prevent the success of others,
you are acting in the destructive attitude, which sooner or later will
react on others, but if you are taking an active interest in the success
of everybody, you are entertaining only constructive attitudes, and
these will sooner or later accumulate in your own mind to add volume and
power to the forces of success that you are building up in yourself.

In this connection, we may well ask why those succeed who do succeed,
why so many succeed only in part, and why so many fail utterly. These
are questions that occupy the minds of most people, and hundreds of
answers have been given, but there is only one answer that goes to rock
bottom. Those people who fail, and who continue to fail all along the
line, fail because the power of their minds is either in a habitual
negative state, or is always misdirected. If the power of mind is not
working positively and constructively for a certain goal, you are not
going to succeed. If your mind is not positive, it is negative, and
negative minds float with the stream. We must remember that we are in
the midst

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of all kinds of circumstances, some of which are for us and some of
which are against us, and we will either have to make our own way or
drift, and if we drift we go wherever the stream goes. But most of the
streams of human life are found to float in the world of the ordinary
and the inferior. Therefore, if you drift, you will drift with the
inferior, and your goal will be failure.

When we analyze the minds of people who have failed, we invariably find
that they are either negative, non-constructive or aimless. Their forces
are scattered, and what is in them is seldom applied constructively.
There is an emptiness about their personality that indicates
negativeness. There is an uncertainty in their facial expression that
indicates the absence of definite ambition. There is nothing of a
positive, determined nature going on in their mental world. They have
not taken definite action along any line. They are dependent upon fate
and circumstances. They are drifting with some stream, and that they
should accomplish little if anything is inevitable. This does not mean,
however, that their mental world is necessarily unproductive; in fact,
those very minds are in many instances immensely rich with
possibilities. The trouble is, those possibilities continue to be
dormant, and what is in them is not being brought forth and trained for
definite action or actual results.

What those people should do, is to proceed at once to comply with the
three essentials mentioned above,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and before many months there will be a turn in the lane. They will soon
cease to drift, and will then begin to make their own life, their own
circumstances and their own future.

In this connection, it is well to remember that negative people and
non-constructive minds never attract that which is helpful in their
circumstances. The more you drift, the more people you meet who also
drift, while on the other hand, when you begin to make your own life and
become positive, you begin to meet more positive people and more
constructive circumstances. This explains why "God helps them that help
themselves." When you begin to help yourself, which means to make the
best of what is in yourself, you begin to attract to yourself more and
more of those helpful things that may exist all about you. In other
words, constructive forces attract constructive forces; positive forces
attract positive forces. A growing mind attracts elements and forces
that help to promote growth, and people who are determined to make more
and more of themselves, are drawn more and more into circumstances
through which they will find the opportunity to make more of themselves.
And this law works not only in connection with the external world, but
also the internal world. When you begin to make a positive determined
use of those powers in yourself that are already in positive action, you
draw forth into action powers within you that have been dormant, and as

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

this process continues, you will find that you will accumulate volume,
capacity and power in your mental world, until you finally become a
mental giant.

As you begin to grow and become more capable, you will find that you
will meet better and better opportunities, not only opportunities for
promoting external success, but opportunities for further building
yourself up along the lines of ability, capacity and talent. You thus
demonstrate the law that "Nothing succeeds like success," and "To him
that hath shall be given." And here it is well to remember that it is
not necessary to possess external things in the beginning to be counted
among them "that hath." It is only necessary in the beginning to possess
the interior riches; that is, to take control of what is in you, and
proceed to use it positively with a definite goal in view. He who has
control of his own mind has already great riches. He has sufficient
wealth to be placed among those who have. He is already successful, and
if he continues as he has begun, his success will soon appear in the
external world. Thus the wealth that existed at first in the internal
only will take shape and form in the external. This is a law that is
unfailing, and there is not a man or woman on the face of the earth that
cannot apply it with the most satisfying results.

The reason why so many fail is thus found in the fact that they do not
fully and constructively apply the forces and powers they possess, and
the reason

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

why so many succeed only to a slight degree is found in the fact that
only a small fraction of their power is applied properly. But any one
can learn the full and proper use of all that is in him by applying
faithfully the three essentials mentioned above. The reason why those
succeed who do succeed is found in the fact that a large measure of
their forces and powers is applied according to those three essentials,
and as those essentials can be applied by any one, even to the most
perfect degree, there is no reason why all should not succeed.

Sometimes we meet people who have only ordinary ability, but who are
very successful. Then we meet others who have great ability but who are
not successful, or who succeed only to a slight degree. At first we see
no explanation, but when we understand the cause of success as well as
the cause of failure, the desired explanation is easily found. The man
with ordinary ability, if he complies with the three essentials
necessary to the right use of mind, will naturally succeed, though if he
had greater ability, his success would of course become greater in
proportion. But the man who has great ability, yet does not apply the
three essentials necessary to the right use of mind, cannot succeed.

The positive and constructive use of the power of mind, with a definite
goal in view will invariably result in advancement, attainment and
achievement, but if we wish to use that power in its full capacity,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the action of the mind must be deep. In addition to the right use of the
mind, we must also learn the full use of mind, and as the full use
implies the use of the whole mind, the deeper mental fields and forces,
as well as the usual mental fields and forces, it is necessary to
understand the subconscious as well as the conscious.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*When you think of yourself do not think of that part of yourself that
appears on the surface. That part is the smaller part and the lesser
should not be pictured in mind. Think of your larger self, the immense
subconscious self that is limitless both in power and in possibility.*

*Believe in yourself but not simply in a part of yourself. Give constant
recognition to all that is in you and in that all have full faith and
confidence.*

*Give the bigger man on the inside full right of way. Believe thoroughly
in your greater interior self. Know that you have something within you
that is greater than any obstacle, circumstance or difficulty that you
can possibly meet. Then in the full faith in this greater something
proceed with your work*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Forces of the Subconscious](yfhu06)
