[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu15)  [Next](yfhu17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index.md)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

#### HOW CHARACTER DETERMINES CONSTRUCTIVE ACTION

All the elements of life are good in themselves, and should produce good
results when in action; that is, when the action is properly directed;
but when any action is misdirected, evil follows, and this is the only
cause of the ills of human existence.

Everything that is wrong in the world has been produced by the
perversion and the misuse of the good. Therefore, to eliminate wrong,
man must learn to make the proper use of those things that exist in his
sphere of action. The misuse of things comes either from ignorance or
lack of character, or both. That person who does not understand the
elements and the forces of the world in which he lives will make many
mistakes, and he will make the wrong use of nearly everything unless he
is guided by instructions of those who understand. The leadership of
greater minds is therefore necessary to the welfare of the race, but
this leadership is not sufficient. Guidance from great minds will help
to a limited degree so long as the actions of the individual are simple,
but when greater development is

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

sought, with its more complex actions, the individual himself must learn
to master the laws of life. He can no longer depend upon others.

Therefore, though the leadership of greater minds be necessary to the
welfare of the race, it is also necessary for that leadership to be
used, not for keeping the multitude in a state of simple-mindedness and
dependence, but for promoting the intelligence of each individual until
external guidance is needed no more. The true purpose of the strong is
to promote greater strength in the weak, and not to keep the weak in
that state where they are at the mercy of the strong. Our united purpose
should be to develop more great men and women, and to do everything
possible to lead the many from dependence to independence.

Every state of individual attainment is preceded by a childhood period,
but this period should not be unnecessarily prolonged, nor will it be,
when every strong mind seeks to develop strength in the weak instead of
using the weakness of the weak for his own gain. Those who understand
the laws of life may inform the ignorant what to do and what not to do,
and may thereby prevent most of the mistakes that the ignorant would
otherwise make. But this guidance will not prevent all the mistakes, as
experience demonstrates, because it requires a certain amount of
understanding to even properly apply the advice of another. Those who do
not have

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the understanding will therefore misuse the elements of life at every
turn, no matter how well they are guided by wiser persons, while those
who do have this understanding will invariably begin to do things
without consulting their so-called superiors. It is therefore evident
that more understanding for every- body is the remedy, as far as this
side of the subject is concerned, but there is also another side.

A great many people go wrong because they do not know any better. To
them, a better understanding of life is the path to emancipation. They
will be made free when they know the truth, but the majority of those
who go wrong do know better. Then why do they go wrong. The cause is
lack of character. When you fail to do what you want to do, your
character is weak. The same is true when you preach one thing and
practice another. When you fail to be as perfect, as good or as ideal as
you wish to be, or fail to accomplish what you think that you can
accomplish, your character is at fault. It is the character that directs
the action of the mind. It is the lack of character, or a weak character
that produces misdirections; and when you fail to accomplish what you
feel you can accomplish, something is being misdirected.

What you feel that you can do that you have the power to do. Therefore,
when you fail to do it, some of the powers of your being are being
misdirected. To be influenced to do what you would

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

not do if you were normal, means that your character is weak, and to be
affected by surroundings, events, circumstances and conditions against
your will, indicates the same deficiency. A strong character is never
influenced against his will. He is never disturbed by anything, never
becomes upset, offended or depressed. No one can insult him because he
is above small states of mind, and is stronger than those things that
may tend to produce small states of mind. All mental tendencies that are
antagonistic, critical or resisting indicate a deficiency in character.
The desire to criticise becomes less and less as the character is
developed. It is the mark of a fine character never to be critical and
to mention but rarely the faults of others. A strong character does not
resist evil, but uses his strength in building the good. He knows that
when the light is made strong, the darkness will disappear of itself. A
strong character has no fear, never worries and never becomes
discouraged. If you are in the hands of worry, your character needs
development. The same is true if you have a tendency to submit to fate,
give in to adversity, give up in the midst of difficulties, or surrender
to failure or wrong. It may be stated, without any exceptions or
modifications whatever, that the more temper, the less character. Anger
is always a misdirection of energy, but it is the function of character
to properly direct all energies. Therefore,

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

there can be no anger when the character is thoroughly developed.

The mind that changes easily, that is readily carried away by every new
attraction that may appear, and that does not retain a well-balanced
attitude on any subject lacks character. A strong character changes
gradually, orderly, and only as each step is thoroughly analyzed and
found to be a real step forward. The more individuality, the more
character, and the more one is oneself, the stronger the character.
Practice being yourself, your very best self, and your very largest
self, and your character will be developed. The more one is conscious of
flaws and defects, the weaker the character, and the reason is because
nearly everything is being misdirected when the character is weak. The
strong character is conscious only of the right because such a character
is right, and is causing everything in its sphere of action to do right.

To the average person, character is not important as far as this life is
concerned; and as most theological systems have declared that it was
repentance and not character that would insure human welfare in the
world to come, the development of character has naturally been
neglected. But when we realize that it is character that determines
whether our actions in daily life are to go right or wrong and that
every mistake is due to a lack of character, we shall feel that the
subject requires attention.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

It is the power of character that directs everything that is done in the
human system or by the human system. Character is the channel through
which all expressions must pass. It is character that gives human life
its tone, its color and its quality, and it is character that determines
whether our talents and faculties are to be their best or not.

The man who has a well-developed character is not simply good. He is
good for something, because he has the power to turn all his energies to
good account. A strong character not only turns all the elements and
energies of life to good account, but has the power to hold the mind in
the right attitude during the most trying moments of life, so that he
will not make mistakes nor fall a victim to insidious temptation. A
strong character will keep all the faculties and forces of life moving
in the right direction, no matter what obstacles we may meet in the way.
We shall turn neither to the right nor to the left, but will continue to
move directly towards the goal we have in view, and will reach that goal
without fail.

Thousands of people resolve every year to press on to higher attainments
and greater achievements. They begin very well, but ere long they are
turned off the track. They are misled or switched off by counter
attractions. They have not the character to keep right on until they
have accomplished what they originally set out to do. True, it is
sometimes

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

wisdom to change one's plans, but it is only lack of character to change
one's plans without reason, simply because there is a change of
circumstance. To change with every circumstance is to drift with the
stream of circumstance, and he who drifts can only live the life of a
log. He will be a victim of every external change that he may meet. He
will control little or nothing, and he will accomplish little or
nothing.

We all can develop the power to control circumstances or rather to cause
all circumstances to work with us and for us in the promotion of the
purpose we have in view; and this power is character. Never permit
circumstances to change your plans, but give so much character to your
plans that they will change circumstances. Give so much character to the
current of your work that all things will be drawn into that current,
and that which at first was but a tiny rivulet, will thus be swelled
into a mighty, majestic stream.

When the various forces of the system are properly directed and properly
employed, the development of the entire mentality will be promoted; and
this means greatness. The power that directs the forces of the system is
character, and it is character that causes the mind to use those forces
in the best and most constructive manner. There must be character before
there can be true greatness, because any deficiency in character causes
energy to be wasted

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and misdirected. It is therefore evident that the almost universal
neglect in the development of character is one of the chief reasons why
great men and women are not as numerous as we should wish them to be.
Many may argue, however, that great minds do not always have good
characters, and also that some of our best characters fail to manifest
exceptional ability. But we must remember that there is a vast
difference between that phase of character that simply tries to follow
the moral law, and real character—the character that actually is
justice, virtue and truth. Then we must also remember that character
does not mean simply obedience to a certain group of laws, but the power
to use properly all the laws of life. That person who uses mental laws
properly, but fails to comply with moral laws does not possess a
complete character. Nevertheless, the character of this person is just
as good as that of the person who follows moral laws while constantly
violating mental laws.

In the study of character, it is very important to know that the
violation of mental laws is just as detrimental as the violation of
moral laws, though we have been in the habit of condemning the latter
and excusing the former. That person who uses properly the mental laws,
will to a degree promote the development of the mind even though he may
neglect the moral laws; and this accounts for the fact that a number of
minds have attained a fair

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

degree of greatness in spite of their moral weakness. But it is a fact
of extreme importance, that those minds who attain greatness in spite of
their moral weakness could become two or three times as great if they
had also developed moral strength. That person who complies with the
mental laws but who violates the moral laws, wastes fully one-half of
the energies of his mind, and sometimes more. His attainment and
achievement will, therefore, be less than one-half of what they might be
if he had moral character as well as mental character.

The same is true, however, of that person who complies with the moral
laws, but who violates the mental laws; fully one-half of his energy is
wasted and misdirected. This explains why the so-called good characters
are not any more brilliant than the rest, for though they may be morally
good, they are not always mentally good; that is, they do not use their
minds according to the laws of mind, and therefore cannot rise above the
level of the ordinary.

The true character tries to turn all the energies of the system into the
best and most constructive channels, and it is the mark of a real
character when all the various parts of the being of man are working
together harmoniously for the building of greatness in mind and soul.
When the character is weak, there is more or less conflict among the
mental actions. Certain actions have a tendency to work for one thing,
while other actions are tending to produce

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the very opposite. The same is true of the desires. A character that
lacks development will desire one thing today, and something else
tomorrow. Plans will change constantly, and little or nothing will be
accomplished. In the strong character, however, all actions work in
harmony and all actions are constructive. And this is natural because it
is the one supreme function of character to make all actions in the
human system constructive—to make every force in the human life a
building force.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Be good and kind to everybody and the world will be kind to you. There
may be occasional exceptions to this rule, but when they come pass them
by and they will not come again.*

*Ideals need the best of care. Weeds can grow without attention, but not
so with the roses.*

*Not all minds are pure that think they are. Many of them are simply
dwarfed.*

*It does not pay to lose faith in anybody. It is beater to have faith in
everybody and be deceived occasionally than to mistrust everybody and be
deceived almost constantly.*

*When you meet a person who does not look well, call his attention to
the sunny side of things, and aim to say something that will give him
new interest and new life. You will thereby nip in the bud many a
threatening evil, and carry healing with you wherever you go*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Art of Building Character](yfhu17.md)
