[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](yfhu19)  [Next](yfhu21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_nth.jpg)](index.md)  
*Your Forces and How to Use Them*, by Christian D. Larson, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

#### IMAGINATION AND THE MASTER MIND

The forces of the human system must have something definite to work for;
that is, they must have an ideal upon which to concentrate their
attention, or some model or pattern to follow as they proceed with their
constructive actions.

To form this model, it is the power of imagination that must be
employed, and that power must, in each case, be applied constructively.
What we imagine becomes a pattern for the creative energies of mind and
personality, and as the creations of these energies determine what we
are to become and attain, we realize that the imaging faculty is one of
the most important of all our faculties. We therefore cannot afford to
lose a moment in learning how to apply it according to the laws of
mental construction and growth.

To proceed, imagine yourself becoming and attaining what you wish to
become and attain. This will give your energies a model, both of your
greater future self and your greater future achievements. When you think
of your future, always imagine success

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

and greater things, and have no fear as to results. If you fear, you
give your creative energies a model of failure, and they will
accordingly proceed to create failure. Then we must also remember if we
wish to succeed, our faculties must work successfully, but no faculty
can work successfully when filled with fear. It is only when constantly
inspired by the idea of success than any faculty or power in the human
system can do its best.

To inspire our faculties with this idea, we should always imagine
ourselves obtaining success. The picture of success should be placed
upon all the walls o£ the mind, so that the powers within us will see
success, and success only as their goal. Hang up pictures in your mind
that will inspire you to do your best; hang up pictures in your mind
that will cause you to think constantly of that which you desire to
accomplish, and this you may do by imagining yourself being that greater
something that you want to be and doing that greater something that you
want to do.

An excellent practice is to use your spare moments in creating such
pictures in your imagination and placing them in the most conspicuous
position of your mind, so that all your faculties and powers can see
them at all times. We are always imagining something, It is practically
impossible to be awake without imagining something. Then why not imagine

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

something at all times that will inspire the powers within us to do
greater and greater things?

To aid the imagination in picturing the greater, the higher and better,
we should "hitch our wagon to a star." The star may be something quite
out of reach as far as present circumstances indicate, but if we hitch
our wagon to something in such a lofty position, our mind will begin to
take wings. It will no longer be like a worm crawling in the dust. We
shall begin to rise and continue to rise.

The only thing that can cause the mind to rise is imagination. The only
thing that can make the mind larger than it is, is
[imagination](errata.htm#3.md). The only thing that can make the mind act
along new lines is imagination. This being true, it is unwise to use the
imagination for any other purpose than for the best that we can think or
do.

In this connection, there are a few suggestions that will be found of
special value. First, make up your mind as to what you really want in
every respect. Determine what surroundings or environment you want.
Decide upon the kind of friends you want and what kind of work you would
prefer. Make all those ideals so good and so perfect that you will have
no occasion to change them. Then fix those ideals so clearly in mind
that you can see them at all times, and proceed to desire their
realization with all the power of mind and soul. Make that your first
step.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

Your second step should be to imagine yourself living in those
surroundings that you have selected as your ideal; then make it a point
to live in that imagination every moment of every day. Instead of
imagining a number of useless things during spare moments, as people
usually do, imagine yourself living in those surroundings and those
ideals. Imagine yourself in the presence of friends that are exactly
what you wish your ideal friends to be, and permit your fancy to run as
far as it may wish along all of those idealistic lines. If you have not
found your work, proceed to imagine yourself doing what you wish to do.
If you have already found your work, imagine yourself doing that work as
well as you would wish, and imagine the coming of results as large as
your greatest desires could expect. Devote every moment of your spare
time to the placing of those ideals before your attention, and you will
give your power and forces something strong and definite to work for.
Every mental force is an artist, and it paints according to the model.
What you imagine is the model, and there is not a single mental action
that is not inspired or called forth into action by some picture or
model which the imagination has produced.

The imagination can call forth the ordinary or the extraordinary. It can
give the powers of your being an inferior model or an extraordinary
model, and if the imagination is not directed to produce the

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

extraordinary and the superior, it is quite likely to produce the
ordinary and the inferior. Your second step, therefore, should be to
imagine yourself actually living in those surroundings that you have
selected as your ideal, and in actually becoming and doing what you are
determined to become and do.

This practice would, in the first place, give you a great deal of
pleasure, because if you have definite ideals and imagine yourself
attaining those ideals, you will certainly enjoy yourself to a marked
degree for the time being. But in addition to that enjoyment, you will
gradually and steadily be training your mind to work for those greater
things. The mind will work for that which is uppermost in thought and
imagination. Therefore, we should invariably place our highest ideals
uppermost, so that the whole of our attention may be concentrated upon
those ideals, and all the powers of our mind and personality directed to
work for those ideals.

Your third step should be to proceed to apply the power of desire, the
power of will, the power of scientific thought, and in brief, all your
powers, in trying to realize those beautiful ideals that you continue to
imagine as your own. Do as the ancient Hebrews did. First make your
prediction. Then go to work and make it come true. What you imagine
concerning your greater future is your prediction, and you can cause
that prediction to come true if you apply

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

all the power in your possession in working for its realization every
day.

The constructive use of imagination therefore will enable you to place a
definite model or pattern before the forces of your system, so that
those forces may have something better and greater to work for. In
brief, instead of permitting most of your energies to go to waste and
the remainder to follow any pattern or idea that may be suggested by
your environment, or your own helter-skelter thinking, you will cause
all your energy to work for the greatest and the best that you may
desire.

This is the first use of imagination, and it easily places this
remarkable faculty among the greatest in the human mind. Another use of
the imagination is found in its power to give the mind something
definite to think about at all times, so that the mind may be trained to
always think of that which you really want to think; that is, through
this use of the imagination, you can select your own thought and think
your own thought at all times; and he who can do this is gradually
becoming a master mind.

The master mind is the mind that thinks what it wants to think,
regardless of what circumstances, environment or associations may
suggest. The mind that masters itself creates its own ideas, thoughts
and desires through the original use of imagination, or its own imaging
faculty. The mind that does not master itself forms its thoughts and
desires after

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

the likeness of the impressions received through the senses, and is
therefore controlled by those conditions from which such impressions
come; because as we think, so we act and live. The average mind usually
desires what the world desires without any definite thought as to his
own highest welfare or greatest need, the reason being that a strong
tendency to do likewise is always produced in the mind when the desires
are formed in the likeness of such impressions as are suggested by
external conditions. It is therefore evident that the person who permits
himself to be affected by suggestions will invariably form artificial
desires; and to follow such desires is to be mislead.

The master mind desires only that which is conducive to real life and in
the selection of its desires is never influenced in the least by the
desires of the world. Desire is one of the greatest powers in human
life. It is therefore highly important that every desire be normal and
created for the welfare of the individual himself. But no desire can be
wholly normal that is formed through the influence of suggestion. Such
desires are always abnormal to some degree, and easily cause the
individual to be misplaced.

A great many people are misplaced. They do not occupy those places
wherein they may be their best and accomplish the most. They are working
at a disadvantage, and are living a life that is far inferior

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

to what they are intended to live. The cause is frequently found in
abnormal or artificial desires. They have imitated the desires of others
without consulting their present needs. They have formed the desire to
do what others are doing by permitting their minds to be influenced by
suggestions and impressions from the world, forgetting what their
present state of development makes them capable of doing now. By
imitating the lives, habits, actions and desires of others, they are led
into a life not their own; that is, they are misplaced.

The master mind is never misplaced because he does not live to do what
others are doing, but what he himself wants to do now. He wants to do
only that which is conducive to real life, a life worth while, a life
that steadily works up to the very highest goal in view.

The average mind requires a change of environment before he can change
his thought. He has to go somewhere or bring into his presence something
that will suggest a new line of thinking and feeling. The master mind,
however, can change his thought whenever he so desires. A change of
scene is not necessary, because such a mind is not controlled from
without. A change of scene will not produce a change of thought in the
master mind unless he so elects. The master mind changes his thoughts,
ideals or desires by imaging upon the mind the exact likeness

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

of the new ideas, the new thoughts and the new desires that have been
selected.

The secret of the master mind is found wholly in the intelligent use of
imagination. Man is as he thinks, and his thoughts are patterned after
the predominating mental images, whether those images are impressions
suggested from without, or impressions formed by the ego acting from
within. When man permits his thoughts and desires to be formed in the
likeness of impressions received from without, he will be more or less
controlled by environment and he will be in the hands of fate, but when
he transforms every impression received from without into an original
idea and incorporates that idea into a new mental image, he uses
environment as a servant, thereby placing fate in his own hands.

Every object that is seen will produce an impression upon the mind
according to the degree of susceptibility. This impression will contain
the nature of the object of which it is a representation. The nature of
this object will be reproduced in the mind, and what has entered the
mind will be expressed more or less throughout the entire system.
Therefore, the mind that is susceptible to suggestions will reproduce in
his own mind and system conditions that are similar in nature to almost
everything that he may see, hear or feel. He will consequently be a
reflection of the world in which he lives. He will think, speak and act
as that world may suggest; he will

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

float with the stream of that world wherever that stream may flow; he
will not be an original character, but an automaton.

Every person that permits himself to be affected by suggestion is more
or less an automaton, and is more or less in the hands of fate. To place
fate in his own hands, he must use suggestions intelligently instead of
blindly following those desires and thoughts that his surroundings may
suggest. We are surrounded constantly by suggestions of all kinds,
because everything has the power to suggest something to that mind that
is susceptible, and we are all more or less susceptible in this respect.
But there is a vast difference between permitting oneself to be
susceptible to suggestion and training oneself to intelligently use
those impressions that suggestions may convey.

The average writer on suggestion not only ignores this difference, but
encourages susceptibility to suggestion by impressing the reader with
the remark. that suggestion does control the world. If it is true that
suggestion controls the world, more or less, we want to learn how to so
use suggestion that its control of the human mind will decrease
steadily; and this we can accomplish, not by teaching people how to use
suggestion for the influencing of other minds, but in using those
impressions conveyed by suggestion in the reconstruction of their own
minds. Suggestion is a part of life, because everything has

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

the power to suggest, and all minds are open to impressions. Nothing
therefore can be said against suggestion by itself. Suggestion is a
factor in our midst; it is a necessary factor. The problem is to train
ourselves to make intelligent use of the impressions received, instead
of blindly following the desires produced by those impressions as the
majority do.

To proceed in the solution of this problem, never permit objects
discerned by the senses to reproduce themselves in your mind against
your will. Form your own ideas about what you see, hear or feel, and try
to make those ideas superior to what was suggested by the objects
discerned. When you see evil do not form ideas that are in the likeness
of that evil; do not think of the evil as bad, but try to understand the
forces that are back of that evil—forces that are good in themselves,
though misdirected in their present state. By trying to understand the
nature of the power that is back of evil or adversity, you will not form
bad ideas, and therefore will feel no bad effects from experiences that
may seem undesirable. At the same time, you will think your own thought
about the experiences, thereby developing the power of the master mind.

Surround yourself as far as possible with those things that suggest the
superior, but do not permit such suggestions to determine your thought
about the superior. Those superior impressions that are

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

suggested by superior environment should be used in forming still more
superior thoughts. If you wish to be a master mind, your thought must
always be higher than the thought your environment may suggest, no
matter how ideal that environment may be. Every impression that enters
the mind through the senses should be worked out and should be made to
serve the mind in its fullest capacity. In this way the original
impression will not reproduce itself in the mind, but will become
instrumental in giving the mind a number of new and superior ideas.

To work out an impression, try to see through its whole nature. Look at
it from every conceivable point of view, and try to discern its actions,
tendencies, possibilities and probable defects. Use your imagination in
determining what you want to think or do, what you are to desire and
what your tendencies are to be. Know what you want, and then image those
things upon the mind constantly. This will develop the power to think
what you want to think, and he who can think what he wants to think is
on the way to becoming what he wants to become.

The principal reason why the average person does not realize his ideals
is because he has not learned to think what he wants to think. He is too
much affected by the suggestions that are about him. He imitates the
world too much, following desires that are not his own. He is therefore
mislead and misplaced. Whenever you permit yourself to think what

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

persons, things, conditions or circumstances may suggest, you are not
following what you yourself want to think. You are not following your
own desires but borrowed desires. You will therefore drift into strange
thinking, and thinking that is entirely different from what you
originally planned. To obey the call of every suggestion and permit your
mind to be carried away by this, that or the other, will develop the
tendency to drift until your mind will wander. Concentration will be
almost absent and you will become wholly incapable of actually thinking
what you want to think. One line of constructive thinking will scarcely
be begun when another line will be suggested, and you will leave the
unfinished task to begin something else, which in turn will be left
incomplete. Nothing, therefore, will be accomplished.

To become a master mind, think what you want to think, no matter what
your surroundings may suggest; and continue to think what you want to
think until that particular line of thought or action has been
completed. Desire what you want to desire and impress that desire so
deeply upon consciousness that it cannot possibly be disturbed by those
foreign desires that environment may suggest; and continue to express
that desire with all the life and power that is in you until you get
what you want. When you know that you are in the right desire, do not
permit anything to influence your mind to change.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

Take such suggestions and convert them into the desire you have already
decided upon, thereby giving that desire additional life and power.
Never close your mind to impressions from without. Keep the mind open to
the actions of all those worlds that may exist in your sphere and try to
gain valuable impressions from every source, but do not blindly follow
those impressions. Use them constructively in building up your own
system of original thought. Think what you want to think, and so use
every impression you receive that you gain greater power to think what
you want to think. Thus you will gradually become a master mind.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Follow the vision of the soul. Be true to your ideals no matter what
may happen now. Then things will take a turn and the very things you
wanted to happen will happen.*

*The ideal has a positive drawing power towards the higher, the greater
and the superior. Whoever gives his attention constantly to the ideal,
therefore, will steadily rise in the scale.*

*Take things as they are today and proceed at once to make them better.*

*Expect every change to lead you to something better and it will. As
your faith is so shall it be.*

*To be human is not to be weak. To be human is to be all that there is
in man, and the greatness that is contained in the whole of man is
marvelous indeed*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The Higher Forces In Man](yfhu21.md)
