[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kmu03)  [Next](kmu05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628258/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kundalini, The Mother of the Universe*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal,
\[1930\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### "THE YOGA AND ITS OBJECT"

Whenever we see or read of any miracles of supernatural power shown by
human beings in India it is always done by Yoga.

What is this Yoga that gives such wonderful power, divine peace,
longevity, etc.?

Yoga is the science of sciences, it is the way that leads to Godhood.
"The Yoga we practice, is not for ourselves alone, but for humanity. Its
object is not personal Mukti (liberation), although Mukti is a necessary
condition of the Yoga, but the libration of the human race. It is not
personal ananda (bliss), but the bringing down of the divine
Ananda—Christ's Kingdom of Heaven, our Satyayuga upon the earth".—

—An excerpt from "The Yoga and Its Objects".

"Humanity is evolving. Yoga is the means of carrying that evolution
forward with great and victorious rapidity", "Yogic Sadhan".

"The goal marked out for us is not to speculate about these things but
to experience them. The call upon us is to grow into the image of God,
to dwell in Him and with

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Him and be a
channel of His joy and might and an instrument of His works. Purified
from all that is Asubha (evil), transfigured in soul by His touch we
have to act in the world as dynamos of that divine electricity and send
it thrilling and radiating thru mankind, so that wherever one of us
stands, hundreds around may become full of His light and force, full of
God and full of Ananda (the bliss of the spirit). Churches, orders,
theologies, philosophies have failed to save mankind because they have
busied themselves with intellectual creeds, dogmas, rites and
institutions, with achara sudhi and darshana, as if these could save
mankind, and have neglected the one thing needful, the power and
purification of the soul. We must go back to the one thing needful,
take-up again Christ's Gospel of the purity and perfection of mankind,
Mahomed's gospel of perfect submission, self-surrender and servitude of
God, Chaitanya's gospel of the perfect love and joy of God in man,
Ramkrishna's gospel of the unity of all religions and the divinity of
God in man, and gathering all these streams into one mighty river, one
purifying and redeeming Ganges, pour it over the death-in-life of a

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

materialistic humanity as Bhagiratha led down the Ganges and flooded
with it the ashes of his fathers, so that there may be a resurrection of
the soul in mankind and the Satya yuga for a while returns to the world.
Nor is this the whole object of the Lila or the Yoga, the reason for
which the Avatars descend is to raise up man again and again, developing
in him a higher and ever higher-humanity, a greater and yet greater
development of divine being, bringing more and more of heaven again and
again upon the earth until our toil is done. Our work accomplished and
Sachchidananda fulfilled in all even here, even in this material
universe. Small is his work, even if he succeeds, who labours for his
own salvation or the salvation of a few, infinitely great is he even if
he fail or succeed only partially or for a season, who lives only to
bring about peace of soul, joy, purity and perfection among all
mankind."

<span class="small">[Excerpt](errata.htm#3) from the "Yoga and Its
Objects" by a Master.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Location of Kundalini](kmu05)
