[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kmu10)  [Next](kmu12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628258/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Kundalini, The Mother of the Universe*, by Rishi Singh Gherwal,
\[1930\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

#### Introduction To

### LALITA SAHASRANAMA.

##### - The Mother of the Universe -

This is the work of Sri Bhaskararaya. I have translated it for the Truth
Seeker, as it is very highly respected by all devotees of the Kundalini,
The Mother of the Universe. It is the best japa to please the Mother of
the Universe. All Mantras are hidden in this japa, the fulfilment of all
desires. The sick have been healed by only reading it, the poor have
attained wealth, and fears have been removed. "To obtain the favor of
the Mother of the Universe, one should repeat the Thousand Names."

"He who recites my Thousand Names once, is my devotee. He shall be known
as dear to me, and I will give him all that he desires when having
worshipped me in the Sir Chakras."

The Vyu Purana says: "One should repeat Devi's names on the water, in
the forest, on the land, and any place where fear arises from wild
animals or thieves. The names of Devi's should be repeated always, for
such a one will be liberated from himself and bondage."

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

The Kebika Purana says: "O Mother of the Universe, those who praise Thee
by words,—Ambika, Jaganmaya and Maya will obtain All."

"The Vandika and Tantrika rites of repeating once the Thousand Names are
better than bathing in the Holy Ganges, or other places."

For the purification of oneself and fulfilment of desires, repeat the
Thousand Names.

Swami Vivekananda, wrote in his book Raja Yoga, about, 'The power of
words.' "There are certain sacred words called Mantrams, which have
power, when repeated under proper conditions, to produce these
extraordinary powers. We are living in the midst of such a mass of
miracles, day and night, that we do not think anything of them. There is
no limit to man's power, the power of words and the power of mind."

The reader will find these Thousand sayings, like the Upanishads
teachings, beginning from Gross to Subtle and more Subtle Truth. The
repetition of many words will be found here but these are most
important.

Author—May 10, 1930.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lalita Sahasranama](kmu12.md)
