<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsn01)  [Next](fsn03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R0HU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk Stories From Southern Nigeria*, by Elphinstone Dayrell, \[1910\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_fn_02"></span>

# INTRODUCTION

MANY years ago a book on the Folk-Tales of the Eskimo was published, and
the editor of *The Academy* (Dr. Appleton) told one of his minions to
send it to me for revision. By mischance it was sent to an eminent
expert in Political Economy, who, never suspecting any error, took the
book for the text of an interesting essay on the economics of "the
blameless Hyperboreans."

Mr. Dayrell's "Folk Stories from Southern Nigeria" appeal to the
anthropologist within me, no less than to the lover of what children and
older people call "Fairy Tales." The stories are full of mentions of
strange institutions, as well as of rare adventures. I may be permitted
to offer some running notes and comments on this mass of African
curiosities from the crowded lumber-room of the native mind.

I. *The Tortoise with a Pretty Daughter.*--The story, like the tales of
the dark native tribes of Australia, rises from that state of fancy by
which man draws (at least for purposes of fiction) no line between
himself and the lower animals. Why should not the fair heroine, Adet,
daughter of the tortoise, be the daughter of human parents? The tale
would be none the less interesting, and a good deal more credible to the
mature intelligence. But the ancient fashion of animal parentage is
presented. It may have originated, like the stories of the Australians,
at a time when men were totemists, when every person had a bestial or
vegetable "family-name," and when, to account for these hereditary
names, stories of descent from a supernatural, bestial, primeval race
were invented. In the fables of the world, speaking animals, human in
all but outward aspect, are the characters. The fashion is universal
among savages; it descends to the Buddha's *jataka*, or parables, to
Æsop and La Fontaine. There could be no such fashion if fables had
originated among civilised human beings.

The polity of the people who tell this story seems to be despotic. The
king makes a law that any girl prettier than the prince's fifty wives
shall be put to death, with her parents. Who is to be the Paris, and
give the fatal apple to the most fair? Obviously the prince is the
Paris. He falls in love with Miss Tortoise, guided to her as he is by
the bird who is "entranced with her beauty." In this tribe, as in
Homer's time, the lover offers a bride-price to the father of the girl.
In Homer cattle are the current medium; in Nigeria pieces of cloth and
brass rods are (or were) the currency. Observe the queen's interest in
an affair of true love. Though she knows that her son's life is
endangered by his honourable passion, she adds to the bride-price out of
her privy purse. It is "a long courting"; four years pass, while pretty
Adet is "ower young to marry yet." The king is very angry when the news
of this breach of the royal marriage Act first comes to his ears. He
summons the whole of his subjects, his throne, a stone, is set out in
the market-place, and Adet is brought before him. He sees and is
conquered.

"It is no wonder," said the king,  
"This tortoise-girl might be a queen."

Though a despot, his Majesty, before cancelling his law, has to consult
the eight Egbos, or heads of secret societies, whose magical powers give
the sacred sanction to legislation. The Egbo (see p. 4, note) is a
mumbo-jumbo man. He answers to the bogey who presides over the rites of
initiation in the Australian tribes.

When the Egbo is about, women must hide and keep out of the way. The
king proclaims the cancelling of the law. The Egbos might resist, for
they have all the knives and poisons of the secret societies behind
them. But the king, a master of the human heart, acts like Sir Robert
Walpole. He buys the Egbo votes "with palm-wine and money," and gives a
feast to the women at the marriage dances. But why does the king give
half his kingdom to the tortoise? When an adventurer in fairy tales wins
the hand of the king's heiress, he usually gets half the kingdom. The
tortoise is said to have been "the wisest of all men and animals." Why?
He merely did not kill his daughter. But there is no temptation to kill
daughters in a country where they are valuable assets, and command high
bride-prices. In the Australian tribes, the bride-price is simply
another girl. A man swops his sister to another man for the other man's
sister, or for any girl of whose hand the other man has the disposal.

II\. The second story is a very ingenious commercial parable, "Never
lend money, you only make a dangerous enemy." The story also explains
why bush cats eat poultry.

III\. *The Woman with Two Skins* is a peculiar version of the story of
the courteous Sir Gawain with his bride, hideous by day, and a pearl of
loveliness by night. The Ju Ju man answers to the witch in our fairy
tales and to the mother-in-law of the prince, who, by a magical potion,
makes him forget his own true love. She, however, is always victorious,
and the prince

"Prepares another marriage,  
Their hearts so full of love and glee,"

and ousts the false bride, like Lord Bateman in the ballad, when Sophia
came home. In this case of Lord Bateman, the scholiast (Thackeray,
probably) suggests that his Lordship secured the consent of the Church
as the king in the tortoise story won that of the Egbos. Our tale then
wanders into the fairy tale of the king who is deceived into drowning
his children, in European folk-lore, because he is informed that they
are puppies. The Water Ju Ju, however, saves these black princes, and
brings forward the rightful heir very dramatically at a wrestling match,
where the lad overthrows more than he thought, like Orlando in *As You
Like It*, and conquers the heart of the jealous queen as well as his
athletic opponents.

In the conclusion the jealous woman is handed over to the ecclesiastical
arm of the Egbos; she  
is flogged, and, as in the case of Jeanne d'Arc, is burned alive, "and
her ashes were thrown into the river." Human nature is much the same
everywhere.

IV\. *The King's Magic Drum*.--The drum is the mystic cauldron of
ancient Welsh romance, which "always provides plenty of good food and
drink." But the drum has its drawback, the food "goes bad" if its owner
steps over a stick in the road or a fallen tree, a tabu like the
*geisas* of ancient Irish legends. The tortoise, in this tale, has the
*geisas* power; he can make the king give him anything he chooses to
ask. This very queer constraint occurs constantly in the Cuchullain
cycle of Irish romances, and in *The Black Thief*. (You can buy it for a
penny in Dublin, or read it in Thackeray's *Little Tour in Ireland*.)
The King is constrained to part with the drum, but does not tell the
tortoise about the tabu and the drawback. The tortoise, though
disappointed, at least pays his score off in public, and then the tale
wanders into the Hop o' my Thumb formula, and the trail of ashes.
Finally the story, like most stories, explains the origin of an animal
peculiarity, why tortoises live under prickly tie-tie palms. That
explanation was clearly in the author's mind from the first, but to
reach his point he adopted the formula of the mystic object, drum or
cauldron, which provides endless supplies, and has a counteracting charm
attached to it, a tabu.

V. *Ituen and the King's Wife*.--Some of these tales have this
peculiarity, that the characters possess names, as Ituen, Offiong, and
Attem. They are thus what people call sagas, not mere Märchen. All the
pseudo-historic legends of the Greek states, of Thebes, Athens, Mycenæ,
Pylos, and so on, are folk-tales converted into saga, and adapted and
accepted as historical. Some of these Nigerian fairy-tales are in the
same cast. The story of Athamas of Iolcos and the sacrifice of any of
his descendants who went into the town hall, exactly corresponds to the
fate of the family of Ituen (p. 32).\[1\] The whole Athamas story, in
Greece, is a tissue of popular tales found in every part of the world.
This Ituen story, as usual, explains the habits of animals, vultures,
and dogs, and illustrates the awful cruelties of Egbo law.

VI\. *The Pretty Stranger* is a native variant of Judith and Holofernes.

VII\. A "Just So Story," a myth to explain the ways of animals. The
cauldron of Medea, which destroyed the wrong old person, and did not
rejuvenate him, is introduced, "All the stories have been told," all the
world over.

VIII\. *The Disobedient Daughter who Married a Skull*.--This is most
original; though all our ballads and tales about the pretty girl who is
carried to the land of the dead by her lover's ghost (Bürger's *Lenore*)
have the same fundamental idea. Then comes in the common moral, the
Reward of Courtesy, as in Perrault's Les Fées. But the machinery of the
Nigerian romance leads up to the Return of Proserpine from the Dead in a
truly fanciful way.

IX\. *The King who Married the Cock's Daughter* is Æsop's man who
married the woman that had been a cat. As Adia unen pecks at the corn,
the other lady caught and ate a mouse.

\[1. See the Platonic dialogue, Minos, 315-6, and Athamas in Roscher's
*Lexikon*.\]

X. *The Woman, the Ape, and the Child*.--This tale illustrates Egbo
juridicature very powerfully, and is told to account for Nigerian
marriage law.

XI\. *The Fish and the Leopards Wife*.--Another "just So Story."

XII\. *The Bat*.-Another explanation of the nocturnal habits of the bat.
The tortoise appears as the wisest of things, like the hare in North
America, Brer Rabbit, the Bushman Mantis insect, and so on.

XIII., XIV., XV. All of these are explanatory "Just So Stories."

XVI\. Why the Sun and Moon live in the Sky.-Sun and Moon, in savage
myth, lived on earth at first, but the Nigerian explanation of their
retreat to the sky is, as far as I know, without parallel elsewhere.

XVII., XVIII., "Just So Stories."

XIX\. Quite an original myth of Thunder and Lightning: much below the
divine dignity of such myths elsewhere. Thunder is not the Voice of Zeus
or of Baiame the Father (Australian), but of an old sheep! The gods have
not made the Nigerians poetical.

XX\. Another " just So Story."

XXI\. *The Cock who caused a Fight* illustrates private war and justice
among the natives, and shows the Egbos refusing to admit the principle
of a fine in atonement for an offence.

XXII\. *The Affair of the Hippopotamus and of the Tortoise*.--A very
curious variant of the *Whuppitie Stoorie*, or Tom-Tit-Tot story,
depending on the power conferred by learning the secret name of an
opponent. These secret names are conferred at Australian ceremonies. Any
amount of the learning about secret names is easily accessible.

XXIII\. *Why Dead People are Buried*.--Here we meet the Creator so
common in the religious beliefs of Africans as of most barbarous and
savage peoples. "The Creator was a big chief." The Euahlayi Baiame is
rendered "Big Man" by Mrs. Langloh Parker (see *The Euahlayi Tribe*).
The myth is one of world-wide diffusion, explaining The Origin of Death,
usually by the fable of a message, forgotten and misrendered, from the
Creator.

XXIV\. *The Fat Woman who Melted Away*.--The revival of this beautiful
creature, from all that was left of her, the toe, is an incident very
common in folk-tales, i.e. the Scottish *Rashin Coade*. (The word
"dowry" is used throughout where " bride-price " would better express
the institution. The Homeric *hena* is meant.)

XXV\. *The Leopard, the Squirrel, and the Tortoise*.--A "Just So Story."

XXVI\. *Why the Moon Waxes and Wanes*.--A lunar myth; not a poetical
though a kindly explanation of the habits of the moon.

XXVII\. *The Story of the Leopard, the Tortoise, and the Bush Rat*.--A
"Just So Story."

XXVIII\. *The King and the Ju Ju Tree*.--This is a fine example of Ju Ju
beliefs, and of an extraordinary sacrifice to a Ju Ju power located in a
tree. Goats, chickens, and white men are common offerings, but "seven
baskets of flies " might propitiate Beelzebub. The "spirit-man " who can
succeed when sacrifice fails, chooses the king's daughter as his reward,
as is usual in *Märchen*. Compare Melampus and Pero in Greece. The skull
in spirit-land here plays a friendly part, in advising the princess,
like Proserpine, not to eat among the dead. This caution is found
everywhere-in the Greek version of Orpheus and Eurydice, in the
*Kalewala*, and in Scott's "Wandering Willie's Tale," in *Redgauntlet*.
Like Orpheus, the girl is not to look back while leaving spirit-land.
Her successful escape, by obeying the injunctions of the skull, is
unusual.

XXIX\. *How the Tortoise overcame the Elephant and the Hippopotamus*.--A
"Just So Story," with the tortoise as cunning as Brer Rabbit.

XXX\. *Of the Pretty Girl and the Seven Jealous Women*.--Here the good
little bird plays the part of the popinjay who "up and spake" with good
effect in the first ballads. The useful Ju Ju man divines by casting
lots, a common method among the Zulus. The revenge of the pretty girl's
father is certainly adequate.

XXXI\. *How the Cannibals drove the People from Insofan Mountain to the
Cross River (Ikom)*.--This professes to be historical, and concerns
human sacrifices, "to cool the new yams," and cannibalism.

XXXII\. is unimportant.

In XXXIII. we find the ordeal poison, which destroys fifty witches.

XXXIV\. *The Slave Girl who tried to Kill her Mistress* is a form of our
common tale of the waiting-maid who usurps the place of her mistress,
the Bride. The resurrection of the Bride from the water, at the cry of
her little sister, occurs in a remote quarter, among the Samoyeds in
Castrens *Samoyedische Märchen*, but there the opening is in the style
of *Asterinos and Pulja* (*Phrixus and Helli*) in Van Hahn's
*Griechische Märchen*. The False Bride story is, in an ancient French
*chanson de geste*, part of the legend of the mother of Charlemagne. The
story also occurs in Callaway's collection of Zulu fairy tales. In the
Nigerian version the manners, customs, and cruelties are all thoroughly
West African.

XXXV\. *The King and the 'Nsiat Bird* accounts, as usual, for the habits
of the bird; and also illustrates the widespread custom of killing
twins.

XXXVI\. reflects the well-known practices of poison and the ordeal by
poison.

XXXVII\. is another "Just So Story."

XXXVIII\. *The Drummer and the Alligators*.--In this grim tale of one of
the abominable secret societies the human alligators appear to be
regarded as being capable of taking bestial form, like werewolves or the
leopards of another African secret society.

XXXIX\. and XL. are both picturesque "Just So Stories," so common in the
folk-lore of all countries.

The most striking point in the tales is the combination of good humour
and good feeling with horrible cruelties, and the reign of terror of the
Egbos and lesser societies. European influences can scarcely do much
harm, apart from whisky, in Nigeria. As to religion, we do not learn
that the Creator receives any sacrifice: in savage and barbaric
countries He usually gets none. Only Ju Jus, whether ghosts or fiends in
general, are propitiated. The Other is "too high and too far."

I have briefly indicated the stories which have variants in ancient myth
and European *Märchen* or fairy tales.

ANDREW LANG.

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Tortise with a Pretty Daughter](fsn03)

</div>
