<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsn27)  [Next](fsn29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R0HU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk Stories From Southern Nigeria*, by Elphinstone Dayrell, \[1910\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_fn_28"></span>

# XXVI. Why the Moon Waxes and Wanes

THERE was once an old woman who was very poor, and lived in a small mud
hut thatched with mats made from the leaves of the tombo palm in the
bush. She was often very hungry, as there was no one to look after her.

In the olden days the moon used often to come down to the earth,
although she lived most of the time in the sky. The moon was a fat woman
with a skin of hide, and she was full of fat meat. She was quite round,
and in the night used to give plenty of light. The moon was sorry for
the poor starving old woman, so she came to her and said, "You may cut
some of my meat away for your food." This the old woman did every
evening, and the moon got smaller and smaller until you could scarcely
see her at all. Of course this made her give very little light, and all
the people began to grumble in consequence, and to ask why it was that
the moon was getting so thin.

At last the people went to the old woman's house where there happened to
be a little girl sleeping. She had been there for some little time, and
had seen the moon come down every evening, and the old woman go out with
her knife and carve her daily supply of meat out of the moon. As she was
very frightened, she told the people all about it, so they determined to
set a watch on the movements of the old woman.

That very night the moon came down as usual, and the old woman went out
with her knife and basket to get her food; but before she could carve
any meat all the people rushed out shouting, and the moon was so
frightened that she went back again into the sky, and never came down
again to the earth. The old woman was left to starve in the bush.

Ever since that time the moon has hidden herself most of the day, as she
was so frightened, and she still gets very thin once a month, but later
on she gets fat again, and when she is quite fat she gives plenty of
light all the night; but this does not last very long, and she begins to
get thinner and thinner, in the same way as she did when the old woman
was carving her meat from her.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. The Story of the Leopard, the Tortoise, and the Bush
Rat](fsn29)

</div>
