<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsn23)  [Next](fsn25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R0HU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk Stories From Southern Nigeria*, by Elphinstone Dayrell, \[1910\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_fn_24"></span>

# XXII. The Affair of the Hippopotamus and the Tortoise; or, Why the Hippopotamus lives in the Water

MANY years ago the hippopotamus, whose name was Isantim, was one of the
biggest kings on the land; he was second only to the elephant. The hippo
had seven large fat wives, of whom he was very fond. Now and then he
used to give a big feast to the people, but a curious thing was that,
although every one knew the hippo, no one, except his seven wives, knew
his name.

At one of the feasts, just as the people were about to sit down, the
hippo said, "You have come to feed at my table, but none of you know my
name. If you cannot tell my name, you shall all of you go away without
your dinner."

As they could not guess his name, they had to go away and leave all the
good food and tombo behind them. But before they left, the tortoise
stood up and asked the hippopotamus what he would do if he told him his
name at the next feast? So the hippo replied that he would be so ashamed
of himself, that he and his whole family would leave the land, and for
the future would dwell in the water.

Now it was the custom for the hippo and his seven wives to go down every
morning and evening to the river to wash and have a drink. Of this
custom the tortoise was aware. The hippo used to walk first, and the
seven wives followed. One day when they had gone down to the river to
bathe, the tortoise made a small hole in the middle of the path, and
then waited. When the hippo and his wives returned, two of the wives
were some distance behind, so the tortoise came out from where he had
been hiding, and half buried himself in the hole he had dug, leaving the
greater part of his shell exposed. When the two hippo wives came along,
the first one knocked her foot against the tortoise's shell, and
immediately called out to her husband, "Oh! Isantim , my husband, I have
hurt my foot." At this the tortoise was very glad, and went joyfully
home, as he had found out the hippo's name.

When the next feast was given by the hippo, he made the same condition
about his name; so the tortoise got up and said, "You promise you will
not kill me if I tell you your name?" and the hippo promised. The
tortoise then shouted as loud as he was able, "Your name is Isantim," at
which a cheer went up from all the people, and then they sat down to
their dinner.

When the feast was over, the hippo, with his seven wives, in accordance
with his promise, went down to the river, and they have always lived in
the water from that day till now; and although they come on shore to
feed at night, you never find a hippo on the land in the daytime.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Why Dead People are Buried](fsn25)

</div>
