[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc21002)  [Next](cc21004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 49

<span id="ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith
the LORD, Hath Israel no sons? hath he no heir? why *then* doth their
king inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities?

<span id="ii.ii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Ad filios Ammon: Sic dicit Jehova,
An filii non sunt Israeli? An haeres non est ei? quare haereditate
possidet rex eorum Gad et populus ejus in urbibus ejus habitat?

<span id="ii.ii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.i-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p6"></span>We have said that the Ammonites were not
only contiguous to the Moabites, but had also derived their origin from
Lot, and were thus connected with them by blood. Their origin was indeed
base and shameful, for they were, as it is well known, the offspring of
incest. There was, however, the bond of fraternity between them, because
both nations had the same father. God had spared them when he brought up
his people from Egypt; for in remembrance of the holy man Lot, he would
have both peoples to remain uninjured. But ingratitude doubled their
crime, for these impious men ceased not in various ways to harass the
children of Abraham.: For this reason, therefore, does Jeremiah now
prophesy against them.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p7"></span>And we see here, again, the object of this
prophecy and the design of the Holy Spirit in announcing it, even that
the Israelites might know that they were not so completely cast away by
God, but that there remained some remnants of his paternal favor; for if
the Moabites and the Ammonites had been free from all evils, it would
have been a most grievous trial; it would have been enough to overwhelm
weak minds to see a people whom God had adopted, miserably oppressed and
severely chastised, while heathen nations were remaining quiet in the
enjoyment of their pleasures, and exulting also over the calamities of
others. God, then, in order to mitigate the grief and sorrow which the
children of Israel derived from their troubles and calamities, shews
that he would yet show them favor, because he would carry on war against
their enemies, and become the avenger of all the wrongs which they had
suffered. It was no common consolation for the Israelites to hear that
they were still the objects of God’s care, who, nevertheless, seemed in
various ways to have poured forth his wrath upon them in a full stream.
We now, then, see the reason why Jeremiah denounced destruction on the
Ammonites, as he did before on the Moabites.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p8"></span>Then he says, *To the children of Ammon*:
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) *Are there no children to Israel?*
*Hath he no heir?* It was a trial very grievous to the miserable
Israelites to see a part of the inheritance promised them by God
forcibly taken from them by the Ammonites; for what must have come to
their minds but that they had been deceived by vain promises? But it had
happened, that the Ammonites had deprived the children of Israel of a
part of their inheritance. Hence the Prophet teaches us here, that
though God connived for a time, and passed by this robbery, he yet would
not suffer the Ammonites to go unpunished for having taken to themselves
what justly belonged to others. Hence it is added, *Why doth their king
inherit Gad*?

<span id="ii.ii.i-p10"></span>I know not why *Jerome* rendered <span
id="ii.ii.i-p10.1"></span>מלכם, *melkam*, as though it were the name of
an idol, as the word is found in the Prophet Amos.  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) But it is evident that Jeremiah speaks
here of the king, for immediately after he adds, *his people* *Their
king*, then, he says, *inherits Gad* Gad is not the name of a place, as
some think, but Mount Gilead, which had been given to that tribe. The
Prophet says that they possessed the country of the Gadites; for they
had been ejected from their portion, and the children of Ammon had
occupied what had been given by God to them. And this is confirmed by
the Prophet Amos, when he says,

<span id="ii.ii.i-p12"></span>“For three of the transgressions of the
children of Ammon, and for four, I will not be propitious to them,
because they have cut off the mountain of Gilead.”  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) (<span id="ii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>[Am
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013)<span id="ii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.i-p14"></span>He speaks there metaphorically, because
God had fixed the limits between the tribe of Gad and the children of
Ammon, so that both might be satisfied with their own inheritance. But
the children of Ammon had broken through and expelled the tribe of Gad
from the cities of Mount Gilead. This, then, is what now our Prophet
means, even that they had taken to themselves that part of the land
which had been allotted to the children of Gad; for it immediately
follows, *and his people dwell in his cities*, even in the cities which
had been given by lot to that tribe; for we know that a possession
beyond Jordan had been given to the children of Gad. We now, then,
perceive the meaning of the words.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p15"></span>God, then, shews that he had not forgotten
his covenant, though he had for a time suffered the Ammonites to invade
the inheritance which he had conferred on the children of Israel; yet
the Gaddites would at length recover what had been unjustly taken from
them. For it was a robbery not to be endured, that the Ammonites should
have dared to take to themselves that land, which was not the property
of men, but rather of God himself, for he had called it his rest,
because he would have his people to dwell there. And though God
inflicted a just punishment on the Gaddites when he expelled them from
their inheritance, yet he afterwards punished the children of Ammon, as
he is wont to chastise his own children by the hand of the wicked, and
at length to render them also their just reward. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#002)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2"></span>**2**. Therefore, behold, the days come,
saith the LORD, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah
of the Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters
shall be burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir unto them that were
his heirs, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Propterea ecce dies veniunt, dicit
Jehova, et audire faciam (*vel*, faciam resonare) super Rabbath filiorum
(*vel*, super filios) Ammon clangorem praelii, et erit in acervum
vastitatis, et filiae ejus igne comburentur, et possidebit Israel
possessores suos, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p6"></span>God testifies here plainly that he would
not suffer the Ammonites for ever to enjoy their unjust plunder. He says
that *the days would come*, in order to sustain with hope the minds of
his children: for the Prophet announced his prediction at a time when
the Ammonites were in a state of security; and then, some years elapsed
while that people enjoyed their spoils. He therefore holds here the
minds of the faithful in suspense, that they might learn patiently to
wait until the fixed time of God’s vengeance came. For this reason,
then, he says, that the *days* would *come* when God would *cause the
trumpet of war to resound in Rabbah* He speaks as of a thing
extraordinary, for the Ammonites thought, as we shall see, that they
should never be in any danger. As, then, they proudly trusted in their
own strength, the Prophet speaks here of the trumpet of war in Rabbah,
which was the metropolis of the whole land. Some think that it was
Philadelphia, a name given to it by Ptolemy. Interpreters, however, do
not agree; but the opinion mostly received is, that it was Philadelphia.
Now, as to the main thing, there is no doubt but that it was then the
chief seat of government, and the capital of the kingdom, because the
Prophet, stating a part for the whole, includes the whole land when he
speaks of this city.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p7"></span>He says that she would become *a heap of
desolation* But this was then wholly incredible, because Rabbah was so
fortified that no one thought that it could be destroyed. But the
Prophet now declares that the whole city would be demolished, so that
neither walls nor private houses would remain, but that it would be a
deformed mass of ruins. He adds, *her daughters shall be burned with
fire* By daughters he no doubt understands towns and villages; and hence
is confirmed what I have said, that Rabbah was then the chief city of
the whole land of Ammon. At the end of the verse he says, *Israel shall
possess all who possess them*  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) By
these words Jeremiah again confirms what I have slightly referred to,
that the calamity of the Ammonites would be a testimony as to God’s
paternal kindness towards his chosen people, because he resolved to
avenge the wrongs done to them. As, then, God undertook the cause of the
Israelites as his own, he sufficiently manifested the favor he had
intended for his people, and for no other reason, but because he had
gratuitously chosen them.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>It may be asked, when was this prophecy
fulfilled? God, indeed, under David, gave some indication of their
future subjection, but Israel never possessed that land. Indeed, from
that time Ammon had not been brought low until after the overthrow of
Israel. It then follows that what Jeremiah predicted here, was not fully
accomplished except under the kingdom of Christ. David humbled that
nation, because he had received a great indignity from the king of
Ammon; and he took also Rabbah, as it is evident front sacred history.
(<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>[2Sa
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#029)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>,
etc.; <span id="ii.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>[1 Chr.
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#002)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>.)
He was yet satisfied with making the people tributary. From that time
they not only shook off the yoke, but exercised authority within the
borders of Israel; and that the Israelites had recovered what they had
lost, we nowhere read.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) Then Israel
began to possess power over the Ammonites when the kingdom of Christ was
established; by which all heathen nations were not only brought into
subjection and under the yoke, but all unworthy of mercy were also
reduced to nothing. What is added at the end of the verse is not
superfluous; for the Prophet introduces God as the speaker, because he
speaks of great things, and of which it was difficult to be fully
convinced. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003)<span id="ii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p2"></span>**3**. Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is
spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth; lament,
and run to and fro by the hedges; for their king shall go into
captivity, *and* his priests and his princes together.

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Ulula Chesbon, quoniam vastata est
Hai; vociferamini filiae Rabbath, accingite vos saccis, plangite,
discurrite per sepes, quoniam rex eorum in captivitatem profectus est,
et sacerdotes ejus et principes cum ipso.

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet now triumphs, as it were,
over the land of Ammon, and, according to his accustomed manner, as we
have before seen; for had the prophets spoken without metaphors, and
simply narrated the things treated of by them, their words would have
been frigid and inefficient, and would not have penetrated into the
hearts of men. This, then, is the reason why the prophets adopted an
elevated style, and adorned with grandeur their prophecies; for they
never, like rhetoricians, affected eloquence, but necessity so urged
them, that they represented to the eyes those things which they could
not otherwise form a conception of in their minds. On this subject we
have spoken often already; but I am again constrained briefly to touch
on it, because those who are not well acquainted with Scripture, and do
not understand the design of the Holy Spirit, may think that words only
are here poured forth. But when we duly weigh what I have said, then we
shall readily acknowledge that the Prophet did not, without reason,
enlarge on what he had previously said.

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p7"></span>*Howl, thou Heshbon*, he says, *for Ai is
laid waste* These were two neighboring cities: hence he exhorts Heshbon
to howl on seeing the overthrow of another city. He then adds, *Cry*, or
cry aloud, *ye daughters of Rabbah* He again repeats what he had before
touched upon as to the city Rabbah. *Gird yourselves*, he says, *with
sackcloth*, or put on sackcloth. He does not here exhort the citizens of
Rabbah to repentance, but he speaks according to the customs of the
people, as it has been stated elsewhere. Sackcloth was, indeed, a symbol
of penitence; when the miserable wished humbly to flee to God’s mercy,
and to confess their sins, they put on sackcloth. But the unbelieving
imitated the faithful without discretion or judgment. Hence it was, that
they scattered ashes on their heads, that without any reason they put on
sackcloth. What was then commonly done is now mentioned by Jeremiah;
*Put on sackcloth*, he says, *lament and run here and there by the
fences*

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds in the third person,
*for gone is their king into captivity.* He expressed this, that the
Israelites might know, that though that kingdom flourished for a time,
yet the day of which the Prophet had spoken would come, when the
condition of the Ammonites would be nothing better than that of the
Israelites; whose king, as it was known, had been driven into exile,
together with the priests and princes. The Prophet now denounces the
same punishment on the Ammonites, that not only their king would be
driven into another land, as a captive, but also their princes and their
priests. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#004)<span id="ii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p2"></span>**4**. Wherefore gloriest thou in the
valleys, thy flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her
treasures, *saying*, Who shall come unto me?

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Quid gloriaris reconditis tuis?
defluxit profunditas tua (*ad verbum*, vallis tua; *sed quoniam* קמע
*significat prfundum esse* ideo םיקמע *sunt profunditates*; cur *ergo*
gloriaris in tuis profunditatibus? sed *non repugno quin transferamus*,
quid gloriaris in vallibus tuis? defluvit vallis tua, *est idem nomen*,)
filia aversatrix, quae confidit in reconditis suis (in thesauris suis,)
Quis veniet ad me?

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p6"></span>As the minds of men continually vacillate,
because they do not sufficiently consider the infinite power of God, the
Prophet, that he might remove all obstacles which might have rendered
his prophecy doubtful, now declares that the Ammonites gloried in vain
in their valleys. Some understand by valleys a fertile land, well
watered. But the Prophet, as I think, refers rather to fortified places.
He then says, that they in vain *gloried in their deep valleys*; as they
were surrounded with mountains, so they thought that they could not be
approached. He derides this vain confidence, *Why*, he says, *dost thou
glory in thy valleys*, or, profundities? *Flown down has thy valley.* By
saying, that the *valley*, or depth, had flown down, he alludes to its
situation: for when any one considers a region situated among mountains,
the land appears as flowing, like a river gliding between its banks. It
is then a striking allusion to a deep place, when he says that the
*valley flowed down*  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) It was the
same as though he had said, “Thy depth has vanished,” or, “It shall not
be to thee such a protection as thou thinkest.” But the meaning is, that
though the Ammonites, confiding in their defences, disregarded all
attacks of enemies, they would yet be exposed to plunder; for their
mountains and valleys would avail them nothing, notwithstanding the
opinion they entertained, that they were so fortified, that they could
not be assailed.

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10"></span>He calls Ammon a *rebellious*, or a
backsliding *daughter*, though he mentions no particulars. But Ezekiel
and also Amos and Zephaniah, these three, clearly show why God was so
severe towards the Ammonites, (<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>[Ezekiel
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>[Am
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013)<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10.3"></span>[Zep
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii.iv-p10.3"></span>;)
it was because they had uttered blasphemies against him and his people,
exulted over the miseries and calamities of the chosen people, and
plundered them when they saw them overcome by their enemies. For these
reasons, then, our Prophet now calls them a *rebellious* people: they
had proudly exalted themselves against God, and exercised cruel tyranny
as to the miserable Israelites, who were yet, as it has been stated,
connected with them by blood.

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p11"></span>*Who trusts in her secrecies*, or hidden
places: rendered by some, “in her treasures.” But as <span
id="ii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>אצר, *atser*, means to hide, the reference
is, as I think, to strongholds; for the Prophet in the next words
explains himself, *Who can come to me?* It appears, then, that the
Ammonites thought themselves thus secure, because they were not exposed
to their enemies, but protected by their mountains, as though they were
in hiding places. This boasting sufficiently shews that they did not so
much trust in their treasures as in their hidden places, because they
dwelt in recesses. The meaning is, that though the Ammonites gloried
that they were beyond the reach of danger, yet God would become the
avenger of the cruelty which they had exercised towards their relations,
the Israelites. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#005)<span id="ii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p2"></span>**5**. Behold, I will bring a fear upon
thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts, from all those that be about thee;
and ye shall be driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather
up him that wandereth.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p3"></span>**5**. Ecce ego adduco super to terrorem,
dicit Dominator, Jehova exercituum, ab omnibus circuitibus tuis, et
expellemini, quisque coram facie sua, et nullus erit qui colligat
dispersos.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.v-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p6"></span>Jeremiah at length concludes his prophecy,
by saying, that God would dissipate that foolish confidence through
which the Ammonites were filled with pride, *because he would bring a
terror* on them. He sets up terror in opposition to that security in
which the Ammonites lay torpid; for they were inebriated, as it were,
with their pleasures. And then the strongholds by which they thought
themselves protected, so hardened their hearts, that they feared no
danger. God then sets up this terror in opposition to the false
arrogance by which they were inflated: *I bring*, then, *a terror from
all around thee.* And this was not without reason added, for the
Ammonites thought that they could, on some side, escape, if enemies
pressed hard on them; and as there were many outlets, they thought it
impossible that they should fall into the hands of enemies. But God
declares that they would be in every way full of fear, for terror would
surround and besiege them, so that they could not escape.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p7"></span>He then adds, *Ye shall be driven out,
every one to his face,* or, before his face. This would be the effect of
terror, because God would deprive them of all thought; for when we flee
in haste, and only regard any opening that may present itself, it is
evident that we are driven by terror. As we say in French, *Il court
devant soi*; so the Prophet says here, *Ye shall be driven out, every
one before his face*, that is, “ye shall flee wherever a place may be
open to you.” He shews that they would be so full of fear, that they
would not consider which would be the best way, nor think of a safe
retreat; they would, in short, think of nothing but of flight. And to
the same purpose is what follows: *There will be none to gather the
dispersed*: for when trembling seizes the hearts of the multitude, they
can yet be recalled, when one who has more courage than the rest
encourages them to stop, as we know that many armies have been in this
way saved; for as to soldiers, when suddenly seized with fear, a leader
has often been able to gather them again. But the Prophet, when he says,
that there would be none to call them back from flight, intimates their
destruction. He at length subjoins —

<span id="ii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006)<span id="ii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p2"></span>**6**. And afterward I will bring again
the captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p3"></span>**6**. Et postea reducam captivitatem
filiorum Ammon, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p6"></span>He now says the same thing of the children
of Ammon, as he said before of the Moabites, that some hope yet remained
for them, for God would at length show mercy to that nation. But, as we
have said, these promises were but adventitious, because God had chosen
but one people to be a Father to them; and the children of Abraham must
be viewed as distinct from all other nations. But though God built, as
it were, a wall to separate his people from aliens, it was yet his will
to give some preludes of his favor, and of the calling of the Gentiles.
The Prophet, then, had here a regard to the kingdom of Christ. The
promise, no doubt, extended itself to his coming; for he speaks of the
calling of the Gentiles, which God deferred until he manifested his own
Son to the world. It is the same then, as though the Prophet had said,
that God’s mercy would at length be showed to the Ammonites in common
with others; that is, when God would gather his Church from the whole
world, and unite, in one body, those who were before scattered. Nor is
there a doubt but that the Prophet, speaking of the children of Ammon,
intended to show what was to be manifested through all parts of the
world. And so it is, that on our calling is our salvation founded, for
we see that the gospel has not been, without a design, proclaimed to the
world; but as God had determined and settled this from the beginning, so
we see that Jeremiah was a herald of our adoption. This, then, is the
import of what is said. He afterwards passes over to the children of
Edom. But I cannot now proceed farther.

<span id="ii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou didst
formerly give so many proofs how great and singular was thy love towards
the children of Abraham, whom it had pleased thee to choose as thy
people, — O grant that we at this day may also enjoy the same favor,
since we have been admitted into a participation of the same union, and
that we may be so chastised as never to lose the hope of thy mercy, but
that we may so taste it as to meditate on that celestial kingdom, which
has been obtained for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. —
Amen.

<span id="ii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-Fourth

<span id="ii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007)<span id="ii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p2"></span>**7**. Concerning Edom, thus saith the
LORD of hosts; *Is* wisdom no more in Teman? is counsel perished from
the prudent? is their wisdom vanished?

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p3"></span>**7**. Ad Edom (contra Edom) sic dicit
Jehova exercituum, An non amplius sapientia in Theman? periitne
consilium ab intelligentibus? computruit (*vel*, supervacua facta est)
sapientia ipsorum?

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p6"></span>Here Jeremiah turns to Idumeans, who were
most inveterate enemies to the chosen people, though their origin ought
to have disposed them to show kindness to them, for they had descended
from the same father, even Abraham. The Idumeans also gloried in their
holy descent, and had circumcision in common with the Jews. It was then
a most impious cruelty that the Idumeans entertained such bitter hatred
towards their own blood. Hence our Prophet most severely reproved them,
as also did Ezekiel and Obadiah. (<span id="ii.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>[Eze
25:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012)<span
id="ii.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>; <span id="ii.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>[Obad.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008)<span id="ii.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p7"></span>He says first, *Is there not wisdom any
more in Teman?* By these words he intimates, that though the Idumeans
thought themselves safe through their own counsels, because they
excelled in acuteness, it yet would avail them nothing, for the Lord
would blind them and deprive them of a sane mind; for what is put here
interrogatively is declared plainly by Obadiah, (<span
id="ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>[Ob 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008)<span
id="ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>) even in God’s name,

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p8"></span>“I will take away wisdom from Teman, and
there shall be no understanding in Mount Esau.”

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p9"></span>But as Obadiah had preceded Jeremiah, it
was necessary that he should speak of this as of a future thing. But our
Prophet, as the judgment of which Obadiah was a witness and a herald,
was near at hand, boldly exults over the Idumeans, and laughs at their
reproach, inasmuch as they were deprived of counsel and understanding
when they had most need of them. Teman, no doubt, was the name of a
mountain or of a region; and this we learn from the Prophet Habakkuk,

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p10"></span>“God shall come from Teman, and the holy
one from Mount Paran.” (<span id="ii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>[Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)<span id="ii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p11"></span>It was also a chief city, as we learn
form other places; and our Prophet sets it forth as the seat of the
kingdom, when he says, *Is there not wisdom in Teman?* and then, *Has
counsel perished from the intelligent?*

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p12"></span>I wonder that interpreters, skillful in
the language and conversant in it, should render the last word “*sons*,”
for it is unsuitable to the place.  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)
The word, no doubt, is derived from <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p13.3"></span>בום, *bun*, to understand, and not from <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p13.4"></span>בנה, *bene*, to build, whence the word, <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p13.5"></span>בנים, *benim*, sons, comes. For how can it
suit this passage to say, *Is there no more wisdom in Teman? Has counsel
perished from the children?* that is, as they understand it, “from the
children of Esau.” But this is frigid and forced; and the two clauses
correspond much better when read thus, “Is there no more wisdom in
Teman? has counsel perished from the intelligent?” that is, from those
who have hitherto boasted of their intelligence and acuteness.

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p14"></span>He then adds, *Rotten has become their
wisdom.* The verb <span id="ii.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>סרח, *sarech*, means
to be superfluous, but some render it here to be putrid, as it is in
*Niphal* I know not whether they have done this, because they did not
know another meaning suitable to the context; but we may fitly render it
thus, that their wisdom had become superfluous, that is, useless. We may
also adopt another meaning, that their wisdom had been hitherto
overflowing, that is, superabounded; for they had such wisdom, so as not
only to act wisely for themselves, but also to show to others what was
right and useful. As then the Idumeans possessed so much wisdom as to
direct others, and not to be wise only for themselves, the words would
read well were they rendered, that their wisdom had abounded. But in
that case the words would be ironical; for the Prophet seems to assign a
reason for his astonishment.

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p15"></span>I give then this explanation: he first
says, *Is there wisdom no more in Teman?* He exclaims, as though the
thing was very strange, “How can this be! is the very fountain of wisdom
exhausted? Who could have thought that a city so renowned for wisdom
would become so fatuitous as not to know her approaching calamity, so as
to meet it, and apply in time the remedy?” And to the same effect he
adds, *Has counsel perished from the intelligent?* At length he
subjoins, *Abounded has their wisdom*; and this he says, in order to
show a reason for his astonishment.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p19"></span>But we must notice the sameness and the
difference between our Prophet and Obadiah. The latter foretold the
blindness of that nation; but our Prophet, as though he wished to rouse
from their torpor those who had been inattentive to the prophecy of
Obadiah, exclaims, “How has wisdom perished from Teman, and counsel from
the intelligent?” We must further observe, that this punishment was by
God inflicted on the Idumeans, because they had applied all their
thoughts to frauds and intrigues; and it seldom happens, but that they
who excel in acuteness become very sharp and fraudulent. As then men are
thus wont to abuse for the most part their knowledge, God blinds them,
and shews that men cannot of themselves be wise, but as far as it is
given them from above. As I have already said, the Prophet enlarges on
this judgment, that he might the more effectually rouse the minds of
men. For had the Idumeans been rustics, such as dwell among mountains,
and had no report prevailed as to their wisdom, no one would have
wondered that they were taken and subdued; for simple and unwary men are
exposed to the intrigues of their enemies, and cannot escape them. But
the Prophet, in order to set forth this judgment of God as wonderful,
says that their wisdom had been as it were overflowing, that is, like an
abundant treasure, for they administered counsel to others. As, then,
the Idumeans so much excelled in intelligence, especially those who
dwelt in the city Teman, the Prophet shews by this very circumstance
that their blindness proceeded from the manifest vengeance of God, and
that such a change did not happen by chance. It follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.x-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008)<span id="ii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.x-p2"></span>**8**. Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O
inhabitants of Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him,
the time *that* I will visit him.

<span id="ii.ii.x-p3"></span>**8**. Fugite, conversi sunt,
profundaverunt habitationem incolae Dedan, quia interitum Esau adduxi
super ipsum tempore visitationis ejus.

<span id="ii.ii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.x-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.x-p6"></span>The Prophet shews here how great was the
pride of that nation, and sets it as it were before their eyes. *Flee*,
he says; the language is abrupt, yet the meaning is not ambiguous. The
meaning is, that when any one warned the Idumeans to flee, none of them
would move; nay, they would remain fixed in their own country, for they
thought that they would have there a perpetual quietness. *The citizens
of Dedan have made deep their habitation* He names another city not far
from Teman. He then adds, in God’s name, *But I will bring destruction
on Esau in the time of his visitation*  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="ii.ii.x-p8"></span>We now understand the design of the
Prophet, — that he wished to set before our eyes how proudly the
Idumeans trusted in their defences, as they never could be persuaded to
flee. The Prophet then, as God’s herald, declares that they would have
to flee. But what did they do? *They made deep their habitation,* that
is, they would remain quiet in their own country, as though they were
fixed in the center of the earth, and therefore unassailable. By saying
then that they *made deep*, he sets forth their obstinacy, so that no
one could terrify them, though he announced extreme dangers. But it was
his purpose thus to strengthen confidence in his prophecy, because the
greatest part of the faithful could form no judgment but according to
the present aspect of things; and the Idumeans proudly laughed at all
threatenings. That the faithful then might not think that the Idumeans
would be safe, he afterwards adds, in God’s name, “Behold, I will bring
ruin on Esau.” He mentions their father, and the Idumeans, we know,
descended from Esau the first-born of Isaac; and hence they were of the
same blood with the Israelites. But the Prophet, by bringing forward the
name of a reprobate man, intended, no doubt, to renew the memory of a
curse, for Esau had been rejected, and his younger brother Jacob
succeeded in his place. Hence the Prophet, that he might gain more
credit to his words, brought before the people what was well known to
them, that Esau had been rejected by God; for on the rejection of Esau
depended their gratuitous election and adoption.

<span id="ii.ii.x-p9"></span>And he says that God would be the avenger
of that nation *at the time of visitation*; for as I have before
reminded you, what we have read was not immediately fulfilled. When,
therefore, the Israelites suffered extreme calamities, their hope might
a hundred times have failed them, on seeing the Idumeans remaining still
as it were asleep in their pleasures, and these judgments of God as it
were buried; for it might have come to their minds that all which
Jeremiah had declared had passed away like smoke. Hence, to sustain
their hope and patience, he sets before them here the *time* of
visitation; as though he had said, that the Idumeans also would have
their turn, after God had patiently borne with their impiety and spared
them for a long time. But of this we shall hereafter see. Now, as I have
shown elsewhere, the words which remind us of the time of God’s
visitations, ought to be noticed, that we may not by hastening fall
headlong, as it is usually the case; for they who are in a hurry, fall
at the first step. That we may then learn to wait for the ripened time,
let this remain fixed in our minds, that God has his settled seasons of
visitations. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p2"></span>**9**. If grapegatherers come to thee,
would they not leave *some* gleaning-grapes? if thieves by night, they
will destroy till they have enough.

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p3"></span>**9**. Si vindemiatores venissent contra
to, non reliquissent uvas? si fures in nocte, nonne perdidissent quod
sufficeret ipsis?

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p6"></span>Interpreters have not only obscured, but
also perverted this verse, and only said what is to no purpose, and have
gone far from the meaning of the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) How so? because it did not occur to them
to compare this with a passage in Obadiah. Obadiah is the true
interpreter; nay, our Prophet has borrowed what we read here from him.
For there a question is asked, “If thieves were to come to thee, if
robbers (<span id="ii.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>שדדי, *shaddi*, is added there,
but is omitted by Jeremiah) — if robbers by night, how wouldest thou
have been reduced to nothing?” But in the first place the rendering
ought to be, “Had thieves come to thee, how wouldest thou have been
reduced to nothing?” then he adds, “Would they not have stolen what
would suffice them?” He afterwards adds the second clause, “If the
grape-gatherers had come to thee, would they not have left grapes.”
There is now then no ambiguity in the Prophet’s words, if we read them
interrogatively. But there is an implied contrast between the calamity
threatened to the people and the other devastations. Were a thief of the
night to plunder another’s house, he would depart, loaded with his prey,
and leave something behind; for in all plunder some things remain: so
also as to grape-gatherers, some grapes remain, which escape the
gatherers.

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p8"></span>Then the Prophet here shews, that so great
would be the destruction of that nation, that it would exceed all kinds
of plundering; for when one strips his vines, he leaves some grapes; and
when a thief enters a house, he does not carry all things away with him,
being satisfied with his booty. But nothing, he says, shall be left
remaining with the Idumeans. We hence see why the Prophet brings forward
the two comparisons, that of the grape-gatherers and of the thieves.

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p9"></span>We must at the same time observe, that
when God denounces his vengeance on the Israelites, he often adduces
these comparisons, in order to show that nothing would be left them,
“When the olives are shaken, yet some fruit remains on the top of the
trees; but thou shalt be wholly emptied.” As God had said these things,
the Israelites might have raised an objection and said, “What is our
condition, and how miserable! for we are extremely afflicted; though God
afflicts the Idumeans, yet he deals mildly with them, for God’s wrath is
less inflamed against them than against us.” Lest then the faithful
should be thus thrown into despair, our Prophet declares that the
Idumeans would be wholly destroyed, so that not a grape would be left
them, nor any of their furniture, for their enemies would lay desolate
the whole land. Now follows a confirmation of this verse —

<span id="ii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#010)<span
id="ii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p2"></span>**10**. But I have made Esau bare, I have
uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself:
his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, and his neighbour’s, and he *is*
not.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p3"></span>**10**. Quia ego discooperio Esau, retego
abscondita ejus, et occultari non poterit; vastatum est semen ejus
(*aut*, vastabitur) et fratres ejus, et vicini, et non ipse (*quanquam
alii vertunt*, et nemo erit, *et contexunt proximum versum*,)

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p4"></span>**11**. Leave thy fatherless children, I
will preserve *them* alive; and let thy widows trust in me.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p5"></span>**11**. Relinque pupillos tuos; ego
vivificabo (hoc est, alam ipsos;) et viduae tuae in me sperent.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p7"></span><span id="ii.ii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p8"></span>As to the beginning of the verse, the
meaning of the Prophet is not obscure; for he means that such would be
the destruction of the people of Edom, that they would be spoiled by
enemies, that they would become wholly naked. But he speaks in the name
of God: *Behold, I uncover Esau, and make open his hidden things* By
hidden things he means treasures, as it is evident from Obadiah. He then
says that he would so expose the Idumeans to plunder, that there would
be no hidden thing but that their enemies would seize and plunder it.
This is the meaning.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p9"></span>He then confirms what I have said, that
this plundering would not be like grape-gathering, or theft, or common
robbery, because God would altogether empty the Idumeans of all that
they had, even of all that they hid in the ground.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p10"></span><span id="ii.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p11"></span>With regard to the end of the verse,
some give this explanation, “There will be none to say:” there is then a
word to be understood, — “there will be none to say, *Leave thy orphans
to me, I will nourish* or sustain *them*, or I will he a father to them;
*and thy widows, let them hope* or trust *in me*, or rest on me.” For it
is no small comfort to parents, when they know that their widows would
have one to flee to, and also their orphans. When one dies and sees that
his widow is destitute of every help, and sees that his orphans are
miserable and needy, his paternal and conjugal love is grievously
wounded. For is it more bitter than death itself, when the husband
cannot provide any help for his widow, when he cannot provide any relief
for his orphans. Hence some interpreters think that the ruin of this
people is in this way exaggerated; that is, because no one would be
found to bring comfort to parents, and to take as it were the place of
the dead.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p12"></span>But the meaning would not be unsuitable,
were the words deemed ironical, that the Prophet spoke in the person of
God, *Leave to me thy orphans, I will nourish them, and let thy widows
rest on me*, or trust in me: for it follows afterwards, *Behold, they to
whom there was no judgment, have drunk of the cup,* etc. The passage
then would not read amiss, if we consider that God taunts the Idumeans,
and ironically declares that he would be a judge against them even after
they were dead; for God’s vengeance, we know, reaches to the third and
the fourth generation. As then he had before declared, that the Idumeans
would be destroyed, their seed, their brethren, and their neighbors, so
he now confirms the same thing, — “What! dost thou expect that I should
be a father or a protector to thy orphans? that I should bring aid to
thy widow? This thou expectest in vain from me.”

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p13"></span>The Prophet, in a few words, very
sharply goads the minds of the Idumeans, when God thus presents himself,
and says by way of mockery, that he would be a protector to their
orphans and widows; for they had indiscriminately vented their rage on
orphans and women, and spared neither sex nor age. Then God shews here
that there was no reason why they should expect any comfort as to their
children, for he would be their avenger to the third and the fourth
generation. And forced, no doubt, is what some say; at least I do not
see how the words, *I will nourish them*, can comport with the rest of
the context. This clause, then, I apply to God himself, because his
vengeance would consume them with their brethren, their neighbors and
their seed. And the irony is the most suitable to the whole passage;
that is, that God meant to show, that he could bring no help to orphans
or aid to widows, since they had been so cruel both to orphans and
widows.  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) Then follows a
confirmation —

<span id="ii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012)<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**12**. For thus saith the LORD; Behold,
they whose judgment *was* not to drink of the cup have assuredly
drunken; and *art* thou he *that* shall altogether go unpunished? thou
shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink *of it*

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**12**. Quia sic dicit Jehova, Ecce,
quibus non erat judicium (*ad verbum*, quibus non judicium ipsorum,) ad
bibendum calicem bibendo bibent; — tu vero ipse immunis eris? *vel*,
immunis immunitatem adipisceris? *vel* tu, vero immunis evades?) non
evades immunis, quia bibendo bibes.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p6"></span>He confirms the last verse, as I think,
— that God’s vengeance awaited the whole seed of Esau, because it would
be unreasonable to deal more severely with God’s people than with
aliens, who had wholly shaken off the yoke. For I explain what is said
here of the Church, *Those to whom it was not their judgment to drink
the cup shall surely drink* Some apply this to neighboring nations who
had not become so wicked as the Idumeans. But this exposition is frigid,
and we ought always, as we have said elsewhere, to have regard to the
design of the Prophet. What then was his object but to show to the
faithful, that there was no reason for them to despond, however
grievously God might afflict them, because the punishment which he would
inflict on the Idumeans would in no way be milder; for we know that we
are greatly tempted by envy when we see that the state of the impious
and the reprobate is better than that of God’s children. And it was for
this purpose that <span id="ii.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>[Psalm
37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>
was composed,

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p7"></span>“Envy not the wicked, nor let their
prosperity vex thee, because they shall soon perish.”

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p8"></span>And David also, in <span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>[Ps. 73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003)<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>,
confesses, that he in a manner staggered when he saw the wicked
luxuriating in their pleasures, while the children of God were miserably
treated. Then our Prophet in this place, as often elsewhere, had regard
to the faithful, and wished to sustain them, lest they should succumb
under their burden, when God afflicted them as well as the Idumeans.
Hence he says, when speaking of the Idumeans, *Drinking they shall drink
the cup whose judgment was not to drink, and shalt thou be exempted*?
that is, “I will not spare my people, and should I spare aliens? this
cannot be.”

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p9"></span>We then see that it was a fruitful
source of consolation to the faithful, when they heard that the wicked,
who openly and avowedly disregarded God, could not escape his judgment.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p10"></span>But it may be now asked, how could he
say that it was not the judgment of the Church to drink of the cup of
God’s wrath? He speaks comparatively, and this answer ought to suffice
us. It is certain that the Israelites deserved all the evils which they
suffered. God then justly chastised them; he did not act without reason
or through sudden wrath, but executed what he had previously decreed. It
was then God’s judgment, even what he had determined and fixed; for
judgment here is to be taken for God’s decree, by which he apportions to
each his own lot. It was not then a judgment to the Israelites to drink
of the cup, when one compared them to the Idumeans, — how so? Here a new
question arises, for the Israelites had been worse than all others. The
Idumeans had departed wholly from God; all light had become extinct
among them; and then the law had not been given them: before Jacob went
down to Egypt, who was to be from thence delivered according to the
prefixed time made known to Abraham, they dwelt in mountains separated
from the land of Canaan. They therefore possessed no part of God’s law,
except that they had the empty symbol of circumcision. But the
Israelites, on whom had always shone the doctrine of the law, were
altogether inexcusable. Why then does the Prophet say that there was no
judgment to them? My answer is, that the reference here is not to the
persons of men, but on the contrary to the grace of God, through which
he had been pleased to embrace the children of Israel. As then God had
chosen that nation, what is regarded here is special adoption; for it is
right in God to indulge his children, and it is right also in him to
pardon them rather than aliens. When any one is offended with his own
son, he will be reconciled to him; but an alien will not find pardon.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p11"></span>We now then see that the Prophet does
not regard what the people had deserved, nor consider how detestable had
been their impiety, and of what grievous punishment they were worthy;
but on the contrary, he refers to that grace of God through which he had
chosen the seed of Jacob. He had indeed previously chosen the whole seed
of Abraham; but the rejection of Esau followed, so that Jacob alone
remained as the seed. Since then God had manifested himself as a father
to the children of Jacob, the Prophet says that it was not their
judgment to drink of the cup, because it was according to reason and
common sense that God should forgive them rather than aliens, whom he
had already rejected, and who were like putrid members: *They*, then,
*whose judgment was not to drink the cup, drinking shall drink, and
shalt thou escape free*? The meaning is, that if the green wood is
burnt, what will become of the dry? as Christ said. (<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>[Lu
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031)<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>.) There is a similar consolation mentioned
in <span id="ii.ii.xiii-p11.2"></span>[1 Pet.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p11.2"></span>, where those afflictions are mentioned to
which the Church of God is now exposed. Now, as we are tender and
delicate, and the minds of many may be harassed, Peter says, that if God
be so severe towards his own, those of his own household, what will
become of the wicked? what dreadful vengeance awaits them?

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p12"></span>We hence perceive the drift of the
Prophet’s words, and what doctrine may be hence deduced, even that when
we see God’s judgment beginning at God’s house, as the Prophet elsewhere
says, (<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>[Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029)<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>) and as also Peter says; that is, when God
chastises his own children, and seems in the meantime to pass by the
wicked, we ought patiently to wait for the visitation previously
mentioned; and this ought always to be remembered by us, “If this be
done in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?” We shall not then
envy the wicked, when God defers and does not immediately execute his
judgment; for the punishments inflicted by God on his servants are only
temporary and limited, and intended as medicine, inasmuch as all we
suffer are helps to our salvation, as Paul teaches us. (<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>.) As then God paternally chastises us, let
us not shun his paternal hand; nor let us think that God deals more
kindly with the wicked because he suspends his judgments, for at length
they will be hurried into their own ruin, as the Prophet says here.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p13"></span>In speaking of a cup, the Prophet uses
a phrase common in Scripture, for the Scripture by a metaphor calls
punishment inflicted on men for their sins a cup; because God apportions
to each his just measure. It is taken then as allowed, that calamities
are not by chance, but proceed from God’s hand, as though he gave a cup
to drink. Now when he afflicts his own, they are constrained to drink as
it were his wrath; it is therefore a sour and a bitter cup. But the
wicked shall hereafter drink poison. Even medicine, though displeasing
to the taste because of its bitterness, is yet wholesome; but poison
kills men, though its taste is like medicine. This then is the
comparison that is used here by Jeremiah; *Drinking, they shall drink
the cup*, even God’s servants, who yet ought to have been exempted
through a singular privilege, even because God had chosen them to be his
peculiar people; *shalt thou*, he says, *be exempted from drinking*? He
addresses all aliens.

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p14"></span>We have before seen another mode of
speaking, “They shall drink to the dregs,” as though he had said, “God
will not only give thee to drink a bitter cup, but its bitterness will
kill and destroy thee, for God will constrain thee to drink the very
dregs.” But still the meaning is the same, though the phrase is
different. He then asserts that the Idumeans would not be exempt from
God’s judgment, and why? because God does not spare even his own
children. Here then is suggested to us the best consolation when God in
various ways afflicts us: let us know that it cannot be otherwise, but
that it is a prelude to the last judgment, when salvation shall surely
be our portion, for God purifies us now by temporal punishments, that we
may be then free from final vengeance. But when the ungodly are secure,
let us know that God’s judgment is indeed hidden, but yet certain, and
will shortly overtake them; for when they say,

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p15"></span>“Peace and security, then sudden
destruction  
will come upon them.” (<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p15.2"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span
id="ii.ii.xiii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ii.xiii-p16"></span>But the clock strikes.

<span id="ii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xiv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.ii.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
not only in thine eternal counsel adopted us as thy children, but hast
also inscribed on our hearts a sure sign and pledge of thy paternal
favor towards us, — O grant that we may accustom ourselves to bear thy
scourges, and patiently to receive them without murmuring or
complaining, but that we may ever look forward to the blessed rest and
inheritance above, and at the same time dread the punishment that awaits
the wicked, and that we may thus courageously persevere in our warfare,
until thou at length gatherest us into that celestial kingdom which
thine only-begotten Son has procured for us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="ii.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-fifth

<span id="ii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#013)<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p2"></span>**13**. For I have sworn by myself, saith
the LORD, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste,
and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p3"></span>**13**. Quia per me ipsum juravi, dicit
Jehova, quod in vastitatem, in opprobrium, in desertum, et in
maledictionem erit Bosra; et omnes urbes ejus erunt in vastitates seeuli
(*id* *est*, perpetuas.)

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet confirms what he had
already prophesied respecting the Idumeans; but to remove every doubt,
he says, that God had *sworn*; and he introduces God as the speaker, in
order that his word might be emphatical. He then declares that God had
made an oath respecting the destruction of Bozrah. What is particular is
put for what is general; for he includes the whole nation under the name
of this city. Nor does he simply declare that the Idumeans would be laid
waste and destroyed, but he accumulates words: *Bozrah*, he says, *shall
be a waste*;  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) secondly, *a
reproach*; thirdly, *a solitude*, or desert; and fourthly, *a curse*

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p8"></span>What the Prophet said was no doubt a
thing difficult to be believed; for God did not without reason bring
forth his own name. For as he would have us to use it seriously and
reverently, so he does not interpose so precious a pledge except under
the greatest necessity. It is then certain, that there was a weighty
reason why God testified by an oath what we read here of the destruction
of the people of Edom. Now I have said that what Jeremiah announced was
hardly credible; and it was so, because there was no cause for war; and
besides, the country was fortified by its own inclosures; for the
Idumeans thought, as it seems, that they were impregnable. This, then,
was the reason why God interposed an oath. At the same time his purpose
was, as I have before reminded you, to consult the benefit of the
faithful; for God makes an oath that he might apply a remedy to the
weakness of our faith; for as we almost always vacillate, a simple
testimony, without being sanctioned by an oath, would not be sufficient
for us. This is then the reason for making an oath.

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p9"></span>God is said to swear *by himself*,
because there is none greater; as the apostle says, by whom he can
swear. (<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p9.1"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p9.1"></span>.) Men in doubtful and hidden things flee to
God, who knows the heart, who is himself the truth, and from whom
nothing is hid. And an oath, as we learn from many places of Scripture,
is a part of divine worship. As then this honor peculiarly belongs to
him, that is, that we should swear by his name, when he himself swears,
he cannot derive authority from another, which may confirm his words: he
therefore swears by himself. And we have heard what he declares by
Isaiah,

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p10"></span>“I will not give my glory to another.”
(<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>[Isa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p11"></span>God then prescribes to us the form of
swearing, when he swears by himself. God is said to swear sometimes by
his soul, or by his life, and he is said sometimes to lift up his hand.
These expressions are not strictly proper, but transferred to God from
men. But the mode of speaking used by Jeremiah ought especially to be
observed, for we see how an oath is to be rightly made, even when it is
made by an appeal to God’s name, for he is alone the fit witness and
judge in things doubtful and hidden.

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p12"></span>There is therefore under the Papacy a
base and an intolerable idolatry, for the Papists swear by dead saints.
This is nothing else but to rob God of his right; for since he alone, as
it has been stated, is the truth, so he alone is the fit judge when
things are hidden and cannot be ascertained by human testimony. And we
ought to notice the words used in swearing, that is, when men submit to
God’s judgment, and implore him as a judge. Whosoever then swears by the
saints, it is the same thing as to make them to occupy the place of God,
so as to make them the judges of the world, and to ascribe to them all
power.

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p13"></span>“God is a witness to my soul,”

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p14"></span>says Paul, (<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p14.1"></span>[2Co
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p14.1"></span>;) and then we have such words as these,

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p15"></span>“May God do this to me and add that.”  
(<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p15.2"></span>[Ru
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#017)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p15.2"></span>; <span id="ii.ii.xvi-p15.3"></span>[1Sa
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p15.3"></span>; <span id="ii.ii.xvi-p15.4"></span>[2Sa
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#035)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p15.4"></span>, etc.)

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p16"></span>By such expressions, as I have said, is
set forth the authority and character of an oath. In short, we must bear
in mind, that when necessity constrains us to swear, God is ever the
sole judge, and that therefore his name is profaned when we swear by
another.

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p17"></span>Now what it is to be *a reproach* and *a
curse*, is evident from other places, even when any one is set as it
were in a theater, that he might be an example of disgrace, or when any
calamity gives an occasion for execrations and maledictions, “May God
destroy thee as he destroyed the Idumeans:” this is to be a curse, as we
have elsewhere seen.

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p18"></span>He adds *cities*, and thereby intimates
that this desolation would not be confined to one part, but be extended
to all parts. He also says that they would be *perpetual wastes*; and
thus he took away every hope of restoration. When he prophesied before
against the Moabites and the Ammonites, he mingled some consolation, but
as to Edom, every hope is cut off. The nation, no doubt, deserved a
heavier vengeance, for it had a nearer connection with the Israelites —
hence its cruelty was less to be borne. Besides, it appears that it
exceeded in its barbarity all other nations; for it is not without
reason said in the Psalms,

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p19"></span>“Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom,
who said in the day of Jerusalem, Let it be erased, let it be wholly
erased to its foundation.” (<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p19.1"></span>[Ps
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p19.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p20"></span>We hence learn that the Idumeans raged
most cruelly against their own blood: and this was the reason why God
declared that their cities would become perpetual desolations; for the
word <span id="ii.ii.xvi-p20.1"></span>עולם, *oulam*, which some render
“age,” often means perpetuity. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#014)<span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>**14**. I have heard a rumour from the
LORD, and an ambassador is sent unto the heathen, *saying*, Gather ye
together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle.

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p3"></span>**14**. Auditum (*hoc est*, sermonem)
audivimus a Jehova, et nuntius ad gentes missus est, Congregamini
(*vel*, congregate vos,) et venite super eam, surgite ad praelium.

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet again shews that God would
be the author of the calamity of which he speaks; for if things were
viewed by men, no one could have thought that the Idumeans could in so
short a time be destroyed. It was therefore necessary for the faithful
to raise upwards their minds. And this the Prophet had in view when he
said that all this would be from God.

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p7"></span>But most forcible are his words when he
says, *We have heard a hearing;* some say, “a report,” but improperly,
as I think; for though, <span id="ii.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>שמועה,
*shemuoe*, often means a report or rumor, yet here it ought to be taken
for a proclamation, which God published as it were by his own heralds.
For the similitude is taken from men, proclaiming war against their
enemies by a solemn rite. Then Jeremiah says, that a *voice was heard*
sent from above, because it was God’s purpose publicly and openly to
testify, that what we read here of the destruction of Edom would take
place. We now then understand the meaning of the Prophet, when he says,
*A hearing have we heard from Jehovah*

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p8"></span>Then follows immediately a confirmation,
*a messenger*, or *an ambassador*, *is sent to the nations* God, indeed,
had no messenger or herald to proclaim war against the Idumeans, or to
rouse up the Assyrians and Chaldeans; but the Prophets usually spoke
thus, that men, being led to the very scene, might know that what was
said was real, and would not be without its effect, as prophecies were
as so many embassies. And according to this view, the prophets, as we
have stated elsewhere, sometimes besieged and stormed cities, sometimes
sounded the trumpet, even for this purpose, to show that their doctrine
was linked with its execution, for God never spoke by them to no purpose
or in vain. The Prophet at the same time reminds us that the Chaldeans
and the Assyrians were in God’s hand, so that he could by a nod or a
hiss rouse them to war, as it is said elsewhere,

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p9"></span>“God will hiss for the fly of Egypt.”
(<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)<span
id="ii.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p10"></span>The Prophet then means, that the
Chaldeans and the Assyrians would be ready to obey God, as though they
were hired soldiers, and enlisted under his banner.

<span id="ii.ii.xvii-p11"></span>We now then see how forcible was this
mode of speaking; for the faithful might hence learn, that it was in
God’s power to perform whatever he proclaimed by his servant, because he
could by one word rouse, draw, arm, and lead to war the Assyrians and
the Chaldeans, as he also says, *Be ye assembled, and come against her,
and rise up to battle* And he speaks of many nations, lest any one
should think that the Idumeans would be able to resist, for he is not
immediately conquered who is attacked by his enemies. But the Prophet
meets this doubt, and says that there would be many nations, who, with
their united strength, would come against the people of Edom, so that
they would have no power to resist. Nearly the same words are found in
Obadiah. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#015)<span
id="ii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p2"></span>**15**. For, lo, I will make thee small
among the heathen, *and* despised among men.

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p3"></span>**15**. Quia ecce parvum posui to inter
gentes, contemptum inter homines.

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p6"></span>Interpreters for the most part give
this exposition, that the people of Edom would be contemptible, because
God had determined to cast them down from their dignity, which they for
a time possessed: and then they connect the next verse, in which the
reason for this is given, “Thy terror deceived thee, the pride of thy
heart,” etc. But this passage may be taken otherwise, — that God derides
the pride of that nation, which ought to have restrained itself, because
it contended against nature, when it wished to elate itself so much. And
it seems to me that this is the real meaning of the Prophet. I do not,
indeed, pronounce the other view wrong, yet it behooves me to state what
I prefer. I then think that there is to be understood here an implied
comparison between the Israelites and the children of Edom, which is
more clearly expressed by Malachi, (<span
id="ii.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Mal.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)<span
id="ii.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>;) for God there extols his kindness
towards the Israelites, because he gave them a rich and fruitful land,
and sent away the posterity of Esau, and confined them within rough
mountains. As then the Idumeans, ejected from so pleasant and desirable
an inheritance as had been given to the children of Abraham, were
confined as it were to rugged mountains, the Prophet derides their
pride, because they tried in a way contrary and repugnant to nature to
elevate themselves: *I made thee*, he says, *small among the nations,
and contemptible among men* And we know that less easily can that pride
be borne, where there is no reason for boasting. When any one obscure
from the lowest rank exalts himself above the most noble, all regard him
with contempt, for it is a monstrous thing. It is for this reason that
the Prophet now says, “What have you, O Idumeans, that ye are so proud!
What do you possess? what is your glory? for God has humbled you. It is
then the same as though a fly wished to exceed in bulk the elephant.”

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p7"></span>But if the other exposition be
preferred, the meaning would be as follows, “Behold, I will make thee
small and contemptible among the nations, because thou hast been very
proud.” But I have stated what I approve, even that God here brings
against the Idumeans their folly, because they ought not to have boasted
without reason, “Behold,” he says; he shews, as by the finger, how mean
and abject their condition was; *1 have made thee small among the
nations, and contemptible among men* And, doubtless, were it a
threatening, it would not have been sufficiently forcible; for the
Prophet has hitherto been thundering against the Idumeans, and he goes
on in the same strain. If then he had now put in what we read, referring
to their smallness, it would have been frigid. I doubt not, then, but
that the Prophet describes the state of that nation, such as it had been
in comparison with that of the chosen people, and even of other nations;
for though they were rich, had always been free from disturbance, and
suffered no losses, yet they lived, as it has been stated, in mountains
by no means fertile. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016)<span id="ii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p2"></span>**16**. Thy terribleness hath deceived
thee, *and* the pride of thine heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts
of the rock, that holdest the height of the hill: though thou shouldest
make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence,
saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p3"></span>**16**. Superbia cordis tui, terror tuus,
decepit to, quae habitas in fissuris petrae (*vel*, rupis,) quae occupas
altitudinem collis (*id est*, collium, *mutatio est numeri*, *sicur
etiam in* עלס, *ham significat rupes*, *plurali numero*;) quamvis
extollas tanquam aquila nidum tuum, illinc detraham to (descendere
faciam, *ad verbum*,) dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p6"></span>Some render the first words thus, “Thine
idol hath deceived thee;” and others, “Thy folly hath deceived thee.”
The verb has, indeed, this meaning, though there is a different reading,
for some put a point over the right side of the letter, and others on
the left. But the most suitable meaning is thus conveyed, *Deceived thee
has thy terror, the pride of thy heart* Those who render the first word
“idol,” consider that superstition is referred to, that the false
confidence which the Edomites placed in their idols had deceived them.
But this seems to be a forced explanation. Why others have rendered the
word “folly,” I know not. The word properly means terror. The verb <span
id="ii.ii.xix-p6.1"></span>פלף, *pelets*, means to terrify, and from
this the noun is derived. And when the word is taken for an idol, it is
so metaphorically, because idols terrify men, or because a terrible end
awaits their worshippers. But I retain the proper meaning of the word.
At the same time terror here is to be taken actively, because the
Idumeans were a terror to other nations, and were thus blinded with
pride on account of their conceit as to their power.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p7"></span>And the following words are explanatory,
*the pride of thy heart*; for they who despise others fill themselves
with empty pride, and thus elevate their own hearts. As then the
Idumeans had gained for themselves the repute of being a warlike people,
the terror entertained for them inflated their own hearts with pride:
but the Prophet says, that they were *deceived*, as they arrogated to
themselves too much power. At the same time he continues the subject
which I have stated, as though he had said, “How comes it, that as God
has designed thee to be contemptible, thou takest to thyself such
authority among the nations? Thou fightest against nature, for thou hast
hitherto in vain terrified thy neighbors: hence it is, that thou art
swollen with pride; but it is a mere delusion; thou art greatly
mistaken, and deceivest thyself in thus thinking of thy strength, since
thy condition ought, on the contrary, to make thee humble.” We now see
how well the whole passage runs, and how aptly the words agree together.
He then says that it was a foolish confidence, by which the people of
Edom, whom God had made contemptible, were deceived.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p8"></span>He now adds, by way of concession, *Thou
who dwellest in the fissures of rocks, and occupiest the heights of
mountains* In these words the Prophet concedes something to the
Idumeans; but he afterwards adds, that the fortresses, by which they
thought themselves to be protected, would come to nothing; *though thou
raisest high thy nest as the eagle, thence will I*, says God, *draw thee
down* We hence see that the Prophet concedes to the Idumeans some reason
for boasting on account of their mountains, because they presented on
every side a defense against enemies; and yet he shews that all this
would be useless to them; for he says, *though thou raisest high thy
nest as the eagle*, that is, though thou ascendest, as they commonly
say, above the very clouds, *thence will I draw thee down*

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p9"></span>Now this passage teaches us first, that
all who trust in their own earthly defences deceive themselves; and,
secondly, that all who arrogate to themselves more than what is just and
right, contend, as it were, against God, and that it cannot, therefore,
be otherwise but that God will lay them prostrate. We are then taught by
this doctrine to cultivate humility. Humility has its roots fixed deeply
within; so that the state of those who willingly submit themselves,
becomes firm and permanent; for the root, which appears not on the
surface, sustains the tree. So also that humility, which is not known by
men, is our real and solid prop and support. Whosoever takes the wing
and flies, and seeks, through his own presumption, to raise up himself,
provokes God as it were designedly: and here the Prophet shews what end
awaits all those who thus raise themselves on high, seeking to set their
nest on a summit like the eagle; for God will draw them down and lay
them prostrate, as he did to the Idumeans. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#017)<span id="ii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p2"></span>**17**. Also Edom shall be a desolation:
every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all
the plagues thereof.

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p3"></span>**17**. Et erit Edom in vastitatem,
quisquis transierit super ipsam obstupescet, et sibilabit super omnes
plagas ejus.

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p6"></span>Here again the Prophet confirms what he
had said. We have before stated how necessary was such a repetition,
because no one could have thought that destruction was so nigh the
Idumeans. He did not then repeat what he had said, in order to explain
more clearly what might have been otherwise obscure, but to fix more
fully in the hearts of the faithful what appeared incredible.

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p7"></span>He then says that *Edom would become a
waste*; and then, that every one *passing by it* would be *astonished*
and *hiss on account of all her wounds*, or strokes. Hissing may refer
to derision, or to astonishment, or, at least, to wonder: for many hiss,
or shake the head through mockery; and others hiss through wonder, when
any unusual thing happens. And as he had said before, *Whosoever shall
pass through it shall be astonished*, I am disposed to refer this also
to what is produced by wonder or amazement. It afterwards follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#018)<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p2"></span>**18**. As in the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah and the neighbour *cities* thereof, saith the LORD, no man
shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it.

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p3"></span>**18**. Secundum subversionem Sodomae et
Gomorrae et vicinarum ejus, dicit Jehova, non habitabit illie vir, et
non manebit in ea filius hominis.

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p6"></span>He expresses more at large what he had
briefly included in one word: he had said, that Edom would become a
*waste*; but he now shews what sort of waste it would be, even such as
that of *Sodom and Gomorrah, and other cities*; for God, as it is well
known, destroyed the five cities against which he fulminated.

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p7"></span>And hence again we learn, that there was
no hope left for the Idumeans; as though the Prophet had said, that
their final overthrow was inevitable, because God would have them wholly
destroyed, and their memory obliterated. It is yet probable that there
were some remnant of the nation; but this was not inconsistent with this
prophecy, because they who remained alive became so scattered, that they
never formed one people, nor had any name. And though God might have
chosen some from that nation, yet this favor remained hid, and, as it
was unknown to men, it can hardly be taken to the account. However this
may have been, we must bear in mind what I have before briefly referred
to, — that the Idumeans were so accursed, that their calamity was much
severer than that of other nations; and this they had deserved by their
unnatural cruelty and many contumelies towards the miserable Israelites,
their own relatives. This, then, was the reason why Jeremiah compared
the land to, *Sodom and Gomorrah, and the other cities; no man shall
dwell there*, that is, the country shall be desolate.

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p8"></span>And yet it appears, from history, that
that country was afterwards inhabited, for even the Romans placed there
a garrison. But the Prophet, as I have already said, meant that none of
the Idumeans would survive to possess the land, so as to become a
nation. Though, then, other inhabitants might have afterwards possessed
the land, this was nothing to the Idumeans; for that people had
perished, and from that time no restoration followed: this was
sufficient as a fulfillment of this prophecy. Nay, it was a harder
thing, that their land should receive aliens and strangers, than if it
had been left desolate.

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p9"></span>But we must also bear in mind the common
mode of speaking adopted by the Prophets; for when they adduce Sodom and
Gomorrah as examples, they speak hyperbolically; and there is no need
here to accumulate passages to prove this; for they who are in any
tolerable measure acquainted with Scripture, must know that whenever
mention is made of Sodom and Gomorrah, all pardon and alleviation of
punishment are excluded. Isaiah, extolling God’s mercy towards his
chosen people, says,

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p10"></span>“Had not God left us a very small seed,
we must have been as Sodom and like to Gomorrah.” (<span
id="ii.ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p11"></span>And this mode of speaking, as I have
said, often occurs in Scripture; yea, even our Prophet threatened the
Israelites with the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, (<span
id="ii.ii.xxi-p11.1"></span>[Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014)<span
id="ii.ii.xxi-p11.1"></span>.) The words, no doubt, are used
hyperbolically; for God had not fulminated against other lands or
nations and sunk them in the deep, as he had done to Sodom and Gomorrah.
But in comparisons all parts do not correspond.

<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p12"></span>Now, some one may ask, Why does God thus
exceed due limits in speaking? To this I answer, that it is not done
without just reason and necessity. We indeed see that men are
indifferent to God’s judgments; for such is their sloth and
insensibility, that they disregard as a light thing, or deem as nothing,
what God threatens. As then men are so brutish, being unmoved by God’s
threatenings, it is necessary that such indifference should be roused
and awakened. He therefore sets Sodom and Gomorrah before their eyes;
and as Jude also says, there an example of all the punishments which
await the reprobate has been exhibited. (<span
id="ii.ii.xxi-p12.1"></span>[Jude
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="ii.ii.xxi-p12.1"></span>)
God therefore designed to represent once for all, as in a mirror, how
dreadful will be his vengeance on all the wicked. Since it is so, to the
same end is this threatening, that God would destroy the Idumeans and
all like them, as he did Sodom and Gomorrah, so that none would survive,
though aliens might come and succeed the Idumeans and occupy their
inheritance. I cannot now finish; we shall leave the other comparison.

<span id="ii.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.ii.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
been pleased to stretch forth thine hand to us, we may be raised by
faith above the world, and learn to submit to thee in true humility, and
to know how miserable must be our condition and life, except we wholly
recumb on thee alone, so that we may be made partakers of that glory
which thou hast purchased for us in Heaven, and which thine
only-begotten Son, our Lord, has obtained for us. — Amen.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-sixth

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019)<span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>**19**. Behold, he shall come up like a
lion from the swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong:
but I will suddenly make him run away from her: and who *is* a chosen
*man*, *that* I may appoint over her? for who *is* like me? and who will
appoint me the time? and who *is* that shepherd that will stand before
me?

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span>**19**. Ecce tanquam leo ascendet ab
elevatione Jordanis ad tabernaculum fortitudinis; postquam quiescere
fecero, faciam currere ab ea; et quis electus super eam praeficiam? nam
quis sicut ego? et quis contestabitur mecum? et quis hic pastor qui stet
coram facie mea (*vel*, contra faciem meam.)

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p6"></span>The Prophet here confirms what he had
said, that such would be the violence of the Chaldean army, that the
Idumeans would not be able to resist it. He then says, that the
Chaldeans would come like lions, who ascend in great fury when compelled
to change the place of their habitation; for so I explain what is said
of the elevation of Jordan. The explanations are various; but the one I
approve is, that Jeremiah compares the Chaldeans to lions, who every
year, or at least when there was a great inundation, sought
hiding-places on mountains or on elevated grounds, because they could
not lie down on the plains. The elevation of Jordan is then to be taken
for its swelling, that is, when it overflowed. We learn from many
passages that the lions lodged around Jordan. As then they dwelt in the
low plains, when the river swelled, they changed the place of their
habitation. But this could not be without their rage being excited; for
we know how savage these wild beasts are. Jeremiah had also a regard to
the situation of Idumea, which was more elevated than Jordan and the
country around it. He says the same also, in the next chapter, of the
Babylonians. But it may be that he alluded in this place to what was
common among the Idumeans, and this is probable.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p7"></span>The meaning then is, as I think, that as
lions ascended to higher grounds when Jordan swelled and overflowed, so
the Chaldeans would come to the Idumeans, and invade the country like
furious wild beasts. This is one thing. Then he adds, *to the habitation
of strength* Jerome’s rendering is, “to valiant beauty;” the word is so
explained almost everywhere, but it is to be taken here for a strong
dwelling. He alludes to the situation of that land, for it seemed
impregnable, because it was surrounded, as it has appeared elsewhere, by
mountains. The situation of Babylon was different, it being surrounded
by the various streams of the Euphrates.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>What follows is obscure, *when I shall
have made him to rest, I will make him to run from her.* Some explain
the particle <span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>כי, *ki*, differently. It
is indeed a causative, but is often taken, as it is well known, as an
adverb of time. But the meaning of the Prophet is ambiguous, and some
have imagined that the chosen people are spoken of, as though the
Prophet meant, that when the Lord gave rest to his people, he would then
cause them to flee from the land of Edom. But this exposition is wholly
inadmissible; and I wonder how they came to make such a mistake; for the
Prophet, I have no doubt, means here that the Idumeans had a long time
been at ease, but that a sudden calamity would come which would scatter
them here and there, and force them to seek safety by flight; and this
is the best meaning that we can elicit: *When*, therefore, *I shall have
made her to rest*, or, from the time I shall have made her to rest, *I
will make him to flee from her*; as though he had said, “I have hitherto
suffered this nation to rest in its abundance, and thus to remain quiet;
but I will suddenly disperse the inhabitants here and there, and they
shall see their own land occupied by their enemies.” In short, there is
here a comparison between two conditions; for the Idumeans had long
remained in their own dregs, for there was no one who caused them any
trouble. God had then granted them a continual quietness; but now he
declares that he would make all of them to flee, and that suddenly. And
it was necessary that this should be distinctly expressed, that the
Idumeans might not in future trust in their tranquil state, as
hypocrites do, who usually abuse God’s indulgence, and think, when he
bears long with them, that they have escaped every danger. Lest then
such confidence should deceive the Idumeans, the Prophet says that they
would have to flee after having been long in a state of tranquillity.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p9"></span>The words may at the same time be
explained otherwise; for <span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>רגע, *rego*,
means to rend, to cut, to break; and it may be so taken here, “When I
shall have made a rent;” for the Idumeans, as it has been stated, were
fortified by defences on every side. God now intimates that he would
make an irruption, which he compares to rending; and this explanation is
not unsuitable.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p10"></span>It afterwards follows, *And who is the
chosen* one, *that I may set him over her?* God now summons all the
strong ones, that he might set them over Idumea, not as pastors or such
as might care for the welfare of the land and provide for its safety,
but such as would oppress it with tyrannical cruelty: *Who* then *is the
chosen* one? At the same time God shews that all men of war are in his
hand and at his disposal; as though he had said, “If the Idumeans think
that they surpass all others in courage and strength, they are greatly
mistaken; for I will find those who possess more courage, for I have
ready at hand chosen men to set over them whenever I please, who will
easily subdue the Idumeans, however superior they may think themselves
to be in martial valor.” Then God does not here ask a question as of a
doubtful matter, *Who is the chosen one, that I may set him over her?*
but he shews that it would be no difficult thing for him to destroy the
Idumeaus, because he would send for the chosen one from any part of the
world he pleased, and set him over Idumea, not as a pastor, as I have
said, but as a cruel tyrant.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p11"></span>He then adds, *For who is as I am?* He
confirms the last clause; for God extols his own power, which is wont to
be despised by the unbelieving. The sentence indeed seems to be a common
truth, *Who is as I am?* for all allow this from the least to the
greatest. The Prophet appears then to have announced something trite and
ordinary by saying, that *none is like God;* for even the worst of men
acknowledge this, and the least child confesses it, and it is the
dictate of nature. But were any one duly to consider how great is the
pride of men, he would find that this truth is not so common; for there
is hardly one in a hundred who concedes to God what justly belongs to
him. For when he comes forth either to promise salvation or to announce
punishment, how little is any one moved? nay, they who hold this
principle, that God can do all things, are yet carried away, when the
least hinderance occurs, to vain imaginations, and at length become
wholly lost. When any one is persuaded that God ought to be feared, if
any occasion for a false confidence be presented, what he had at first
entertained in his mind will be choked, and then wholly extinguished. In
short, if we carefully consider how contemptibly men think of God, we
shall understand that this truth is not in vain often repeated in
Scripture, that God has none like him. For when any one dares to exalt
himself against God, he immediately strikes all with terror; and yet the
power of God is regarded as nothing. We see that even the faithful
themselves deem the least thing stronger than God; nay, they hesitate
not to set up flies and insects, so to speak, in opposition to God, and
even to make them equal to him. This is indeed very shameful, and yet it
is what has usually prevailed perpetually in all ages.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p12"></span>We now, then, understand why God
declares here as a great matter and as it were incredible, that *there
is none like him* And hence also we learn what the last clause means,
when it is asked, *Where is the chosen one whom I may set over her?* for
he follows up the subject by saying, *There is no one like me.* By these
words he shews that the whole world is under his power.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p13"></span>He now adds, *and who will protest
against me?* Some read, “Who will prescribe to me the time?” But they
who thus render the words, obscure the meaning of the Prophet. The
Prophet, I doubt not, means, that there is no one who will dare to
dispute with God; or were any one to attempt this, it would be
ridiculous, because God could with one breath dissipate all contentions
which men might raise. When therefore he says, *Who will protest against
me?* it is the same as though he said, “Who will make himself a party
against me?” as it is commonly said. Who then will oppose himself to me?
or, Who will dare to contend with me? or, Who will dare to dispute in
judgment with me? I have therefore given this rendering, *and who will
protest against me?* and this seems clearly to express the meaning of
the Prophet.

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p14"></span>He afterwards says, *and who is this
pastor that stands before my face?* By the word *pastor*, he alludes to
the comparison of a lion; for he thus compares the Idumeans to sheep.
Though they were very ferocious, yet here their weakness is referred to.
As, then, a sheep cannot defend itself against a lion, so the Prophet
shews that the Idumeans would not possess sufficient courage to resist
the attacks of the Chaldeans. In short, the Prophet means, that though
the Idumeans had many protectors, yet there would be no one able to
stand against God when he came forth armed to destroy that nation. The
sum of what is said is, that there would be no one, by right or by
strength, equal to God, to defend the Idumeans; for he said first, *Who
will protest against me?* and then, *What shepherd will stand against
me?* We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet, that as the Idumeans
had to carry on war with God, it could not possibly be but that they
must perish, for though they might get aids on every side, yet they
could not, either by right or by strength, withstand God.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#020)<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p2"></span>**20**. Therefore hear the counsel of the
LORD, that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he hath
purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the least of the flock
shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitations desolate
with them.

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p3"></span>**20**. Propterea audite consilium
Jehovae, quod consultavit contra Edom, et cogitationes ejus, quas
cogitavit contra habitatores Theman; Si non minores gregiseos
dejecerint, si non perdiderint super eos habitacula ipsorum (*vel*, si
non perdant super ipsos habitacula ipsorum.)

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p6"></span>The Prophet proceeds with his subject
respecting the Idumeans and their destruction; but he makes a preface in
order to gain credit to his words. He then says that this was God’s
*counsel* and his *thoughts*. He speaks after the manner of men; for he
transfers to God what does not properly belong to his nature; for God
does not deliberate or consult, but has once for all decreed before the
creation of the world what he will do; nor does he toss about his
thoughts in all directions, as men do, who do not immediately see what
is right or what ought to be done. Nothing of this kind belongs to God.
But this way of speaking is sufficiently common, when what strictly
applies to man is transferred to God. It ought at the same time to be
observed, that this is not done without reason, for when God speaks by
his servants, we ever raise doubts, “Is that said in earnest — can it be
changed — is it revocable?” In short, we receive what is light and
frivolous, and immediately give credit to it; but when God declares
anything, we subject it to comments, and raise up a hundred disputes on
every subject, “Oh, but this or that may happen; and it may be that God
does not speak in earnest.” As, then, men never acquiesce in God’s word,
as they ought to do, the Prophets borrow from common use these forms of
speech, that God had thus thought, that he had thus decreed.

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p7"></span>The meaning is, that whatever Jeremiah
had hitherto predicted of the Idumeans, could not be retracted, for it
was a settled decree, so fixed as though God had thought of it for a
hundred or thousand years.

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p8"></span>He now adds, *the inhabitants of Teman*;
by whom he means the Idumeans. But the repetition deserves notice: he
first mentions Edom, and then the inhabitants of Teman. And Teman and
Seir are sometimes the same. *If not, cast them down*, etc.; the verb
properly means to draw, and to draw in reproach and contempt, as when a
carcase is drawn through the mire. Then the Prophet means here a
throwing down, accompanied with reproach. And he says, *If not, draw
them forth shall the least of the flock* He speaks here otherwise than
before; for he called the Chaldeans chosen, and extolled their strength,
that he might strip the Idumeans of their vain confidence; but he now
proceeds further and says, that there was no need of great valor to put
that nation to flight, because even the least could lay them prostrate
on the ground, and also draw them in disgrace through the land. Now,
though the manner of speaking is different, yet the meaning remains the
same, even that God would arm the Chaldeans with courage, so that they
would easily destroy the land of Edom; and then, that though the
Chaldeans should not, according to the estimation of men, excel in
valor, they would yet be superior to the Idumeans, because victory was
in God’s hand, and he could work by means of flies as well as by men,
and by children as well as by giants.

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p9"></span>The formula of swearing is adopted, when
he says, *If not*, *draw them*, etc. It is an elliptical phrase, as it
has often been observed; such an obtestation as this is understood,
“Believe me not hereafter,” or, “Regard me not as God.” In short, it is
a form of an oath, which is a stronger affirmation than if he had simply
said, “Draw them forth shall the least of the flock.”

<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p10"></span>Some render the last clause, “If not,
set shall they,” etc.; as though the verb came from <span
id="ii.ii.xxv-p10.1"></span>שום, *shum*, to put, to set; but it is from
<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p10.2"></span>שמם, *shemem*, or <span
id="ii.ii.xxv-p10.3"></span>ימם, *imem*, as some think, though rather
<span id="ii.ii.xxv-p10.4"></span>שמם, *shemem* The Prophet, I have no
doubt, means, that they would destroy, or lay waste over them their
dwellings. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#021)<span
id="ii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>**21**. The earth is moved at the noise
of their fall, at the cry the noise thereof was heard in the Red sea.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span>**21**. A voce ruinae ipsorum contremuit
terra; clamor vocis eorum in mari rubro auditus est.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p6"></span>The Prophet in many words dwells on the
same thing, in itself sufficiently clear; but as it was not easy to
convince the Jews of what had been already said of the destruction of
the Idumeans, the Prophet continues the same subject. He then says that
the *earth trembled at the sound of their fall* By these words he means
that such would be the calamity, that it would terrify all neighboring
countries: as when a great mass falls, the earth shakes, so the fall of
the Idumeans, who had long gloried in their wealth, could not but strike
all their neighbors with terror. Lest the Jews should think that
incredible which had been said, the Prophet says, that though the earth
should tremble, yet God would overthrow that nation.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p7"></span>He then adds, *the cry of their voice
was heard at the Red Sea*  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) This
sea, called now Red, was at some distance. The word <span
id="ii.ii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>סוף, *suph*, properly signifies weedy, a
name given to it on account of the bulrushes it produced; but the sea
that is meant, is what is now called the Red Sea. I have said that the
distance between these places was considerable, and what the Prophet
means is, that so great and so dreadful would be the shaking of the land
of Edom, that its noise would make this sea to tremble, though it was at
some distance. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022)<span
id="ii.ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p2"></span>**22**. Behold, he shall come up and
fly as the eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and at that day
shall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in
her pangs.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p3"></span>**22**. Ecce tanquam aquila ascendet,
et volabit et expander alas suas super Bosra, et erit cor fortium Edom
die illo sicuti cor mulieris anxiae.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p6"></span>He again speaks of the speedy coming of
the Chaldeans, as though he had said, “When the state of that nation
shall seem peaceable, when they rest secure in their own nest, then
shall the Chaldeans suddenly come, or rather fly.” For he compares them
to eagles, in order to show that it would be a very quick and ruinous
expedition. At the time this prophecy was declared by the Prophet, no
one could have suspected that the Chaldeans would become enemies to the
Idumeans, for they were on the best terms with each other; nay, we know
that they paid every attention to gain the favor of the Chaldeans. Hence
it is said in the Psalms,

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p7"></span>“Remember, O Lord, the children of
Edom, who said in the day of Jerusalem,  
Let it be cut down, let it be cut down.”  
(<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p7.3"></span>[Ps
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)<span
id="ii.ii.xxvii-p7.3"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p8"></span>By these words is intimated the impious
conspiracy of that nation with the Chaldeans. Nor is there a doubt but
that they tried by all means to conciliate the Chaldeans for their own
interest. Hence the Prophet here points out a sudden change, when he
says that the Chaldeans would be like eagles, who would *expand their
wings over Bozrah* We have seen elsewhere that this was the chief city
of that nation.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p9"></span>*The heart*, he says, *of the valiant
men of Edom shall be like the heart of a sorrowful woman* We have seen
how great was the pride of the Idumeans. As then they thought themselves
superior in valor and counsel, and all other things, the Prophet here
shews that the *heart* of their *valiant* men would become effeminate;
for it cannot be but the hearts of men are in God’s hand. God then is
alone he who can sustain and animate us and give us firmness; and he
also, when he pleases, can debilitate our spirits; and these things he
does every moment: and *that day* then is not expressed without reason;
for God does not only impart to every one of us what valor he pleases,
but also takes away, when he pleases, the courage which he had given.
Hence it is, that the hearts of the brave become cowardly, and also,
that the most timid become sometimes bolder than lions, even when it
pleases God either to weaken or to strengthen the hearts of men.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvii-p10"></span>But it ought to be noticed, that no
hope is given here to the Idumeans as to any remnant. When the Prophet
spoke before of other nations, he gave them some consolation; but here
he does not mitigate God’s vengeance: he dooms the Idumeans to final
ruin, without giving them any hope; and for this reason, because God had
for a long time borne with them, and they had most wickedly abused his
forbearance. He had spared them from the time the children of Israel
came up from Egypt; and when they denied a passage to them, the children
of Israel made a long circuit with great inconvenience, that they might
not touch their land. It was a singular favor shown to them. And had
they had the least drop of humanity in them, they must have acknowledged
such a kindness; on the contrary, they had ever cruelly treated their
own brethren, and never ceased to do so, though often warned. It is no
wonder then that God should now give them up to ruin, and announce
predictions full of despair. This ought to be carefully observed, so
that we may learn not to make light of God’s patience when he bears long
with us, but in due time to repent, lest when he rises for judgment he
should utterly destroy us. It now follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023)<span
id="ii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p2"></span>**23**. Concerning Damascus. Hamath is
confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard evil tidings: they are
fainthearted; *there is* sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p3"></span>**23**. Ad Damascum: Pudefacta est
Chemath, et Arphad, quia rumorem malum audierunt, liquefacti sunt; in
mari pavoris ad quiescendum non potest (*hoc est*, quod quiescere non
potest.)

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p6"></span>Jeremiah speaks here of the kingdom of
Syria, which he means by *Damascus*, where the kings, as it is well
known, resided. The Syrians had been from the beginning very hostile to
the Israelites; and histories, well known, record that they had
continual wars for many years. At length the kings of Israel
confederated with the Syrians for the purpose of attacking their
brethren the Jews. Hence it was, that the Syrians caused great troubles
to the Jews, and were friends to the Israelites until both kingdoms were
subverted by the Chaldeans. It is hence probable that this prophecy was
announced while the kingdom was yet standing, or at least before its
final overthrow; for it was much weakened before it was wholly cut off,
as it has been stated elsewhere.

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p7"></span>It was necessary to make this preface,
in order that we might know the design of God in proclaiming this
prophecy against the Syrians, even because they had been from the
beginning enemies to the Israelites, and also, because they had united
their strength with them for the purpose of oppressing the Jews. They
had therefore always been like the fans of the Devil in the work of
consuming the church of God. God then shews here that the calamity which
awaited them, was a just reward for the impious cruelty which they had
exercised towards the chosen people. This we must bear in mind.

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p8"></span>He now says, that *Hamath is
confounded*; this is considered to have been Antioch in Syria. There
were many celebrated cities of this name; but Hamath towards Cilicia was
the most renowned. He then says that the city *Hamath*, that is,
Antioch, was *ashamed* as well as *Arpad*, which was also an opulent
city. He adds, *because they heard a bad report*, or an adverse rumor.
By these words he intimates that the kingdom of Syria would be terrified
by a report only. No one could have thought such a thing, for when they
had united themselves with the Israelites, they thought that they had
power enough to drive away their enemies. As then they supposed
themselves to be thus strong, so as to be beyond danger, the Prophet
derides their confidence, and says that they would be so terrified by
mere report, that they would be ashamed as though conquered by enemies.

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p9"></span>He then adds, that they *would be
melted*; for <span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>מוג, *mug*, means to be
dissolved or melted. But there is here a different reading; many copies
have <span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>בים דאגה, *beim dage*,
connected with this; and they who read thus are forced to wrest the
words of the Prophet. This reading literally is, “They are ashamed in
the sea, dread to rest,” or, make to rest, “it cannot,” or could not. We
see how harsh is the expression; they, however, elicit this meaning,
that these cities would be dissolved, as he who sails on the sea and
cannot through dread make his heart tranquil. But, as I have already
said, the words of the Prophet are thus perverted. Now, if we read for
<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p9.3"></span>ב, *beth*, <span
id="ii.ii.xxviii-p9.4"></span>כ, *caph*, which denotes likeness, the
meaning would be very suitable, *as a sea of dread,* or a turbulent sea
(a noun in the genitive case instead of an adjective, a common thing in
Scripture) *which cannot rest* or be still.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p13"></span>As to the general meaning of the
passage, there is not much difference; for the Prophet intends to show
that the Syrians would be like a turbulent sea, which is tossed here and
there, so that the waves conflict together. If any one prefers to refer
this to sailors, the meaning would be still materially the same. The sum
of what is said then is, that as the Syrians had been terrible to all,
so they would be frightened at the mere report of war, and so much so as
to melt away and not be able to stand their ground, like the sea, which,
when a tempest rages, has no rest, but is driven in all directions. He
afterwards adds, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#024)<span
id="ii.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxix-p2"></span>**24**. Damascus is waxed feeble, *and*
turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on *her:* anguish and
sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail.

<span id="ii.ii.xxix-p3"></span>**24**. Remissa est (*vel*, debilitata)
Damascus; convertit se ad fugam; et tremor apprehendit eam; angustia et
dolores tenuerunt eam tanquam parturientem.

<span id="ii.ii.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxix-p5"></span>As the clock strikes, I will not proceed
further.

<span id="ii.ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxx-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.ii.xxx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou settest
before our eyes memorable judgments which ought to benefit us at this
day, so that we may be kept under thy yoke and under the fear of thy
law, — O grant, that we may not grow hard at such threatenings, but
anticipate thy wrath, and so submit to thee, that whatever thou
denouncest on the ungodly may turn to our comfort, and for a cause of
joy, when we know that the salvation of thy church is thus promoted, of
which thou hast been pleased to regard and acknowledge us as members in
thy Son our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.ii.xxx-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-seventh

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p2"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#024)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p3"></span>**24**. Damascus is waxed feeble, *and*
turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on *her*; anguish and
sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p4"></span>**24**. Remissa est (*vel*, debilitata)
Damascus; convertit se ad fugam; et tremor apprehendit eam; angustia et
dolores tenuerunt eam tanquam parturientem.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p6"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p7"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same
subject, for as the kingdom of Syria had flourished, and had been
eminent in wealth and power, it was hardly credible that it could so
soon be overthrown. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet, according
to his usual manner, describes at large the ruin of that kingdom in
order to confirm what he said.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxi-p8"></span>He then says, *relaxed*, or weakened,
*is Damascus* This verb, indeed, sometimes means to cease: he means that
she was broken in strength. But under the name of this city, he
includes, as it was stated yesterday, the whole kingdom of Syria, which
was celebrated for its riches, largeness, and number of men. *She
turns*, he says, *to flight* By these words he intimates that no safety
remained for the Syrians except by fleeing into other countries. And it
is a miserable safety when men cannot otherwise secure it than by a
voluntary exile. He adds the reason, *Trembling has laid hold on her,
anguish and pangs have seized her as a woman in travail* Whenever this
comparison occurs in Scripture, some sudden and unexpected evil is
intended. The Prophet then no doubt means that the ruin of Syria would
be sudden; and he says this, that it might not trust in its own power,
and that others might not think her to be beyond danger, because they
saw that it was fortified by the number of its men, and by the abundance
of all other things. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#025)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p2"></span>**25**. How is the city of praise not
left, the city of my joy!

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p3"></span>**25**. Quomodo non est relicta urbs
laudis? civitas gaudii mei?

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p6"></span>Some think “my” to be redundant, and
therefore render it “the city of joy;”  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) but they seem to be induced by no good
reason; for they think it absurd that it should be called a city of joy
to the Prophet, since he ought not to have regarded Damascus with any
love or kindness. But the prophets, we know, do not always speak
according to their own feelings, but assume the persons of others. We
might then fitly read the words as they are, *the city of my joy!*
Besides, Jeremiah very cuttingly exults over Damascus, when he thus
expresses his wonder at its destruction: “How can this be,” he says,
“that *the city of praise*, that is, a celebrated city, and *the city of
my joy*, that is, a spectacle so noble as to cause joy to all, — how can
it be that this city should not be left, that is, should not be spared?”
For by “left” he does not mean forsaken by its inhabitants, or reduced
to solitude; for by “left” he means untouched or safe.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p12"></span>But we must ever bear in mind what we
have often stated, that the prophets, when they thus speak in
astonishment, do not adopt an elevated style as rhetoricians do, to show
their eloquence, but have always a regard to what is profitable. It was
necessary powerfully to impress the minds of men, when the Prophet spoke
of the ruin of so great a city. Then this astonishment includes what
they call an anticipation; for it obviated a doubt which might have
prevented credit from being given to this prophecy. This might have
immediately occurred to every one, “How can it be that Damascus is to
perish?” Then the Prophet anticipates this, and shews, that though this
was contrary to the judgment commonly formed, yet, as the Lord had so
decreed, the destruction of that city was certain. We now then perceive
the design of the Prophet. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#026)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p2"></span>**26**. Therefore her young men shall
fall in her streets, and all the men of war shall be cut off in that
day, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p3"></span>**26**. Propterea cadent electi ejus
(*aut*, robusti juvenes, םירוחב, *enim propria sunt electi*, *sed
transfertur hoc nomen ad eos qui sunt in pleno vigore aut flore
oetatis*) in compitis ejus; et omnes viri militares silebunt (*alii
vertunt*, excidentur, *to metaphorice accipitur illo sensu hoc verbum*)
in die illo, inquit Jehova exercituum.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet in a manner corrects
himself, and declares, that though the ruin of Damascus would astonish
all, yet it was certain; and so I explain the particle <span
id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>לכן, *lacen*

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p7"></span>It is regarded by the Hebrews as a
particle assigning a reason — therefore, for this cause. They then think
that a reason is here expressed why God had decreed to destroy that
city, even because it had formerly made war with the Israelites, and
then with the Jews, and thus it had not ceased to persecute the Church
of God. But it is to be taken here in a simpler way, as an affirmative,
according to its meaning in many other places. The Prophet then checks
here the astonishment which he had expressed, as though he had said,
“However this may be, yet it is so appointed by God, though all should
be astonished at the destruction of Damascus, yet *fall shall its young*
men, etc.” The meaning is, that no power under heaven was such as could
resist God. Then Damascus, as it was devoted to destruction, could not
avoid that judgment, though it was, according to the opinion of men,
impregnable.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p8"></span>And this passage deserves particular
notice, for when hinderances occupy our minds, and are presented to our
thoughts, we ought ever to set up this as our shield, “Whatever God has
appointed must be fulfilled.” Though, then, heaven and earth may seem
united to impede the celestial decree, let us know that we ought to
acquiesce in God’s word, and this particle “yet,” or nevertheless, <span
id="ii.ii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>לכן, *lacen*, ought always to be
remembered by us. For we have said that it was Jeremiah’s purpose, in a
manner, to bring into subjection whatever men might plan in their own
minds; for this alone is sufficient, God has decreed what he declares.
It follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#027)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p2"></span>**27**. And I will kindle a fire in the
wall of Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of Benhadad.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p3"></span>**27**. Et accendam ignem in muro
Damasci, et consumet palatia Benhadad.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p6"></span>Here God himself speaks, and declares
that he would be the author of the destruction of which Jeremiah
prophesied. And he employs the similitude of fire, because there is
nothing more violent or more dreadful than burning; for we know that the
greatest cities are soon consumed and reduced to ashes when fire begins
to blaze. God then compares the destruction of the city to burning,
though no fire was applied to destroy the walls and the palaces of the
king; but the Prophet means by this metaphor, that such would be the
destruction of the city, as though it was consumed by fire. He at the
same time reminds the faithful of God’s judgment, that they might know
that whatever happened to the Syrians proceeded from his hand; because
such calamities would have availed but little, except this doctrine was
also added, that just punishments are inflicted by God on the wickedness
of men.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxiv-p7"></span>But when he speaks of the *palaces of
Ben-hadad*, he briefly points out the cause why God would deal so
severely with the Syrians. We have said already that they had been
always hostile to God’s chosen people. They first tried to overthrow the
kingdom of Israel; afterwards they confederated with the kings of
Israel, but it was for the purpose of overthrowing the kingdom of Judah;
and many were the confederacies for this end. But Ben-hadad, as we read
in the first book of Kings, grievously distressed the Israelites. We
indeed learn from the history of those times, that there were many kings
of Syria who bore this name, for it was a common name, as the kings of
Egypt were called Pharaohs; and other kings also took a popular name, as
the emperors of Rome called themselves Caesars. But we read that the
last Ben-hadad was the son of Hazael, who was also the king of Syria;
and as I have said, it was not a private name. Since, then, sacred
history clearly shews that there were many who were called Ben-hadad,
the Prophet, I have no doubt, refers to the first who began to disturb
and harass the Israelites. He then points out the cause why God had
determined to destroy Damascus, for he had in his forbearance borne for
a long time with the Syrians. But when he saw that they did not repent,
but on the contrary added sins to sins, at length ascending his
tribunal, he says, that the *fire* which he would apply to the walls of
Damascus, would also consume the palaces of Ben-hadad, that is, the
palaces whence so many evils had proceeded, and so much cruelty, by
which the miserable Church had been distressed. This is the meaning. It
now follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p2"></span>**28**. Concerning Kedar, and concerning
the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite,
thus saith the LORD; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the
east.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p3"></span>**28**. Ad Kedar, et regna Hazor, quae
percussit Nabuchadrezar, rex Babylonis, sic dicit Jehova, Surgite,
ascendite adversus Kedar, et perdite filios Kedem (vel, orientis).

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p6"></span>There is here another prophecy added
respecting the Kedareans, who inhabited a part of Arabia. There is
elsewhere mention made of them, and it is probable that they were
neighbors to the Syrians and not far from Judea; for David complained
(if he was the author of that psalm) that he dwelt among the children of
Kedar,

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p7"></span>“Woe to me, because I am compelled to
dwell in Mesech and with the children of Kedar,” (<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p7.1"></span>[Ps
120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p8"></span>Whoever, then, composed that psalm, it
is a probable conjecture that the Kedareans, though not contiguous to
Judea, were not yet far distant; and we have said that they were the
inhabitants of Arabia. And the Prophet adds, *the children of Kedem*; so
some render the word, as though it were the name of a nation; and Moses
tells us that Kedem was one of the sons of Ishmael. It may be that for
this reason Jeremiah joined this people to the Kedareans, (<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p8.1"></span>[Ge
25:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p8.1"></span>.) But I am, however, inclined to the
opinion, that he mentions here *the children of the East*, that is, with
respect to Judea; not that they were nigh the Persians or other oriental
nations, but he only points out a land to the east of Judea.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p9"></span>But why God took vengeance on that
people, the cause is not expressed. It may yet have been that they
formerly had much injured the Israelites; God therefore having long
spared them at length appeared as their severe judge. And though the
reason was unknown, yet it did good to the Jews to know, that God’s hand
was extended to every part of the world to execute vengeance; for they
might have hence concluded that they were justly punished, because they
had rebelled against God; for we know that a servant who willfully and
disdainfully disobeys his master, deserves double punishment. (<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p9.1"></span>[Lu
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p9.1"></span>) When the Jews then saw that these
barbarians, who were like wild beasts, could not escape God’s vengeance,
they might have thought within themselves how just must have been God’s
judgments executed on them, who had knowingly and willfully despised
him. This then was one of the benefits to be derived from this prophecy.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p10"></span>And then, as we have elsewhere said,
this general rule ought to be borne in mind, that when changes happen in
the world, it is necessary, as men’s thoughts and feelings are
evanescent, that this warning should be given, that God so rules in all
these changes, that chance has no place in them. For when calamities,
like a deluge, spread over the whole world, then we think, as it has
been stated, that such a confusion happens by chance, and without any
cause. For when God afflicts some portion, the difference may lead us to
some reflection, — “One part is afflicted and another escapes;” but when
evils overwhelm the whole world, then, there being no difference, we
think that all things are in a state of confusion, nor can we collect
our thoughts so as to know, that God so takes vengeance on all, that he
yet regulates his judgments, as it is right, according to his infinite
and incomprehensible wisdom and justice. As then this adjustment which
God makes, as to his judgments, is not evident to the mind and
perception of men, it was necessary, when God was at the same time
fulminating through the whole world, that the Jews should be reminded to
be ever attentive to the operations of his hand. They saw themselves
ruined, they saw the same thing happening to the Egyptians and to all
other contiguous nations; at length Assyria was to have its turn, then
Chaldea, and afterwards the Medians and Persians. As then no part was to
remain untouched, who would not have thought that all things revolved,
as it were, through blind and uncertain fate? God, therefore, did not,
without reason, forewarn the faithful, lest they should think, that in
so great vicissitudes and violent changes, all things were
indiscriminately mixed together, but that they might know that God, from
heaven, regulated and overruled all these confusions. This is the reason
why the Prophets so particularly spoke of the calamities of all nations.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p11"></span>Let us come now to the Kedareans: *To
Kedar*, he says, *and the kingdoms of Hazor* These kingdoms, no doubt,
included a large country, for it is hardly credible that Hazor was the
name of a city; for who would have said, *the kingdoms of Hazor*, had it
been only the name of a city? It is, indeed, certain, that there was a
city of this name, as it is mentioned by Joshua. But here it means a
large region, contiguous to the Kedareans. And he says that all these
nations had been *smitten by Nebuchadnezzar*, because these barbarous
men were probably but little known to the Jews. It must yet be observed,
that they had not been as yet smitten by Nebuchadnezzar, that is, at the
time the Prophet spoke of their destruction. But Jeremiah spoke thus, in
order to confirm his prophecy, as though he had said, that what many
disregarded, and even treated with disdain, was at length really
fulfilled. For when he threatened ruin to these remote nations, it is
probable that he was derided by his own people; and hence he says, that
he had not spoken in vain, but that by the event itself his vocation was
proved, because these were smitten as he had predicted.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p12"></span>And this is the prophecy, *Arise ye,
ascend against Kedar, and destroy the children of the East*  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) Here the Prophet speaks of the
Babylonians, and in the person of God, as his herald. And we have said
that God’s servants commanded and ordered what was future with supreme
authority, in order to gain more reverence and honor to their words or
doctrine. For prophecies were despised by ungodly men, and they
insultingly said, that they were only words. Hence the servants of God,
to show that their words had accomplishment connected with them, assumed
the person of God. Thus they boldly commanded the greatest kings, as
Jeremiah does here, *Arise ye*; for whom does he here address? the king
of Babylon, that greatest of monarchs, and also the Assyrians as well as
the Chaldeans: and he commanded them to *arise* and to *ascend*, as
though he had them ready for his service, even because he did not speak
except by God’s command.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p14"></span>And such mode of speaking ought to be
especially observed, that we may learn to embrace whatever is announced
in God’s name, as though the thing itself were already before our eyes,
and that we may also know that the power of the whole world, is in such
a way under God’s control, that all the kingdoms of the earth are ready
to fulfill his word. When, therefore, God himself speaks, we ought so to
regard the efficacy of his word, as though heaven and earth were ready
to obey and to fulfill what he has commanded. It follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p2"></span>**29**. Their tents and their flocks
shall they take away: they shall take to themselves their curtains, and
all their vessels, and their camels; and they shall cry unto them, Fear
*is* on every side.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p3"></span>**29**. Tentoria ejus (tabernacula
ejus) et greges ejus tollent, et cortinas ejus, et omnia vasa ejus, et
camelos ejus sument sibi, et clamabunt contra eos, Terror undique.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p6"></span>The Prophet, in speaking of tents and
curtains, had regard to the way of living adopted by that nation; for
the Arabs, we know, dwelt in cabins and tents, as they do at this day,
and they were also shepherds. They had no cultivated fields, but led
their flocks through the deserts; and they had a great number of camels.
This is the reason why the Prophet mentions *tents, curtains, camels,
and flocks*, while speaking of the Kedareans; for they dwelt not in a
fertile country, they possessed no arable lands, nor had they much other
wealth, neither cities nor palaces. The sum of what is said is, that the
Kedareans were doomed to destruction, and were therefore exposed as a
prey to their enemies.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvi-p7"></span>But as this was difficult to be
believed, he adds, *They shall cry to them, Terror on every side* By
these words the Prophet means, that there would be so much dread, that
all would suffer their possessions to be plundered, not daring to make
any resistance, because terror on every side would lay hold on them.
They who read, “They shall call them terror on every side,” think that
this is said metaphorically of the soldiers, as they were terrible. Some
also say, “The king of Babylon shall call” or summon “terror on every
side against them.” But the former explanation is the most probable,
that when enemies called or cried out, *Terror, terror*, as conquerors,
they would overcome them by their voice alone. This is, as I think, the
real meaning of the Prophet. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#030)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p2"></span>**30**. Flee, get you far off, dwell
deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the LORD; for Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose
against you.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p3"></span>**30**. Fugite, abite procul valde
(profundaverunt ad habitandum incolae Hasor, dicit Jehova); quia
consultavit super vos Nabuchadnezar rex Babylonis consilium, et
cogitavit contra vos cogitationem.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p6"></span>Jeremiah continues here the same
subject, but more clearly expresses what he had said, *Flee*, he says,
*depart far away* What follows I read as a parenthesis, *Deep have they
made to dwell, the inhabitants of Hazor* Then Jeremiah proceeds with his
subject, *because consulted against you has Nebuchadnezzar, the king of
Babylon*, etc. He then bids them to *flee* to a distance, because
Nebuchadnezzar had resolved to destroy them. By *counsel* and *thought*
or purpose, the Prophet means the secret means by which he subdued the
people when they feared no such thing. As then these shepherds lived
securely on their mountains, Nebuchadnezzar prepared his forces, and
divided them; and thus were these taken by his counsel and craft less
than by strength. What the Prophet says here of the *counsel* and
*device* of Nebuchadnezzar is not superfluous, because he indirectly
touched on the sloth of that nation, who exercised no vigilance and
thought, their desert being a sufficient cover to them. As then they
thus lived securely, the Prophet here reminds them that they would have
to do with a cunning enemy, who would contrive and form his counsels at
home, and then would execute in due time what he had long meditated.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p7"></span>But a parenthesis follows, *Deep have
they made*; to make more clear the sense, an adversative particle must
be considered as understood, *Though deep have they made to dwell;* for
without this exception the prophecy would have been less credible. For
Kedareans were on every side fortified, because no one envied them, as
they were not only frugal men, but also barbarous and contented with an
austere and wretched living. As then they thought themselves thus safe,
some one might have raised this objection and said, “Why dost thou bid
them to flee? wherefore should they flee? for there is no one so foolish
as to attack them.” So also the Scythians laughed at Alexander when he
attacked them. “What is your object? you think that you have to do with
men; we are wild beasts: and then if you seek wealth and riches, you
will not find them with us.” Such then was the state of those nations
mentioned here. When, therefore, the Prophet bids them to flee, because
Nebuchadnezzar would suddenly attack them, he at the same time adds,
*Though deep have they made to dwell*  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) He had before used this mode of speaking:
to make deep to dwell, means to have a safe and hidden standing, remote
from all danger. They are then said to be deep in their dwellings who
dwell in fortified cities, or who inhabit deserts, or who are hid in
some poor country, as the Kedareans and their neighbors. But the Prophet
says, that this would not prevent the Babylonians from invading their
land, and taking possession of it. It follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#031)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p2"></span>**31**. Arise, get you up unto the
wealthy nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the LORD, which have
neither gates nor bars, *which* dwell alone.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p3"></span>**31**. Surgite, ascendite contra
gentem securam, habitatorem (eum qui habitat) in fiducia, dicit Jehova;
non portae nec vectes ei, solus habitat.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p6"></span>He confirms the last verse, repeating
what he had already said, *Arise*, *ascend*; but he adds, *against a
quiet nation* This was the *deep* dwelling of which he had spoken; for
the Kedareans, as they thought themselves to be as it were in another
world, were secure; and hence he says, *against a secure nation.* The
word <span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>שליו, *sheliu*, means
delicate, as we have seen elsewhere, but in this place its meaning is
secure. For though there might be no joys there, it is yet said to be a
secure nation, <span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p6.2"></span>גוי שליו, *gui
sheliu*, a nation which feared nothing. And then he explains himself, a
*dweller in confidence*, one without fear and anxiety.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p7"></span>And he gives the reason, because they
had no need of *gates* and *bars*, and they *dwelt alone* Some
interpreters think that the pride of the Kedareans is denoted, because
they would not protect themselves in the usual way, and regarded gates
and bars as nothing. But the Prophet’s meaning is different, that as
they were barbarians and shepherds and beyond the reach of envy, they
thought that no enemy would ever come to them. For what are the causes
of wars but avarice and ambition? and who would wish to rule over
barbarous nations living on their mountains? and then wealth cannot be
found in a wild uncultivated country. As then the Kedareans were such,
the Prophet says that they *dwelt securely*, though they were not
fortified by gates and bars, but lived alone. He then says that they
lived alone, not because they thought much of themselves as being
solitary, and regarded themselves as being above kings — for solitude
often produces pride and obstinacy; but the meaning of the Prophet, as I
have said, is quite different, even because the Kedareans thought that
they had no need of friends and assistants, because they depended not on
their neighbors for aid, but were contented with their own deserts. And
at the same time they did not think that any enemy would disturb them,
as there was no cause and no occasion.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxviii-p8"></span>We now then perceive again why the
Prophet says, that they *made deep to dwell*, that is, that they had
their dwelling deep, even because poverty and the absence of all riches
were to them a sort of safe fortress: as they had no splendor and no
dignity, they thought themselves exempt from the common lot of other
men. But nevertheless he says that the Chaldeans would come and plunder
them of what they had. It follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#032)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxix-p2"></span>**32**. And their camels shall be a
booty, and the multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will scatter
into all winds them *that are* in the utmost corners; and I will bring
their calamity from all sides thereof, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxix-p3"></span>**32**. Et erunt cameli eorum in
direptionem, et copia pecorum ipsorum in praedam; et dispergam eos ad
omnem ventum, extremos anguli, et ab omnibus lateribus ejus adducam
perditionem ipsorum, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xxxix-p5"></span>The explanation shall be given
tomorrow.

<span id="ii.ii.xl"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xl-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.ii.xl-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though the
things related to us today from thy Prophets, concerning ancient
nations, may seem as grown out of use, O grant that we may however be
seriously impressed whenever we read of thy judgments as executed on any
part of the world, so that we may learn at this day wholly to submit to
thee and flee to thy mercy, and that whatever may happen to us, we may
never doubt but that thou wilt be propitious to us, if we seek thee with
a sincere heart, and with unfeigned faith in Christ Jesus, our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="ii.ii.xl-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xli-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-eighth.

<span id="ii.ii.xli-p2"></span>In the verse we read yesterday, Jeremiah
again repeated that the Kedareans would be so plundered by their enemies
that nothing would remain for them. He therefore speaks again of camels
and of cattle: he says that the *abundance of cattle* and the *camels*
would be for a *spoil* and *plunder* But why he names camels and cattle
rather than fields and vineyards, I briefly explained yesterday. For
when a fertile country is the subject, whether abounding in corn or in
vines, the Prophets spoke of such possessions; but when, as now, a
reference is made to a country abounding in cattle and also mountainous,
the Prophet speaks only of camels and of cattle; for the mode of living
in that nation, as it has been stated, was austere and hard, and almost
below the condition of man. When food for their cattle failed them, they
went elsewhere, and carried in their waggons all their furniture.

<span id="ii.ii.xli-p3"></span><span id="ii.ii.xli-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xli-p4"></span>It now follows, *1 will disperse them to
every wind* Here Jeremiah predicts the scattering of that nation. It
sometimes happens that a country is plundered by enemies, when yet the
inhabitants, stripped of their goods, remain there and live in poverty.
But together with poverty, Jeremiah declares that there would be no
ordinary exile, for the words are emphatical, *I will scatter them to
every wind* There is here an implied contrast between that people and
chaff; for as the chaff is carried away in all directions by blasts of
wind, so would be, as Jeremiah shews, the scattering of that people. And
he mentions also *the utmost corners*, <span
id="ii.ii.xli-p4.1"></span>קצוצי פאה, *kotsutsi pae* *Jerome* usually
renders the words, “shorn of hair,” but very improperly; for there is no
reason why the other people mentioned before should be thus called; for
in <span id="ii.ii.xli-p4.2"></span>[Jeremiah
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.xli-p4.2"></span> and
<span id="ii.ii.xli-p4.3"></span>[Jeremiah
25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.xli-p4.3"></span>
Jeremiah did not speak of the Kedareans, and yet he called many nations
<span id="ii.ii.xli-p4.4"></span>קצוצי פאה *kotsutsi pae* The verb <span
id="ii.ii.xli-p4.5"></span>קצף *kotsets*, whence this word comes, means
to cut off; and <span id="ii.ii.xli-p4.6"></span>פאה *pae*, signifies
the extremity of anything. This phrase then is the same as though he
mentioned those bordered by an extremity or a corner. And this is most
suitable to this passage; for it was not probable that they who dwelt in
recesses should be thus scattered. When any wealthy country is plundered
by enemies, they flee here and there in all directions; for instance,
were a part of Italy laid waste, they would flee to those parts who
could receive fugitives; but when a nation dwells in an extreme corner,
where could it betake itself, when routed by enemies? The Prophet
therefore enhances the misery of exile when he says, that people at the
extremities would become fugitives, so as to be scattered through all
parts of the world.

<span id="ii.ii.xli-p5"></span>He adds, *and from all its sides will I
bring their destruction.* He confirms the same thing; for when an evil
enters on one side, neighbors may assist; but when calamity urges on
every side, miserable men must then of necessity be scattered; and they
must seek some distant exile, as there is no part that can show them
hospitality. All this then refers to their scattering. It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#033)<span
id="ii.ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p2"></span>**33**. And Hazor shall be a dwelling
for dragons, *and* a desolation for ever: there shall no man abide
there, nor *any* son of man dwell in it.

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p3"></span>**33**. Et erit Hazor in habitationem
draconum, vastitas usque in perpetuum (in seculum;) non habitabit illic
vir, et non manebit illic (*aut*, peregrinabitur in ea) filius hominis.

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p6"></span>Here Jeremiah concludes his prophecy
concerning the Kedareans; he says that their land would be deserted. The
Prophets often make use of this way of speaking, that the land, deserted
by its inhabitants, would become the habitation of dragons. And this is
more grievous than when the land remains empty; for when dragons succeed
men, it is a dreadful thing. Hence, that God’s judgment might produce
more impression on men’s feelings, the Prophets often declare that a
deserted place would become the dwelling of dragons. He adds what
imports the same thing, *A waste shall it be for an age*: but <span
id="ii.ii.xlii-p6.1"></span>עולם, *oulam*, means perpetuity. And it is
added, *Not dwell there shall a man, nor live there shall a son of man*
There seems indeed to be a superfluity of words, for it would have been
sufficient in one sentence to say, that the land would be deserted and
not inhabited. But he first assigns it to dragons: then he adds that it
would be a waste or solitude; and lastly, he says that no one would
dwell there, and not only so, but having mentioned *man*, he adds the
*son of man* Some indeed think that by *man* the nobles are referred to,
and that by the *son of man*, or Adam, we are to understand the common
people, the multitude. But as we have said elsewhere, this is too
refined. It is a repetition which increases the effect, though in the
second clause he speaks more generally and expresses the thing more
clearly, as though he had said, that no one of the human race would
become an inhabitant of that land.  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)
It now follows, —

<span id="ii.ii.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034)<span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p2"></span>**34**. The word of the LORD that came
to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam in the beginning of the reign of
Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p3"></span>**34**. Qui fuit sermo Jehovae ad
Jeremiam, prophetam, contra Elam, principio regni Zedechiae, regis
Jehudah, dicendo,

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p4"></span>**35**. Thus saith the LORD of hosts;
Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p5"></span>**35**. Sic dicit Jehova exercituum,
Ecce ego frango arcum Elam, principium fortitudinis ipsorum.

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p7"></span><span id="ii.ii.xliii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p8"></span>By Elam some interpreters understand
Persia, and it is the most common opinion. I however think that the
Elamites were not the same with the Persians; I should rather say that
they were the Parthians, were it not that Luke, in <span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p8.1"></span>[Ac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009)<span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p8.1"></span>, makes them a distinct people from the
Parthians. At the same time it is not right, as it seems to me, to
regard the Persians as generally designated by Elam; for the Persians
were remote from the Jews, and the Jews never received any injury from
that people. There was therefore no reason why the Prophet should
denounce punishment on them. The country of Elymais was known as
bordering on the Medes, and contiguous to the Persians. But that people
must have joined the Assyrians and Chaldeans against the Jews. As then
the Babylonians had them as auxiliaries, it was God’s purpose to avenge
the injury done to his people. Besides, Pliny also speaks of Elamites as
being contiguous to the Nabatheans; but they were occupying, as it were,
the middle place between Persia and Judea. They were indeed, as he shews
elsewhere, a maritime people; for he speaks often of Elymais, but names
the Elamites only once. However this may have been, they were orientals
as the Persians were, but not so far from Judea; and as they were, at it
has been said, near the Medes, the probability is that they joined
themselves with the enemies of the Church, when Nebuchadnezzar drew with
him the vast forces which he had everywhere gathered, that he might
extend his dominion far and wide; for we shall see in what follows that
God was grievously displeased with the Elamites.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) We hence conclude that they were very
hostile to the chosen people, whose cause God here undertakes.

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p10"></span>This much as to the name: when,
therefore, Jeremiah speaks here of the Elamites, let us know that a
particular nation is referred to, and one distinct from the Persians,
and then that this nation assisted the Chaldeans in oppressing the Jews.
Let us now see what the Prophet declares respecting them.

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p11"></span>He says, first, that this word came to
him *in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah* Nebuchadnezzar, then,
greatly harassed the Jews, while yet they remained in their obstinacy;
and it is probable that the Elamites formed a part of the Chaldean army.
When, therefore, the Jews considered how various were their enemies, and
when they did not expect that they would ever be punished, it was a
trial that must have greatly distressed the minds of the godly. What
Jeremiah then declared, no one could have thought of, that is, that the
Elamites would not escape unpunished, because they so furiously attacked
the chosen people under the banner of King Nebuchadnezzar. This, then,
was the reason why the Prophet specified the time: *this word*, then,
*came in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah*

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p12"></span><span id="ii.ii.xliii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p13"></span>Then God, in the first place, declares
that he would *break the bow of Elam* The Parthians and other Orientals,
we know, were very skillful archers; for every nation possesses its own
peculiar excellency in connection with war. Some excel in the use of one
kind of weapons, and others in the use of another kind. Formerly light
infantry were in high repute among the Italians; the Gauls excelled in
mailed horsemen. Though, now, all things are changed, yet still every
nation differs as to its peculiar art in war. Now historians testify
that the Orientals were very skillful in the use of the bow and arrow.
It is, then, no wonder that the Prophet speaks of the *bow* of this
people, and calls it *the chief part of their strength*, as they
excelled in this sort of fighting. The Parthians were indeed much
dreaded by the Romans; they pretended to flee, and then they turned back
and made an impetuous attack on their enemies. They had also arrows
dipped in poison. By these means they conquered large armies. For the
Romans laid by their darts and fought hand in hand, and carried on a
standing fight, so to speak; but when the Parthians kept discharging
their arrows, they almost always fought unsuccessfully with them. I
refer to this, that we may know that the bow was not without reason
called the *chief of their might*, for it was by it that they were
superior to other nations, though they could not fight hand in hand nor
with drawn swords. It afterwards follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xliv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xliv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#036)<span
id="ii.ii.xliv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p2"></span>**36**. And upon Elam will I bring the
four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them
toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the
outcasts of Elam shall not come.

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p3"></span>**36**. Et adducam contra Elam quatuor
ventos a quatuor finibus coelorum, et dispergam eos ad omnes ventos
istos; et non erit gens ad quem non veniat quispiam profugus (*est
mutatio numeri*, *sed quae sensum non obscurat*, quispiam ex iis qui
expulsi fuerint) ab Elam.

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xliv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p6"></span>He now adds that *four winds* would
come, which would dissipate the whole people. God himself speaks, in
order that the word might be more powerful and have more weight. *I will
rouse up,* he says, *four winds* And we know that the air is in a moment
put in motion whenever it pleases God; and when Scripture extols the
power of God, it does not without reason refer to the winds; for it is
not a small miracle when the whole world is on a sudden put in motion.
It is now tranquil, and then in half an hour the winds rise and conflict
together in mid air. And God alludes to what is usual in nature: as then
he suddenly rouses up winds which make, as it were, the whole world to
shake and tremble; so he says he would raise up winds from the four ends
of the world. But he speaks metaphorically; by winds he understands
enemies, who would on all sides unite their powers to oppress the
Elamites. *I will bring*, he says, on *Elam the four winds from the four
quarters of the world* By the last words he expresses more clearly what
I have just said, that God alludes to that formidable power which is
daily presented to our eyes in nature. As, then, a sudden change
disturbs the whole earth when winds arise, so God declares that he would
rouse up four winds from the four quarters of the heavens. And he calls
them the *quarters of the heavens*; for though the winds arise from the
earth, yet their blowing is not perceived until they ascend into mid
air: and though sometimes they seem to be formed above the clouds, they
yet arise from the earth; for the origin of the wind is cold and dry
exhalation.

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p7"></span>We now understand the reason why the
Prophet speaks of the winds. There is yet no doubt but that he denotes
some enemies by the four winds; but this prophecy was not fulfilled as
long as the Persian monarchy ruled and flourished. It is, then, probable
that the destruction denounced by the Prophet took place many ages
after, even when the soldiers of Alexander contended about the
supremacy; for we know how grievously distressed were all the Orientals
when Alexander made an irruption into those countries. It was, indeed, a
horrible tempest. But as he enjoyed the empire of the east but for a
short time, what is said by the Prophet here was not then fulfilled. But
those countries were afterwards so miserable, torn by intestine wars,
that the Prophet does not without reason compare those contrary and
opposite movements to four winds; for never has there been a fiercer
emulation between enemies, and each of them had strong armies. Hence,
then, it was, that that land was not oppressed by one enemy, but exposed
to various and almost innumerable calamities. This is the reason that
leads me to interpret this prophecy as fulfilled in the calamities which
followed the death of Alexander the Great.

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p8"></span>*I will scatter them*, he says, *to
these four winds*; that is, as one wind breaks out at one time, and
another at another time, so the Elamites shall flee here and there. For
no one ruled long peaceably in the East, till almost all the soldiers of
Alexander were consumed by mutual slaughters. Then Seleucus obtained
Syria, and exercised the cruelest tyranny. But, as I have said, before
Seleucus obtained peace and security, the whole of that part of the
world had been inundated with blood. This is the reason why the Prophet
says that the Elamites would be scattered to *these four winds*

<span id="ii.ii.xliv-p9"></span>The end of the verse remains: *and there
shall be no nation to which some of the fugitives from Elam shall not
come* We cannot, certainly, show from histories when this was fulfilled
which the Prophet now says; but it is probable that that people were
scattered at the time when the chiefs contended about the supremacy,
that is, those who obtained power under Alexander. At the same time
there would be nothing unreasonable were we to say that the Prophet
spoke hyperbolically; and no doubt he exceeds due limits when he says
“There shall be no nation to which some of the fugitives from Elam shall
not come.” He indeed understands all the neighboring nations. But it may
also have been that they did not flee to the Asiatics, but rather
departed towards the Persian sea or to the Indies. We have already
stated why the servants of God sometimes introduced hyperbolical
expressions into their teaching, even because they had to do with men
who were slow and stupid, who would not hear God when speaking in a
simple manner, and could hardly be moved when he thundered. It now
follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#037)<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p2"></span>**37**. For I will cause Elam to be
dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life: and
I will bring evil upon them, *even* my fierce anger, saith the LORD; and
I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them.

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p3"></span>**37**. Et expavefaciam Elam coram
hostibus ipsorum, et coram his qui quaerunt animam ipsorum; et adducam
super eos malum excandescentiae irae meae, dicit Jehova; et emittam post
eos gladium usque dum consumpsero ipsos.

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p6"></span>This verse especially shews that the
Elamites were of the number of those who had inhumanly raged against
God’s people, for he did not without reason set forth the severity of
his vengeance towards them. We must, then, bear in mind that the
Elamites had been among the chief of God’s enemies, or at least had been
in no ordinary way cruel, delighting in slaughters. Hence he says, *I
will dismay*, or affright, etc. The verb <span
id="ii.ii.xlv-p6.1"></span>חתת, *chetat*, means to tear in pieces, or to
break; it may therefore be rendered, “I will break.” They who render it
“I will lay prostrate,” do not seem to know the difference between
*consternere*, to lay prostrate, and *consternare*, to dismay. But the
most suitable meaning is, that God would terrify the Elamites, for he
had spoken before of their flight and exile.

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p7"></span>He then mentions the cause of their
dread, even because *God* would dismay them and frighten them before
their enemies, so that they would not be able to stand before them. By
these words he intimates, that however warlike the Elamites were, they
yet would not stand their ground when it seemed good to God to render to
them their reward, for in his hand are the hearts of men. Though, then,
the Elamites were brave, yet the Prophet declares that they would be so
faint-hearted *at the sight of enemies*, as immediately to flee away,
even because God would terrify them.

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will send the
sword after them* He means by this clause that he would not be content
with terrifying them, but that when they began to flee, he would take
them, because he would follow them, that is, urge on their enemies. And
it ought ever to be observed, that what proceeds from men is ascribed to
God, because men, however little they may think of it, yet execute his
purpose, and are not only the proclaimers of his wrath, but also the
instruments of it.

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p9"></span>But he mentions *the evil of the
indignation of his wrath*  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) This
mode of speaking seems indeed harsh; but we have elsewhere stated, that
the Prophets did not without reason join together these words, which
appear somewhat harsh. Now wrath does not in a strict sense belong to
God, for no feelings of this kind appertain to him. But when heat of
wrath or indignation is mentioned, it doubles its vehemence in order to
shake off the torpor of men, who would otherwise, as I lately said, be
wholly insensible and indifferent. In short, by *indignation* the
Prophet means no other thing than that vengeance is dreadful, and ought
to astonish all mortals, so that they ought to fall down immediately as
it were lifeless, as soon as they hear that God is displeased with them.
In the meantime he shews what I have stated, that God was grievously
offended with that people whom he threatens with extreme punishment, for
he says, *until I shall have consumed them* We see what I have said,
that this people were not slightly chastised, according to what has been
mentioned of others: it hence follows that their wickedness had been
very atrocious. The two clauses seem however to be inconsistent, — that
God would scatter the Elamites through all nations, — and that he would
consume them, for dispersion and consumption widely differ. But
consumption refers to the body of the nation or to its name, as though
he had said, that no Elamites would survive, because they would be
merged in other nations, and disappear like chaff. It follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xlvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#038)<span
id="ii.ii.xlvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p2"></span>**38**. And I will set my throne in
Elam, and will destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the
LORD.

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p3"></span>**38**. Et statuam solium meum in Elam;
et perdam illinc regem et principes, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p6"></span>He confirms what I have just referred to
as to their consumption; but he at the same time adds, that God would be
in such a way the avenger as though his tribunal was erected in that
land. He threatens that he would *destroy the king and the princes*; and
this, as I have explained, was the consumption; for though some
individuals would remain alive, yet the name of the people would not
survive, the whole race as such would become extinct.

<span id="ii.ii.xlvi-p7"></span>But these words ought to be noticed —
that God would *erect* his *throne*. God is said to erect his throne
when he rules; but his kingdom is not to be taken always in a good
sense. God is properly said to rule or reign among the faithful, whom he
governs by his Spirit. So God’s kingdom begins and has its origin when
regeneration takes place. But sometimes, as I have already said, God is
said to reign in the midst of his enemies, as we have seen respecting
the Egyptians. He then erected his throne when he executed his recorded
judgment on the Elamites, for though the Elamites were blind, yet God’s
power was made really evident, and by the effect he proved that he was
the King of that people whose wickedness he punished with so much
severity. In short, as God is said to be silent, to sleep, or to lie
down, when he does not execute his vengeance; so in this place he is
said to erect his throne when he discharges the office of a Judge. It
follows —

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039)<span
id="ii.ii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p2"></span>**39**. But it shall come to pass in
the latter days, *that* I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith
the LORD.

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p3"></span>**39**. Et erit in posteritate dierum
(*hoc* *est*, diebus sequentibus, *vel* successu dierum) convertam
(*vel*, reducam) captivitatem Elam, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p6"></span>Here God mitigates the severity of the
prediction, because he would at length gather some of the Elamites and
restore them, so that they might again obtain some place or honor. He
says not in the *end of days*, but after many days, *It shall be in
course of time that I will restore the captivity of Elam* If it be asked
when this was fulfilled, doubtless there has not been a restoration of
that nation recorded in history. But the Prophet no doubt gives here a
hope to the Elamites, which he gave before to other nations, even that
they should be united again under Christ as their head. Though then the
Elamites were not afterwards known, yet they have found out that this
was not said in vain; nor does the Holy Spirit without reason mention
them by the mouth of Luke among others who were converted to Christ.
(<span id="ii.ii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>[Ac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009)<span
id="ii.ii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>.) For though the Elamites were almost
unknown, yet he connects them with the Medes and Parthians, “Parthians
and Medes and Elamites.” This then was the time of which Jeremiah had
prophesied, when he said that the Elamites would again be gathered
together, that they might not be perpetually captives. And though they
might not have then returned into their own country, yet it was a
condition far better and more desirable when they obtained a name and a
place in the Church than if they had enjoyed every other blessing in the
world. And we know that it is said of Christ, that God would gather
under his hand all things scattered both in heaven and earth. (<span
id="ii.ii.xlvii-p6.2"></span>[Col
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span
id="ii.ii.xlvii-p6.2"></span>.) A part of this scattering was God’s
vengeance on the Elamites. Gathered then have been Elamites with others;
and thus God at that time stretched forth in a manner his hand to them
through Christ the Mediator, and opened to them the door of hope as to
eternal life.

<span id="ii.ii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.ii.xlviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
didst favor despairing men with some consolation when justly and
extremely indignant with them, — O grant that whenever we at this day
provoke thy wrath, we may at the same time taste of thy paternal mercy,
and learn to flee to thee, and to put our hope in thine only-begotten
Son, so that we may never despond, but ever look forward to that
gathering, whose beginning is now seen, and whose final and complete
accomplishment awaits us in heaven, through the same Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc21003.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p9"></span> Literally it is, “To the children of Ammon
thus saith Jehovah:” so the *Sept.,* the *Vulg.,* and the *Targ.* There
are prophecies concerning Ammon in <span id="ii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>[Ezek.
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028), [Ezek.
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#002)<span id="ii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>[Am
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013)<span
id="ii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>; and in <span id="ii.ii.i-p9.3"></span>[Zep
2:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)<span id="ii.ii.i-p9.3"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc21003.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p11"></span> “Milcom” is given by the *Sept.,* the
*Vulg.,* and the *Syr.;* but “their king” by the *Targ.* In <span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>[Am
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#015)<span id="ii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>,
the *Vulg.* and *Syr*. are the same; but the *Sept.* have “kings,” and
the *Targ.* is the same as here. There was a king of Ammon, <span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.2"></span>[Jer
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#003)<span id="ii.ii.i-p11.2"></span>;
and there is one passage in which the possession of a country is
ascribed to a heathen god, to Chemosh, see <span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.3"></span>[Jud
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024)<span id="ii.ii.i-p11.3"></span>.
But *“inheriting”* is more suitably applied to a king than to an idol;
and the contrast in the next verse is with Israel and not with God,
*“Israel* shall be heir,” etc. Most probably, then, the king is meant,
and not the idol. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc21003.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p13"></span> The quotation is not literally given, but
the meaning of the passage. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc21003.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p8"></span> Literally it is, “And Israel shall
inherit his inheritors.” The Ammonites claimed to be the heirs, and
Israel succeeded them as the right heir. This prophecy was fulfilled as
recorded in <span id="ii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>[1 Macc.
5:6](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#007),
[28](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#028)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc21003.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.ii.ii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p10"></span> Except in <span
id="ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>[1Ma
5:6-8](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#006)<span
id="ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>. The victories of the Maccabees were, no
doubt, a literal accomplishment of this prophecy. See <span
id="ii.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>[1 Macc.
5:33](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#034)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>;
where the sound of the “trumpets” is expressly mentioned. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc21003.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p7"></span> The verb means to flow out, and to flow
away, to waste. The latter seems to be the meaning here, “wasted has thy
valley.” (See <span id="ii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>[La
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>.)
It has a noun after it, when it means to flow out in the sense of
abounding; but when used intransitively, it means to flow away in the
sense of wasting, —

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p8"></span>Why gloriest thou in deep valleys! Flown
away has thy deep valley, O daughter, who hast turned aside, Who hast
trusted in thy treasures, Who hast said in thine heart, “Who can come to
me?”

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p9"></span>The participle <span
id="ii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>השובבה, “who hast turned aside,” or away, is
rendered “delicate,” by the *Vulg.,* and “beloved,” by the *Syr.,* and
the idea of impudence or folly, is conveyed by the *Sept.* and *Targ*.
How the word could be so rendered, it is difficult to say. The verb
means to turn to or from. Being a reduplicate here, it means to turn
away resolutely; hence “rebellious” would be no improper rendering.
“Her” before “treasures,” refers to “daughter,” but in our language
“thy” reads better, as adopted by the *Vulg.* and the *Syr.* There is an
addition in several copies of the words, “Who hast said in thine heart,”
and all the versions have what corresponds with them. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc21003.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p13"></span> So the *Vulg.* and the *Targ.,* while
the *Sept.* and the *Syr.,* have “prudent,” or intelligent. The word is
not in its regular form, the <span id="ii.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>י *iod*
being wanted, and the <span id="ii.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>מ *mem* before it
being omitted, which is not uncommon. Discerning rather than “prudent,”
or “intelligent,” is its meaning. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc21003.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p16"></span> Some maintain that the first clause only
is a question, for there is no interrogatory particle prefixed to the
other clauses, —

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p17"></span>Is wisdom no longer in Teman? Perished
has counsel from the discerning, Vanished has their wisdom.

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p18"></span>Neither the versions nor the *Targum* put
the two last lines as questions; nor the *Sept.* and the *Syr.* the
first. The verb <span id="ii.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>סרח is differently
rendered, — by the *Sept.,* “departed;” by the *Vulg.,* “become
useless;” by the *Syr.,* “taken away;” by the *Targ.,* “marred,” or
corrupted. The verb means to spread, to stretch out; and spreading here
is in the sense of dissipating or scattering, and the verb here is
passive. So “vanished” would convey the meaning. The first line is a
question, and the two following contain the answer. A tautology cannot
be otherwise avoided. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc21003.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.ii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.x-p7"></span> The versions, (except the *Syr.* and the
*Targ.*) have the verbs here in the imperative mood; and they are so
regarded by most critics, “Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep,” etc.. This
is necessary on account of <span id="ii.ii.x-p7.1"></span>כי, *for,*
which follows. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc21003.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xi-p7"></span> The interpreters probably referred to are
the *Sept.* and the *Vulg.,* where the interrogative form is not used;
not so the *Syr.* and the *Targ.* — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc21003.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.ii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p14"></span> Neither of the two explanations here
given are satisfactory, though the first especially has been adopted by
many, such as *Henry* and *Scott.* It is difficult to know the meaning
of the *Sept.;* the *Vulg.* and the *Syr.* are literally our version.
The *Targ.* goes wide astray, representing this verse as addressed to
the people of Israel, of whom there is no mention here. *Blayney*
supposes a typographical mistake, joins <span
id="ii.ii.xii-p14.1"></span>עזב to the preceding verse, and puts <span
id="ii.ii.xii-p14.2"></span>ה, to the next word, and gives this version,
—

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p15"></span>And there is nothing of him left.  
**11.** Shall I preserve the life of thy fatherless children?  
Or shall thy widows trust in me?

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p16"></span>The questions he considers as strong
negatives. The simpler view seems to be this: in the preceding verse the
destruction not only of Esau, but also of his brethren and neighbours,
is announced. His “seed” means his posterity, the nation, and he was
*was not to be,* that is, as a kingdom. There would be still some
“orphans” and “widows*,*” and as “brethren” and “neighbors” would be
destroyed as well as Esau himself, as to all grown up people, forming
the nation, and thus orphans and widows would be left helpless, God was
pleased to give the promise here stated:

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p17"></span>Leave thy orphans, I will preserve
*them,  
*Thy widows also, in me let them trust.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p18"></span>The last verb is both masculine and
feminine, and refers both to the orphans and widows. This is
substantially the explanation given by Venema, and is the most
satisfactory. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc21003.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p7"></span> It is better to render it as in the
*Syr.,* “astonishment;” then “reproach” comes after it; and the next
word, <span id="ii.ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>חרב, is properly “a waste,” and
in the plural is rendered “wastes” at the end of the verse. There were
two cities called Bozrah, one in Moab, <span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p7.2"></span>[Jer
48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024)<span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p7.2"></span>, and one in Edom, <span
id="ii.ii.xvi-p7.3"></span>[Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii.xvi-p7.3"></span>
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc21003.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p15"></span> This verse is variously rendered in
the versions and in the *Targum,* and also by commentators. The
following rendering I deem plain and literal, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p16"></span>Behold, as a lion from the swelling of
Jordan, Will he ascend to the strong habitation; For suddenly will I
cause him to run from it: And he who is chosen will I appoint over her;
For who is like me? and who can meet me? And who is he, the shepherd,
who can stand before me?

<span id="ii.ii.xxiv-p17"></span>The word <span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>ארגיעה, as in <span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p17.2"></span>[Pr
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#019)<span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p17.2"></span>, is “suddenly,” or in a moment. “Him” is
the lion, and “from it,” the swelling of Jordan. “Over her” is Edom.
“Who can meet me?” that is, to contend with me, or resist *me,*
according to the *Sept.* The verb is <span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p17.3"></span>יעד, though *Calvin* derived it from <span
id="ii.ii.xxiv-p17.4"></span>עוד. The “shepherd” is mentioned, because
of the “lion,” whom no shepherd can resist when he attacks the flock.
God speaks of himself as identified with his chosen one — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc21003.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p8"></span> The literal rendering is, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p9"></span>The cry — at the Red Sea was heard its
sound.

<span id="ii.ii.xxvi-p10"></span>It is an instance of the nominative
case absolute. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc21003.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.ii.xxviii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p10"></span> There are several copies in which
the <span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>כ, *caph,* is found, and it is
evidently the most suitable reading, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p11"></span>Confounded is Hamath and Arpad;  
For an evil report have they heard, — they melt away;  
Like the sea the agitation, the quieting none can effect.

<span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p12"></span>The melting away was through fear.
They were moved or agitated, and, like the sea, they could not rest or
be still. <span id="ii.ii.xxviii-p12.1"></span>אל may be often rendered
none or nothing. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc21003.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.ii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p7"></span> So the versions, (except the *Sept*.)
and also the *Targ.,* the <span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>י *iod*
being regarded as paragogic. So *Grotius.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc21003.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.ii.xxxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p8"></span> The *Syr.* rendered it “spared;” the
*Vulg.* has left out the negative *not.* There are two difficulties, the
verb <span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p8.1"></span>עזב is not used in the sense of
sparing, though *Gataker* labours to shew this; then the connexion: the
next verse begins with a “therefore.” Take the verb here in its usual
sense, and then “therefore” will have its force. He asks, Why was not
this city, under the circumstances previously mentioned, forsaken or
abandoned, notwithstanding its being a celebrated and a joyous city? But
as it was not forsaken, “therefore,” he says, “her young men shall fall
in her streets,” etc.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p9"></span>*Venema’s* view is different; his
version is, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p10"></span>Why not? forsaken has been the city of
praise, The city of my joy.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxii-p11"></span>That is, Why should not Damascus be
compelled to flee, since Jerusalem had been forsaken, the city of praise
and of his joy. “Therefore,” in this sense, refers to the slaughter of
those who would not flee. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc21003.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.ii.xxxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxv-p13"></span> It is *“Kedem”* in the *Sept.,* and
*“East”* in the other versions and the *Targum.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc21003.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p8"></span> This verb is deemed by most to be in
the imperative mood, like the two foregoing verbs; and it is so given in
the *Sept.,* the *Vulg.,* and the *Targ.* In the *Syr*., all the verbs
are in the past tense, which is not consistent with the context.
*Blayney’s* version is, —

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p9"></span>Flee ye, move off apace, Retire deep
for to dwell, etc.

<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p10"></span>The meaning is, as he says, that they
should go into deep caverns to hide themselves from their enemies. See
<span id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>[Jud
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>; <span
id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>[1Sa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006)<span
id="ii.ii.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc21003.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.ii.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p7"></span> The difference in the two clauses is
properly distinguished by *Blayney,* in his version, —

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p8"></span>There shall not a man dwell there, Nor
shall a son of man sojourn therein.

<span id="ii.ii.xlii-p9"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc21003.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p9"></span> They were the descendants of Elam the
son of Shem, <span id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.1"></span>[Ge
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022)<span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.1"></span>. They were a powerful kingdom in the days
of Abram, <span id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.2"></span>[Ge
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)<span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.2"></span>. Isaiah speaks of them as hostile to the
people of Israel, <span id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.3"></span>[Isa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006)<span
id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.3"></span>. Shushan is said to have been in the
province of Elam, <span id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.4"></span>[Da
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002)<span id="ii.ii.xliii-p9.4"></span>
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc21003.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.ii.xlv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p10"></span> “The indignation of his wrath” is in
apposition with “evil.” So the *Vulg.,* the *Syr.,* and the *Targ.*

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p11"></span>And I will bring on them evil, The
burning of my wrath, saith Jehovah.

<span id="ii.ii.xlv-p12"></span>The evil was the effect of God’s high
displeasure. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 50](cc21004)
