[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc21005)  [Next](cc21007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span>The last chapter, as it is historical, and all
its parts have been elsewhere handled, holy Calvin did not expound in
his Lectures, that he might not burden the hearers with superfluous
repetitions: however, to render the book complete, we here add it.

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 52

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span><span id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>[Jeremiah
52:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001)<span id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span>**1**. Zedekiah *was* one and twenty years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And
his mother’s name *was* Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>**1**. Viginti et unius anni erat Sedechias
quando regnavit, et undecim annis regnavit in Jerusalem, et nomen matris
ejus Hamutal filia Jeremiae de Libnah.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span>**2**. And he did *that which was* evil in the
eyes of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span>**2**. Et fecit malum in oculis Jehovae,
secundum omnia quae fecerat Jehoiakim:

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span>**3**. For through the anger of the LORD it
came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had cast them out from his
presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>**3**. Nempe propter furorem Jehovae qui fuit
contra Jerusalem et Jehudah, donec projiceret eos a facie sua,
rebellavit Sedechias contra regem Babylonis.  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114)

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span>**4**. And it came to pass in the ninth year
of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth *day* of the month,
*that* Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem, and pitched against it, and built forts against it round
about.

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span>**4**. Fuit autem anno nono regni ejus, mense
decimo, decima mensis, venit Nabuchadrezer rex Babylonis, ipse et
universus exercitus ejus adversus Jerusalem, et castrametati sunt contra
eam, et aedificaverunt contra earn munitionem undique.

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span>**5**. So the city was besieged unto the
eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span>**5**. Venitque civitas in obsidionem usque
ad undecimum annum regis Sedechiae.

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span>**6**. And in the fourth month, in the ninth
*day* of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was
no bread for the people of the land.

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>**6**. Mense quarto, nona mensis, invaluit
fames in urbe, *(adeo)* ut non esset panis populo terrae.

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span>**7**. Then the city was broken up, and all
the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way
of the gate between the two walls, which *was* by the king’s garden;
(now the Chaldeans *were* by the city round about:) and they went by the
way of the plain.

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span>**7**. Et dirupta fuit urbs, et omnes viri
bellatores fugerunt, exieruntque de urbe noete per viam portae *(quoe
erat)* inter duos muros, qui (erant) juxta hortum regis (Chaldaei autem
erant juxta urbem per circuitum) abieruntque per viam solitudinis.

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span>**8**. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued
after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all
his army was scattered from him.

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span>**8**. Persecutus vero est exereitus
Chaldaeorum regem, apprehenderuntque Sedechiam in desertis Jericho; quia
omnis exercitus ejus dispersus est ab eo.

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span>**9**. Then they took the king, and carried
him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where
he gave judgment upon him.

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span>**9**. Comprehenderunt igitur regem, et
duxerunt eum ad regem Babylonis in Riblatah, in terram Chamath, qui
disceptavit cure eo judiciis.

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span>**10**. And the king of Babylon slew the sons
of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in
Riblah.

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span>**10**. Et jugulavit rex Babylonis filios
Sedechiam in oculis ejus, et etiam omnes principes Jehudah jugulavit in
Riblatah:

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span>**11**. Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah;
and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon,
and put him in prison till the day of his death.

<span id="ii.v-p28"></span>**11**. Oculos autem Sedechiae excaecavit, et
vinxit catenis, adducique fecit eum rex Babylonis, Babylonem, et posuit
eum in domo carceris  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) usque ad
diem quo mortuus est.

<span id="ii.v-p30"></span>**12**. Now in the fifth month, in the tenth
*day* of the month, which *was* the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, *which* served
the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem,

<span id="ii.v-p31"></span>**12**. Mense autem quinto, decima mensis
 <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) (is annus erat decimus nonus
annus regis Nabuchadrezer regis Babylonis) venit Nebuzaradan princeps
militum, qui stabat  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) coram rege
Babylonis, in Jerusalem,

<span id="ii.v-p34"></span>**13**. And burnt the house of the LORD, and
the king’s house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of
the great *men,* burned he with fire.

<span id="ii.v-p35"></span>**13**. Et incendit domurn Jehovae et domum
regis, atque cunctas domos Jerusalem, et omnem domum magnam combussit
igni:  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118)

<span id="ii.v-p37"></span>**14**. And all the army of the Chaldeans,
that *were* with with the captain of the guard, brake down all the walls
of Jerusalem round about.

<span id="ii.v-p38"></span>**14**. Onmesque muros Jerusalem undique
destruxerunt totus exercitus Chaledaeorum, qui erat cum magistro
militum.

<span id="ii.v-p39"></span>**15**. Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard carried away captive *certain* of the poor of the people, and the
residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell
away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

<span id="ii.v-p40"></span>**15**. De pauperibus autem populi, et de
reliquo populo qui remanserant in urbe*,* et de transfugis qui
transfugerunt ad regem Babylonis, et de reliquiis multitudinis
transmigrare fecit Nebuzaradan nmgister militum.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119)

<span id="ii.v-p42"></span>**16**. But Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard, left *certain* of the poor of the land for vinedressers and for
husbandmen.

<span id="ii.v-p43"></span>**16**. De pauperibus vero terrae reliquit
Nebuzaradan magister militurn vinitores et agricolas.

<span id="ii.v-p44"></span>**17**. Also the pillars of brass that *were*
in the house of the LORD, and the bases, and the brasen sea that *was*
in the house of the LORD, the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass
of them to Babylon.

<span id="ii.v-p45"></span>**17**. Et columnas aereas quae erant in domo
Jehovae, et bases et mare aereum quod erat in domo Jehovae confregerunt
Chaldaei, et detulerunt omne aes eorum Babylonem.

<span id="ii.v-p46"></span>**18**. The caldrons also, and the shovels,
and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of
brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.

<span id="ii.v-p47"></span>**18**. Lebetes quoque et scopas et psalteria
et pelves et cochlearia et omnia vasa aerea quibus ministrabant,
tulerunt.

<span id="ii.v-p48"></span>**19**. And the basons, and the firepans, and
the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and
the cups; *that* which *was* of gold *in* gold, and *that* which *was*
of silver *in* silver, took the caprain of the guard away.

<span id="ii.v-p49"></span>**19**. Et hydrias et thuribula et pelves et
ollas et candelabra, et mortariola et cyathos, quae aurea, aurea, et
quae argentea, argentea,  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) tulit
magister militum.

<span id="ii.v-p51"></span>**20**. The two pillars, one sea, and twelve
brasen bulls that *were* under the bases, which king Solomon had made in
the house of the LORD: the brass of all these vessels was without
weight.

<span id="ii.v-p52"></span>**20**. Columnas duas, mare unum, et boves
duodecim aereos, qui erant sub basibus quas fecerat rex Solomo in domo
Jehovae, non erat pondus, aeris eorum omnium *(nempe)* vasorum istorum.

<span id="ii.v-p53"></span>**21**. And *concerning* the pillars, the
height of one pillar *was* eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve
cubits did compass it; and the thickness thereof *was* four fingers; *it
was* hollow.

<span id="ii.v-p54"></span>**21**. Quod ad columnas, octodecim cubitorum
erat altitudo columnae unius, et filum duodecim cubitortum circuibat
eam, cujus crassitudo *(quoe)* erat quatuor digitorum; (erat) vacua.

<span id="ii.v-p55"></span>**22**. And the chapiter of brass *was* upon
it; and the height of one chapiter *was* five cubits, with network and
pomegranates upon the chapiters round about, all *of* brass. The second
pillar also and the pomegranates *were* like unto these.

<span id="ii.v-p56"></span>**22**. Capitellum autem quod erat super earn
aereum; altitudo vero capitelli unius, quinque cubitorum erat, et
reticulum, et malogranata super capitellum per circuiturn, omnia aerea
et similia erant columnae secundae et malogranata.

<span id="ii.v-p57"></span>**23**. And there were ninety and six
pomegranates on a side; *and* all the pomegranates upon the network
*were* an hundred round about.

<span id="ii.v-p58"></span>**23**. Fuerunt autem malogranata nonaginta
et sex ad plagam (unam) onmia malogranata, centum super reticulum per
circuitum.

<span id="ii.v-p59"></span>**24**. And the captain of the guard took
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three
keepers of the door:

<span id="ii.v-p60"></span>**24**. Tulit quoque magister militurn
Seraiah sacerdotem primum, et Sephaniah sacerdotem secundum, et tres
custodes liminis.

<span id="ii.v-p61"></span>**25**. He took also out of the city an
eunuch, which had the charge of the men of war; and seven men of them
that were near the king’s person, which were found in the city; and the
principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and
threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst
of the city.

<span id="ii.v-p62"></span>**25**. Et de urbe tulit eunuchum unum, qui
erat praepositus super viros bellatores, et septem viros ex iis qui
videbant faciem regis, qui inventi sunt in urbe, et scribam principem
militiae, qui colligebat ad militiam populum terrae, et sexaginta viros
de populo terrae, qui inventi sunt in medio urbis.

<span id="ii.v-p63"></span>**26**. So Nebuzaradan, the captain of the
guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

<span id="ii.v-p64"></span>**26**. Tulit, inquam, cos Nebuzaradan
magister militum, et deduxit eos ad regem Babylonis in Riblatha:

<span id="ii.v-p65"></span>**27**. And the king of Babylon smote them,
and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was
carried away captive out of his own land.

<span id="ii.v-p66"></span>**27**. Et percussit eos rex Babylonis, et
interfecit eos in Riblatha in terra Chamath; et translatus est Jehudah
de terra sua.

<span id="ii.v-p67"></span>**28**. This *is* the people whom
Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand
Jews and three and twenty:

<span id="ii.v-p68"></span>**28**. Iste est populus quem transferre
fecit Nabuchadrezer, anno septimo, Judaeos tria millia et viginti tres.

<span id="ii.v-p69"></span>**29**. In the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred
thirty and two persons:

<span id="ii.v-p70"></span>**29**. Anno decimo octavo Nabuchadrezer
transferre fecit de Jerusalem animas octingentas triginta duas.

<span id="ii.v-p71"></span>**30**. In the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: all the persons *were*
four thousand and six hundred.

<span id="ii.v-p72"></span>**30**. Anno tertio et vigesimo
Nabuchadrezer, transferre fecit Nelmzar-adan magister militum, Judaeorum
animus septingentas quadraginta quinque; omnes animae quatuor millia et
sexcentae.  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121)

<span id="ii.v-p75"></span>**31**. And it came to pass in the seven and
thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, in the five and twentieth *day* of the month, *that*
Evilmerodach king of Babylon in the *first* year of his reign lifted up
the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of
prison,

<span id="ii.v-p76"></span>**31**. Fuit autem tricesimo septimo anno
transmigrationis Jehoiakin regis Jehudah, duodecimo mense, vicesima
quinta mensis, elevavit Evil-merodach rex Babylonis, anno regni sui,
caput Jehoiakin regis Jehudah, et eduxit eum de domo carceris;

<span id="ii.v-p77"></span>**32**. And spake kindly unto him, and set
his throne above the throne of the kings that *were* with him in
Babylon,

<span id="ii.v-p78"></span>**32**. Loquutusque est eum eo bolla, et
posuit thronum ejus super thronum regum, qui erant secum in Babylone;

<span id="ii.v-p79"></span>**33**. And changed his prison garments: and
he did continually eat bread before him all the days of his life.

<span id="ii.v-p80"></span>**33**. Et mutavit vestimenta carceris ejus,
et comedebat panem coram eo semper omnibus diebus vitae suae.

<span id="ii.v-p81"></span>**34**. And *for* his diet, there was a
continual diet given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion
until the day of his death, all the days of his life.

<span id="ii.v-p82"></span>**34**. Et portio ejus, portio perpetua
dabatur ei a rege Babylonis, per singulos dies ejus, usque ad diem quo
mortuus est, omnibus diebus vitae ejus.

<span id="ii.v-p83"></span>Laus Deo

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc21006.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span> The best rendering of this verse is by
Venema, —

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span>Therefore the height of the wrath of Jehovah
(that is, the extreme wrath of Jehovah) was on Jerusalem and Judah,
until he cast them from his presence: and Zedekiah rebelled against the
king of Babylon.

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span>The same words, in <span
id="ii.v-p12.1"></span>[2Ki 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v-p12.1"></span>, ought to be rendered in the same way. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc21006.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p29"></span> Literally, “in the house of visitations,”
that is, of punishments. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc21006.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p32"></span> It is “the seventh” in <span
id="ii.v-p32.1"></span>[2Ki 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008)<span
id="ii.v-p32.1"></span>. This discrepancy is accounted for by *Blayney*
and others, by suppposing a typographical mistake of putting the numeral
<span id="ii.v-p32.2"></span>ז, seven, for <span
id="ii.v-p32.3"></span>י, ten, or *vice versa*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc21006.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.v-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p33"></span> It is <span id="ii.v-p33.1"></span>עבד,
“served,” in <span id="ii.v-p33.2"></span>[2Ki
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008)<span id="ii.v-p33.2"></span>; but
the meaning is the same. To stand before one is phrase which designates
the office of one who serves. See <span id="ii.v-p33.3"></span>[Lu
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#029)<span id="ii.v-p33.3"></span>. It
would be better, in rendering this part of the verse, to change the
place of the verb, to come, — “Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the
executioners, who stood before the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem.”
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc21006.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p36"></span> The literal rendering is, “even every great
house burnt he with fire.” This clause qualifies the former one. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc21006.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p41"></span> Though in the parallel passages in <span
id="ii.v-p41.1"></span>[Jer 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009)<span
id="ii.v-p41.1"></span>, and in <span id="ii.v-p41.2"></span>[2Ki
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011)<span id="ii.v-p41.2"></span>,
the words, “Some of the poor of the people,” ar3e not found, yet the
*Vulg*., the *Syr*., and the *Targ*., retain them here, and they are
found in all the MSS. except one. Some of the poor of the city were
evidently left, as well as some of the poor of the land. In the
following words, the *Vulg*. for the most part is followed, which is not
correct: the words should be, “<span id="ii.v-p41.3"></span>et reliquum
populum,” and, “<span id="ii.v-p41.4"></span>et reliquias multitudinis.”
And the past words should be, “even the remnant (or remainder) of the
multitude,” that is, of the people that formerly inhabited the city. See
<span id="ii.v-p41.5"></span>[Jer
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009)<span id="ii.v-p41.5"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc21006.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p50"></span> “Which gold, gold, and which silver,
silver:” <span id="ii.v-p50.1"></span>אשר, “which,” repeated, may be
rendered here, “some;” and the repetition of “gold,” and of “silver,” is
the same as to say, that some of the vessels were pure gold, and that
some were pure silver: then the version would be this, “some gold of
gold,” *i.e*., pure gold, “and some silver of silver,” *i.e*., pure
silver, there being no mixture in either. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc21006.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.v-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p73"></span> The number here given is to be restricted to
the years here specified, that is, the *seventh*, the *eighteenth*, and
the *twenty-third* of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign. We read of other captives;
that is, in the *third* year of Jehoiakim’s reign, (<span
id="ii.v-p73.1"></span>[Da 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v-p73.1"></span>) which was the *first* of Nebuchadnezzar; and in
the *eighth* year of his reign, (<span id="ii.v-p73.2"></span>[2Ki
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)<span id="ii.v-p73.2"></span>)
when Jehoiachin was taken prisoner, and with him not less than ten
thousand people, (<span id="ii.v-p73.3"></span>[2Ki
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014)<span id="ii.v-p73.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v-p74"></span>We have no account of the number in the first
captivity, when Daniel was taken to Babylon. The largest number in the
*eighth* year of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign, even *ten* thousand. The amount
of *three* captivities mentioned here, the last of which must have been
after the murder of Gedaliah, is *four* thousand *six* hundred. All
these being men, and of full age, there must have been many women and
children. It has been thought that all, taken captive all these times,
could not have been less than fifty thousand. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Lamentations](cc21007)
