[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc21001)  [Next](cc21003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span>CHAPTER 48

<span id="ii.i.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.i.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p2"></span>**1**. Against Moab thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled; Kiriathaim
is confounded *and* taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.

<span id="ii.i.i-p3"></span>**1**. Contra Moab, sic dicit Jehova
exercituum, Deus Israel, Vae super Nebo, quia in vastitatem redacta est
(vastata est;) destructa est Kiriathaim; pudefacta est Misgab et expavit
(*vel*, anima fracta est.)

<span id="ii.i.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.i-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p6"></span>This prophecy is against the Moabites, who,
though they derived their origin from Lot, and were of the same blood
with the Israelites, had yet been inimical to them. This prophecy would
be uninteresting, were we not to remember the history on which the
application and use of what is said depends. We have said that the
Moabites, as the father of their nation was Lot, were connected by blood
with the Israelites; they ought then to have retained the recollection
of their brotherhood, and to have dealt kindly with them; for God had
spared them when the people of Israel entered into the land of Canaan.
The Israelites, we know, passed through the borders of Moab without
doing any harm to them, because it was God’s purpose, from a regard to
Lot, to preserve them for a time. But this people never ceased to
contrive all manner of plots against God’s people; and, as we shall
hereafter see, when the state of that people became embarrassed, they
cruelly exulted over them, and became more insolent than avowed enemies.
Hence God prophesied against them, that the Israelites might know, as we
reminded you yesterday, that their miserable condition was not
overlooked by God, and that though he chastised them, yet some hope of
mercy remained, as he undertook their cause and would be their defender.
It was then no small comfort which this prophecy brought to the
faithful; for they thus knew that God was still their father, though
apparently he seemed to be severe to them. We now perceive the design of
what is here said.

<span id="ii.i.i-p7"></span>The case of the Moabites was different from
that of the Egyptians, for the Egyptians were wholly aliens to the
chosen people; but the Moabites, as we have said, were related to them.
They were therefore willful, and as it were intestine enemies; and
nature itself ought to have taught them to acknowledge the Israelites as
their brethren, and to cultivate mutual kindness. This cruelty and
ingratitude were so hateful to God, that at length he punished them most
severely. But as the Moabites remained in quietness when Judea was laid
waste, and the city Jerusalem destroyed, after the overthrow of the
kingdom of Israel, and the banishment of the ten tribes to distant
countries, it behooved the faithful to exercise patience, which could
not have been done without hope. It was this then that Jeremiah had in
view, even to sustain the minds of the godly with the expectation of
God’s judgment, which he here denounces on the Moabites.

<span id="ii.i.i-p8"></span>He says, *Against Moab*;  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and then it follows, *Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel* By the first term he designates the immense
power of God, and reminds them that God is the judge of the whole world,
and that his kingdom extends over all nations; but by the second
expression he bears testimony to the love with which he had embraced the
children of Abraham, because he had been pleased to choose them as his
peculiar inheritance. *Woe*, he says, on *Nebo*;  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) which was a city in the land of Moab;
*because laid waste, ashamed, taken is Kiriathaim* He names here, as we
see, some cities, and he will name more as he proceeds. *Ashamed* then
and *taken is Kiriathaim; and Misgab*  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)
*is ashamed and torn*, or broken in mind. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p2"></span>**2** *There shall be* no more praise of
Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut
it off from *being* a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the
sword shall pursue thee.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Nulla amplius gloriatio Moab in
Chesbon; cogitaverunt super eam malum, Venite et excidamus eam, ne sit
gens; etiam Madmen, (*alloquitur urbem ipsam*,) excisa es (*ad verbum*,
in solitudinem redacta, *sed metaphorice accipitur pro interitu*,
interiit *ergo* Madmen;) post to proficiscetur gladius.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.ii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet, as before, does not speak in
an ordinary way, but declares in lofty terms what God had committed to
him, in order that he might terrify the Moabites; not indeed that they
heard his threatenings, but it was necessary that he should denounce
vengeance in this vehement manner, that the Jews might know that the
cruelty and pride of the Moabites, hereafter mentioned, would not go
unpunished.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p7"></span>Hence he says, *No more shall be the
praise* or the boasting *of Moab over Heshbon* We may learn from this
place and from others, that Heshbon had been taken from the Moabites;
for it was occupied by God’s people, because the Moabites had lost it,
as Moses relates in <span id="ii.i.ii-p7.1"></span>[Nu
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p7.1"></span>,
and in <span id="ii.i.ii-p7.2"></span>[De
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p7.2"></span>,
etc. But (as things change) when the Moabites became strong, they took
away this city from the Israelites. Hence the Prophet says, that there
would be no more boasting that they possessed that city; for he adds,
*They have thought,* or devised, etc. There is here a striking allusion,
for <span id="ii.i.ii-p7.3"></span>חשבון, *chesbon*, is derived from
<span id="ii.i.ii-p7.4"></span>חשב, *chesheb*, to devise or to consult,
as though it were a place of consultation or devisings. The Prophet then
says, that as to Heshbon they *consulted against it*, <span
id="ii.i.ii-p7.5"></span>חשבו עליה *cheshbu olie* He uses the root from
which the name of the city is derived. Heshbon, then, hitherto called
the place of consultation, was to have and find other counselors, even
those who would contrive ruin for it. *Come ye*; the Prophet refers here
to the counsel taken by the Chaldeans, *Come ye, and let us cut her off
from being a nation* He then joins another city, *And thou, Madmen*,
 <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) *shalt be cut off, for a sword shall
go after thee*, or pursue thee, as though the city itself was fleeing
from the sword; not that cities move from one place to another; but when
the citizens deliberate how they may drive away their enemies and resist
their attacks, — when they seek aid here and there, — when they set up
their own remedies, they are said to flee. But the Prophet says, “Thou
shalt gain nothing by fleeing, for the sword shall pursue thee.” It
follows, —

<span id="ii.i.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.i.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iii-p2"></span>**3**. A voice of crying *shall be* from
Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction.

<span id="ii.i.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Vox clamoris (*id est*, sonora) e
Choronaim, vastitas et contritio magna.

<span id="ii.i.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iii-p6"></span>By naming many cities, he shews that the
whole land was doomed to ruin, so that no corner of it would be exempt
from destruction. For the Moabites might have suffered some loss without
much injury had they been moderately chastised; but the Prophet shews
that they would be so reduced by the power of Nebuchadnezzar, that ruin
would extend to every part of the land. We now then see why this
catalogue of the cities is given.

<span id="ii.i.iii-p7"></span>By the *voice of crying* he means howling,
a loud lamentation, heard far and wide. He says that the *voice of
crying* would *go forth from Horonaim*, which some think was so called,
because the city consisted of two parts, a higher and a lower part. He
then adds, *desolation and great destruction* He thus explains himself,
for the citizens of Horonaim would in vain cry out, because desolation
and breaking or destruction would constrain them, that is, make them cry
out so as to howl for the bitterness of their grief. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.i.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv-p2"></span>**4**. Moab is destroyed; her little ones
have caused a cry to be heard.

<span id="ii.i.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Afflicta est Moab; audire fecerunt
clamorem parvuli ejus.

<span id="ii.i.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iv-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet speaks again generally of the
whole country. It is said that the land of Moab was afflicted; not that
it was so then; but to make certain the prophecy, he speaks of the event
as having already taken place; for the prophets, as it is well known,
speaking in the person of God, relate things as yet hidden, as though
they had been completed. He says that the *little ones* of Moab so cried
as to be heard.  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) This is much more
emphatic than if he had said that men and women cried out; for children
do not soon perceive what is going on, for their understanding is not
great. Men and women howl when threatenings only are announced; but
little children are not moved but by present evils, and except they are
actually beaten, they are not affected; and then they hardly distinguish
between some slight evil and death. Hence, when the Prophet says that
the little ones of Moab were heard in their crying, he means that the
grievousness of its calamity would be extreme, as that little children,
as though wise before their time, would perceive the atrocious cruelty
of their enemies. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.v"></span>

<span id="ii.i.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.i.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.v-p2"></span>**5**. For in the going up of Luhith
continual weeping shall go up; for in the going down of Horonaim the
enemies have heard a cry of destruction.

<span id="ii.i.v-p3"></span>**5**. Quoniam in ascensu Luhith cum fletu
ascendet fletus, quia in descensu Choronaim hostes clamorem contritionis
audierunt (conjungi debet proximus versus,)

<span id="ii.i.v-p4"></span>**6**. Flee, save your lives, and be like
the heath in the wilderness.

<span id="ii.i.v-p5"></span>**6**. Fugite, eripite animas vestras; et
eritis quasi Aroer (vel, myrica) in deserto.

<span id="ii.i.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.v-p7"></span><span id="ii.i.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.v-p8"></span>Here Jeremiah uses another figure, that the
weeping would be everywhere heard in the ascent to Luhith. It is
probable, and it appears from the Prophet’s words, that this city was
situated on a high place. He then says, that men would go up with
weeping *in the ascent to Luhith*; literally, In (or with) *weeping
shall weeping ascend* But some read as though it were written <span
id="ii.i.v-p8.1"></span>בכה, *beke*, weeping; nor is there a doubt but
that the verb <span id="ii.i.v-p8.2"></span>יעלה, *iole*, refers to a
person. But Jeremiah seems to have mentioned weeping twice in order to
show that men would not only weep in one place, but during the long
course of their ascent, as though he had said, “They who shall be near
the city shall weep, and they in the middle of their course, and those
at the foot of the mountain;” that is, there shall be weeping in every
place. We now then perceive the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ii.i.v-p9"></span>He afterwards says, *In the descent to
Horonaim* It hence appears that this city was situated in a low place or
on a plain; and therefore I know not why they say that one part of it
was higher than the other. It might indeed be that it had a hill in it;
but the place was in a level country, and had mountains around it, as we
learn from the Prophet’s words, *In the descent to Horonaim the enemies
shall hear a cry of distress* By saying that enemies would hear a cry,
 <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) he means that the citizens of
Horonaim and their neighbors would become frantic through grief. For
fear restrains weeping, and when any one sees an enemy near, the very
sight of him checks him, so that he dares not openly to show his grief;
and then shame also restrains tears as well as sighings, for an enemy
would deride our weepings in our misery. There is no doubt then, but
that the Prophet here amplifies the grievousness of their sorrow, when
he says, that though the citizens of Horonaim had enemies before their
eyes, they would yet break forth with weeping and loud crying, and that
the reproach and derision of enemies would not restrain them.

<span id="ii.i.v-p13"></span><span id="ii.i.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.v-p14"></span>Then he adds, *Flee, save*: this is the
crying of distress; for miserable men, as the case is in extreme evils,
mutually exhort one another, *Flee, save your lives* He then compares
them to a tamarisk. The word <span id="ii.i.v-p14.1"></span>ערוער,
*oruor*, designates a country, as it is probable, and there were also
two cities of this name. However, <span id="ii.i.v-p14.2"></span>ערער,
*oror*, is a tamarisk, as we have already seen in <span
id="ii.i.v-p14.3"></span>[Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.i.v-p14.3"></span>.
Some render it, “*a* tower;” and the words of Isaiah in <span
id="ii.i.v-p14.4"></span>[Isa
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.i.v-p14.4"></span>,
are perverted by some to maintain another meaning; for they think that
<span id="ii.i.v-p14.5"></span>ערוער, *oruor*, means the cot of
shepherds in the desert; but I prefer the opinion of those who render it
“tamarisk,” or juniper, though the Prophet seems to me to allude to the
city Aroer, or to a region of that name, but I rather think to the city.
He then says, *­And ye shall be as a tamarisk in the desert*: and it is
known from other places that Aroer was in the land of Moab.

<span id="ii.i.v-p15"></span>We now then perceive what the Prophet
means: that Moab would be like a juniper in the desert, that is, a
barren tree, which never grows to any size; and then it is dry, because
it is not cherished by any rain, nor fed by any moisture from the
ground. It is in this sense, as we have stated, that our Prophet took
the similitude in <span id="ii.i.v-p15.1"></span>[Jer
17:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.i.v-p15.1"></span>:

<span id="ii.i.v-p16"></span>“Blessed,” he says, “is the man who trusts
in Jehovah, for he shall be like a tree planted near waters: cursed is
the man who trusts in man, and who makes flesh his arm, and withdraws
his heart from Jehovah; for he shall be as the tamarisk of the desert;”

<span id="ii.i.v-p17"></span>that is, he shall be barren and dry,
without any moisture or support. It now follows: —

<span id="ii.i.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.i.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.vi-p2"></span>**7**. For because thou hast trusted in thy
works, and in thy treasures, thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall
go forth into captivity *with* his priests and his princes together.

<span id="ii.i.vi-p3"></span>**7**. Propterea quod fiducia tua fuit in
operibus tuis (*ad verbum*) et in thesauris tuis, etiam tu capieris; et
egredietur Chamos in captivitatem, sacerdotes ejus et principes ejus
simul.

<span id="ii.i.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.vi-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.vi-p6"></span>Jeremiah assigns here the reason why God
would take vengeance on the Moabites; but we shall hereafter see other
reasons why God had been so much displeased with them. Let us then know
that we are not here taught avowedly why God determined to lay waste and
destroy the land of Moab; for there is here but one reason given, while
there were others and greater ones, even because they had wantonly
exulted over the miseries of the Jews, because they had conspired
against them, because they had betrayed them, and lastly, because they
had as it were carried on war with their God. But here Jeremiah briefly
shews, that were there no other reasons, the Moabites deserved that God
should pour forth his wrath on them even for this, because they trusted
in their own works and treasures. By works some understand herds and
flocks; and in this sense they are sometimes taken, and it is an
exposition that may be admitted. We may however understand by “works”
fortifications, especially as “treasures” are added. He then says, that
the Moabites were such that it was just that God should be roused
against them, because they were inebriated with false confidence in
their own power, and because they had many treasures: they hence thought
that they were impregnable.

<span id="ii.i.vi-p7"></span>The Prophet in the meantime intimates, that
the Moabites greatly deceived themselves in thinking that they were safe
against God’s hand, because they were strongly fortified, and because
they had immense treasures laid up. Hence he says that all these things
would avail nothing, for God would destroy the whole land.

<span id="ii.i.vi-p8"></span>*Even thou*, he says, *shalt be taken*
There is no small emphasis in the particle <span
id="ii.i.vi-p8.1"></span>גם, *gam*, even or also; for the Prophet
expresses what would now take place; for the Moabites in vain trusted in
their treasures and power, because God would notwithstanding destroy
them, and his hand would penetrate into their fortresses. “God then
shall find thee out equally the same, as though thou wert exposed to all
dangers.” They who abound in warlike preparations, furnished with all
kinds of defences, think themselves exempted from the common lot of men:
hence he says, *Even thou*, equally the same with any village exposed to
the will of enemies, *even thou shalt be taken; and go forth shall
Chemosh* This was the tutelar God of the land, as it appears from the
book of Judges and other places, and even from what Moses says, (<span
id="ii.i.vi-p8.2"></span>[Jud
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.i.vi-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.vi-p8.3"></span>[1 Kings
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007.md),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033.md)<span id="ii.i.vi-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.vi-p8.4"></span>[Nu
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029)<span id="ii.i.vi-p8.4"></span>..md)
As, then, the Moabites worshipped this idol, they thought themselves
safe whatever evil might be at hand. The Prophet then derides this
confidence. We have said before, that the ungodly in part set up their
own earthly power in opposition to God, and in part imagined that they
were aided by their idols. Hence the prophets exposed these two evils,
as it appears also from the present passage: the Prophet had said,
“Because thou trustest in thy fortresses and treasures, even thou shalt
be taken;” and now he says, “Because thou thinkest Chemosh to be a sure
and invincible defense, it shall be driven into exile and be kept
captive.” This he said in reproach to the idol. He adds, *its priests
and its princes*, even those princes, who seem to lie down safely under
its shadow, they also shall be driven into exile.

<span id="ii.i.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.vii-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.i.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.vii-p2"></span>**8**. And the spoiler shall come upon
every city, and no city shall escape: the valley also shall perish, and
the plain shall be destroyed, as the LORD hath spoken.

<span id="ii.i.vii-p3"></span>**8**. Et veniet vastator ad omnem urbem,
neque urbs eripietur; et peribit vallis, et perdetur planities, quod (id
est, quemadmodum) locutus est Jehova.

<span id="ii.i.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.vii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.vii-p6"></span>He confirms the previous verse; nor ought
he to be deemed too wordy, for this prophecy was not announced, that it
might cherish the hope and patience of the faithful only for a few days;
but it was necessary for them to rest dependent for a long time on this
promise, which God had given them many years before. This, then, is the
reason why the Prophet confirms at large a truth in itself sufficiently
clear. *Come*, he says, *shall a waster to all the cities* It now
appears more clearly why he mentioned some of the cities, though, as we
shall see, they were many, even that the Israelites might know that all
the land of Moab was to be given up to desolation: *Nor shall a city
escape, for destroyed shall be the valley and the plain, as Jehovah has
spoken* It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.viii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.i.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.viii-p2"></span>**9**. Give wings unto Moab, that it may
flee and get away: for the cities thereof shall be desolate, without any
to dwell therein.

<span id="ii.i.viii-p3"></span>**9**. Date alam ipsi Moab, quia volando
volabit; et urbes ejus in vastationem erunt, ut non sit qui habitet in
illis.

<span id="ii.i.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.viii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.viii-p6"></span>Here is a bitter derision; for it was
necessary not only to goad the Moabites, but also to pierce them
through, because they were inflated with so much pride, and also because
they cruelly raged against God’s people, as we shall more fully see
hereafter. When the Israelites were conquered, these ungodly men cast
forth their taunts, and also betrayed them to their enemies. Hence the
Prophet now says, *Give wings to Moab* Though the word <span
id="ii.i.viii-p6.1"></span>ציף, *tsits*, properly means a flower, yet it
means here a wing, put for wings; as though he had said, that the
Moabites could not escape destruction except by flying. In short, as
they had not only so proudly despised, but had also persecuted their
miserable brethren, the Prophet says, “Come shall the time when feet for
running or for flight shall not be sufficient for you, your enemies
being so eager in pursuit; but you will desire to have wings.” But, as
we shall see, he will presently tell us, that Moab had been quiet and
settling on its dregs.

<span id="ii.i.viii-p7"></span>He then adds, that its *cities would be a
waste, so as to have no inhabitant* He mentions the reason why Moab
would need wings, even because there would be no refuge for them, for
wherever it would betake itself, it would be thence driven away; for the
enemy would take all the cities, so that the whole people would be under
the necessity of removing elsewhere; he intimates, in short, that there
would be no hope for life to the Moabites, except by flight, and that
the swiftest. At length he adds, —

<span id="ii.i.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.i.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ix-p2"></span>**10**. Cursed *be* he that doeth the work
of the LORD deceitfully, and cursed *be* he that keepeth back his sword
from blood.

<span id="ii.i.ix-p3"></span>**10**. Maledictus qui tacit opus Jehovae
fraudulenter (*hoc est*, non bona fide,) et maledictus qui prohibet
gladium suum a sanguine.

<span id="ii.i.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.ix-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet here encourages the Chaldeans
to severity, so as to make no end until they destroyed that nation. We
have said that the prophets assumed different characters, so that what
they said might be more impressive. The Chaldeans were not indeed the
disciples of Jeremiah; nor was this exhortation intended for them, but
that the Israelites might know that what they heard from the mouth of
Jeremiah was certain. He then turns to address the Chaldeans; as he
before spoke to any who might be present, “Give wings to Moab;” so now
another apostrophe follows, *Cursed*, etc., — to whom does he speak? to
the Chaldeans; and yet the Prophet did not address them as though he
could effect anything; but, as I have said, he had a regard to the Jews.

<span id="ii.i.ix-p7"></span>This passage has been very absurdly
explained, and it is commonly quoted as though the Prophet had said,
that special care ought to be taken by us, not to omit anything of what
God commands. But they thus misrepresent the meaning. We ought therefore
to bear in mind what I have already said, that these words are addressed
to the Chaldeans, as though he had said, “Spare not, but shed blood, and
let no humanity move you, for it is the work of God; God has armed you,
that ye might fully execute his judgment and spare no blood: ye shall
then be accursed, except ye execute his vengeance.” It is not indeed a
common mode of speaking; but as to the subject and the meaning there is
no ambiguity. It is the same thing as though he had said, “Go on
courageously, and boldly execute God’s vengeance, inasmuch as punishment
has been denounced on them.” As when soldiers idly delay, the leader
when present not only exhorts them but also urges them on with reproofs
and threatenings, in order to rouse their alacrity; so the Prophet here
shews that God, as though present with the Chaldeans, would chide their
sloth, “Why do ye give over? cursed is every one who will not shed
blood, and who will not destroy them from the least to the greatest.”

<span id="ii.i.ix-p8"></span>But the whole import of the passage is
found in the expression, that the destruction of that ungodly nation was
*the work of Jehovah*; as if he had said, “Though the Chaldeans shall
lay waste the land of Moab, and shall do this, not in order to obey God,
but from avarice and ambition, yet it will be the work of God; for God
has hired the Chaldeans for this end, that they might destroy the
Moabites, though they may think of no such thing.” It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.x"></span>

<span id="ii.i.x-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.i.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.x-p2"></span>**11**. Moab hath been at ease from his
youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from
vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his
taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.

<span id="ii.i.x-p3"></span>**11**. Tranquillus fuit Moab a pueritia sua
(*vel*, quietus fuit Moab,) et resedit ipse super faeces suas, et non
mutatus fuit a vase in vas, et in captivitatem non profectus (*aut*, non
migravit;) propterea stetit sapor ejus in eo, et odor ejus non mutatus
est.

<span id="ii.i.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.x-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.x-p6"></span>Here he expresses more clearly what we have
before seen, that Moab in vain promised to himself perpetual impunity,
because he had for a long time been prosperous. Then the Prophet says
that he would be suddenly destroyed, when God ascended his tribunal to
execute his judgment.

<span id="ii.i.x-p7"></span>He first says, that he had been *quiet from
his childhood*, because when the Israelites had been often harassed,
that nation remained untouched, and never felt any disadvantage, as
though fortified on all sides by their own defences; for they dwelt in
part amidst mountains, but had a level country, as it is well known,
beyond Jordan. It was a land in a moderate degree fertile, so that as
they enjoyed continual peace, they collected great wealth. But it was
very hard for the Israelites, when God afflicted them with various
calamities, to see the Moabites secure and safe from all trouble and all
losses. As, then, this thought might have grievously wounded the minds
of the faithful, the Prophet here exhorts them not to envy the happiness
of the Moabites, because God would at length stretch forth his hand
against them, according to what was done by David, who also exhorted the
faithful patiently to wait for the day of the Lord, when they saw the
ungodly enjoying all kinds of pleasure, and meeting with success
according to their wishes. (<span id="ii.i.x-p7.1"></span>[Ps.
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#008)<span id="ii.i.x-p7.1"></span>..md) We
now then understand the object of the Prophet.

<span id="ii.i.x-p8"></span>He compares Moab to an old man, who had
passed his whole life in security, without any losses, without any grief
or sorrow. *Quiet*, then, *has Moab* been, or quiet *from his
childhood*, even from the time he became a nation. For what was the
childhood of Moab? even from the time they expelled the giants and other
inhabitants and dwelt in their land. Then success ever attended them;
and hence he says, that they *settled on their dregs,* so that they
underwent no change. Here is another metaphor: as wine which remains in
its own vessel, and is never changed into another, retains its taste,
its strength, and its savor; so also the Prophet says that Moab had
always been in the enjoyment of perpetual felicity, like wine which
remains on its own dregs. For the dregs preserve the wine, as it is well
known; for the wine, being taken off from its dregs, loses in part its
own strength, and at length becomes vapid; but wine, being not changed,
continues in its own strength.

<span id="ii.i.x-p9"></span>We hence see how apt is the comparison, when
the Prophet says, that *Moab had not been changed from vessel to vessel,
but had settled on his dregs* And he explains himself without a figure
when he adds, that he had *not gone*, or removed, *into captivity* He
yet intimates that this perpetual peace would avail the Moabites
nothing, because as the Lord had resolved to destroy them, he would
cause the strength of Moab to fail and all his wealth to be reduced to
nothing.

<span id="ii.i.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.i.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are so
disposed to indulge sloth, and so devoted to earthly things, that we
easily forget our holy calling except thou dost continually stimulate
us, — O grant that the afflictions by which thou triest us, may
effectually rouse us, so that leaving the world we may strive to come to
thee, and devote ourselves wholly to thy service; and that we may so
carry on the warfare under the various afflictions of the present life,
that our minds and all our thoughts may always be fixed on the hope of
that eternal and blessed rest which thine only-begotten Son our Lord has
promised as having been prepared for us in heaven. — Amen.

<span id="ii.i.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventieth

<span id="ii.i.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.i.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p2"></span>**12**. Therefore, behold, the days come,
saith the LORD, that I will send unto him wanderers, that shall cause
him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles.

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p3"></span>**12**. Propterea ecce dies veniunt,
dicit Jehova, et mittam ei abactores qui abigant eum, et vasa ejus
evacuent, et lagenas eorum dispergant.

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet said in the last lecture that
the Moabites, as long as they lived prosperously, were very hardened, as
impunity becomes an incentive to sin; for the ungodly, while God spares
them, think that they shall never be called to an account. He now adds,
that the *days* would *come*, in which God would suddenly execute
vengeance on them. But he pursues the comparison which he had used; for
he had said, that the Moabites were like wine which had not been poured
from one vessel into another; and hence they retained their own odor,
that is, they were inebriated with their own pleasures, because God had
granted them peace and quietness for a long time.

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p7"></span>Now, the Prophet, on the other hand, says
that God would send to them *drivers*,  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) *to drive them away*, and who would *empty
their vessels and scatter their bottles,* — the containing for the
contained; though I do not disapprove of another rendering, “and destroy
their bottles;” for the verb is sometimes taken in this sense. Properly
it means to scatter, to dissipate; but the verb <span
id="ii.i.xiii-p8.1"></span>נפף, *nuphets*, sometimes expresses a
stronger idea, even to scatter or to cast forth with violence, so as to
break what is thus cast forth. As to the real meaning there is not much
difference: for we perceive what was God’s purpose, that he would send
to the Moabites enemies to drive them into exile, and thus to deprive
them of those pleasures in which they had so long indulged. But this was
not said for the sake of the Moabites, but that the Jews might know,
that though that land had been in a quiet state, yet it would not escape
the hand of God; for its long continued felicity could not render void
that decree of God of which the Prophet had spoken. It now follows —

<span id="ii.i.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.i.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p2"></span>**13**. And Moab shall be ashamed of
Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence.

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p3"></span>**13**. Et pudefiet Moab a Chamos, sicuti
pudefacti sunt domus Israel a Bethel, sua fiducia.

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p6"></span>We may see more clearly from this verse,
that the Prophet does not so much address the Moabites as his own
people; for he was not a teacher to the Moabites to promote their
safety; on the contrary, he intended his doctrine for the benefit of the
Jews, as in the present instance.

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p7"></span>*Ashamed*, he says, *shall Moab be of his
idol:* for we have said that Chemosh was the god of the Moabites, as
every nation had its own peculiar god, even its own invention. Now, the
comparison made here shews that the Prophet wished to exhort the people,
to whom he was appointed a teacher, to repentance; for he set before
them the example of the ten tribes. And we know that at the time
Jeremiah announced this prophecy, the kingdom of Israel was destroyed.
All the Israelites, then, had been driven into exile except the tribe of
Judah and the half tribe of Benjamin. Now, the ten tribes, as it is well
known, had, under Jeroboam, departed from the pure worship of God, and
had built for themselves an altar in Bethel. Hence, then, the Prophet
now says, *As ashamed were* the Israelites of their superstitions, which
they had devised for themselves, so a similar vengeance of God awaited
the people of Moab; and thus he shews to the Jews what it is to trust in
the only true God. The Jews were not, indeed, involved in so gross a
superstition as to worship idols, at least publicly; but Ezekiel shews
that they also were contaminated with this kind of pollution, and that
the very sanctuary was defiled with idols; and at the same time the
worship of God, according to the Law, continued to be celebrated. But
the Jews had nothing but the external form: they had, indeed, the temple
and the altar, they professed to worship the true God, but in the
meantime impiety and contempt of true religion prevailed among them, and
they had begun to involve themselves in many ungodly superstitions, as
we have before seen.

<span id="ii.i.xiv-p8"></span>What, then, does Jeremiah now do? He sets
before their eyes the ten tribes whom God had destroyed, though the
Israelites, as well as the Jews, had descended from the same father,
even Abraham. As, then, God had inflicted so heavy a punishment on the
kingdom of Israel, he now shews to the Jews, that the punishment of the
Moabites was not less probable; and why? because they have, he says,
their idol. God shews that this was a most atrocious wickedness, by
which the Moabites had provoked his anger; for there is nothing less
intolerable than for men to transfer the glory of God to their own
inventions, to statues, to logs of wood, to stones, or to idols of gold
and silver. We now, then, understand the object of the Prophet. It
follows —

<span id="ii.i.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xv-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.i.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xv-p2"></span>**14**. How say ye, We *are* mighty and
strong men for the war?

<span id="ii.i.xv-p3"></span>**14**. Quomodo dicitis, Viri (fortes) nos,
et viri robusti ad praelium?

<span id="ii.i.xv-p4"></span>**15**. Moab is spoiled, and gone up *out
of* her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter,
saith the King, whose name *is* the LORD of hosts.

<span id="ii.i.xv-p5"></span>**15**. Vastatus est Moab, civitates ejus
excidit (*alii vertunt*, civitates ejus evanuerunt, *ut sit mutatio
numeri*; *alii*, incola ascendit, *vel*, discessit ab urbibus ejus,) et
electio juvenum descendit (*hoc est*, electi juvenes; *et est allusio ad
nomen* <span id="ii.i.xv-p5.1"></span>בחריו, *nam* <span
id="ii.i.xv-p5.2"></span>בחורים, *dicuntur apud Hebroeos adolescentes*,
*qui sunt in flore oetatis*, *sed* *nomen hoc deducitur a* <span
id="ii.i.xv-p5.3"></span>בחר, *quod est eligere*, *unde est etiam nomen
hoc quo utitur Propheta*; electio *igitur* juvenum, *vel*, electi
juvenes, descenderunt) ad mactationem, dicit Rex, nomen ejus Jehova
exercituum (*id est*, cujus nomen est Jehova exercituum.)

<span id="ii.i.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xv-p7"></span><span id="ii.i.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xv-p8"></span>The Prophet here reproves the pride of the
Moabites, because they trusted in their own strength, and derided God
and what the Prophets announced. We indeed know that ungodly men, when
all things prosper with them, are moved by no fear, divest themselves of
every feeling, and become so sunk in indifference, that they not only
disdainfully disregard the true God, but also what is connected with
moral obligation. Such, then, was the confidence which prevailed among
the Moabites. Hence the Prophet here checks this foolish boasting.

<span id="ii.i.xv-p9"></span>*How say ye, We are strong, we are warlike
men*? as though he had said, “These boastings, while God is seriously
contending with you, are all empty, and will avail you nothing: ye think
yourselves beyond the reach of danger, because ye possess great power,
and are surrounded with strong defences; but God will reduce to nothing
whatever you regard as your protection.” *Wasted*, then, *is Moab* He
sets up this threatening in opposition to their arrogance. He indeed
foretells what was to come, but speaks of it as a thing already
fulfilled. *Wasted*, he says, is *Moab, and the enemy has cut off his
cities* The verb <span id="ii.i.xv-p9.1"></span>עלה, *ole*, is to be
taken in a transitive sense; it is indeed a neuter verb, but the other
meaning is more suitable to this place, that the enemy would cut off the
cities of the Moabites. I yet allow that it may be explained otherwise,
that the inhabitants would ascend or depart from his cities; for, <span
id="ii.i.xv-p9.2"></span>עלה, *ole*, metaphorically, indeed, signifies
to ascend, and to flow off, or to go away, as they say, in smoke; and if
an anomaly as to number, common in Hebrew, be approved, the sense will
be, “and from his cities they have vanished.”  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) And this explanation agrees well with what
follows, *and his young men have descended to the slaughter*; that is,
they who seem the strongest among them shall be drawn to destruction, or
shall descend to the slaughter. But as the event seemed difficult to be
believed, God is again introduced. Then the Prophet says, that he did
not speak from his own mind, but announced what God had committed to
him. And he adds his title, that the Jews might be more attentive to the
consideration of God’s power. God, he says, is he who speaks, *the King,
whose name is Jehovah of hosts* He sets up God’s name in opposition to
the warlike preparations, of which the Moabites, as we have seen,
boasted; as though he had said, that if the Moabites had to do with
mortals, they might indeed have justly gloried; but as they had a
contest with the living God, all their power would vanish away, since
God was prepared to execute vengeance. It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.i.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p2"></span>**16**. The calamity of Moab *is* near to
come, and his affliction hasteth fast.

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p3"></span>**16**. Propinqua est calamitas Moab (דיא,
*sigificat infortunium et calamitatem*, *significat etiam interitum*,
*ideo vertunt quidam* propinquus est interitus) ad veniendum (ut
veniat,) et malum ejus (*id est*, calamitas) festinat valde.

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet expresses something more,
that the vengeance of which he spoke was near and hastening. It served
to alleviate the sorrow of the faithful, when they understood that the
Moabites would shortly be punished; for it was a grievous and bitter
trial, when God severely chastened his own children, to see that the
wicked were in the meantime spared. As, then, he deferred his judgments
as to the wicked, that delay tended to drive the faithful to despair, at
least they could not bear with sufficient patience the scourges of God.

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p7"></span>This is the reason why the Prophet now
says, *Near is the destruction* of the Moabites, *and their calamity
hastens* And though God did for some time yet bear with the Moabites, so
that they remained in a quiet state, and reveled in their pleasures, yet
this prophecy was true; for we are to bear in mind that truth, which
ought ever to be remembered as to promises and threatenings, that a
thousand years are as one day with the Lord: and hence is that
exhortation given by the Prophet Habakkuk,

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p8"></span>“If the prophecy delays, wait for it; for
coming it will come, and will not delay.”  
(<span id="ii.i.xvi-p8.2"></span>[Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)<span id="ii.i.xvi-p8.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p9"></span>And this mode of speaking occurs often in
the prophets. When, therefore, God denounces punishment on the wicked
and the despisers of his Law, he says, “Behold, your day hastens,” and
he says this, that they might be awakened and begin to fear in due time.

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p10"></span>But here, as I have reminded you,
Jeremiah had a regard to his own people. For the faithful might have
objected, and said, “What can this be? how long will God defer the
punishment which he threatens to our enemies?” Hence he says,
“Strengthen your minds for a little while, for God will presently
stretch forth his hand and show that he is a defender who cares for you
and your safety; for he will set himself against the Moabites, because
they have been unfaithful and vexatious to you.” It is, then, for this
reason that he says, *Near is their destruction*, and *their vengeance
hastens*

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p11"></span>We may hence learn this useful doctrine,
that whenever God promises anything, we ought to receive it as a present
thing, though yet hidden and even remote. There is no distance which
ought to impede our faith; but we ought to regard as certain whatever
God promises, and as though it were before our eyes and in our hand. And
the same ought to be the case as to threatenings; whenever God denounces
anything hard and grievous, it ought to touch and move us the same as
though we saw his hand armed with a sword, and as though the very
execution of his vengeance was exhibited before our eyes. For we know
what the Scripture teaches us elsewhere,

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p12"></span>“When the wicked shall say, Peace and
security, destruction comes suddenly on them, as the pain of
childbearing, which seizes a woman when she thinks nothing of it.”
(<span id="ii.i.xvi-p12.1"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="ii.i.xvi-p12.1"></span>.md)

<span id="ii.i.xvi-p13"></span>Let us then learn to set God’s favor ever
as present, and also all punishments, so that we may really fear them.
It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.i.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p2"></span>**17**. All ye that are about him, bemoan
him; and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken,
*and* the beautiful rod!

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p3"></span>**17**. Commovemini illi (*id est*, super
Moab) quicunque estis in circuitu ejus, et quicunque cognoscitis nomen
ejus, dicite, Quomodo fractus est baculus fortis? virga pulchritudinis
(*vel*, excellentiae, *nam* תראפת *significat decorum* *pulchritudine*.)

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet seems indeed to exhort all
neighbors to sympathy; but we have stated for what purpose he did this;
for it was not his object to show that the Moabites deserved pity, so
that their neighbors ought to have condoled with them in their
calamities: but by this figurative mode of speaking he exaggerated the
grievousness of the evils which were soon to happen to the Moabites; as
though he had said, “This judgment of God will be so dreadful as to make
all their neighbors to tremble; all who had previously known the state
of the people of Moab, will be smitten with such terror as will make
them to groan and mourn with them.” In short, the Prophet had nothing
else in view than to show that God’s vengeance on the Moabites would not
be less severe and dreadful than it had been on the ten tribes, and what
it would be on the tribe of Judah.

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p7"></span>*Say ye*, he says, *how is the staff
broken*? He introduces here all their neighbors as astonished with
wonder; for the same purpose are other things mentioned, even to show
that the calamity of Moab would be deemed a prodigy, for the people
thought them unassailable, and no one had ever dared to attempt anything
against their land. This, then, was the reason why the Prophet here asks
as one astonished, even in the person of all nations, How has it
happened *that the staff is broken*? *and the beautiful rod*?  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) These are metaphorical words, which refer to
the royal dignity and the condition of the whole people. It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.i.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p2"></span>**18**. Thou daughter that dost inhabit
Dibon, come down from *thy* glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of
Moab shall come upon thee, *and* he shall destroy thy strong holds.

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p3"></span>**18**. Descende e gloria, sede in sit
habitatrix filia Dibon; quia vastator Moab ascendit contra to,
destructor munitionum tuarum (*vel*, quia vastatus est Moab, et supra to
ascendet, etc.)

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet turns to address the
city Dibon, which was renowned among that people. The mode of speaking
is well known; he calls the people of the city the *daughter of Dibon*;
and he calls the daughter an *inhabitant*, because the Moabites, as it
has been said, ever rested in safety and quietness in their own
habitations, for no one disturbed them. It is, then, the same as though
he had said, “Ye who have hitherto been in a quiet state, *descend* now
*from your glory, and dwell in thirst*.”  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) By thirst he means the want of all things.
Thirst is set in opposition to glory; but it is more than if the Prophet
had mentioned disgrace or poverty; for there are many who are otherwise
oppressed by want, and yet find fountains or streams; but when there is
no drop of water to quench thirst, it is an extreme misery.

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p8"></span>We hence see that the Prophet
exaggerates the punishment of the Moabites, when he says that the
citizens of Dibon would *sit in thirst*, *because*, he says, *ascended
against thee has the waster*,  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) *and
the destroyer of thy fortresses.* We may hence conclude that the city
was on all sides fortified, so that it thought its defences sufficient
to keep off enemies. But the Prophet derides this presumption, because
the Chaldeans would come to pull down and destroy all these strongholds.
It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xix-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.i.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xix-p2"></span>**19**. O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by
the way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, *and*
say, What is done?

<span id="ii.i.xix-p3"></span>**19**. Super viam consiste et speculare
habitatrix Aroer; interroga fugientem et eam quae elapsa fuerit, dic,
Quid factum est (quid accidit?)

<span id="ii.i.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xix-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xix-p6"></span>We have stated elsewhere why the prophets
in describing calamities spoke in so elevated a style; for their object
was not to seek fame or the praise of eloquence. They are not these
rhetorical ornaments which the prophets used; but they necessarily spoke
in a lofty style of the punishments which awaited the ungodly, because
such was the hardness of their hearts that they hesitated not to despise
God’s threatenings, or to regard them as fables. That God’s threatenings
then might penetrate into the hearts of men, it was necessary to
exaggerate them by means of various comparisons, as it is done here and
in many places. We ought at the same time to bear in mind what I have
said, that the Prophet had a regard to his own people. As the Moabites
were like a hid treasure, the Jews could never have thought it possible,
that the Chaldeans would at length make an inroad there; but the Prophet
declares that the thing was so certain, as though it was seen by their
own eyes. In order then to lead the Jews to the very scene itself, the
judgments of God are here not only described, but as it were painted.

<span id="ii.i.xix-p7"></span>*Stand*, he says, *on the way, and look,
thou inhabitant of Aroer* This was another city of the Moabites, of
which mention is made in many places; and then he mentions others, as we
shall see. *Ask him*, he says, *who fleeth and her who escapes* He,
indeed, changes the gender of the nouns; but when he mentions many, and
then one person, he did this for the sake of amplifying; because, on the
one hand, he wished to show that so great would be the number of exiles,
that the whole land would become empty; and then, on the other hand,
when he says that this and that person would flee, he means that they
would be so scattered that they would not go in troops; but as it is
usual in a disordered state of things, one would flee on this side, and
another on the other side. *Ask him who fleeth*, or as we may render the
words, *Ask all who flee*; and then, *ask her who escapes*; because not
only men, but also women would flee, so that no sex would be spared. In
short, he intimates, that those who dwelt in cities well fortified,
would be all anxiety on seeing enemies irresistibly advancing through
every part of the country.

<span id="ii.i.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xx-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.i.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xx-p2"></span>**20**. Moab is confounded; for it is
broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled,

<span id="ii.i.xx-p3"></span>**20**. Pudefactus est Moab, quia contritus
est; ululate et clamate, et annuntiate in Arnon, quoniam vastatus est
Moab (vel, quod vastatus est Moab; <span id="ii.i.xx-p3.1"></span>כי
enim hic explicative accipitur, non causaliter;)

<span id="ii.i.xx-p4"></span>**21**. And judgment is come upon the plain
country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,

<span id="ii.i.xx-p5"></span>**21**. Et judicium perveniet ad terram
planam (vel, rectam, hoc est, ad ipsam planiciem,) ad Holon et ad Jazar
et ad Mephaath;

<span id="ii.i.xx-p6"></span>**22**. And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and
upon Bethdiblathaim,

<span id="ii.i.xx-p7"></span>**22**. Et super Dibon, et super Nebo, et
super Beth-diblathaim (domum Diblathaim, sed est nomen proprium urbis;)

<span id="ii.i.xx-p8"></span>**23**. And upon Kiriathaim, and upon
Bethgamul, and upon Bethmeon,

<span id="ii.i.xx-p9"></span>**23**. Et ad Cariathain, et ad
Beth-gamoul, et ad Beth-meon;

<span id="ii.i.xx-p10"></span>**24**. And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah,
and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.

<span id="ii.i.xx-p11"></span>**24**. Et super Chirioth, et super
Bozrah, et super omnes urbes terrae Moab remotas et propinquas.

<span id="ii.i.xx-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xx-p13"></span><span id="ii.i.xx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xx-p14"></span>We have stated why the Prophet describes
so fully the ruin of the Moabites, and dwells so long on a subject in no
way obscure; it was not indeed enough merely to teach and to show what
was useful to be known, but it was also necessary to add goads, that the
Jews might attend to these prophecies; nay, it was necessary to drive as
it were with a hammer into their minds what would have been otherwise
incredible; for they deemed it a fable that the Moabites could thus be
broken, laid waste, and reduced to nothing. The Prophet then would have
labored in vain, or spoken ineffectually, had he described in simple and
plain words what we here read. But he added vehemence to his words, as
though he would drive in his words with a hammer and fasten them in the
minds of the people.

<span id="ii.i.xx-p15"></span>He then says, that *Moab was ashamed,
because he was smitten* And then he turns again to address their
neighbors, *Howl, cry, and declare in Aroer*: but the Prophet ironically
exhorted others to howl and cry; for, as we have said, it was not his
purpose to show that they deserved pity who had been the most cruel
enemies to God’s Church, but to show that God’s vengeance would be so
dreadful as to call forth cryings and howlings through the whole
neighborhood. And then he adds, *Declare it in Aroer;* and afterwards he
names many cities; as though he had said, that no corner of the land
would be free from fear and anxiety, because the enemies, after having
made an inroad into one part, would turn to another, so as to make no
end of ravaging, until they had destroyed the whole country and all the
people. Of these cities and of their situation there is no need of
saying much, for it would be a useless labor. For in the last place, the
Prophet sufficiently shews that what he had in view was what I have
stated; for he says, *on all the cities of Moab, remote as well as
near*: he intimates that no part of the land would be exempted from
destruction; for the enemies having begun to attack it, would not cease
until they had gone through every part, and desolation had spread
everywhere, as though the whole country had been burnt with fire. It
follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.i.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxi-p2"></span>**25**. The horn of Moab is cut off, and
his arm is broken, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.i.xxi-p3"></span>**25**. Succisum est cornu Moab, et robor
ejus confractum, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.i.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxi-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxi-p6"></span>By another metaphor he expresses the same
thing. By *horn* he means power, as all who are in any measure
acquainted with Scripture well know that by this word is set forth
power, strength, or any defense for the protection of a nation. He then
says that the *horn of Moab was cut off*; and he adds afterwards as all
explanation, that *his strength was broken* Hence by this second clause
we understand what the Prophet meant when he said, that the horn of Moab
was cut off. But he again introduces God as the speaker, because the
Moabites thought that their horn could not be broken. As then Jeremiah
would not have obtained credit, had he spoken in his own name, he again
brought forward God as declaring his own words. It now follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p2"></span>**26**. Make ye him drunken; for he
magnified *himself* against the LORD: Moab also shall wallow in his
vomit, and he also shall be in derision.

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p3"></span>**26**. Inebriate ipsum, quia adversus
Jehovam magnificatus est, et complosit Moab in vomitu suo (vel, involvit
se,) et ipse quoque in derisum (vel, in ludibrium: adjungamus etiam
alterum versum.)

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p4"></span>**27**. For was not Israel a derision
unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him,
thou skippedst for joy.

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p5"></span>**27**. Annon in risum fuit tibi Israel?
an inter fures deprehensus fuit? quia ex quo sermo tuus de eo fuit,
commovisti to.

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p7"></span><span id="ii.i.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxii-p8"></span>The Prophet now addresses the Chaldeans,
who were to be the executioners of God’s vengeance: hence he says, *Make
him drunk, because he has magnified himself against Jehovah*, that is,
raised himself in his pride against God. Then the Prophet, as God’s
herald, encouraged the Chaldeans, fully to execute God’s judgment, who
had been chosen to be his servants. And the address had more force in it
when the Prophet showed that such a command was committed to him, as we
have seen elsewhere; for the Prophets showed how efficacious was their
doctrine, when they besieged and stormed cities, when they gave orders
to armies. This then is the course which Jeremiah now follows, when as
God’s herald he summons the Chaldeans, and commands them vigorously to
perform what God approved and what he had decreed, even to *inebriate*
the Moabites with evils. The rest to-morrow.

<span id="ii.i.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.i.xxiii-p2"></span>Grant Almighty God, that we may learn,
not only to consider thy judgments when they appear before our eyes, but
also to fear them whenever they are announced, so that we may implore
thy mercy, and also repent of our sins and patiently bear thy paternal
chastisements, and never murmur when thou sparest for a time the
ungodly, but wait with calm and resigned minds until the time comes when
thou wilt execute vengeance on them, and when in the meantime thou wilt
gather us at the end of our warfare into the blessed rest above, and
give us to enjoy that inheritance which thou hast prepared for us in
Heaven, and which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine
only-begotten Son our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.i.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-first

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain why the
Prophet, denouncing on the Moabites the punishment they had deserved,
directed his speech to the Chaldeans, even that his prophecy might have
greater force and produce greater effect. The metaphor of drunkenness
which he uses, is common; for when Scripture intimates that any are made
miserable, as they say, to satiety, or more than what can be well borne,
it compares them to those who are made drunk. For as a drunken man loses
his senses, so they who are overwhelmed with miseries, are almost
stunned with evils, so that they become deprived of reason and judgment.
This then is the drunkenness which the Prophet now mentions. And
following up the same idea, he adds, *And Moab is rolled in his own
vomit* Some by vomit understand intemperate joy, and render the words in
the past tense, “And Moab shouted in his own vomit,” that is, he
luxuriated in his own abundance, and when he gorged himself with wine
and with all kinds of luxuries, he loudly exulted; *and therefore he
shall be also a reproach* This contrast is not unsuitable, that Moab
immediately exulted when in prosperity, and that therefore God would
shortly punish him, so as to make him a reproach or a derision.

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p3"></span>But I follow what has been generally
approved, that Moab shall be rolled, or shall clap hands even in his own
vomit: so that by vomit the Prophet means excessive grief. For the
drunkard delights in drinking, but afterwards by vomiting he suffers the
punishment of his intemperance, when his head, his stomach, his legs and
other members shake and tremble. So also, it is no unsuitable
comparison, when the Prophet calls sorrow, arising from calamity,
vomiting. He then says, that when *Moab shall clap his hands*, or roll
himself  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) (for the word is variously
rendered) in his own miseries, he shall be even a *derision* Why he
says, that he would be a derision, we may learn from the next verse, for
he says, *Has not Israel been a derision to thee?*

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p7"></span><span id="ii.i.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p8"></span>But the higher cause for the drunkenness
mentioned here ought to be observed, even because Moab exalted himself
against God. For after having spoken of the pride through which he
exulted over God, he adds an explanation, *Has not Israel been a
derision to thee?* See then how the Moabites acted proudly towards God,
even because they treated his Church reproachfully. And this ought
especially to be noticed; for God intimates by these words, that he is
so connected with the faithful as to regard their cause as his own, as
it is said elsewhere,

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p9"></span>“He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple
of my eye.” (<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p9.1"></span>[Zec
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p9.1"></span>.md)

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p10"></span>God then so takes the faithful under his
own protection, that whatever injury is done to them, he counts it as
done to him. This connection is well expressed by the Prophet, when he
says, “The Moabites have raised themselves against God;” and at the same
time he shews the way and manner, even because they exulted over the
Israelites. Were any one to object and say, that the Moabites injured
mortal men only and not God; the answer has already been given, even
that God has so adopted his Church as to identify himself with it. Let
us then know, that God, when he sees us suffering anything unjustly,
regards the wrong as done to himself. As then the people of Israel had
been a derision to the Moabites, the Prophet threatens them with a
similar punishment for their pride.

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p11"></span>And then he adds, *Has he been found
among thieves?* It is, indeed, certain, that the people of Israel
deserved very severe scourges, and that when they were subjected to so
many adversities, a just reward was rendered to them for their
iniquities. With regard to God this is certain; but with regard to the
Moabites, the people of Israel were innocent; for these ungodly men
could not object anything to the Israelites, for they were altogether
like them, or even worse. God then compares here his chosen people with
aliens, and says that the Israelites were not thieves. Under one thing
he comprehends everything, as though he had said, “Of what wickedness
have the Israelites been guilty, that you have thus become so enraged
against them?” We hence see what the words of the Prophet mean, even
that the Moabites were impelled by nothing but cruelty and pride, when
they so basely raged against the Israelites, and so disdainfully
oppressed them; for as I have already said, there was no cause why the
Moabites should have been so hostile to the miserable people. Thus their
crime was doubled, for they acted proudly towards God’s people, and they
acted thus without a cause; for with regard to them, God’s people were
innocent.

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p12"></span>By saying that they *were moved*, or
excited *whenever they spoke of the Israelites*, he intimates that they
were carried away by malevolence, so as to wish all kinds of evil to the
miserable, and then, as far as they could, to lay snares for them. As
then they thus raged furiously against the Israelites, the Prophet
includes everything of this kind in the word “moved,” or raised an
uproar.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.i.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p2"></span>**28**. O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the
cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove *that* maketh her
nest in the sides of the hole’s mouth.

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p3"></span>**28**. Deserite urbes, et habitate in
petra (*hoc est*, in rupibus) habitatores Moab, et erunt quasi columba,
quae nidulatur in transgressionibus (*hoc est*,) trans os fissurae.

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p6"></span>Here Jeremiah denounces exile on the
Moabites; as though he had said, that such would be the desolation of
their land, that they would be forced as wanderers to flee here and
there. That he bids them to *leave their cities,* this is not done in
the same way as when God commands his people what is right; but he only
shews that he was armed with the sword of God, not only to speak with
the mouth, but also to perform what he foretells; for the execution
ought not to be separated from the prophecies, for the hand of God is
joined with his mouth. When, therefore, he announces anything by his
servants, the fulfillment also, as it has been stated, is included.

<span id="ii.i.xxv-p7"></span>This is the import of the words, *Leave
the cities, and dwell among the rocks*; that is, Hide yourselves in
lurking-places, for no habitable land will afford you rest, or be a
convenient place to flee to. *And they shall be,* he says, *like a dove
which makes a nest in remote places beyond the clefts of the rocks*, or
stones. He means the most deserted places. It is the same as though he
had said, that it would not be simply an exile that God would allot to
the Moabites, but that they would be taken away to regions unknown, and
deserted by men. It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md)<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p2"></span>**29**. We have heard the pride of Moab,
(he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride,
and the haughtiness of his heart.

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p3"></span>**29**. Audivimus superbiam Moab;
superbit valde fastum ejus (*vel*, arrogantiam ejus) et superbiam ejus
(*nomen est etiam ejusdem significationis*, *et ab eadem radice*,
*quemadmodum si quis diceret ferocitatem et ferociam*, *tantum
pronuntiatione differunt istoe voces*) et altitudinem cordis.

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet intimates by
anticipation, that how much soever the Moabites might boast, they could
not, by their boastings and their pride, so succeed that God should not
appear against them as a Judge. We have said already, that as the
Moabites had been long in a quiet state, what the Prophet denounced on
them, appeared at the first hearing as incredible. It is then by way of
anticipation that he says, that the Moabites were *proud*, did swell
with *haughtiness*, and breathed much *arrogance*, that, in short, they
manifested high and lofty spirits. When the Prophet says all this, and
adds, that nothing would avail them, we see that he meets those doubts
which might have possessed weak minds, so as to prevent them to believe
his prophecy.

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p7"></span>And when he uses the words, *We have
heard*, he not only means by report, but that the Moabites loudly
boasted, as it is usual with proud men; for they made, so to speak, a
bellowing, and sought, even by their tongues alone, to strike others
with terror. As then they proclaimed their wealth and their power, they
sought in a manner to shake the very air, so that all might tremble at
their voice alone. This seems to have been expressed by the Prophet,
when he said, *We have heard* In short, Jeremiah does not mean that the
report of the pride of Moab had spread abroad, as rumors often fly
respecting the haughtiness and boastings of men; but he intimates that
the Moabites were heralds of their own power, so that they spoke in
lofty terms of their own greatness, and thus their own tongues testified
of their haughtiness and arrogance.  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) And hence it was that the Prophet
enlarged on their pride; Moab *is very proud*, he says; *we have heard
his haughtiness, his pride and his arrogance*, (though it be the same
word,) *and the loftiness of his heart*, or, as we may say in Latin, *et
altos spiritus*, and his high sprits. It now follows —

<span id="ii.i.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p2"></span>**30**. I know his wrath, saith the
LORD; but *it shall* not *be* so; his lies shall not so effect *it*

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p3"></span>**30**. Ego cognovi, dicit Jehova,
insolentiam ejus; et mendacia ejus non rectitudo; non sic facient.

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p6"></span>This verse is variously explained, at
least the second clause. Some render it, “His indignation, and not what
is right;” then they add by itself, “his lies;” and lastly, “they have
not done rightly,” or as others, “they will not do anything fixed,”
which is more suitable, and comes near to the rendering which I have
given. But I will not here discuss other interpretations, or try at
large to disprove-them, but it is sufficient for us to understand the
real meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p7"></span>In the first place, God is here
introduced as saying, *I know his insolence* The pronoun <span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p7.1"></span>אני, *ani*, is emphatical, for in the last
verse the Prophet had said, that the boastings of Moab were a terror, as
they spoke loudly of their own strength and defences. As then they thus
with open mouths sounded forth their own praises, they filled all their
neighbors with terror; hence the Prophet said, *We have heard the pride
of Moab* Now God also on his part gives this answer, *I know*, he says,
*his insolence;* as though he had said, “The Moabites do not thus boast,
but that I am a witness; all these things ascend to my tribunal.”

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, still in the person
of God, *Not rectitude are his lies* By the word <span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p8.1"></span>עברתו, *obertu*, which some render, “his
indignation,” the Prophet means, I think, insolence. It signifies
properly excess, as it comes from <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p8.2"></span>עבר,
*ober*, to pass over. The noun is indeed often taken to express
indignation, because anger keeps within no limits, but is, as Horace
says, a momentary madness.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) But on
account of what the passage seems to require, I render it insolence, and
it is the most suitable word. And God having declared that the insolence
of Moab was seen by him, mentions also his *lies* The word <span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p9.2"></span>בדים, means branches of trees, and sometimes
sons or children, they being members of the community; and hence some
render it “sons” here, as though the Prophet had said, that after the
Moabites had been cut off, there would be none remaining to continue
their name in the world. As then there was to be no posterity to the
Moabites, they think that <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p9.3"></span>בדים,
*badim* here means sons or children. But this view cannot be admitted,
because we shall hereafter see that there was to be some residue to the
Moabites. We cannot then take <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p9.4"></span>בדים,
*badim*, but as referring to their vain boastings, for they were nothing
but lies.

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p10"></span>But we must consider what Jeremiah
says; the word <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p10.1"></span>כן, *ken*, means
right; and I take the two words as being in apposition, “His lies are
not right;” that is, there is no stability in his lies. For when an
apposition is explained, one of the words is turned to an adjective, or
a preposition is inserted: *Not* *right* then *are his lies*; that is,
in his lies there is no rectitude, or in his lies there is no stability.
But the rectitude of which the Prophet now speaks, refers not to justice
or equity, but to stability; and that it has this meaning may be
gathered from other places. Then he says, that the boastings which the
Moabites indulged in were vain, because God would not establish what
they thought, or as they commonly say, what they presumed.

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p11"></span>And then he adds the reason; the
particle <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p11.1"></span>כן, *ken*, is to be taken
here adverbially; it is an adverb of likeness, “so,” or thus, *they
shall not so do*; that is, as they had conceived in their minds. It is a
confirmation of the last clause; for why was there to be no stability in
their lies? because God would break down the Moabites, so that their
counsels would be vain, without any effect. We now then perceive the
meaning of the words. <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p11.2"></span>[Isa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p11.2"></span> uses nearly the same expressions, but he
does not add this confirmation, that they would not be able to do what
they intended. He only says, “there shall no rectitude be in their
boastings,” <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p11.3"></span>לא כן בדיו, *la ken
bediu*, having previously spoken of the loftiness of their heart and of
their ferocity and insolence; for he mentions the third word with the
other two.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p15"></span>Now this verse may be accommodated to
our use; whenever the ungodly indulge in boasting, and insolently
arrogate all things to themselves, let us not fear and tremble, but bear
in mind what the Prophet teaches us here, whose admonition is very
necessary; for he shews that this pride is in derision with God, and
that when the ungodly fulminate in a terrible manner, there will be no
effect to their lies. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p2"></span>**31**. Therefore will I howl for Moab,
and I will cry out for all Moab; *mine heart* shall mourn for the men of
Kirheres.

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p3"></span>**31**. Propterea super Moab ululabo,
et ad Moab totum (*hoc est*, penitus ad totam gentem) clamabo, meditabor
ad viros urbis testae.

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p6"></span>Some think the last word to be a proper
name, though, according to etymology, it is “the city of potsherd.” They
therefore give this rendering, “the strong city.” But Isaiah calls it
“Kir-hareseth,” <span id="ii.i.xxviii-p6.1"></span>קיר-הרשת; he extends
the word by adding a syllable to it; but the word, however, is the same.
Then he says, *I will think of the men of Kir-cheres* The word <span
id="ii.i.xxviii-p6.2"></span>הגה, *ege*, is properly to complain, to
whisper, to murmur; and hence some render the words not improperly, “I
will mutter to the men of the city of potsherd.”  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md)

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p9"></span>The Prophet does not relate here what
he would do, as I have before reminded you; but that he might represent
to the life the ruin of Moab, he mentions their howling, crying, and
complaints. He then says, I will howl, cry aloud, and with a trembling
voice complain, as those who are grievously oppressed with evils; at one
time they complain, cry aloud, and howl, and at another they mutter
inwardly, grumble and murmur. Thus the Prophet assumes the character of
such persons, in order that he might more fully set forth the extreme
calamity of that nation. He afterwards comes to particulars: —

<span id="ii.i.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.i.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p2"></span>**32**. O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for
thee with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they
reach *even* to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thy
summer-fruits and upon thy vintage.

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p3"></span>**32**. A fletu Jaezer flebo (*vel*, a
planctu plangam) tibi (*id est*, super to) vitis Sibmah; propagines tuae
penetrarunt ultra mare (trajecerunt mare,) usque ad mare Jaezer (*hoc
est*, *cives Jaezer*, *vel propagines*) attigerunt; super aestivales
(*vel*, aestivos) fructus tuos (*vel*, messes *proprie*,) et super
vindemias tuas irruit vastator.

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p6"></span>Here the Prophet shews more clearly what
he had said generally before, that Sibmah would weep for her vines,
after having wept for Jazer. These were cities in the land of Moab, as
it appears from other places. Some give this rendering, “In comparison
with the weeping” or mourning, etc.; and <span
id="ii.i.xxix-p6.1"></span>מן, *men*, as it is well known, has this
meaning; but as <span id="ii.i.xxix-p6.2"></span>ב, *beth*, “in
weeping,” is adopted by Isaiah, instead of <span
id="ii.i.xxix-p6.3"></span>מן, *men*, there is no doubt but that the
Prophet means a continued mourning, when he says, *From* (or with) *the
weeping of Jazer I will weep for thee, vine of Sibmah*; that is, there
will be no end to weeping; for after the Moabites had mourned for the
destruction of the city Jazer, a new cause of weeping would arise, for
other cities would be destroyed, and especially Sibmah.

<span id="ii.i.xxix-p7"></span>Now the region of Sibmah was very
fertile, especially on account of the abundance of vines. Then the
Prophet includes the whole wealth of that city under the word *vine*;
nay, he designates the citizens as its shoots or young branches. *I will
weep*, he says, “*over thee, the vine* of the vine-bearing region of
*Sibmah*; for *thy shoots*, that is, thy wealth, *have passed over the
sea*, and the citizens of Jazer, who were thy neighbors.” He afterwards
repeats respecting the city of Jazer what he had said, because its
calamity was connected with the other, and was the same. For God had
involved these two cities in the same destruction. *Jazer* then *came
even to the sea.* Now *a waster rushed in*: Isaiah has shouting, <span
id="ii.i.xxix-p7.1"></span>הידד, *eidad*, which is added presently here;
but the word there has quite a different meaning, that all rejoicing
would cease. The word here is <span id="ii.i.xxix-p7.2"></span>שדד,
*shidad*, and means a waster or spoiler. *A waster* then *has fallen*,
that is, has come with great irresistible force, on thy vintages and
harvests; that is, that he may scatter and consume all things. It
follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033.md)<span id="ii.i.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p2"></span>**33** And joy and gladness is taken from
the plentiful field, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine
to fail from the winepresses: none shall tread with shouting; *their*
shouting *shall be* no shouting.

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p3"></span>**33**. Et tolletur laetitia et exultatio
ab agro fertili (*neque enim est hic proprium loci nomen*; *scio quidem
montem Carmelum esse celebrem*, *sed hic accipitur appellative*, *quia
agitur de regione Moab*; *sicut explicative continuo post additur
proprium nomen regionis*,) a terra Moab (*inquit Propheta*,) et vinum e
torcularibus cessare faciam (*loquitur adhuc in persona Dei*,) non
calcabit cum cantico, cantico, non erit canticum.

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p6"></span>He pursues the same metaphor or
comparison; for he says that all places would be laid waste and
desolate, which before had been valuable and highly regarded on account
of their fruitfulness. *Cease* then *shall all rejoicing from the land
of Moab*, however fruitful it might have been. And then he adds, *I will
make the wine to cease from the presses*; that is, no one shall press
the grapes, that from them the wine may flow. And he adds, <span
id="ii.i.xxx-p6.1"></span>הידד הידד, *eidad*, *eidad*, *shouting,
shouting, for there will be no shouting* Some render <span
id="ii.i.xxx-p6.2"></span>הידד, *eidad*, “*signal*,” *celeuma*, (*vel
celeusma*,) a Greek word, but used also in Latin: <span
id="ii.i.xxx-p6.3"></span>κέλευμα is said by the Greeks to be the
shouting of sailors, especially when they drive to the shore; they then
rouse one another in rowing, and also congratulate one another, because
they are nigh to land; for to see the harbor is a cause of special joy
to sailors, as though it were a restoration to life and safety. But this
word <span id="ii.i.xxx-p6.4"></span>κέλευμα is applied to other things,
as it may be said that reapers sing a *celeusma* when they finish their
work. The vine-dressers had also their songs; and they were sung by
heathen nations, as Virgil says. “Now the worn-out vine-dresser sings at
the extreme rows of vines.”  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) By
extreme rows or ranks he seems to mean the extreme parts of the vines;
for extreme rows (*antes*) are properly prominences or overhanging
stones. Now when they had come to the end, they sang and congratulated
themselves as to the vintage. It was then a common custom among all
nations.

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p8"></span>The Prophet, now alluding to this, says,
“They who shall tread in the winepress shall not be as usual joyful, so
as to have their shouting, shouting, <span
id="ii.i.xxx-p8.1"></span>הידד הידד, *eidad*, *eidad*.” He repeats the
word, because men greatly exult at the vintage, and are excessive in
their rejoicings. This is the reason why the Prophet mentions the word
twice. He then adds, *there shall be no shouting*, <span
id="ii.i.xxx-p8.2"></span>לא הידד, *la eidad*, because there would be no
vineyards. Isaiah uses other expressions, but the meaning is the same.
It now follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034.md)<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p2"></span>**34**. From the cry of Heshbon *even*
unto Elealeh, *and even* unto Jahaz, have they uttered their voice, from
Zoar *even* unto Horonaim, *as* an heifer of three years old: for the
waters also of Nimrim shall be desolate.

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p3"></span>**34**. A clamore Hesebon usque ad
Elealeh, ad Jahaes edent (ediderunt, *ad verbum*) vocem suam; a Zoar ad
Choronaim vitula triennis (*aut*, vitulam triennem;) quia etiam aquae
Nimrim in vastationem erunt (in ariditatem *scilicet*.)

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p6"></span>He continues the same subject; and by
many and various expressions confirms the same thing, in order that the
faithful might know that the destruction of the Moabites was really
foretold, and that they might feel more assured that God announced
nothing but what he would presently execute.

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p7"></span>*At the cry of Heshbon* even to Elealeh
they shall *send forth their voice.* He means, as before, that there
would be continued cryings and howlings sounding forth from every part,
and spreading through every region. He then adds, *From Zoar to
Horonaim* We must bear in mind the situations of these cities; but we
may suppose that the Prophet chose those cities which were opposite to
each other. Then from one corner to the other continual crying would be
heard, because there would be everywhere desolation and ruin. And then
he comes to another part, from one city even to another there would be a
similar cry. In short, he shews that no part in the whole land of Moab
would be in a quiet state and free from miseries. This is the meaning.

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p8"></span>But he compares the whole land of Moab,
or the city Horonaim, to an heifer three years old, on account of its
lasciviousness. Some restrict the comparison to the city Horonaim, for
they read the words in apposition, “to Heronaim, an heifer three years
old,” putting the last words in the accusative case: but others read
them apart, “an heifer three years old” is Moab. And I prefer this
construction, because he afterwards adds another city, even Nimrim. As,
however, it is a matter of no great moment, I will not contend with any
one who may take the other view. Whether then it be one city or the
whole country, it is compared to *an heifer three years old*, because
that nation had long luxuriated in its own pleasures. Now, an heifer
three years old, as it is well known, frisks and leaps, because it knows
not what it is to fear the yoke; and then it is not worn out, as the
case is with cows, who are weakened by having often brought forth young;
and further, the milk that is taken from them exhausts their strength.
But all heifer three years old is in her rigor and prime. In short, the
Prophet intimates that the Moabites lived well, and as it were
unrestrained, for they had long exulted in their abundance; and as they
had plenty of wine and bread, they gave themselves up to luxury.  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p10"></span>He then adds, *Surely even the waters of
Nimrim shall be a desolation* Some think Nimrim to have been a city, and
it is elsewhere called Nimra. Its waters are also mentioned by Isaiah,
as the brooks of the willows. We may hence conclude that these waters
were perpetual and flowed continually. But the Prophet speaks
metaphorically as before, for the meaning is, that nothing would be so
safe in the land of Moab as not to be destroyed, that nothing would be
so fruitful as not to be dried up. Then by *the waters of Nimrim* he
means the abundance which was in the whole country. For the Chaldeans
did not dry up that river or those lakes, for it is certainly unknown
whether there was a river there or a lake. But it is probable that there
was there abundance of waters, which were not dried up by the coming of
an hostile army; but, as I have said, he shews by these figurative
expressions that the whole land of Moab would be laid waste. It follows
—

<span id="ii.i.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p2"></span>**35**. Moreover I will cause to cease
in Moab, saith the LORD, him that offereth in the high places, and him
that burneth incense to his gods.

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p3"></span>**35**. Et cessare faciam (*id est*
profligabo) ex Moab, inquit Jehova, eum qui offert in excelso, et qui
adolet (*aut*, suffitum facit) diis suis.

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet expresses what
he had before referred to, that God would become in such a way the
avenger of the pride and cruelty of the Moabites as to punish them for
their superstitions. They had descended from a pious father, for they
were the posterity of Lot; but they had renounced the worship of the
only true God, and had defiled themselves with the pollutions of
heathens. Justly then does God declare that he would be the avenger of
idolatry, while executing punishment on the pride and cruelty of the
Moabites.

<span id="ii.i.xxxii-p7"></span>Now this passage, as innumerable others,
clearly shews that idolatry and all profanation of divine worship,
cannot finally escape punishment. God may indeed for a time connive at
it, but he must necessarily at last appear as the vindicator of his own
glory in punishing superstitions. But, if he spared not the Moabites, to
whom the law had not, been given, and who had been corrupted through
many long years, how shall they now escape unpunished, to whom God’s
Word is daily propounded, and in whose ears it sounds? Let, us then
remember that superstitions cannot be endured, for God will at length
vindicate his own glory with regard to these abominations; for every
superstition is nothing less than a profanation of God’s glory, which is
thus transferred to idols and vain inventions.

<span id="ii.i.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.i.xxxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
hast once deigned to receive us under thy protection, we may have thee
as our defense against our enemies, and that the more cruel and
ferocious they become, and that the more heavily thou chastisest them,
we may thus find that thou carest for our salvation, and flee also to
thee with greater confidence, and that when we have experienced thy
mercy, we may more readily give thee continual thanks, through Christ
Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.i.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxiv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-second

<span id="ii.i.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md)<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p2"></span>**36**. Therefore mine heart shall sound
for Moab like pipes, and mine heart shall sound like pipes for the men
of Kirheres: because the riches *that* he hath gotten are perished.

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p3"></span>**36**. Propterea cor meum propter Moab
tanquam tibiae resonabit, et cor meum ad viros Kir-cheres (*vel*, urbis
testaceae, *ut dictum fuit*) sicuti tibiae resonabit, quoniam thesaurus
quem fecerunt, perierunt (*ad verbum est*, residuum fecit, perierunt;
*sed loquitur de thesauris reconditis*, *quemadmodum patet ex simili
loco Isaiae*, *capite* 15.)

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, as it has been before
stated, does not mourn the calamity of the people of Moab, but assumes
the character of others, so that the event might appear more evident, it
being set as it were before our eyes; for as we have said, the wealth of
the Moabites was so great at that time, that it dazzled the eyes of all.
It was then difficult for the faithful to form an idea of this vengeance
of God, therefore the Prophet transfers to himself the feelings of
others, and relates what the Moabites would do, when God had so
grievously afflicted them.

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p7"></span>*My heart*, he says, *shall sound like
pipes* Some think that mournful pipes are meant, but I know not whether
or not they were instruments of this kind; and there are those who think
that <span id="ii.i.xxxv-p7.1"></span>חללים, *chellim*, were bag-pipes,
but what is too refined I leave. The Prophet simply means that such
would be the trepidation, that the hearts of the Moabites would make a
noise like pipes. He repeats the same thing in different words, that his
*heart* would *make a noise,* or sound, *for the men of Kir-heres*, of
which city we spoke yesterday.

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p8"></span>He now adds, *for the residue which they
have made*, or which Moab has made, for the verb is in the singular
number; and then, *they have perished,* where also there is a change of
number; but the reference is to the word “residue,” <span
id="ii.i.xxxv-p8.1"></span>יתרת, *iteret*, which included hidden
treasures, as we have stated.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md)
Whatever then the Moabites had gained for themselves, and whatever they
thought would be always safe, the Prophet declares that it would perish.
Isaiah adds, “their substance,” <span id="ii.i.xxxv-p11.2"></span>פקותם,
*pekotem*, and says, that they would carry it to the willows, that is,
to deserted places; as though he had said, that all the wealth of the
Moabites would be scattered, as though it were, as they say, a thing
forsaken. It now follows —

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p2"></span>**37**. For every head *shall be* bald,
and every beard clipped: upon all the hands *shall be* cuttings, and
upon the loins sackcloth.

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p3"></span>**37**. Quia omni capiti calvitium, et
omni barbae rasura (*ad* *verbum* diminutio; ערג *significat diminuere*,
*sed hic accipitur*, *pro* *rasura*,) et super omnes manus incisiones,
et super lumbos saccus.

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p6"></span>The Prophet describes at large a very
great mourning. They were wont in great sorrow to pull off their hair,
to shave their beard, and to put on sackcloth, or to gird it round their
loins, and also to cut their hands with a knife or with their nails. As
these things were signs of grief; Jeremiah puts them all together, in
order to show that the calamity of Moab would not be common, but what
would cause to the whole people extreme lamentation. *They shall make
bald*, he says, *their heads, their beard they shall pull off*, or
shave; for the word, to diminish, may signify either. Then he adds, the
*incisions in the hands*; they shall tear their faces and their hands
with their nails, or as some say, with a knife or a razor. As to
sackcloth, it was also a sign of mourning. It is indeed certain that it
was formerly the practice for men, as though it was innate in human
nature, in great calamities to spread ashes on the head and to put on
sackloth. But he has added other excesses which are not very congenial
to nature, for it is not agreeable to humanity to pull off the beard, to
make bald the head, or to tear the hands and the face with the nails.
These things show excesses, suitable neither to men nor to women, — not
to women on the ground of modesty, nor to men on the ground of manliness
and strength of mind.

<span id="ii.i.xxxvi-p7"></span>But mankind never control themselves,
and whether they mourn or rejoice, they are ever led away to excesses,
observing no moderation. There was also another evil connected with
sackcloth and ashes; for when it was God’s design to lead men by these
symbols to humble themselves, to consider their sins and to flee to his
mercy, they were diverted to another end, even that he who mourned might
appear miserable to others, and make a display of his weeping and tears.
In short, besides excess, there was also this common evil, even
hypocrisy. For men ever turn aside to what is vain, and dissemble in all
things. But in this place there is no reason to dispute about mourning,
for the Prophet means only that the Moabites would become most
miserable, exhibiting all the symptoms of sorrow. It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#038.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p2"></span>**38** *There shall be* lamentation
generally upon all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof:
for I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein *is* no pleasure, saith the
LORD.

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p3"></span>**38**. Super omnia tecta Moab, et in
compitis ejus omnino planctus (*hoc est*, ubique; <span
id="ii.i.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>כלה *sumitur adverbialiter*,) quoniam
confregi Moab tanquam vas quod non est in pretio (*ad verbum*, non
desiderium in ipso, *tanquam vas quod contemnitur*, *quod non
appetitur*,) dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p6"></span>The Prophet at the beginning of the
verse continues the same subject, that the Moabites would weep and
lament throughout *all their houses* and in *all their streets* The
reason is added in the second clause, because God would bring a severe
judgment on that nation.

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p7"></span>By saying that there would be
*lamentation on all the roofs*, he refers to what was customary at that
time, for they had their walks on the roofs or tops of their houses.
Then he says, that the Moabites, in order to be more seen and to excite
pity, would ascend on the roofs, and cry, howl, and lament there. But we
must observe what is added, that the calamity would come from God; for
it would not have been sufficient to foretell adversity, except this was
added, that God ascended his tribunal to execute his judgments when he
thus chastised the people. He also compares the people of Moab to a
*despised vessel,* in order to make a distinction between God’s children
and aliens; for God does also chastise his own people when they sin, but
he ceases not to love them and to regard them as precious. Now he says
that Moab would be a vessel despised and rejected.  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) It now follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p2"></span>**39**. They shall howl, *saying,* How
is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall
Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p3"></span>**39**. Quomodo contritus est?
ululabunt (alii vertunt, ulularunt:) quomodo vertit cervicem Moab;
pudefactus est; et fuit Moab in derisum, et in terrorem omnibus qui sunt
in circuitu.

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p6"></span>The Prophet still speaks in the person
of others, and according to their feelings and not his own. He then
says, that *howling*, they would say, through wonder, *How is it that
Moab has been so broken*, that all had turned their backs, that Moab had
become ashamed? He indirectly intimates, that though no one could then
know God’s judgment, which he now foretells, yet God would by the event
prove that he had said nothing but in earnest. This wonder then was
expressed for this purpose, that the Jews might know, that though the
calamity of Moab would fill all with astonishment, and make them cry out
as respecting an extraordinary thing, “What can this mean?” yet the
fulfillment of his prophecy would be certain.

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p7"></span>This is the meaning of the words when
he says, *Howling, they will cry out, How has Moab been broken? and how
has he turned his neck,* or as they say, his back? *Moab is ashamed*;
and then, *he is made a derision*, which we have observed before. He
adds, *a terror*, though some read, “a bruising;” but more suitable is
fear or terror. For the Prophet means, that Moab would be to others a
derision, and that he would be to others a dread, being an example of
God’s awful judgment.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) And he says
that he would be a *terror to all around*, that is, to the whole
surrounding country, as well as a laughter and a derision. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p2"></span>**40**. For thus saith the LORD, Behold,
he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over Moab.

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p3"></span>**40**. Quia sic dicit Jehova, Ecce
tanquam aquila volabit, et expandet alas suas super Moab.

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p6"></span>Here again he introduces God’s name, for
it was necessary to confirm an incredible prophecy by his authority.
“God is he,” he says, “who declares that enemies will come, who will fly
through all the land of Moab.” He now compares the Chaldeans to eagles;
and there is here a name understood which is not expressed. *Fly will he
like an eagle*, that is, the king of Babylon with his army.

<span id="ii.i.xxxix-p7"></span>The sum of what is said then is, that
however widely extended might be the country of Moab, yet there would be
no corner into which the Chaldeans would not penetrate, because they
would nearly equal the eagles in swiftness. Hence he adds, *They will
extend their wings*, not to cherish, as eagles spread their wings over
their young ones; but by extension he means, that they would seize on
all the land of Moab; so that hiding places would be sought in vain,
because the Chaldeans would from one part to another take possession of
every place, however remote the Moabites might think it to be, and
however they might hope its distance would render it safe. He afterwards
adds, —

<span id="ii.i.xl"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xl-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xl-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#041.md)<span id="ii.i.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xl-p2"></span>**41**. Kerioth is taken, and the strong
holds are surprised, and the mighty men’s hearts in Moab at that day
shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

<span id="ii.i.xl-p3"></span>**41**. Captae sunt urbes (*est hic etiam
mutatio numeri*, *sed dura esset translatio ad verbum*, *ideo satis est
sensum tenere*; captae *ergo* sunt urbes, *hoc est*, unaquaeque urbs
capta est, *deinde*,) arces (*vel*, propugnacula) comprehensa sunt (*est
iterum mutatio numeri*,) et fuit cor virorum Moab in die illa tanquam
cor mulieris quae angitur (*vel*, premitur anxietate.)

<span id="ii.i.xl-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xl-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xl-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xl-p6"></span>I have already reminded you, that the
Prophet is not using too many words in this extended discourse, for it
was necessary to confirm at large what all would have otherwise
rejected. He then says, that *the cities of Moab were taken,* that
*strongholds were seized* He mentions these things expressly, because
the country of Moab thought that it was defended by cities and
strongholds; and they thus thought, “Should the Chaldeans come and make
an irruption, there are many cities who will oppose them; they will then
have to spend much time in overcoming these obstacles. It may then so
happen, that being broken down with fatigue they will return to their
own country, and we shall recover what we may have lost.” With this
confidence then the Moabites deceived themselves, when they looked on
their well fortified cities and strongholds. For this reason the Prophet
now says, *Taken are the cities, and seized on are the strongholds*
 <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)

<span id="ii.i.xl-p10"></span>There was another thing of which the
Moabites boasted, that they possessed military valor; and yet they had
not of late made a trial of their strength, as they had been indulging
themselves in sloth and pleasures. But as they had formerly performed
deeds worthy of being remembered, they despised, as I have said, their
enemies, arrogating to themselves the credit of great valor. The
Prophet, on the other hand, declares that their courage would vanish
away: *The heart*, he says*, of the men of Moab shall become effeminate
in that day*, softer than the heart of a woman, when oppressed with
evils. It might have appeared a complete comparison, when he said that
the men of Moab would be soft and effeminate; but he wished to express
something more, and hence he added, that they would become softer than
women when in great trouble. And by these words he intimates, that it is
in God’s power to melt the hearts of men, and to break down their
fierceness, so that they who were like lions are made like does. And
this ought to be carefully noticed; because courage is not only a
special gift, but it is also necessary that God should daily and
constantly strengthen those whom he has once made brave; otherwise they
who are courageous above others will soon lose their valor. It follows,
—

<span id="ii.i.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xli-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xli-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#042.md)<span id="ii.i.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xli-p2"></span>**42**. And Moab shall be destroyed from
*being* a people, because he hath magnified *himself* against the LORD.

<span id="ii.i.xli-p3"></span>**42**. Et contritus est (perditus,
excisus) Moab, ut non sit populus; quia adversus Jehovam sese extulit
(magnificatus est., *ad verbum*.)

<span id="ii.i.xli-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xli-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xli-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xli-p6"></span>He repeats what we have before observed,
that the calamity of Moab would be a just reward for his pride and
indeed his sacrilege. The Prophet then says that though God’s vengeance
might seem extremely grievous, yet it was most just, because the
Moabites had not only been cruel against their neighbors, but also
reproachful against God. Here, then, he condemns them first for cruelty,
and then for their impious pride, *because they exalted themselves
against God*

<span id="ii.i.xli-p7"></span>But we must bear in mind the reason
noticed before; for the Moabites did not openly boast that they were
equal or superior to God, but when they raised their crests against
God’s people, they became contumelious against God himself, who had
promised to be the protector and the Father of his people. As then the
Moabites thus despised the protection and promise of God, they are here
justly condemned by the Prophet, that they *exalted themselves against
God* And this ought to be carefully noticed, so that we may not do any
wrong to the godly, for God will at length show that he is injured in
their persons. And then also no common consolation may be hence derived,
that all who molest us are carrying on war against God, and that all who
injure us act sacrilegiously towards him. For the Prophet has before
explained how the Moabites gloried against God, even because they
regarded the children of Israel with derision. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043.md)<span
id="ii.i.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p2"></span>**43**. Fear, and the pit, and the snare,
*shall be* upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p3"></span>**43**. Terror et fovea et laqueus super
to, habitator Moab, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p4"></span>**44**. He that fleeth from the fear
shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be
taken in the snare: for I will bring upon it, *even* upon Moab, the year
of their visitation, saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p5"></span>**44**. Qui fugerit a facie terroris
incidet in foveam; et qui ascenderit e fovea laqueo capietur; quoniam
adducam super eam, super Moab, annum visitationis ipsorum, dicit Jehova.

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p7"></span><span id="ii.i.xlii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p8"></span>By these words the Prophet skews, that
though the Moabites should adopt many means of escape, yet they should
be taken, for God’s hand would everywhere entrap them. He mentions
*terror* first, then the *pit*, and thirdly, the *snare*,  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) that is, “Thou wilt be so frightened that
terror will compel thee to flee; but when thou fleest, pits will be in
the way into which thou wilt fall: but if thou wilt rise from the pit,
snares will surround thee, and thou wilt be taken.” We then see that by
these similitudes nothing else is meant but God’s judgment, which
impended over the Moabites, so that it could by no means be averted by
them; for no ways could be found out by which they could escape, because
fear would force them to flee, and would, as it is usually the case,
deprive them of mind and thought, and thus they would be driven here and
there, and could not move from any place without meeting with a pit,
and, as it has been said, after the pit there would be the snare.

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p10"></span><span id="ii.i.xlii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p11"></span>Now all this has not been expressed
without reason, because we know with how many flatteries men are wont to
delude themselves when God summons them to judgment; for they
immediately look around here and there, and promise themselves impunity,
and then they hope for light punishment, as though they were at peace
with God. But the unbelieving harden themselves, as Isaiah says, as
though they had made a covenant with death and a compact with hell.
(<span id="ii.i.xlii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.i.xlii-p11.1"></span>.) As, then, the wicked set up security in
opposition to God, the Prophet here shews that there are many ways in
his hand, by which he can take the fugitives, and those who seem to
think that they can escape through their own astuteness; and hence he
said, *He who flees from terror*, that is, from present danger, *shall
fall into the pit*, that is, when the Moabites shall now think
themselves secure, they shall meet with new dangers, and new deaths will
surround them.

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p12"></span>But we must notice what is added at the
end of the verse, *Because I will bring on Moab the year of their
visitation* Here God sustains the minds of the godly, that they might
not faint on account of long delay. As, then, the faithful might have
been worn out with weariness while God prolonged the time as to the
Moabites, the Prophet says, “Come at length shall the year of their
visitation.” For as it has been stated elsewhere, by this mode of
speaking God intimates that though he for a time passes by things and
connives at them, he will at length show himself to be the judge of the
world. We would have God ever to act in haste; and hence, when he
exhorts us to patience, all our feelings rebel. This happens, because we
do not consider that the fitness of times is determined by his will.
Hence he speaks now of *the year of visitation*, as though he had said,
“I may for a time appear to disregard human affairs and to neglect my
own, while my people are cruelly oppressed by the wicked; but the time
of visitation will come.” For by this word “visitation,” God means that
there are changes, or, as they commonly say, revolutions, which are
fixed and certain. We now then understand the design of God, when he
says, that he would bring a visitation on the Moabites. It follows, —

<span id="ii.i.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xliii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045.md)<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p2"></span>**45**. They that fled stood under the
shadow of Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shall come forth out
of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the
corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p3"></span>**45**. In umbra Hesbon steterunt a
fortitudine (*aut*, violentia) fugientes; quia ignis egressus est ex
Hesbon, et flamma e medio Sion, et vorabit angulum Moab, et extremitatem
et verticem filiorum tumultus.

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xliii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p6"></span>He confirms what is said in the last
verse, that the Moabites would in vain resort to their strongest cities,
even *Heshbon* and *Sihon*; because a flame would thence break forth,
which would consume the whole land. We hence see that God took away from
the Moabites all their vain confidences, and showed that no defences
could stand against his power, when once he rose up for judgment.

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p7"></span>*The fleers*, he says, *shall stand
under the shadow of Heshbon*, thinking that there would be a safe refuge
in that city, and in others.  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) But
the particle <span id="ii.i.xliii-p8.2"></span>כי, *ki*, seems not to me
to be here causal, but rather an affirmative, or even an adversative;
*but*, or *surely a fire has gone forth from Heshbon, and a flame from
Sihon* The Prophet, I doubt not, borrowed these words from Moses, for he
says in <span id="ii.i.xliii-p8.3"></span>[Nu
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p8.3"></span>, that a fire had gone forth from Heshbon;
and there the expression is given as an old proverb. There is no doubt
but that enemies had triumphed over that city when it was taken; for
that whole song spoken by Moses is ironical, and in saying that fire had
gone forth, he referred to their counsels, for they thought that city
sufficiently strong against enemies. Now the Prophet says, that what had
been formerly said of Heshbon would be again fulfilled, that it would
be, as it were, the beginning of the fire. The meaning then, as I think,
is, that the Moabites indeed thought, that they would have a quiet and
agreeable shadow under the protection of the city Heshbon, and of the
city Sihon; but what was to be? even that these two cities would become,
as it were, the beginnings of the fire. How, or in what way? even
because the probability is, that there those counsels were taken which
provoked the Chaldeans. We indeed know that riches and power always
produce haughtiness and false confidence in men; for in villages and
small towns wars are not contrived; but the great cities gather the wood
and kindle the fire; and the fire afterwards spreads and pervades the
whole land.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md)

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p10"></span>This, then, is what our Prophet means,
when he says, that *fire went forth from Heshbon*, even contrary to the
expectation of the people, for they thought that were all things to go
to ruin, there yet would be safety for them in that city: *go forth*, he
says, *shall fire* from the city *Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of
Sihon, and it shall consume the corner of Moab*, and all his
extremities; for by <span id="ii.i.xliii-p10.1"></span>קרקר, *kadkad*,
he means all parts. Extremity is elsewhere taken for a part; but he does
not mean that fire would come to all parts or extreme corners, only as
it were to touch them slightly: but he intimates that the whole land
would be consumed by this fire; it would thus spread itself to its very
extremities.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p15"></span>But as I have already said, the Prophet
alludes to that old saying mentioned by Moses, (<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p15.1"></span>[Num.
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p15.1"></span>.) Further, there is no doubt but that
Heshbon and Sihon were then in the possession of that nation; for they
had taken away many cities from the Israelites, and thus the children of
Israel had been reduced to narrower limits. At length the tribe of Judah
alone remained after the overthrow of the kingdom of Israel. When they
were driven into Chaldea, it was an easy thing for the Moabites to make
that their own which belonged to no one. Besides, as they had helped the
Chaldeans and betrayed that miserable people, and had thus acted
perfidiously towards their brethren, a reward was given to them. But
when at length they themselves dreaded the power of the Babylonian
monarchy, they began to change their minds, and endeavored to obstruct
the farther progress of the Chaldeans. Hence then a war was
contemplated, and the occasion was given. He then speaks of Heshbon and
Sihon as chief cities; and there is no doubt but that Sihon derived its
name from a king who ruled there. For we know that there was a king
bearing this name; but as he speaks here of a place, it is probable,
that the king’s name was given to the city in order to commemorate it.

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p16"></span>He at length adds, that this *fire* and
*flame* would devour the *top of the head of the sons of Saon,* or
tumult. But he calls the Moabites tumultuous, because they before made a
great noise, and were dreaded by their neighbors. As then all their
neighbors had been frightened, in a manner, by their voice alone, he
calls them sons of tumult, or tumultuous men, from the effect produced.
It follows —

<span id="ii.i.xliv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.xliv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046.md)<span id="ii.i.xliv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p2"></span>**46**. Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the
people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy
daughters captives.

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p3"></span>**46**. Vae tibi Moab! periit populus
Chamos, quia tracti sunt (*vel*, rapti) filii tui in captivitatem, et
filiae tuae in exilium.

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xliv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, as he comes to the end
of his prophecy, suddenly exclaims, *Woe to thee*! as though he had
said, that words failed him to express the grievousness of God’s
vengeance. There is then more force in this single expression, than if
he had at large described the miseries of that nation. He then adds,
*The people of Chemosh have perished* The Prophet again intimates, that
the Moabites vainly confided in their idol, Chemosh; they thought that
there would be a sure safety to them from their god, who was, as they
commonly say, a tutelar god. But the Prophet says, that their
superstition would avail them nothing, for they and their idol would
perish together. He exults over this fictitious god, that on the other
hand he might extol the power of the only true God. For there is here an
implied contrast between the God of Israel and Chemosh whom the Moabites
worshipped.

<span id="ii.i.xliv-p7"></span>He then adds, *Thy sons and thy daughters
shall be carried away into captivity* The Prophet does not seem here to
continue the same subject; for he had said before that ruin or
destruction was coming on the Moabites, but he now mitigates that
punishment, and speaks only of exile. But as captivity is like death, as
it abolishes the name of a nation, he speaks correctly and suitably. And
then we must observe, that God, for a time, so executed his vengeance on
the Moabites, that he left them some hope as to the future, according to
what follows in the last verse —

<span id="ii.i.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlv-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047.md)<span id="ii.i.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlv-p2"></span>**47**. Yet will I bring again the
captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the LORD. Thus far *is* the
judgment of Moab.

<span id="ii.i.xlv-p3"></span>**47**. Et reducam captivitatem Moab in
fine dierum (*hoc est*, post longum tempus,) dicit Jehova. Hactenus
judicium Moab.

<span id="ii.i.xlv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.xlv-p5"></span><span id="ii.i.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlv-p6"></span>Here, as we see, God gives place to his
mercy, so that the Moabites should not wholly perish. At the same time,
things which seem to be contrary agree together, even that destruction
was nigh the people of Moab, and yet that some would remain alive, who
would afterwards renew the name of the nation, as it was God’s purpose
to restore the Moabites to their former state. These things, as I have
said, seem inconsistent, and yet they may be easily reconciled; for it
was God’s will so to destroy the Moabites, that those who died might not
be without hope; and then, those who remained alive were not deemed to
be among the living, but in exile they were like the dead. God, indeed,
ever supported the godly with hope, even when they were driven into
Babylon: but as to the Moabites, the living as well as the dead, had no
hope. Why, then, was this promise given? not for the sake of the
Moabites; but that the Jews might feel assured that God would at length
be propitious to them; he promises pardon to the Moabites as it were
accidentally, so to speak, and thus unavowedly stretches forth his hand
to them, but with a design through this mercy to give to the Israelites
a taste of his paternal favor. What remains we must reserve for the
lecture tomorrow.

<span id="ii.i.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.i.xlvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou wert
formerly pleased to extend thy mercy to aliens, who were wholly
estranged from thee, that the children of Abraham, whom thou didst
adopt, might hence have a hope of deliverance, — O grant, that we may
also, at this day, cast our eyes on the many proofs of thy goodness,
manifested towards the ungodly and the unworthy, so as to make an
application for our own benefit, and never to doubt but that however
miserable we may be, thou wilt yet be ever propitious to us, since thou
hast deigned to choose us for thy peculiar people, and hast promised to
be ever our God and Father in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.i.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlvii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-Third

<span id="ii.i.xlvii-p2"></span>We began in our last lecture to explain
what the Prophet has said of the restoration of Moab; and we said that
some hope of mercy to the unworthy is left here. For though they had in
various ways provoked the wrath of God, yet he was unwilling wholly to
destroy them; and from that nation also Christ, the Redeemer of the
world, derived his origin. Here, then, we have a memorable instance of
God’s favor, that he did not wholly obliterate that nation, which yet
had deserved extreme punishment. We said further, that it was, as it
were, accidental that the Prophet promised favor to the Moabites; for we
know that the people of Israel were then a people distinct from other
nations. God then so disposed of his favor, that when a few drops came
to heathens, it was, as it were, adventitious. For it was not his will
to cast indiscriminately to all the bread which he had designed for his
own children, as Christ also says, that it is not right that the
children’s bread should be given to dogs. (<span
id="ii.i.xlvii-p2.1"></span>[Mt
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.i.xlvii-p2.1"></span>.) God, however, designed to show some
preludes of his mercy towards alien nations, when he so directed the
promises of salvation to his chosen people as not wholly to exclude the
heathens, as we have an example here in the Moabites. We shall hereafter
see the same as to the Ammonites. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc21002.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="ii.i.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p9"></span> All the versions, except the *Syriac,*
which *Calvin* has followed, have “to Moab,” and connect the words with
the following, that is, “Jehovah says thus to Moab.” The best version
is, as given by *Blayney* and *Henderson,* “concerning Moab, thus
saith,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc21002.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="ii.i.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p10"></span> Some give this rendering, “Alas! no Nebo;”
it had ceased to exist, and the reason is given, “for it is laid waste.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc21002.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="ii.i.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p11"></span> Neither the *Vulg.* nor the *Syr.* gives
this as a proper name, nor is there any such place found elsewhere.
*Blayney* renders it “the high fortress,” agreeably with the *Vulg.,
Syr.,* and the *Targ.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc21002.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p7.6"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p8"></span> None of the versions renders this a proper
name, but as a participle from the verb which follows, and no such place
is mentioned elsewhere. They must have read <span
id="ii.i.ii-p8.1"></span>מרמה, instead of <span
id="ii.i.ii-p8.2"></span>מדמן. Then the version would be,

<span id="ii.i.ii-p9"></span>Even silenced thou shalt be silenced,  
After thee shall go the sword.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p10"></span>To be silenced, in the language of the
prophets, is to be subdued. See <span id="ii.i.ii-p10.1"></span>[Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p10.1"></span>,
when the same thing is said of Moab. The word silence forms a contrast
with the boasting of Moab mentioned at the beginning of the verse. After
being subdued and removed elsewhere, still the sword would follow Moab.
— Ed.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc21002.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="ii.i.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv-p7"></span> Here all the versions and the *Targum*
differ. The *Vulg.* only has “little ones;” the *Syr.* has “her poor,”
the *Sept.* take “Zoar” to be intended, according to <span
id="ii.i.iv-p7.1"></span>[Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.i.iv-p7.1"></span>,
the word <span id="ii.i.iv-p7.2"></span>צוערה, instead of <span
id="ii.i.iv-p7.3"></span>צעוריה. The passage in Isaiah confirms this
reading, though not found in any copies. Then the verse would read thus,
—

<span id="ii.i.iv-p8"></span>Broken is Moab, They made the cry heard at
Zoar.

<span id="ii.i.iv-p9"></span>This is substantially the version of
*Venema.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc21002.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="ii.i.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.v-p10"></span> The word *enemies* is given only by the
*Vulg.;* the other versions render it “distress.” The literal rendering
of the verse is, —

<span id="ii.i.v-p11"></span>For *in* the ascent to Luhith,  
With weeping ascends weeping;  
For in the descent to Heronaim,  
The distress of the cry of ruin have they heard.

<span id="ii.i.v-p12"></span>This version materially corresponds with
<span id="ii.i.v-p12.1"></span>[Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.i.v-p12.1"></span>.
Weeping ascending with weeping, shews that all wept as they ascended.
“The distress of the cry” is a Hebraism for distressing cry — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc21002.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="ii.i.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xiii-p8"></span> “Incliners” is the *Sept.;* “strewers,”
the *Vulg*.; “plunderers,” the *Syr.* and *Targ.* The verb means to
spread, to strew. They were those who turned the wine vessels in order
to empty them. *Henderson* has “overturners;” but *Blayney* has the best
word, “tilters,” who should tilt him. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc21002.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.i.xv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xv-p10"></span> There is no agreement in the Versions and
*Targ.,* as to these words, nor among critics. The easiest construction
is presented by *Blayney,* —

<span id="ii.i.xv-p11"></span>A spoiler of Moab and of her cities is
gone up.

<span id="ii.i.xv-p12"></span>The next clause is not so well rendered by
*Blayney.* He applies it to the Chaldeans. “Moab” is spoken of in this
chapter, both in the feminine and in the masculine gender. In our
language the neuter would be the most suitable, it and its. I render the
verse thus, —

<span id="ii.i.xv-p13"></span>**15.** The waster of Moab and of its
cities *is* going up, And the choice of its youth shall descend to the
slaughter, Saith the King, Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="ii.i.xv-p14"></span>“Going up” as ascribed to the conqueror,
and “descending” to the conquered. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc21002.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.i.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p8"></span> The literal rendering is, —

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p9"></span>How has the rod of strength been broken,
The staff of honor?

<span id="ii.i.xvii-p10"></span>“How” is by what means, or how much: the
first seems to be the meaning here. The rod and the staff are the same —
the sceptre an ensign of power and of honor or glory. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc21002.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.i.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p7"></span> The verb “dwell” favors the idea
adopted by some, that <span id="ii.i.xviii-p7.1"></span>צמא means here a
dry or thirsty land. - *Ed*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc21002.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.i.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p9"></span> <span id="ii.i.xviii-p9.1"></span>עלה
here, as in <span id="ii.i.xviii-p9.2"></span>[Jer
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.i.xviii-p9.2"></span>, is a participle, and so the verb which
follows. The “waster” is represented as then on his way, —

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p10"></span>For the waster of Moab is ascending
against thee, The destroyer of thy fortresses.

<span id="ii.i.xviii-p11"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc21002.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p4"></span> The word has no other meaning than that
of smiting, striking, or clapping the hand. A drunkard rejoices by
clapping his hands, even in his filth, and thus makes himself an object
of ridicule and derision; or he may strike his hands in agony: but it is
by the first he renders himself ridiculous, the thing evidently intended
here. It is observed justly by *Blayney,* that the first verb in the
verse is in the singular number, used for the plural; and he regarded
this verb to be the same; and his version is, —

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p5"></span>And clap at Moab in his vomiting.

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p6"></span>The objection to this is, the verb in
this sense is not used without a preposition after it; see <span
id="ii.i.xxiv-p6.1"></span>[La
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p6.1"></span>:
otherwise this would suit the passage: it was suggested by *Gataker.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc21002.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p13"></span> The *Vulg.* and the *Targ.* give the
best version of these words, —

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p14"></span>Surely for the abundance of thy words
against him, thou shalt be quickly removed, *or,* led captive.

<span id="ii.i.xxiv-p15"></span>Then, in the following verse, Moab is
bidden to quit his cities — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc21002.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p8"></span> Our version in <span
id="ii.i.xxvi-p8.1"></span>[Isa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p8.1"></span>,
where the same form of words occurs, is, “We have heard of,” though here
the “of” is dropped, and thus the meaning of *Calvin* is conveyed, which
is favored by the early versions.

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p9"></span>The verse may be thus literally rendered,
—

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p10"></span>We have heard the arrogance of Moab;
Very arrogant *has been* his insolence and arrogance; Yea, his
arrogantness and the loftiness of his heart.

<span id="ii.i.xxvi-p11"></span>The word for “arrogance” means swelling;
it is to grow big, and to claim more than what belongs to us. Then
“insolence” signifies to rise high, so as to look down on others with
contempt. Arrogance is first, then insolence: and in the last line the
two are inverted, and with this difference, the disposition is denoted
in the last line, and the acting in the former. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc21002.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p9"></span> <span id="ii.i.xxvii-p9.1"></span>Ira
furor brevis est — *Epist. 2 ad Loll.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc21002.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p12"></span> The versions and the *Targ.* all
differ as to this verse. The *Vulg.* is the best; it takes <span
id="ii.i.xxvii-p12.1"></span>בדים, branches, and also limbs, in a
metaphorical sense, signifying strength. I give the following rendering,
—

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p13"></span>**30.** I know, saith Jehovah, his
excess, (*i.e.* of pride;) But not so his strength, not so have they
done.

<span id="ii.i.xxvii-p14"></span>The mixture of numbers, singular and
plural, is common in the prophets — “his” and “they.” The meaning seems
to be, that however excessive was the pride and insolence of Moab, they
had no power fully to effect their purposes. - *Ed*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc21002.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxviii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p7"></span> This paragraph has been transplanted
from the text.

<span id="ii.i.xxviii-p8"></span>The verbs here are imperatives in the
*Sept* and *Syr.*, “Howl ye,” etc.; and in the future tense in the
*Targ.,* “they shall howl, etc. The *Vulg.,* is according to the Hebrew.
The last verb is in the third person, “He (Moab) will mourn for the men
of Kir-heres.” This city was on the extremity of Moab northward, as
Jazer was on its extremity southward. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc21002.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxx-p6.5"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxx-p7"></span> <span id="ii.i.xxx-p7.1"></span>Jam canit
extremos effœtus vinitor antes. — *Geor*. 2:417.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc21002.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p9"></span> A reason more suitable to the passage
has been given for this comparison, — that Moab in its distress is
compared to an heifer lowing for want of pasture and especially of
water, for it follows that the waters of Nimrim would be dried up. See
<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p9.1"></span>[Isa.
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.i.xxxi-p9.1"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc21002.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p9"></span> As to this clause, widely different are
all the versions; the *Targ.* gives the general sense. The word <span
id="ii.i.xxxv-p9.1"></span>יתרת is evidently plural, the <span
id="ii.i.xxxv-p9.2"></span>ו being wanting. “Reserves,” as given by
*Blayney,* is an exact rendering, —

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p10"></span>Because the reserves he had made have
perished.

<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p11"></span>Connected with this word is another in
<span id="ii.i.xxxv-p11.1"></span>[Isa
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.i.xxxv-p11.1"></span>, which means “deposits;” both signify the
wealth or treasures they had laid up. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc21002.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxvii-p8"></span> All the versions and *Targ.* read, “as
a useless vessel;” but the Hebrew is, “as a vessel without delight in
it,” *i.e.,* as a vessel which has nothing pleasing or agreeable in it.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc21002.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="ii.i.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p8"></span> The literal rendering is as follows,
—

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p9"></span>How broken! they howled; How has Moab
turned the back ashamed! Thus Moab has become a derision And a terror to
all around him.

<span id="ii.i.xxxviii-p10"></span>The past tense is used for the
future. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc21002.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="ii.i.xl-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xl-p7"></span> The literal rendering of the verse is as
follows, the nominative case to the two verbs being Moab, taken here as
the country, —

<span id="ii.i.xl-p8"></span>**41.** Taken it is, — the cities; And the
strongholds, — it is seized: And become shall the heart of the valiants
of Moab, In that day, like the heart of a woman in distress.

<span id="ii.i.xl-p9"></span>In our language it would be, “as to its
cities,” and, “as to its strongholds.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc21002.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="ii.i.xlii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xlii-p9"></span> There is a striking alliteration in
these words, fear, pit, snare — *peched, pechet, pech.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc21002.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="ii.i.xliii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p8"></span> The word “strength” is here omitted.
Calvin’s version is, “Under the shadow of Heshbon stood they who had
fled from strength,” or violence, *i.e.,* of their enemies. Some connect
it with “stood,” the fugitives “stood for strength,” or, “without
strength,” which, perhaps, is preferable: they stood under the shadow or
protection of Heshbon, and obtained no help; so far was this from being
the case, that from Heshbon would go forth fire, that is, “the spoiler,”
or, destroyer, before often mentioned. Then <span
id="ii.i.xliii-p8.1"></span>כי would have its usual meaning, *for,* as
giving a reason why the fugitives remained without strength or help,
under the protection of Heshbon. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc21002.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="ii.i.xliii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p9"></span> Most give a different explanation of
this fire, that it designated “the spoiler” that was to come on Moab.
That fire has often this meaning is evident. See <span
id="ii.i.xliii-p9.1"></span>[Jud
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p9.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc21002.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="ii.i.xliii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p11"></span> The last clause is evidently a
quotation from <span id="ii.i.xliii-p11.1"></span>[Nu
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p11.1"></span>: it is not literally the same, but the
meaning is so. It is “corner”’ here and not “corners,” as in Numbers;
and the word there is <span id="ii.i.xliii-p11.2"></span>קרקר, and not
<span id="ii.i.xliii-p11.3"></span>קדקד as here, only there are some
copies which have the former word here. In that case, the passage would
read thus, —

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p12"></span>And it shall devour the corner of Moab,
And destroy the sons (or children) of tumult.

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p13"></span><span id="ii.i.xliii-p13.1"></span>שת
in Numbers is probably for <span id="ii.i.xliii-p13.2"></span>שאת, which
means the same as the word here used, coming from the same root, and
properly rendered “tumult.”

<span id="ii.i.xliii-p14"></span>This passage is omitted in the *Sept.;*
the *Vulg.* renders <span id="ii.i.xliii-p14.1"></span>קדקד, “<span
id="ii.i.xliii-p14.2"></span>verticem,” the crown or top of the head;
but the *Syr.* and *Targ.* drop the metaphor, and render it “chiefs” or
nobles. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 49](cc21003.md)
