[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc21015)  [Next](cc21017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>CALVIN’s VERSION OF

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>THE LAMENTATIONS.

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**1** How sits solitary the city Which
abounded in people I How is she become as a widow, Who was great among
the nations! She who ruled among provinces Is become tributary!

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span>**2** Weeping she has wept in the night And
her tears are on her cheeks; She has no comforter All along all her
lovers; All her friends have dealt falsely with her, They are become her
enemies.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span>**3** Migrated hath Judah because of
oppression, And because of much servitude; She dwelleth among the
nations, She finds no rest; All who pursued her have taken her between
the straits.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span>**4** The ways of Sion mourn, For they come
not to the festivals; All her gates are desolate, her priests are
sighing; her virgins are afflicted, And she is in bitterness!

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span>**5** Her adversaries have become the head,
Her enemies have prospered; Because Jehovah hath afflicted her For the
greatness of her iniquities: Her little ones have gone into exile Before
the adversary;

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>**6** And departed from the daughter of
Sion Has all her glory; her princes have become like harts, Who cannot
find pasture; And they have gone without strength Before their pursuer.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p9"></span>**7** Remember did Jerusalem, In the days
of her affliction and want, All her desirable things, Which were from
ancient days; When fall did her people into the hand of the enemy, And
she had no helper: Seen her have enemies, They laughed at her Sabbath.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p10"></span>**8** A sin hath Jerusalem sinned,
Therefore she is become a wandered; All who honored her have despised
her, Because they have seen her nakedness; She even groaned, And turned
backward:

<span id="iv.ii.i-p11"></span>**9** Her shame is in her skirts; She
remembered not her end; Therefore she came down wonderfully, She hath no
comforter: See, Jehovah, my affliction, For magnified himself hath the
enemy.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p12"></span>**10** His hand did the enemy stretch out
To all her desirable things; For she saw the heathens, When they entered
her sanctuary, Respecting whom thou hast commanded, They shall not come
to thy congregation.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p13"></span>**11** All her people are sighing, They
are seeking bread; They have given their desirable things For food, to
restore life: See, Jehovah, and look, For I am vile.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p14"></span>**12** is it nothing to all of you Who
pass by the way? Look and see, if there be a sorrow Like the sorrow that
is come to me; For afflicted me hath Jehovah, In the day of the
indignation of his wrath.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p15"></span>**13** From on high hath he sent fire into
my bones And it hath prevailed over them: He hath spread his net for my
feet, He hath turned me backward; He hath made me desolate, Sorrowing
all the day.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p16"></span>**14** Tied is the yoke of mine iniquities
by his hand, They are twined together: They have come up on my neck, He
hath weakened my strength: Given me up hath the Lord, Into the hand of
my enemies, From whom I shall not be able to rise.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p17"></span>**15** Trodden under foot all my valiant
men Hath the Lord in the midst of me: He hath brought on me the fixed
time To destroy my young men; The winepress hath the Lord trodden, As to
the virgin, the daughter of Judah.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p18"></span>**16** For this I weep; mine eye mine eye!
Waters flow down; For removed far from me is a comforter Who might
revive my soul; My children are become desolate, For prevailed has the
enemy.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p19"></span>**17** Expand did Sion her hands, She had
no comforter; Given a charge had Jehovah as to Jacob, To his adversaries
all around him; Become is Jerusalem An abomination among them.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p20"></span>**18** Righteous is Jehovah, For his mouth
have I provoked, Hear, I pray, all ye people, And behold my sorrow: My
virgins and my young men, They are gone into captivity.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p21"></span>**19** I called to my friends, They
deceived me; My priests and my elders, In the city they expired, While
they were seeking food for themselves, To revive their soul.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p22"></span>**20** See, Jehovah, for I am distressed,
My bowels are troubled; Overwhelmed is my heart within me, For rebelling
I have rebelled: Without bereaves the sword, Within it is as death,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p23"></span>**21** They have heard that I mourn, That
I have no comforter; All mine enemies have heard of my evil; They
rejoice that thou hast done it, And brought the day thou hast announced:
But they shall be as I am.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p24"></span>**22** Let all their wickedness Come into
thy presence; And do to them as thou hast done To me for all my sins;
For my sighings are many, And my heart is weak.

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1** How hath the Lord clouded in his
wrath The daughter of Sion! He hath cast down from heaven to the earth
The glory of Israel; And hath not remembered his footstool In the day of
his wrath!

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>**2** Destroyed hath the Lord, and spared
not, All the habitations of Jacob; He hath demolished in his indignation
The fortresses of the daughter of Judah; He hath cast them to the
ground, he hath profaned Her kingdom and her princes.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3** He hath broken in the indignation of
his wrath Every horn of Israel; He hath withdrawn his right hand From
before the enemy; And he burned like fire in Jacob, The flame devoured
all around.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Bent hath he his bow as an enemy,
Stand did his right hand as an adversary, And he slew all the delights
of the eye In the tabernacle of the daughter of Sion He hath poured
forth As fire, his wrath.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5** The Lord hath been like an enemy, He
hath destroyed Israel; He hath destroyed all his palaces, He hath
demolished his fortresses; He hath increased in the daughter of Judah
Mourning and lamentation:

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span>**6** And he hath removed as a garden His
tabernacle; He hath destroyed his testimony; Forgotten hath Jehovah in
Sion The assembly and the Sabbath; He hath rejected, in the indignation
of his wrath, The king and the priest:

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9"></span>**7** Abhorred hath Jehovah his altar, He
hath cast off his sanctuary; Given up hath he into the hand of the enemy
The walls of her palaces: A noise they made in the house of Jehovah, As
on the day of the assembly.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p10"></span>**8** Resolve did Jehovah to destroy the
wall Of the daughter of Sion; He extended a line, He drew not back his
hand from scattering; Therefore mourned hath the rampart and the wall,
They have fallen together.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9** Sunk have her gates in the ground;
He hath destroyed and broken her bars; Her king and her princes, They
are among the heathens; There is no law, her prophets, They find no
vision from Jehovah:

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p12"></span>**10** They sit on the ground, they are
silent, The elders of the daughter of Sion; They cast dust on their
head, They gird themselves with sackcloth; Bend to the ground their head
Do the virgins of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p13"></span>**11** Consume with tears did mine eyes,
Troubled were my bowels; Poured forth on the ground was my liver, For
the breach of the daughter of my people; When the child and the suckling
Vanished away in the streets of the city.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14"></span>**12** To their mothers they say,- “Where
is corn and wine“ While they vanish away, as a dying man, In the streets
of the city, And while they pour out their souls Into the bosom of their
mothers

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15"></span>**13** What can I testify to thee? What
can I compare to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? What can I liken to
thee, to comfort thee, O virgin, the daughter of Sion? For great as the
sea is thy breach, Who can heal thee?

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p16"></span>**14** Thy prophets have seen for thee
Vanity and insipidity. And they disclosed not thine iniquity, That they
might reverse thy captivity; And they saw for thee Prophecies of vanity
and expulsions.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17"></span>**15** They clapped at thee their hands,
All who passed by on the road; They hissed and moved their head At the
daughter of Jerusalem, — “Is this the city of which they said, Perfect
in beauty, the joy of all the earth?

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p18"></span>**16** Opened at thee their mouth Have
all thine enemies; They hissed and gnashed the teeth, They said, “We
shall devour her, Surely the day which we expected We have found, we
have seen.”

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p19"></span>**17** Jehovah hath done what he had
purposed; He hath fulfilled his word, Which he had commanded from days
of old; He hath overthrown and not spared; And tie hath made to rejoice
over thee the enemy, He hath raised up the horn of thine adversaries.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20"></span>**18** Cry out did their heart to the
Lord: O wall of the daughter of Sion, Make tears to flow down As a
river, day and night; Give thyself no rest, Let not the pupil of thine
eye cease.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21"></span>**19** Rise, cry aloud in the night, At
the beginning of the watches; Pour out like waters Thy heart before the
Lord; Raise lip to him thy hands For the life of thy little ones, Who
faint through famine At the head of all the streets.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p22"></span>**20** See, Jehovah, and look, To whom
thou hast done this: Should women eat their own fruit, Infants while
nursed! Should they be slain in the Lord’s sanctuary, The priest and the
prophet!

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23"></span>**21** Lie on the ground in the streets
Did boys and old men; My virgins and my young men, They fell by the
sword: Thou hast killed in the day of thy wrath, Thou hast slaughtered
and not spared.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p24"></span>**22** Thou hast summoned, as on t
festive day, My terrors all around; And in the day of the indignation of
Jehovah!, There was none surviving or remaining; Whom I nursed and
brought up, The enemy consumed them.

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**1** I am a man who hath seen affliction
Through the rod of his indignation’

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**2** Me hath he led and made to go Into
darkness, and not into light.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Surely against me is he turned, He
turns his hand daily.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>**4** To grow old hath he made my flesh
and my skin, He hath broken my bones.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**5** He hath builded against me, And
surrounded me with gall and trouble.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>**6** In darkness hath he made me to lie
As the dead for ever.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>**7** He hath shut me up, that I cannot
go forth He hath made heavy my fetter.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>**8** Even when I cried, and cried
aloud, he shut out my prayer.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>**9** He hath enclosed my ways with hewn
stones, My paths hath he perverted.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>**10** A bear lying in wait hath he been
to me, A lion in his den.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>**11** My ways hath he perverted, and
lie hath torn me, He hath made me a waste.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>**12** He hath bent his bow, and made me
As a mark for the arrow.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span>**13** He hath made to enter into my
reins The sons of his quiver.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>**14** I became a derision to all my
people, Their song all the day.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span>**15** He hath satiated me with
bitterness, He hath filled me with gall.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span>**16** He hath broken with pebbles my
teeth, He hath covered me with dust,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span>**17** And far removed from peace is my
soul; I have forgotten good.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span>**18** And I said, “Perished hath my
strength And my hope from Jehovah;”

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span>**19** When I remember my affliction and
my trouble, The poison and the gall:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>**20** Remembering remember does my
soul, And it is humbled within me

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span>**21** This will I recall to my mind,
Therefore will I hope.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span>**22** The mercies of Jehovah! surely
they are not consumed; Surely failed not have his compassion’s;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25"></span>**23** Renewed are they in the morning;
Great is thy faithfulness.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p26"></span>**24** My portion is Jehovah, said my
soul, Therefore will I hope in him.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27"></span>**25** Good is Jehovah to him who waits
for him, To the soul that seeks him;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p28"></span>**26** Good it is to hope and to be
silent, As to the salvation of Jehovah;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p29"></span>**27** Good it is for a man To bear the
yoke in his youth:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p30"></span>**28** He will sit apart, and be silent,
For he will raise it on himself;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p31"></span>**29** He will put in the dust his
mouth, If so be that there is hope;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p32"></span>**30** He will give to the smiter his
cheek, He will be filled with reproaches.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p33"></span>**31** For not cast away for ever Will
the Lord;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p34"></span>**32** For though he causes grief, he
will yet show compassion, According to the multitude of his mercies;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p35"></span>**33** :For he does not from his heart
afflict, Nor cause grief to the children of men.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p36"></span>**34** When one tears under his feet All
the bound of the earth, —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p37"></span>**35** When he perverts man’s judgment
Before the face of the Most High, —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p38"></span>**36** When he turns a man aside in his
causes — The Lord does not regard.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p39"></span>**37** Who is this that says, “It was,
And God has not commanded it”

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p40"></span>**38** From the mouth of the Most High
Can not good and evil proceed?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p41"></span>**39** Why should he weary himself, a
living man, And a man in his sins?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p42"></span>**40** Let us examine our ways, and
search, And turn to Jehovah;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p43"></span>**41** Let us lift up our hearts with
our hands To God in the heavens.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p44"></span>**42** We have sinned, and have been
rebellious, Thou hast not spared;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p45"></span>**43** Thou hast covered us over in
wrath, and pursued us, Thou hast slain and not spared.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p46"></span>**44** Thou hast covered thyself with a
cloud, So that prayer cannot pass through.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p47"></span>**45** An offscouring and a refuse hast
thou made us In the midst of the nations;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p48"></span>**46** Opened at us their mouth Have all
our enemies;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p49"></span>**47** Fear and the pit have come to us,
Desolation and a breach.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p50"></span>**48** Rivers of waters mine eye brings
down, For the breach of the daughter of my people.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p51"></span>**49** Mine eye flows down and rests
not; There will be no intermissions,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p52"></span>**50** Until Jehovah looks down, And
beholds from heaven.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p53"></span>**51** Mine eye grieves my soul, Because
of all the daughters of my city.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54"></span>**52** Hunting they have hunted me as a
sparrow, Who are mine enemies without cause;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p55"></span>**53** They have made fast in a pit my
life, And cast a stone over me;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p56"></span>**54** Flowed have waters over my head;
I said, I am cut off.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p57"></span>**55** I called on thy name, Jehovah,
From the deepest pit:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p58"></span>**56** My voice hast thou heard; close
not thine ear To my groaning, to my cry.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p59"></span>**57** Thou didst draw nigh in the day I
cried to thee, Thou didst say, “Fear not.”

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p60"></span>**58** Thou hast, O Lord, pleaded the
cause of my soul, Thou hast redeemed my life.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p61"></span>**59** Thou hast seen, e Jehovah, my
oppression; Defend my cause.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p62"></span>**60** Thou hast seen all their
vengeance’s, All their counsels against me.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p63"></span>**61** Thou hast heard, O Jehovah, their
reproaches, All their counsels against me,-

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p64"></span>**62** The speeches of those who rose
against me, And their words against me daily.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p65"></span>**63** Look on their sitting down and
their rising up; I am their song.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p66"></span>**64** Render to them their reward, O
Jehovah, According to the work of their hands.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p67"></span>**65** Give them blindness of heart; Thy
curse be on them.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p68"></span>**66** Pursue them in wrath, and destroy
them From under the heavens of Jehovah.

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**1** How obscured is the gold! How
changed is the fine gold! Cast forth have been the stones of the
sanctuary At the head of all the streets

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>**2** The precious sons of Sion, Clothed
in gold, How they are counted as earthen pitchers, The work of the
potter’s hands!

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**3** Even serpents draw out the breast,
They suckle their young ones: The daughter of my people was cruel, Like
the ostriches in the desert.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**4** Cleave did the tongue of the
suckling To the roof of his mouth for thirst; The little ones asked
bread, No one divided to them.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**5** They who fed on delicacies Perished
in the streets; They who had been brought up in scarlet Embraced the
dunghills:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>**6** And the punishment of the daughter
of my people Has been greater than the punishment of Sodom, Which was
overthrown as in a moment, And no strokes remained on her.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>**7** Purer were her Nazarites than snow,
Whiter than milk; They were ruddy in their body, Above precious stones;
Sapphire was their polish:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>**8** Darker than darkness became their
form, They were not known in the streets; Cleave did their skin to their
bones, It became dry as wood.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>**9** Better were the slain with the
sword Than the slain with famine: They pined away, having been pierced
through By the knits of the field.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>**10** The hands of compassionate mothers
Boiled their own offspring; They became food for them, At the
destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>**11** Fulfilled has Jehovah his wrath;
He poured forth the indignation of his wrath; And he kindled a fire in
Sion, Which devoured her foundations.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>**12** They could not have believed, the
kings of the earth, Nor all the inhabitants of the world, That enter
would the adversary and the enemy Into the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span>**13** For the sin of her prophets, The
iniquities of her priests, Who shed in the midst of her The blood of the
righteous, —

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span>**14** They wandered blind in the
streets, They were polluted with blood; Because they could not But touch
their garments.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>**15** Depart ye, “Unclean,” they cried
to them, Depart, depart, come not near: Because they fled, and also
wandered, They said among the Gentiles, “They shall not return to dwell;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span>**16** The face of Jehovah hath divided
them, He will no more regard them.” The face of the priests they
respected not, And to the elders they shewed no mercy.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span>**17** While we were yet standing, our
eyes failed, As to our vain help; In our looking out we looked out To a
nation that could not save us.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>**18** They hunted our steps, So that we
could not walk in our streets; Draw near did our end, fulfilled were our
days, Surely come did our end.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span>**19** Swifter were our pursuers Than the
eagles of heaven; On the mountains they followed us, They lay in wait
for us in the desert.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22"></span>**20** The spirit of our nostrils, the
anointer of Jehovah, Was taken in their snares; Of whom we said, “Under
his shadow We shall live among the nations.”

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23"></span>**21** Rejoice and be glad, thou daughter
of Edom, Who dwellest in the land of Uz. To thee also shall the cup pass
over, Thou shalt be inebriated and made naked.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24"></span>**22** Completed is thy punishment, O
daughter of Sion, He will no more deliver thee into exile; He will visit
thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom, And will uncover thy sin.

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="iv.ii.v-p3"></span>**1** Remember, O Jehovah, what has come to
us; Look, and see our reproach:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p4"></span>**2** Our heritage is turned over to
foreigners, Our houses to aliens.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p5"></span>**3** Orphans are we become, without a
father; Our mothers are as widows.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p6"></span>**4** Our own water, for money we drink;
Our own wood, for a price it comes to us.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p7"></span>**5** On our necks have we suffered
persecution; We have labored, and had no rest.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p8"></span>**6** To the Egyptians we extended the
hand, To the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p9"></span>**7** Our fathers sinned, and are not; And
we their iniquities have borne.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p10"></span>**8** Servants have ruled over us; None
delivered from their hands.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p11"></span>**9** With our life have we procured our
bread, Because of the drought of the desert.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p12"></span>**10** Our skins are like an oven black,
Because of the burnings of famine.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p13"></span>**11** Women in Sion have been ravished,
Virgins in the cities of Judah.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p14"></span>**12** Princes by their own hand were
hung, The faces of elders were not honored.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p15"></span>**13** Young men they took to grind, And
boys under the wood fell.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p16"></span>**14** Eiders ceased from the gate, Young
men from their music.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p17"></span>**15** Ceased has the joy of our heart,
Turned into mourning has our dance.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p18"></span>**16** Fallen has the crown of our head;
Woe now to us, for we have sinned!

<span id="iv.ii.v-p19"></span>**17** Therefore faint is our heart; For
this darkener! are our eyes,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p20"></span>**18** Even for mount Sion, which is
desolate; Foxes pass through it.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p21"></span>**19** Thou Jehovah for ever sittest, Thy
throne is through all ages.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p22"></span>**20** Why shouldest thou perpetually
forget us, And forsake us for ever.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p23"></span>**21** Turn us, Jehovah, to thee, and we
shall be turned; Renew our days as of old;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p24"></span>**22** Except thou hast wholly rejected
us, And hast become very angry with us.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p25"></span>PRAISE BE TO GOD

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc21017)
