[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc21008)  [Next](cc21010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p1"></span>Lecture First.

<span id="iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** How doth the city sit solitary
*that was* full of people! *how* is she become as a widow! she *that
was* great among the nations, *and* princess among the provinces, *how*
is she become tributary!

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Quomodo sedet solitaria civitas,
quae abundavit populo! facta est tanquam vidua, quae magna fuit in
gentibus! Quae dominataest in provinciis, redacta est ad tributum!

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet could not sufficiently
express the greatness of the calamity, except by expressing his
astonishment. He then assumes the person of one who on seeing something
new and unexpected is filled with amazement. It was indeed a thing
incredible; for as it was a place chosen for God to dwell in, and as the
city Jerusalem was not only the royal throne of God, but also as it were
his earthly sanctuary, the city might have been thought exempted from
all danger. Since it had been said,

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p7"></span>“Here is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell,”  
(<span id="iii.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p8"></span>God seemed to have raised that city above
the clouds, and to have rendered it free from all earthly changes. We
indeed know that there is nothing fixed and certain in the world, and
that the greatest empires have been reduced to nothing; but, the state
of Jerusalem did not depend on human protection, nor on the extent of
its dominion, nor on the abundance of men, nor on any other defenses
whatever, but it was founded by a celestial decree, by the promise of
God, which is not subject to any mutations. When, therefore, the city
fell, uprooted from its foundations, so that nothing remained, when the
Temple was disgracefully plundered and then burnt by enemies, and
further, when the king was driven into exile, his children slain in his
presence, and also the princes, and when the people were scattered here
and there, exposed to every contumely and reproach, was it not, a
horrible and monstrous thing?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p9"></span>It was not, then, without reason that the
Prophet exclaimed, *How!* for no one could have ever thought that such a
thing would have happened; and then, after the event, no one with a calm
mind could have looked on such a spectacle, for innumerable temptations
must have come to their minds; and this thought especially must have
upset the faith of all — “What does God mean? How is it that, he has
promised that this city would be perpetual? and now there is no
appearance of a city, and no hope of restoration in future.” As, then,
this so sad a spectacle might not only disturb pious minds, but also
upset them and sink them in the depths of despair, the Prophet exclaims,
*How!* and then says, *How sits the city solitary*, which had much
people! Here, by a comparison, he amplifies the indignity of the fact;
for, on the one hand, he refers to the flourishing state of Jerusalem
before the calamity, and, on the other hand, he shews how the place had
in a manner been turned into darkness. For this change, as I have said,
was as though the sun had fallen from heaven; for the sun has no firmer
standing in heaven than Jerusalem had on earth, since its preservation
was connected with the eternal truth of God. He then says that this city
had many people, but that now it was sitting *solitary*. The verb to
sit, is taken in Hebrew in a good and in a bad sense. Kings are said to
sit on their thrones; but to sit means sometimes to lie prostrate, as we
have before seen in many places. Then he says that Jerusalem was lying
solitary, because it was desolate and forsaken, though it had before a
vast number of people.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p10"></span>He adds, *How is she become, etc.*; for
the word *how*, <span id="iii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>אכה, *aike*, ought to
be repeated, and applied to both clauses. *How*, then, *is she become as
a widow, who was great among the nations!*  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) He says that Jerusalem had not only
been full of citizens, but had also extended its power through many
nations; for it is well known that many contiguous nations were
tributary to it under David and Solomon. And to the same purpose is what
follows, *She who ruled among provinces is become tributary!* that is,
is become subject to a tribute. This phrase is taken from <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>[De
28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>,
for the prophets were wont freely to borrow expressions from Moses, that
chief teacher and prophet, as we shall presently see again.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p15"></span>We now then see the meaning of the
Prophet. He wonders at the destruction of the city Jerusalem, and
regarded it as a prodigy, which not only disturbed the minds of men, but
in a manner confounded them. And by this mode of speaking he shews
something of human infirmity; for they must be void of all feeling who
are not seized with amazement at such a mournful sight. The Prophet then
spoke not only according to his own feelings, but also according to
those of all others; and he deplored that calamity as it were in the
person of all. But he will hereafter apply a remedy to this astonishment
For when we thus exaggerate evils, we at the same time sharpen our
grief; and thus it happens that we at length become overwhelmed with
despair; and despair kindles rage, so that men clamor against God. But
the Prophet so mourned, and was in such a way amazed, that he did not
yet indulge his grief nor cherish his amazement; but as we shall see, he
restrained himself, lest the excess of his feelings should carry him
beyond due bounds. It then follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p2"></span>**2.** She weepeth sore in the night,
and her tears *are* on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to
comfort *her*: all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they
are become her enemies.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Plorando ploravit noctu, et
lachrymae ejus super genas ejus, non est ei consolator ex omnibus amicis
ejus, et omnes socii ejus Perfide egerunt cum ea, fuerunt illi inimici.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p6"></span>Jeremiah still pursues the same subject,
for he could not have spoken briefly and in a few words of things so
bitter and mournful; and he seems to have felt deeply the ruin of his
own country. And when we wish to penetrate into the hearts of those
whose sorrow we desire to alleviate, it is necessary that they should
understand that we sympathize with them. For when any one stronger than
another seeks to mitigate another’s grief, he will be disregarded if
what he adduces seems to proceed from an unfeeling barbarity. Had, then,
Jeremiah spoken as it were in contempt., he could have hardly hoped for
any fruit from his teaching, for the Jews would have thought him void of
all human feelings. This, then, is the reason why he bewails, as one of
the people, the calamity of the city. He did not, however, dissemble in
any degree in the history he related; but we know that God’s servants,
while they speak in earnest, do not yet forget prudence; for they regard
in this respect what is useful; and their doctrine ought in a manner to
be so regulated as to produce effect on the hearers.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p7"></span>He then says that the weeping of
Jerusalem was continual; for he says first, *Weeping she wept*, and
then, *in the night*; by which words he means that there was no
intermission. For the night is given us for rest, and God intends some
relaxation to men by the interchange of nights and days. When,
therefore, the Prophet says that Jerusalem, *weeping, wept in the
night,* he intimates that her sorrow, as I have stated, was continual.
Then he adds, *her tears are on her cheeks*. Some render it jaws, but
improperly; the word <span id="iii.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>לחי, *lachi*,
indeed means a jaw, but it is to be taken for cheeks, or cheek-bones.
Then he means that tears were so profuse as to wet the whole face. It is
possible in weeping to restrain tears; but when they flow over the whole
face and cover the cheeks, it is an evidence of great mourning. This,
then, is the reason why the Prophet says that tears were on her cheeks;
for he wished to shew that tears were profusely shed.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p8"></span>He says further, *She has no comforter*.
And this circumstance ought to be noticed, for nothing is more
seasonable in grief than to have friends near us to shew us kindness, to
be partakers of sorrow, and to apply the consolations which may be had.
But when no one feels for us in our evils, our sorrow is much more
increased. The Prophet then says that there was no one seeking to soothe
the griefs of Jerusalem. He adds, *of all thy friends*. Had Jerusalem
been always forsaken, she could have borne it better when no comforter
was present. For we see that miserable men are not thus soft and tender
when very grievous calamities happen to them; they do not look here and
there for friends to come to them, and why? because they have always
been disregarded. It is, then, nothing new to them, even in the greatest
adversities, to have no one to shew them any tokens of kindness. But
when they who have had many friends, and thought that they would be
always ready to bring them aid — when they see themselves forsaken,
their sorrow becomes much more grievous. This, then, is what the Prophet
means in saying, that of many friends there were none to comfort
Jerusalem in her miseries.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p9"></span>There is not yet a doubt but that he
indirectly reproved Jerusalem; and by <span
id="iii.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>אהבים, *aebim*, he understood *lovers*, as
we have seen in other places; for as they thought themselves safe by
means of ungodly treaties, the prophets say that they were like harlots
who everywhere prostitute themselves and make gain by their
lasciviousness, and allure lovers on every side. It was, therefore,
right of the Prophet to remind the Jews in this place of that
wickedness, even that they had conciliated at one time the Egyptians, at
another, the Assyrians, like an impudent woman, who is not satisfied
with her own husband, but draws lovers from all quarters. However this
may be, he no doubt understands by *friends* those who confederated with
them; and who were these? even those with whom the Jews had connected
themselves, having disregarded God; for they had been sufficiently
warned by the prophets not to form connections with the heathens. But,
at. the same time, Jeremiah sets forth the atrocity of the thing by
saying that there was none of all her friends a comforter to Jerusalem,
because all her friends had acted perfidiously. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Judah is gone into captivity
because of affliction, and because of great servitude: she dwelleth
among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all her persecutors overtook her
between the straits.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Migravit (*tanquam in exilium*)
Jehudah prae magnitudine servitutis; ipsa sedet in gentibus, (*ad
verbum*, sedens in gentibus,) non invenit requiem, (*vel, in praesenti
tempore,* non invenit;) omnes apprehensores ejus apprehenderunt eam
inter angustias.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p6"></span>Interpreters apply this, but in my view
improperly, to the captivity of the people; on the contrary, the Prophet
means that the Jews had been scattered and sought refuges when
oppressed, as they were often, by the tyranny of their enemies, and then
by degrees he advances to their exile; for he could not have said all
things at the same time. Let, then, the order in which he speaks be
observed: before he bewails their exile, he says that Judah had been
scattered; for many, fleeing the cruelty of enemies, went into voluntary
exile. We have before seen that many concealed themselves with the
Moabites; nor is there a doubt but that many went into Egypt: in short,
there was no country in which some of the Jews were not fugitives.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p7"></span>The real meaning, then, of the Prophet
here is, that the Jews had migrated, that is, had left their own country
and fled to other countries, because they were subjected to miseries and
cruel servitude.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p8"></span>Some take the words in a passive sense,
even that Judah migrated, because they had inhumanly oppressed their
servants. But I suspect what has led them astray, they thought that
exile is meant here; and then one mistake produces another; for it would
have been absurd to say, that the Jews had migrated into exile on
account of affliction, and had migrated willingly; for we know that they
were violently driven by the Chaldeans. They did not, then, willingly
migrate. When these two things could not be connected, they thought that
the cruelty of the Jews is what is referred to, which they had exercised
towards their own brethren. But the migration of which the Prophet
speaks is improperly applied, as I have said, to the captivity; but on
the contrary, he means those who had removed into different parts of the
world, because this was more tolerable than their condition in their own
country. And we hence learn how severely they had been harassed by the
Chaldeans, for they had willingly fled away, though, as we know, exile
is hard. We then conclude that it was a barbarous and a violent
oppression, since the Prophet says, that the Jews thus went into exile
of their own accord, and sought hiding-places either in Egypt or in the
land of Moab, or among other neighboring nations.  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md)

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p15"></span>He afterwards adds another evil, that
they never found rest; and lastly, that they had been taken by their
enemies between straits, so that no escape was possible. It must have
been a sad condition for the people to live in a foreign land; for we
know that such a precarious life differs but little from death; and
there were no contiguous nations by whom the Jews were not hated. When
they then fled to such people, it was no small evil. But when they had
nowhere a quiet abode, the indignity was still greater, and this is what
the Prophet now refers to. But when we flee and tremblingly turn here
and there, it is one of the greatest of evils to fall into the hands of
enemies, and to be taken by them when we are enclosed as it were between
two walls, or in a narrow passage, as some explain the word. It follows,
—

<span id="iii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p2"></span>**4.** The ways of Zion do mourn, because
none come to the solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: her priests
sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she *is* in bitterness.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p3"></span>**4.** Viae Sion lugentes a non
venientibus (*ad verbum;* quia non sint qui veniant) ad solennitatem;
omnes portae ejus solitariae (vastatae, <span
id="iii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>שוממין;) sacerdotes ejus plorantes, virgines
ejus afflictae, et ipsa amaritudo ei (*hoc est*, ipsa in amaritudine,
*ut vertit Hieronymus*

<span id="iii.ii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p6"></span>Jeremiah refers here to another cause of
sorrow, that the worship of God had ceased, it having been interrupted;
nay, it seemed to have become extinct for ever. He then says that the
*ways of Sion mourned*, because none came to the feasts. The words are
figurative, for we know that feelings belong not to ways; but the
Prophet ascribes feeling to what is inanimate. And this sort of
personification is more emphatical than if he had introduced the people
as mourning. But when the Jews saw that God’s worship had fallen, it was
more grievous than to find themselves bereaved of children or of wives,
or plundered of all their goods; for the more precious God’s worship was
to them, and the more religion was thought of, in which consisted the
eternal salvation of their souls, the more severe and mournful was it to
see the Church, so scattered, that God could no longer be worshipped and
invoked.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p7"></span>It is indeed true that God’s worship was
not tied to ceremonies; for Daniel never ceased to pray, and he was
heard no less in his exile than if he came to the sacrifices with great
solemnity to make an offering in the Temple. This is no doubt true; but
as God had not in vain instituted these duties and rites of religion,
the Prophet exhibits the thing itself by its symbols. As, then, feasts
were testimonies of God’s grace, it was the same as though the Jews were
called together by a standard being lifted up, and as though God
appeared in the midst of them. Hence the Prophet, referring to these
external symbols, shews that the worship of God had in a manner ceased.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p8"></span>*Her gates are solitary*, or desolate;
*her priests are in mourning, her virgins in afflictions; she is in
bitterness.*  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) Now this passage
reminds us, that when God afflicts his Church, however grievous it may
be to see innocent men slain, blood shed promiscuously, the sexes, men
and women, killed indiscriminately; and though it be a sad spectacle to
see houses robbed and plundered, fields laid waste, and al! things in a
confusion, yet when all these things are compared with the abolition of
God’s worship, this passage reminds us that all these things ought to
appear light to us. Though David greatly deplored his condition, because
he was banished from the Temple, and did not as usual lead thither the
assembly, when he was not the only one ejected from the sanctuary of
God; yet when the sanctuary itself was destroyed, together with the
altar, when there were no sacrifices, no thanksgiving, no praises; in
short, no prayer, it was surely much more bitter.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p12"></span>This lamentation of the Prophet ought
then to be carefully noticed, when he says, that *the ways of Sion
mourned*, that no one went up *to the feasts*. What follows I pass over;
I shall hereafter dwell more on these things when we advance towards the
end of the narrative.

<span id="iii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p2"></span>**5.** Her adversaries are the chief, her
enemies prosper; for the LORD hath afflicted her for the multitude of
her transgressions: her children are gone into captivity before the
enemy.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Fuerunt inimici ejus in caput;
hostes ejus feliciter egerunt (fuerunt in pace, <span
id="iii.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>שלו;) quia Jehova afflixit eam super
magnitude scelerum, ejus; parvuli ejus the enemy. Profecti sunt in
exilium coram adversario.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p6"></span>He first says that her enemies *had
become the head*; and by this expression he doubtless means power; and
this way of speaking he borrowed from Moses, for these are his words,

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p7"></span>“Thou shalt be the head and not the
tail,  
in a high place, not obscure.” (<span id="iii.ii.vi-p7.2"></span>[De
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.ii.vi-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p8"></span>He then says, that *enemies were the
head*, that is, ruled over them. And the opposite of that is to be
understood, even that they had become the tail, that is, were under the
feet as it were of their enemies. And he says that her enemies had
*acted successfully*, even *because Jehovah had afflicted her*. He here
laments after the common practice, as ungodly men are wont to do; but he
mixes instruction with his mourning, and shews that God, in a state of
things so turbulent and confused, appeared as a righteous judge. He then
recalled them to the consideration of God’s hand, when he said that her
enemies had acted successfully, because God had *afflicted her*. Jerome
renders the words, “because Jehovah hath spoken.” He derives the verb
from <span id="iii.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>הגה, *ege*, which means to speak
or to meditate. But this is an evident mistake, as we shall find another
presently in this very chapter. There is no doubt but that the Prophet
intimates that the cause of all evils was, that God had afflicted her,
even on account of the greatness of her impieties, or of her sins. He
now then begins to shew that there is no reason why the Jews should be
swallowed up with grief and despair, if only they considered whence
their evils proceeded. He thus begins to call their attention to God’s
judgment. This indeed of itself would not have been sufficient; but he
afterwards points out a fruitful source of consolation. But we shall see
these things mentioned in their due order.

<span id="iii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as the
deformity of thy Church at this day is sufficient to dishearten us all,
we may learn to look to thine hand, and know that the reward of our sins
is rendered to us, and that we may not doubt but that thou wilt be our
physician to heal our wound, provided we flee to thy mercy; and do thou
so retain us in the assurance of thy goodness and paternal care, that we
may not hesitate, even in extreme evils, to call on thee in the name of
thine only-begotten Son, until we shall find by experience that never in
vain are the prayers of those, who, relying on thy promises, patiently
look for a remedy from thee alone, even in extreme evils, and also in
death itself. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture Second

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the
passage where the Prophet says, that the enemies of Jerusalem had become
*the head* and had *been successful*. It was a trial which must have
grievously assailed the minds of the faithful, when they saw their
enemies having fortune, as they commonly say, as it were in their own
hand; for it appeared as though God shewed himself favorable to them.
Hence the Prophet assigns the reason, lest the faithful should fall off
from religion and the fear of God, and says that the whole of this
proceeded from the just vengeance of God, it being his purpose to
afflict his own Church; and he states not this alone, but adds, *on
account of the greatness of her iniquities* For ungodly men sometimes
acknowledge that they have to do with God, but yet they murmur and think
that God is unjust and cruel. Hence the Prophet not only taught the Jews
that God was the author of the calamities which had happened, but at,
the same time reminded them that they were worthy of such a reward, not
only because they had transgressed, but because they had added sins to
sins; for this is what he means by *the greatness of iniquities*. But he
will presently repeat this sentence and enlarge upon it: it is then
enough now to state his object. It was for this cause, then, as he says,
that *her little ones went into captivity before the adversary.*

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p3"></span>It was, indeed, an indignity,
calculated to embitter the minds of the faithful, to see not only their
young men but also infants so cruelly treated. For men always think that
they have some just cause to contend with God, and especially when the
case of infants is brought forward; who, then, is not disposed to say
that God’s vengeance exceeds its due limits? “If his purpose be,” say
they, “to punish men for their wickedness, why does he not restrain his
wrath as to the innocent? for how have miserable infants sinned?” But
the Prophet here checks such audacity, and says that God had just
reasons for extending his vengeance even to the little ones.  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) It now follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p2"></span>**6.** And from the daughter of Zion all
her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts *that* find no
pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p3"></span>**6.** Et egressus est a filia Sion omnis
decor ejus; fuerunt principes ejus tanquam cervi qui non inveniunt
pascuum: et profecti sunt abaque Virtute coram persequutore.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p6"></span>He continues the same subject. He says
here that the daughter of Sion was denuded of all her ornaments. Now, we
know what was the honor or dignity of that people; for Moses, in order
to set forth the greatness of God’s grace, exclaims,

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p7"></span>“What nation so illustrious under
heaven!”  
(<span id="iii.ii.ix-p7.2"></span>[De
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii.ix-p7.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p8"></span>As, then, the singular gifts of God had
been conferred on that people, it was a very sad spectacle to see that
city, which once possessed the highest glory, robbed of all its honor
and covered with disgrace, as we shall hereafter see. He then says that
all her *glory* was taken away from the daughter of Sion.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p9"></span>Now, there is no need to enumerate all
the kinds of honor or glory which belonged to the city Jerusalem. But it
may be said first, that God had chosen there a habitation for himself;
and then a sacerdotal kingdom was there, — the people were holy to God —
they were his heritage, — there God had deposited his covenant, — he
deemed all the Jews his children, and his will was that they should in
return count him as their Father. As, then, they had been enriched with
so many ornaments and so superior, it is no wonder that the Prophet
deplored the state of the city when stripped of all its glory.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p10"></span>He then adds, that *her princes were
like famished harts* for harts, as they are by nature swift, when
pressed by want run as though they were flying. Since then the swiftness
of that animal is so great, the Prophet says that the princes, who were
wont to walk with so much gravity and to carry the appearance of great
authority, had become swift, like harts oppressed with hunger; for they
also labored under the want of everything.  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) He adds that at length they *went
away*, that is, they fled *before their pursuers without strength*. He
intimates by these words that they dared not to contend with their
enemies, but that they were so frightened that they fled, and thus
proved that they were wholly disheartened and lifeless. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p2"></span>**7.** Jerusalem remembered in the days of
her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that she had
in the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and
none did help her: the adversaries saw her, *and* did mock at her
sabbaths.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p3"></span>**7.** Recordata est Jerusalem diebus
afflictionis suae et penuriae suae, omnium desiderabilium suorum quae
fuerunt a diebus antiquis, cum caderet populus ejus in manu hostis et
nullus auxiliator ei: viderunt hostes, subsannarunt (vel, riserunt)
super sabbatio (vel, cessatione) ejus.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p6"></span>He confirms the former verse when he says,
that *Jerusalem remembered her desirable things* when she was afflicted
by God’s hand, and reduced to extreme want. And he in-intimates by these
words, that when Jerusalem was in its splendor, it did not sufficiently
consider the blessings of God; for the despisers of God cram themselves
with whatever flows from his bounty, and yet do not acknowledge him; for
ingratitude is like an abyss which absorbs all the fullness of God’s
blessings. Then the Prophet intimates that when Jerusalem flourished in
wealth and in abundance of all things, when it was adorned with singular
gifts, she became as it were inebriated, and never considered as she
ought to have done, the benefits which God had bestowed on her. And now,
when she was reduced to want and surrounded with extreme miseries, *she
remembered her desirable things,* even the glory before mentioned; for
by desirable things he means those gifts in which Jerusalem excelled as
long as God manifested himself as a bountiful Father towards it.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p7"></span>I wonder how all have given this version,
“Jerusalem remembered the days,” etc. Some rightly explain the passage,
but all agree in giving a wrong version. But the meaning is sufficiently
evident, *Jerusalem remembered her desirable things in the days of her
affliction and of her want*, or of her groaning, or of her
transmigration; for some derive the word from <span
id="iii.ii.x-p7.1"></span>רוד, *rud*, which means to complain, or to
migrate. Hence they render it “exile,” or migration. But others render
it “complaint.” Others, again, derive it from <span
id="iii.ii.x-p7.2"></span>מרד, *mered*, which sometimes means to fail,
and render it “want,” or indigence. Why some have translated it
“iniquities” I know not, and there is no reason for such a version. I do
not approve of “complaint;” exile or want is the best word.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md)

<span id="iii.ii.x-p9"></span>*The days of affliction* he more clearly
expresses, when he says, *When the people fell into the hand of the
enemy, and there was no helper*. We now see what the Prophet means, even
that Jerusalem was as it were roused from her lethargy when God
afflicted her. For as the drunken, after being satiated, so sleep in
their excess that they know and feel nothing, but seem half dead; so
prosperity inebriated Jerusalem for a long time; but being at length
awakened, she perceived whence she had fallen. As long, then, as she
stood in her high place of honor, she did not consider God’s indulgence
towards her; but after she was stripped of all her blessings, and became
deeply afflicted, she then remembered her *desirable things*, that is,
she at length began to perceive what she had lost, because she had
fallen from the grace of God.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p10"></span>We may hence gather a useful doctrine;
for what the Prophet relates of Jerusalem is seen almost in all mankind;
but we must beware lest this should be true of us. For God has not only
in a common manner dealt liberally hitherto with us, but he has also
been pleased to favor us with evidences of favor even more than
paternal; he has separated us from the unbelieving, and has bestowed on
us many of his blessings. Let us now, then, take heed lest we become
stupid while God deals liberally with us; but, on the contrary, let us
learn to appreciate the blessings of God, and consider the end for which
they have been given us, otherwise what is said here of Jerusalem will
happen to us; for being too late awakened, we shall know that we were
happy when God shewed himself a father to us. We see the same thing
exemplified in Adam the first man; for though God adorned him with
excellent gifts, yet being not content with his lot, he wished to exalt
himself beyond due limits; after he fell and was reduced to extreme
want, he then began to know what he had previously been, and what he had
become through his fall. (<span id="iii.ii.x-p10.1"></span>[Gen.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md), [Gen.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii.x-p10.1"></span>..md)
But as this testimony of the Prophet is peculiarly suitable to the
Church, let us know that we are warned by the example of Jerusalem, so
that when God shews to us his bounty, his gifts ought as they deserve,
to be valued, lest when too late we shall at length begin to acknowledge
how desirable had been our previous condition. Then, in a word, Jeremiah
here reproves the stupidity of the people, who did not know how
desirable was their state, until they were deprived and plundered of all
their blessings. He also says, *from the days of old*. By these words he
probably intimates that the course of God’s kindness had been perpetual;
for God had not for a short time been bountiful to that people, but had
shewed them favors successively and continually.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p11"></span>*When her people fell, etc*. It was a
heavier misery, because they had so long flourished. It is added, *Seen,
her have enemies, they laughed at her Sabbath*, or at her cessation,
which I do not dislike. But they who render it “leisure,” or idleness,
either pervert or too much obscure the meaning of the Prophet. In the
word “cessation,” there is an irony, for the enemies did not simply
laugh at cessation, but did so in mockery, as they took this opportunity
to taunt them for their religion. We know that the Sabbaths of the Jews
were always hated by the heathens; and they were thereby subjected to
many reproaches; for by way of reproach they called the Jews
Sabbatharians. And when they wished ignominiously to traduce the whole
service of God, as under the law, they named it “Sabbaths.” There is,
then, no doubt but that the heathens reproachfully taunted the Jews
because they observed the Sabbath; “See, now is the time to worship
God.” And we also see that God upbraided the Jews in a similar way by
saying,

<span id="iii.ii.x-p12"></span>“Until the land shall enjoy its
Sabbaths.” (<span id="iii.ii.x-p12.1"></span>[Le
26:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#043.md)<span
id="iii.ii.x-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii.x-p13"></span>For when the Jews had the opportunity and
leisure (when no enemies molested them) to observe the worship of God,
they contemptuously profaned the Sabbaths. As, then, God’s worship had
been so disgracefully neglected by them, God said, “The land itself
shall in your stead keep the Sabbath;” how? it shall not be ploughed, it
shall not bring forth fruit. (<span id="iii.ii.x-p13.1"></span>[Lev.
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#035)<span id="iii.ii.x-p13.1"></span>..md)
That cessation was called by God Sabbath, but not without a taunt; for
he cuttingly reproved the Jews for having violated the Sabbaths, as was
also done by Jeremiah, (<span id="iii.ii.x-p13.2"></span>[Jer.
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#022.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#027)<span id="iii.ii.x-p13.2"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md)

<span id="iii.ii.x-p17"></span>It then appears to me probable that
taunts were cast by enemies against the Jews, that they might now have a
long and a continual Sabbath, while the city was deserted and no one
dwelt there. For it would have been cold and unmeaning to say that the
enemies laughed at the cessation of it. The Prophet would have no doubt
used a different word, if his purpose had been to point out the
blasphemy of enemies as to God’s worship. *The enemies* then *saw and
laughed at her cessation*; but this cessation they called by way of
reproach Sabbatharian. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p2"></span>**8.** Jerusalem hath grievously sinned;
therefore she is removed: all that honoured her despise her, because
they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p3"></span>**8.** Peccatum peccavit Jerusalem (hoc
est, scelerate egit;) proterea in migrationem (vel, commotionem) facta
est (hoc est, Reddita fuit instabilis;) omnes qui honore eam
persequebantur, spreverunt eam, quia viderunt turpitudinem (vel,
foeditatem) ejus; etiam ipsa gemens, et conversa est retrorsum.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet expresses more clearly
and strongly what he had briefly referred to, even that all the evil
which the Jews suffered proceeded from God’s vengeance, and that they
were worthy of such a punishment, because they had not lightly offended,
but had heaped up for themselves a dreadful judgment, since they had in
all manner of ways abandoned themselves to impiety. This is the
substance of what is said. We hence learn that the Prophet did not
compose this song to lament the calamity of his own country as heathens
were wont to do. An example of a heathen lamentation we have in Virgil:
—

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p7"></span>“Come is the great day and the
unavoidable time  
Of Dardania: we Trojans have been; Ilium has been,  
And the great glory of the Teuerians: cruel Jupiter has to Argos  
Transferred all things: the Danai rule in the burnt city.”  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p10"></span>He also repeats the same sentiment in
other words: —

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p11"></span>“O country! O Ilium, the house of the
gods! and the famous for war,  
The camp of the Dardanidans! cruel Jupiter has to Argos  
Transferred all things.”  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p14"></span>He thus mourns the destruction of Troy;
but he complains of the cruelty of God, and calls Him cruel Jupiter,
because he was himself enraged, and yet the speaker was Pantheus the
priest of Apollo. We hence see how the unbelieving, when they lament
their own calamities, vomit forth blasphemies against. God, for they are
exasperated by sorrow. Very different is the complaint of the Prophet
from that of the ungodly; for when he deplores the miseries of his
people, he at the same time adds that God is a righteous avenger. He
does not then accuse God of cruelty or of too much rigor, but reminds
the people to humble themselves before God and to confess that they
justly deserved all their evils.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p15"></span>The unbelieving do indeed sometimes
mingle some words, by which they seem to give glory to God; but they are
evanescent, for they soon return to their perverseness. They are
sometimes moderate, “If thou art turned by any entreaties.” In that case
they expostulate with God:, as though he were deaf to the prayers of his
servants. At length they break out into open blasphemies, —

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p16"></span>*“After it seemed good to the gods to
subvert the affairs of Asia  
And the undeserved nation of Priam.”*  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) —

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p19"></span>They regarded the nation which had been
cut off unworthy of such a punishment; they called it an undeserved
nation. Now, then, we perceive what is the difference between the
unbelieving and the children of God. For it is common to all to mourn in
adversities; but the end of the mourning of the unbelieving is
perverseness, which at length breaks out into rage, when they feel their
evils, and they do not in the meantime humble themselves before God. But
the faithful do not harden themselves in their mourning, but reflect on
themselves and examine their own life, and of their own accord prostrate
themselves before God, and willingly submit to the sentence of
condemnation, and confess that God is just.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p20"></span>We hence now see how the calamity of the
Church ought to be lamented by us, even that we are to return to this
principle, that God is a just avenger, and does not punish common
offenses only, but the greatest sins, and that when he reduces us to
extremities, lie does so on account of the greatness of our sins, as
also Daniel confessed. For it was not in few words that he declared that
the people were worthy of exile and of the punishment which they
suffered; but he accumulated words,

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p21"></span>We have sinned, we have acted impiously,
we have done wickedly, we have been transgressors.” (<span
id="iii.ii.xi-p21.1"></span>[Da
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xi-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p22"></span>Nor was the Prophet satisfied without
this enumeration, for he saw how great the impiety of the people had
been, and how mad had been their obstinacy, not for a few years, but for
that long time, during which they had been warned by the prophets, and
yet they repented not, but always became worse and worse. Such, then, is
the mode of speaking adopted here.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p23"></span>He says that *she was made a commotion*,
that is, that she was removed from her country. There seems to be
implied a contrast between the rest which had been promised to the Jews,
and a wandering and vagrant exile; for, as we have seen, the Jews had
not only been banished, but they had nowhere a quiet dwelling; it was
even a commotion. This may at the same time be referred to the curse of
the law, because they were to be for a commotion — for even the
unbelieving shook their heads at them. But the word, <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p23.1"></span>נידה, *nide*, ought properly to be applied
to their exile, when the Jews became unfixed and vagrant.  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) It is added, that she was *despised*
and treated reproachfully by *all who* before esteemed and *honored*
her. This also did not a little increase the grievousness of her
calamity; she had been repudiated by her friends, by whom she had before
been valued and honored. The reason is mentioned, *because they saw her
nakedness*. But the word properly means turpitude or ignominy. It is at
length added, that *she even groaned and turned backward*; that is, that
she was so oppressed with grief, that there was no hope of a remedy; for
to turn backward means the same as to be deprived of all hope of
restoration.  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) It now follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p2"></span>**9.** Her filthiness *is* in her
skirts; she remembereth not her last end; therefore she came down
wonderfully: she had no comforter. O LORD, behold my affliction: for the
enemy hath magnified *himself*

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p3"></span>**9.** Ignominia ejus in fimbriis ejus,
non est recordata finis sui; et descendit mirabiliter, nemo consolator
ei; vide, Jehova, afflic tionem meam, quia magnifice se effert hostis
(ad verbum, magnificatus est hostis.)

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p6"></span>He continues here, as I think, the same
subject; he had said at the end of the last verse that turpitude or
baseness had been seen at Jerusalem; and now he says that it was on the
very *fringes* or skirts. The Prophet seems to allude to menstruous
women who hide their uncleanness as much as they can; but. such a thing
is of no avail, as nature must have its course. In short, the Prophet
intimates that the Jews had become filthy in no common degree, being so
afflicted that their uncleanness appeared on their skirts. This seems to
be the Prophet’s meaning. Interpreters think that Jeremiah speaks of the
sins of the people, but they are mistaken; for I doubt not but that the
reference is to their punishment. They say that filthiness was on the
skirts, because the people had shamelessly prostituted themselves to all
kinds of wickedness, and that they remembered not their end, because
they had become altogether foolish, according to what is said in the
song of Moses,

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p7"></span>“O that they were wise, and would
foresee their end?  
(<span id="iii.ii.xii-p7.2"></span>[De
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xii-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p8"></span>But let any one duly consider the design
of the Prophet, and he will readily agree with me that he speaks not of
guilt, but on the contrary of punishment.  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p10"></span>The Prophet then says that the reproach
of the Jews was on their skirts, because they could not hide their
disgrace, For shame often makes men to hide their evils and silently to
bear them, because they are unwilling to expose themselves to the
mockery of their enemies. But the Prophet says that the miseries of the
people could not be kept hidden, but that they appeared to all, as the
case is with women subject to an overflow — it issues forth to the
extremities of their garments.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p11"></span>And when he says that *she remembered
not her end*, I understand this to mean, that the Jews were so
overwhelmed with despair, that they did not raise up their thoughts to
God’s promises; for it is no ordinary source of comfort, and what even
common sense dictates to us, to take breath in extreme evils, and to
extend our thoughts farther, for misery will not always oppress us —
some change for the better will happen. As then men are wont thus to
sustain themselves in adversities, he says that *the Jews remembered not
their end*; that is, they were so demented by their sorrow, that they
became stupified, and entertained no hope as to the future. In short, by
these words, he denotes extreme despair; for the Jews were so stupified
that they could not raise up their minds to any hope.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p12"></span>And the reason is expressed, because
they had *come down wonderfully*, that is, because they had been cast
down in an extraordinary manner. A noun is here put instead of an
adverb, and in the masculine gender, <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>צפלאים *pelaim*; sometimes we have <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p12.2"></span>פלאות, p*elaut*, but in the same sense. He
then says that the Jews had sunk as it were miraculously; but by a
miracle he means a prodigy, the word being taken in a bad sense; then
*miraculously has Jerusalem come down*. It hence followed that it
succumbed under its miseries, so that it could not turn its thoughts to
any hope, nor think of another end; but. became stupid in its miseries,
as men usually become desperate, when they think that there is no
deliverance for them. He repeats what he had said before, that *there
was no comforter*

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p13"></span>These things ought to be carefully
observed, for Satan at this day uses various means to lead us to
despair. In order to avert us from all confidence in the grace of God,
he sets before us extreme calamities. And when sorrow lays such hold on
our minds, that the hope of grace does not shine forth, from that
immoderate sorrow arises impatience, which may drive us to madness.
Hence it comes that we murmur, and then clamor against God. As, then, at
this day Satan supplies materials to harass our minds, that we may
succumb under our griefs, let us bear in mind what the Prophet says,
that Jerusalem, which was then the only true Church of God in the world,
was overwhelmed with so many and so great evils, that she *remembered
not her end*. This, indeed, ought to be understood of external
circumstances, for God no doubt sustained the minds of the godly, and
always so mitigated their grief that they had regard to their end. But
the reference is to the people in general, and also to the outward
appearance of things, when the Prophet says that the Jews remembered not
their end.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p14"></span>He now encourages them to pray, and
suggests words to them, for he speaks as in the person of all*: See,
Jehovah, my affliction, for the enemy hath highly exalted himself*.
Though the Prophet here represents the Church, yet he exhorts them no
doubt, according to the obligations of his office, to entertain good
hope, and encourages them to pray, for true and earnest prayer cannot be
offered without faith; for when the taste of God’s grace is lost, it
cannot be that we can pray from the heart; and through the promises
alone it is that we can have a taste of God’s paternal goodness. There
is, then, no doubt but that the Prophet here promises a sure deliverance
to the Jews, provided they turned to God, and believed and were fully
persuaded that he would be their deliverer.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p15"></span>We now, then, see what is the right way
of teaching, even that men are to be humbled, and that their just
condemnation is to be set before them, and that they are also to be
encouraged to entertain hope, and a hand is to be stretched out to them,
that they may pray to God, and not hesitate in extreme evils not only to
hope for but even to request aid from him. This is the order observed by
the Prophet; we must learn in adversities ever to come down to
ourselves, and to acknowledge our guilt; and then when we are sunk deep,
we must learn to elevate our minds by faith that thence prayer may arise
by which our salvation is to be attained.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p16"></span>One thing has escaped me; the Prophet,
in order to obtain favor, says, that enemies had greatly exalted
themselves. And this deserves a special notice; for what seems to
occasion despair to us, ought, on the contrary, to encourage us to
entertain good hope, that is, when enemies are insolent and carry
themselves with great arrogance and insult us. The greater, then, is
their pride and the less tolerable, with more confidence may we call on
God, for the Holy Spirit has not in vain taught us this truth, that God
will be propitious to us when enemies thus greatly exalt themselves,
that is, when they become beyond measure proud, and immoderately indulge
themselves in every kind of contempt. It follows —

<span id="iii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**10.** The adversary hath spread out
his hand upon all her pleasant things: for she hath seen *that* the
heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom thou didst command *that* they
should not enter into thy congregation.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**10.** Manum suam extendit hostis ad
omnia desiderabilia ejus; quia vidit gentes quum ingresse sunt
sanctuarium ipsius, de quibus praeceperas, ne ingrederentur in
congregationem tibi (hoc est, quae tibi sacrata est.)

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet again deplores the
profanation of all sacred things; and this complaint, as I have said,
proceeded from the bitterest sorrow; for though it was a sad thing for
the faithful, to lose all their property, to wander in exile and to
suffer the want of all things, yet it must have been more grievous to
them to see the Temple polluted, and all religion exposed to shame. This
calamity, then, the Prophet again deplores, when he says that *enemies
had stretched forth their hand against all desirable things*. Now, by
desirable things, he does not mean riches, nor anything that belongs to
the condition of an earthly and fading life, but those invaluable
treasures which God had deposited with the chosen people. The enemy,
then, had *extended his hand* against the altar, against the table,
against the ark of the covenant, against all the sacred vessels.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p7"></span>Then this indignity was increased,
*because* Jerusalem *saw the heathens entering into her sanctuary*; for
the pronoun is in the feminine gender. But the sanctuary of Jerusalem
was God’s Temple for, though properly speaking, it was alone God’s
sanctuary, it was yet at the same time the sanctuary of the people,
because God had not caused the Temple to be built for his own benefit,
but rather for the benefit of his people. What God, then, had
consecrated for himself is rightly called the sanctuary of the people.
He still increases the indignity, because God *had forbidden the
heathens to enter the sanctuary*; but they had violently rushed in
there. They did not, however, enter for the sake of worshipping God, for
it was his command to keep them from the holy assembly; but they had by
force entered for the purpose of violating the Temple, and also of
abolishing the whole worship of God, and of exposing religion to all
kinds of mockery.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as at this day
we see thy Church miserably afflicted, we may direct our eyes so as to
see our own sins, and so humble ourselves before thy throne, that we may
yet cease not to, entertain hope, and in the midst of death wait for
life; and may this confidence open our mouth, that we may courageously
persevere in calling on thy name, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Third

<span id="iii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p2"></span>**11.** All her people sigh, they seek
bread; they have given their pleasant things for meat to relieve the
soul: see, O LORD, and consider; for I am become vile.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p3"></span>**11.** Totus populus ejus gementes,
quae rentes panem, diderunt desiderabilia sua (*hoc est*, quicquid
habebant pretiosum) Pro cibo ad revocandum animan: vide, Jehova, et
aspice, quia facta sum vilis (*aut,* contempta.)

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet here complains that all the
citizens of Jerusalem were constantly groaning through want and famine.
He first says, that *all were sighing*. The word “people” is collective,
and hence he uses the plural number,<span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>נאנחיםץ , *nanechim*. Then he says that they
were all sighing; but he expresses also the reason, because they were
*seeking bread*. To seek bread is indeed common to all; but by this word
he intimates extreme want., as though he had said, that they begged
their bread. He then compares them to beggars, who go about here and
there to seek bread.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p7"></span>He says also, that they *gave the most
precious things for meat*, to *recover the soul.* Here he refers more
clearly to famine, for he says that in a manner they suffered want.
Others render the last clause, “to refresh the soul,” which is not
unsuitable. But the Prophet no doubt meant to denote a deficiency as to
the support of life, when he said, that they gave whatever precious
thing they had to restore their souls, as it were from death to life.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p8"></span>A prayer follows, *See, Jehovah, and
look, for I am become vile*. We said yesterday, that the complaints
which humbled the faithful, and, at the same time, raised them to a good
hope, and also opened the door to prayers, were dictated by the Spirit
of God. Otherwise, when men indulge in grief, and torment themselves,
they become exasperated; and then to be kindled by this irritation is a
kind of madness. The Prophet, therefore, in order to moderate the
intensity of sorrow, and the raging of impatience, recalls again the
faithful to prayer. And when Jerusalem asks God *to see and to look*,
there is an emphasis intended in using the two words; and the reason
given does also more fully shew this, because she had become *vile;*
 <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) so that the Church set nothing
else before God, to turn him to mercy, but her own miseries. She did
not, then, bring forward her own services, but only deplored her own
miseries, in order that she might obtain the favor of God. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>**12.** *Is it* nothing to you, all ye
that pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the LORD hath afflicted *me* in
the day of his fierce anger.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p3"></span>**12.** Non ad voc omnes qui transitis
per viam? Aspicite et videte, an sit dolor sicut dolor meus, qui factus
est mihi, quia affixit me (*vel*, dolore affecit) Jehova in die
excandescentiae irae suae.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p6"></span>The beginning of the verse is variously
explained. Some read it interrogatively, “Is it nothing to you who pass
by the way?” Others more simply, “I see that I am not cared for by you;
to you my sorrow is nothing.” Some again read thus, “Let it not be a
sorrow to you;” and others, “Let not sorrow be upon you,” that is, let
not what I have happen to you; so that it is a prayer expressive of
benevolence.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p7"></span>What I prefer is the interrogation, *Is
it nothing to you who pass by the way*? for the letter, <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>ה, *He*, the note of a question, is often
omitted. But were it read affirmatively, the meaning would not be
unsuitable: “It does not concern you who pass by,” as though Jerusalem,
in its lamentations, felt grieved that all those who passed by were not
touched either with pity or with sorrow.  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9"></span>But she addressed those who *passed
by*, that she might more fully set forth the greatness of her calamity.
For. had she directed her words to neighbors alone, there would not have
been so much force in them; but when she spoke to strangers, she thus
shewed that her calamity was so great, that it ought to have roused the
sympathy of men from the remotest parts, even while on their journey.
And she asks them to *look* and *see*. The order is inverted, for she
said before, “See, Jehovah, and look.” Then Jerusalem asked God, first
to turn his eyes to see her calamities, and then attentively to notice
them: but now for another purpose she says, *look ye and see*, that is,
consider how evident is my calamity, which otherwise might have been in
a measure hidden from you. *Look ye*, she says, *is there a sorrow like
my sorrow?* she adds, *which is come to me:* some render the words
actively, “which Jehovah has brought on me;” but the other version is
more correct, for it is more literal. Jerome’s rendering is, “who has
gleaned me;” and <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>צעלל *olal*, means
sometimes to glean, nor do I wish to reject this interpretation. But
what follows is incorrectly rendered, as in a former instance, by
Jerome, “of which Jehovah has spoken:” for he derived the verb, as
before stated, from <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9.2"></span>הגה, *ege*; but
it comes from <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9.3"></span>יגה, *ige*, as it is
evident from the letter <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9.4"></span>ו, *vau*,
being inserted. There is then no doubt but that the Church intimates
that God was the author of that sorrow which she deplored.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p10"></span>And it is necessary to know this, lest
men should be carried away into excesses in their mourning, as it
frequently happens. For the majesty of God imposes a check, when we
perceive that we have to do with him. Simple and bare knowledge of this
is not, indeed, sufficient, for, as it has been said, the ungodly, while
they know that their sorrows proceed from God, yet murmur against him:
but it is nevertheless the beginning of patience and meekness when we
have a regard to God. It was, then, for this reason that Jerusalem said
that she had been afflicted by God.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p11"></span>And it is added, *In the day of the
indignation of his wrath*. Here the Prophet wished to express the
grievousness of God’s vengeance, by mentioning *the indignation of
wrath*. Some render <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p11.1"></span>חרום, *cherun*,
“fury;” but as the word “fury” is too harsh, the word “indignation,” or
great heat (*excandescentia*) is not unsuitable. We must, however, bear
in mind the design of the Prophet, which was to shew that God’s
vengeance had been so dreadful, as though his wrath had all been on a
flame against Jerusalem: and this is more fully confirmed in the
following verse, —

<span id="iii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p2"></span>**13.** From above hath he sent fire
into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for
my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made desolate *and* faint all
the day.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p3"></span>**13.** E sublimi misit ignem in ossa
mea, et dominatus est in ipso (est mutatio numeri, refertur quidem ad
oss, sed perinde est ac Si diceret, dominatus est ignis in unoquoque
ossium;) extendit rete suum pedibus meis, convertet me retrorsum; dedit
me (reddidit me, vel, posuit) vastam vel, desolatam) toto die dolentem
(vel, infirmam.)

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet proceeds with the same
subject, that God’s vengeance had raged most dreadfully agsinst
Jerusalem. But employing a metaphor she says, that *fire* had been sent
to her *bones*. They who interpret bones of fortified places, weaken the
meaning of the Prophet. I take bones in their proper sense, ss though it
was said, that God’s fire had penetrated into the inmost parts. This way
of speaking often occurs in Scripture. By bones is denoted strength or
valor. Hence David sometimes deplored, that his bones were vexed or
troubled. (<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.) And Hezekiah said in his song

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p7"></span>“As a lion he hath broken my bones.”
(<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p8"></span>In the same sense the Prophet now
says, that *fire* had been *sent by God, which ruled in his bones*, that
is, which not only burnt the skin and the flesh, but also consumed the
bones. <span id="iii.ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>רדה, *rede*, means also to
take away or to receive: but as the former rendering is most commonly
taken, I am disposed to follow it — that *fire ruled in his bones*

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p9"></span>There is another similitude added,
that God had *spread a net before her feet;* and thus he had taken away
every means of escape. She intimates (for it is Jerusalem who speaks)
that she had been ensnared by God’s judgments, so that she was bound
over to ruin, as though she had fallen into toils or snares. It is
stated in the third place, that she was *desolate all the day, so that
she sorrowed perpetually*. By all the day is meant continually. It is
then said, that she sorrowed without end, beyond measure, because she
had been turned back by the nets of God, and her bones had been consumed
by celestial fire: for the expression *from above*, <span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>ממרום, *memerumn*, is emphatical, for the
Prophet means that it was no common or human burning; because what is
ascribed to God exceeds what is human or earthly. It is, then, as though
he had said, that it had been such a vengeance as betokened the dreadful
power of God; for it was the same as though God had thundered from
heaven. We now perceive the import of the words. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p2"></span>**14.** The yoke of my transgressions is
bound by his hand: they are wreathed, *and* come up upon my neck: he
hath made my strength to fall, the Lord hath delivered me into *their*
hands, *from whom* I am not able to rise up.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p3"></span>**14.** Ligatumest (*hic vertit
Hieronymus,* vigilavit, *namhallucinatus est inpuncto duntaxat* <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p3.1"></span>צנשקד *et legendum est* <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p3.2"></span>צנשקד *quia est punctum sinistrum, quod
significat ligave*, ligatum est *igitur*) jugum iniquitatum mearum in
manu ejus; implicitae sunt (*vel*, perplexae,) ascenderunt super collum
meum; corruere fecit (*vel*, debilitavit) robur meum; dedit me Dominus
in manus eorum (*est in regimine, et tamen nulla sequitur additio, quae*
*respondeat, sed apparet aliquid esse subaudiendum,* in manus *ergo*
hostium) ex quibus non potero surgere.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p6"></span>Here, again, Jerusalem confesses that
God had been justly displeased. She had ascribed to God’s vengeance the
evils which she suffered; but now she expresses the cause of that
displeasure or wrath. Hence she says, that the *yoke* of her
*iniquities* had been *bound* in God’s hand. Though interpreters explain
the words, yet they touch not the meaning of the Prophet; for they
consider not that there is a continued metaphor. We ought then to bear
in mind the two clauses, — that God’s hand held the yoke tied, and also
that the yoke was bound around the neck of Jerusalem. As when a
husbandman, after having tied a yoke to oxen, holds a rein, and folds it
rotund his hand, so that the oxen not only cannot throw off the yoke,
but must also obey the hand which holds the reins; so also it is said,
that the yoke of iniquities was fastened: “I bear the yoke,” she says,
“but it is tied, and so fastened, that it cannot be shaken off; and
then, however furious I may be, or kick, God holds the tied yoke by his
own hand so as to constrain me to bear it.”

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p7"></span>We now, then, see the design and import
of the Prophet’s words, that God was justly incensed against Jerusalem,
and had justly used so much severity. Expressed at the same time is the
atrocity of the punishment, though wholly just; for, on the one hand,
Jerusalem complains that a yoke was laid on her neck, tied and fastened,
and also that it was tied by the hand of God, as though she had said,
that she was under such a constraint, that there was no relaxation. On
the one hand, then, she bewails the grievousness of her calamity; and on
the other, she confesses that she fully deserved what she suffered; and
thus she accused herself, lest any should think that he clamored against
God, as is commonly the case in sorrow.  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p13"></span>It is added, *He hath made to fall*, or
weakened, etc. The verb <span id="iii.ii.xix-p13.1"></span>כשל,
*cashel*, in *Hilphil*, means, as it is well known, to stumble, or to
cause to stumble or fall. *He hath*, then, *weakened my strength; the
Lord hath given me up into the hand* of my enemies, from whom *I shall
not be able to rise*; that is, he hath so subjugated me, and so laid me
prostrate under the hands of my enemies, that there is no hope of rising
again. Were any one to ask, “Why then does she pray, and again will pray
often?” the answer is, that when she says here, that she will not be
able to rise again, the reference is made to the outward state of
things: in the meantime, the grace of God is not taken to the account.
and this goes beyond all human means. She then says, that according, to
the thoughts of the flesh, she had no hope, because there appeared to be
no means of rising. But yet she did not despair, but that God would at
length, by His almighty power, cause her to rise from fatal ruin. And
this is a mode of speaking that ought to be borne in mind; for hope sees
things which are hidden. But at the same time the faithful speak
according to the common appearance of things, and when they seem to
despair, they regard what falls under their own observation and
judgment. So then Jerusalem now says that she could not rise, except God
manifested his extraordinary power, which far exceeds all human means.
It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p2"></span>**15.** The Lord hath trodden under foot
all my mighty *men* in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly
against me to crush my young men: the Lord hath trodden the virgin, the
daughter of Judah, *as* in a winepress.

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p3"></span>**15.** Calcavit omnes fortes meos
Dominus in medio mei; vocavit super me diem (hoc est, edixit statum
diem, alii vertunt congregationem; *et* <span
id="iii.ii.xx-p3.1"></span>מועד, tam coetum ipsum significat, quam
condictum tempus,) ad conterendos adolescentes meos (vel, electos;)
torcular calcavit Adonai super virginem (vel, puellam,) filiam Jehudah.

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p6"></span>She first says, that *all* her *valiant*
men had been *trodden underfoot*. Now we know how much the Jews trusted
in their men even to the very time when they were wholly subdued. As
then they had shewed so much insolence and pride towards the prophets,
it hence became a cause of greater sorrow, when Jerusalem herself saw
that she was destitute of every protection, and that her valiant men
were trodden under foot. She says, *in the midst of me.* And this ought
to be observed; for if they had fallen on the field of battle, if they
had been taken in the fields by their enemies, such a thing would not
have been so grievous: but that they had been thus laid prostrate, in
the very bosom of the city, was indeed a token of vengeance from above.
We now see that this circumstance was not superfluous, that all the
valiant men of Jerusalem were laid prostrate in *the midst* of her.

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p7"></span>It is then said that it was the *fixed
time*, when God *destroyed her chosen men*, or her youth. Should it seem
preferable to take <span id="iii.ii.xx-p7.1"></span>מועד, *muod*, as
meaning a congregation, I do not object; yet I do not approve of this
meaning, for it seems forced. It agrees better with the context to
regard it as the fixed time, the time before appointed by God to destroy
all the strong men.  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p9"></span>There is then another metaphor used, —
that God had *trodden the winepress as to the daughter of Zion*. This
figure occurs elsewhere, as in <span id="iii.ii.xx-p9.1"></span>[Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.ii.xx-p9.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p10"></span>“Who is this that cometh from Edom? and
why are his garments red?”

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p11"></span>For the Prophet wonders how God could
come forth from Edom, sprinkled with blood. God answers, “The winepress
have I trod alone;” that is, because he had avenged the wrongs done to
his people. For we know that the Idumeans had always been incensed
against the miserable Jews. Then God, in order to shew that lie was the
defender of his Church, says that he came from Edom, and was sprinkled
and even made wet with blood. As when any one is red with wine after
having toiled in the winepress, so also is the representation in this
place. We have also seen in <span id="iii.ii.xx-p11.1"></span>[Jer
51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xx-p11.1"></span>, that Babylon was like a threshing-floor.
The metaphor, indeed, is different, but bears a likeness to the present.
As, then, God is said to tread, or to thresh, when he afflicts any land,
so he is said to tread the winepress, as here.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p2"></span>**16.** For these *things* I weep; mine
eye, mine eye runneth down with water, because the comforter that should
relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the
enemy prevailed.

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p3"></span>**16.** Propter id ego plorans, oculus
meus, oculus meus, descendunt aquae, (*hoc est*, defluit in aquas,) quia
remotus est a me consolator, qui animam revocet, (*vel,* recreat animam,
<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>משיב;) Fuerunt filii mei desolati,
quia praevaluit hostis.

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p6"></span>He describes at large the calamities of
Jerusalem. But it is no wonder that the Prophet, thus lengthened his
discourse; for we know that those who are heavily oppressed never
satisfy themselves with mourning and lamentations. If, indeed, we duly
consider how great the evils were, the Prophet will not appear to us
wordy, nor will his prolixity be wearisome to us. For when any one
compares the flourishing state of Jerusalem with that desolate ruin
which the Prophet laments, it will surely appear to him that no words,
however many, can fully express what it really was; nay, though the
expressions may seem hyperbolical, yet they do not exceed the greatness
of that calamity. This point is briefly adverted to, lest any one should
be wearied with those various modes of expression which the Prophet
employs, when yet he might have at once said that Jerusalem was
destroyed.

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p7"></span>He says, *For this will I weep*. He
throughout sustains the person of a woman; for Jerusalem herself speaks,
and not Jeremiah. *I*, she says, *for this will weep; mine eye mine eye!
it shall descend into waters*. Others read, “Waters will descend from
mine eyes;” but such a rendering is too loose. I do not, then, doubt but
that Jerusalem says that her eyes would be like fountains of waters. She
indeed speaks in the singular number, and repeats the words, *mine eye!
mine eye! it shall descend*, or flow as waters, that is, as though they
were two fountains, *because alienated from me*, or far from me, *is a
comforter, to revive my soul*  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md)
By these words she intimates that she was fainting, and as it were dying
and that there was no one present to administer comfort, so that her
soul might be revived. As it appeared before, that it is deemed an
extreme evil when there is no friend to do the duty of humanity by
alleviating sorrow; so now again Jerusalem repeats the same complaint,
and says that all her *sons were destroyed, because the enemy had
prevailed*. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p2"></span>**17.** Zion spreadeth forth her hands,
*and there is* none to comfort her: the LORD hath commanded concerning
Jacob, *that* his adversaries *should be* round about him: Jerusalem is
as a menstruous woman among them.

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p3"></span>**17.** Expandit Sion in manibus suis
(*id est,* manus suas, *vel*, complosit manibus suis, *alii vertunt*,
confregit,) nullus consolator ei; mandavit Jehova super Jacob per
circuitus ejus adversarios ejus; facta est Jerusalem in abominationem
inter ipsos (*vel*, tanquam immunda, *vel*, menstruata, <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p3.1"></span>נדה, *enim vocater mulier menstruata apud
Moseu.*)

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p6"></span>The Prophet first says that *Jerusalem
had expanded her hands*, as a token of sorrow, or that she might seek
friends from every side; for when we wish to move men to pity, we
stretch forth our arms. I wonder how it came to the minds of some to say
that Jerusalem had broken bread with her hands. This is extremely
puerile. Some have rendered the words, that she had broken with her
hands, understanding thereby that she had clapped with her hands. It is,
however, a harsh mode of speaking; I retain the most suitable sense,
that *Jerusalem had expanded her hands*. The word <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p6.1"></span>פרש, *peresh*, means also to disperse, or
scatter; but the Prophet no doubt means the expansion of the hands, as
though Jerusalem had said that she was like a woman lamenting her
calamities, and seeking friends on every side to give her some
consolation. And we may gather the meaning of the Prophet from the
passage itself, S*ion*, it is said, *by spreading hands calls her
friends, and no one is a comforter*: these clauses ought to be read
together, that is, that Sion expanded her hands, and yet no one
responded to alleviate her sorrow by consolation.

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p7"></span>It follows, that *Jehovah had commanded
respecting Jacob, that through his circuits adversaries should afflict
him*. The Prophet again reminds us that these evils did not happen
through men, but that God had resolved in this manner to punish the
obstinate impiety of the people. Lest, then, the Jews should give vent
to their sorrow, and ascribe it to the Chaldeans, as it was commonly
done, he recalls their attention to God himself, and says that the
Chaldeans, however cruel they were, yet did nothing merely through their
own impulse, but through God’s command. He adds, *through the circuits*,
that the Jews might know that there was no escape, for God held them all
as though they were shut up. For we can in various ways escape from the
hands of men; but when God is our enemy, we in vain seek hiding-places.
The Prophet then teaches us that subterfuges did not avail the Jews,
because God on every side kept them shut up.

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p8"></span>He says at length that *Jerusalem was
like a menstruous woman*, or was an abomination; for <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>נדה, *nede*, may be rendered uncleanness,
or abomination, and is often a noun substantive; and I am disposed so to
render it, even that Jerusalem was regarded as filth, as though the
Prophet had said that there was no humanity or moderation in the enemies
of the Jews, because they were not counted as men, but as offscourings,
as an abominable filth.  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md)

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p13"></span>Now, if such a thing happened to the
ancient Church, let us not wonder if at this day also God should deal
with us more severely than we wish. It is, indeed, a very bitter thing
to see the Church so afflicted as to have the ungodly exulting over its
calamities, and that God’s children should be as the refuse and filth of
the world. But let us patiently bear such a condition; and when we are
thus contemptuously treated by our enemies, let us know that God visits
us with punishment, and that the wicked do nothing except through the
providence of God, for it is his will to try our faith, and thus to shew
himself a righteous judge: for if we rightly consider in how many ways,
and how obstinately we have provoked his wrath, we shall not wonder if
we also be counted at this day an abomination and a curse. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p2"></span>**18.** The LORD is righteous; for I
have rebelled against his commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and
behold my sorrow: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**18.** Justus ipse Jehova, quia os
ejus exacerbavi: Audite agedum omnes populii, videte dolorem meum;
virgines meae et adolescentes mei profecti sunt in captivitatem.

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p6"></span>Jerusalem again acknowledges, and more
clearly expresses, that she suffered a just punishment. She had before
confessed that her enemies were cruel through God’s command; but it was
necessary to point out again the cause of that cruelty, even that she
had too long provoked the wrath of God.

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p7"></span>She says, first, that God was *just*,
or righteous,  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) *because she had
provoked his mouth*. By the *mouth* of God we are to understand the
prophetic doctrine, as it is well known. But the phrase is emphatical,
for when the word of God was proclaimed by the mouth of prophets, it was
despised as an empty sound. As, then, prophetic doctrine has not its own
majesty ascribed to it, God calls whatever his servants declare his
mouth. This mode of speaking is taken from Moses, and often occurs in
his writings. *Jehovah*, then, *is just*; how so? *because I have
provoked his mouth*. And it was more grievous and less excusable to
provoke the mouth of God than simply to offend God. The ungodly often
offend God when they labor under ignorance; but when the Lord is pleased
to open his mouth to recall the erring, and to shew the way of
salvation, and then men rush headlong, as it were designedly, into sins,
it is certainly a mark of extreme impiety. We hence understand why the
Prophet mentions the mouth of God, or the teaching of the prophets, even
to exaggerate the wickedness of Jerusalem, which had so obstinately
disregarded God speaking by his prophets.

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p9"></span>The greatness of her sorrow is again
deplored; and what follows is addressed to all nations, *Hear, I pray,
all ye people; see my sorrow*. And what was the reason for this great
sorrow? *because*, she says, *my virgins and my young men have been
driven into captivity*. This might seem a light thing; for a previous
account has been given of other calamities, which were far more severe;
and exile in itself is but a moderate punishment. But we must bear in
mind what we have before stated, that the Jews dwelt in that land, as
though they had been placed there by the hand of God, that Jerusalem was
to be a perpetual rest, which had been granted them from above; in
short, that it was as it were a pledge of the eternal inheritance. When,
therefore, they were driven into captivity, it was the same as though
God had cast them down from heaven, and banished them from his kingdom.
For the Jews would not have been deprived of that land, had not God
rejected them and shewed his alienation from them. It was then the same
as repudiation. It is therefore no wonder that Jerusalem so much
lamented because her sons and her daughters were driven into exile.

<span id="iii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
hitherto dealt so mercifully with us, we may anticipate thy dreadful
judgment; and that if thou shouldest more severely chastise us, we may
not yet fail, but that being humbled under thy mighty hand, we may flee
to thy mercy and cherish this hope in our hearts, that thou wilt be a
Father to us, and not hesitate to call continually on thee, until, being
freed from all evils, we shall at length be gathered into thy celestial
kingdom, which thine only-begotten Son has procured for us by his own
blood. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxv-p1"></span>Lecture Fourth

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>**19.** I called for my lovers, *but*
they deceived me: my priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the
city, while they sought their meat to relieve their souls.

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span>**19.** Clamavi ad amicos nucos, ipsi
deceperunt me: sacerdotes mei et seniores mei in urbe obierunt, quia
quaesierint cibum sibi et refocillarunt (ad verbum, hoc est, ut
refocillarent) animam suam (ad verbum, ut redire facerent, quemadmodum
Gallice dicimus, faire revenir le coeur.)

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p6"></span>Here the people of God complain in the
person of a woman, as we have before seen, that in their calamity they
were left destitute of every comfort. And it is a circumstance which
increases grief, when no one is present to shew any kindness to the
miserable; for it is no small alleviation of sorrow, when friends offer
their kind services, and as far as they can, endeavor to mitigate the
severity of the evil.

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p7"></span>The Church of God now says, that she
was so forsaken by friends as to be left alone to pine away in her
mourning and sorrow. There may, however, be here an allusion to shameful
and impure connections; for by this term, *friends*, the Spirit often
points out the Egyptians as well as others in whom the Israelites had
foolishly trusted; for in this manner, we know, they had turned aside
from conjugal fidelity. God had bound them to himself, that they might
acquiesce in his favor alone; and so to acquiesce was their spiritual
chastity. Rightly, then, does Scripture compare both the Egyptians and
the Assyrians to harlots, whenever the Israelites sought aid from them.
But as this explanation seems too refined, I am content to view what is
said simply as a complaint., that the people of God, though looking in
all directions, yet could find no comfort in the world. *I cried*, she
said, *to my friends; they deceived me.*

<span id="iii.ii.xxvi-p8"></span>It is then added, *My priests and mine
elders expired in the city*. Had they been slain in battle, it would
have been no wonder; for they who go against an enemy, go as it were to
meet death. But God’s people here deplore a more grievous evil, that the
priests died in the city, not through the enemies’ sword, but through
famine, which is as it were the extreme of evils. It is then said, that
the priests as well as the elders perished through famine, because they
could not find food. And when it is said that they *sought food to
refresh the soul*, there is a contrast to be understood between ordinary
food and a remedy for the famine; for we naturally seek food whenever we
feel hungry; but the Prophet refers here to something more than this,
even that the priests and the elders sought food, because long
abstinence urged them; and it was very sad, that the priests, who
excelled in honor, and also the elders, were thus reduced to want. Had
such a thing happened to the common people, it would not have been so
wonderful; for the long siege of the city had consumed all their
provisions. But when the priests, and those who had wealth, were thus
oppressed with hunger, we may conclude that the want which the Prophet
wished to describe was extreme. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p2"></span>**20.** Behold, O LORD; for I *am* in
distress; my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me; for I
have greviously rebelled: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home *there is*
as death.

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p3"></span>**20.** Vide Jehova, quia afflictio
mihi, (*vel*, augustia,) viscera mea conturbata sunt (*alii,*
contracta;) eversum est cor meum interme, quia rebellando rebellavi;
fris orbat gladius, domi tanquam mors.

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p6"></span>The people turn again to pray God: and
what has been before said ought to be remembered, that these
lamentations of Jeremiah differ from the complaints of the ungodly;
because the faithful first acknowledge that they are justly chastised by
God’s hand, and secondly, they trust in his mercy and implore his aid.
For by these two marks the Church is distinguished from the unbelieving,
even by repentance and faith. To sigh and to mourn in adversities, and
to lament also their miseries, are common to both; but the children of
God differ greatly from the ungodly, because they humble themselves
under his mighty hand, and confess that they deserve to suffer
punishment; and further, they cast not away the hope of salvation, but
implore his mercy. Then the Prophet introduces again the people as
praying God to look on them. For the ungodly pour forth their complaints
into the air; and when at any time nature dictates to them that they
ought to address God, yet no prayer arises from a sincere heart.

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p7"></span>There is no doubt but that the Prophet
here shewed to the faithful how they were to lament their common
miseries, even so as patiently to bear the chastisements of God, and
also to seek deliverance from him, though they had provoked his wrath.
For when we see that we are pressed down by God’s hand, we do not
murmur, but the knowledge of our sins humbles us, and faith moderates
our mourning, which would otherwise exceed moderation. And when we thus
humbly flee to God, we in a manner unburden our sorrows into his bosom,
as it is said in the Psalms, “Cast (or roll) on God thy cares.” (<span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p8"></span>He then says first, *See, Jehovah, for
affliction* is *to me*. He then expresses the manner of the affliction,
*because his bowels were bound*, or troubled. The word is from, <span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p8.1"></span> חמר*chemer*, which is doubled. Some
derive it from <span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p8.2"></span>חמור, *chemur*, an
ass, and so render it “bound,” as when a. burden is fastened on an ass.
But more probable is the opinion of those who derive the word from
mortar or cement, for as cement is made by mixing water with lime and
sand, and stirring them together, so by a metaphor the bowels are said
to be stirred or troubled;  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) and
this explanation agrees better with what follows — for it is added, *my
heart is overturned*. The reason is given, because the people by
*rebelling had rebelled*, that is, had been very rebellious against God.
We have said that the complaints of the godly differ from those of the
ungodly, for they not only pray to God, but make also a sincere
confession, so as to make it evident that they are justly chastised by
God’s hand. At the beginning of the verse the faithful prayed, and now
again they declare that they deserved what they suffered, because they
had been very rebellious. Then Jeremiah proceeds with what he had begun
to say respecting the grievousness of their punishment, *Abroad*, or
without, he says, *the sword bereaves, and at home it is like death*;
that is, “When we go abroad, the sword meets us; and when we hide
ourselves at home, there also many deaths surround us.” He uses the
particle of likeness, *as*, or like; as though he had said that nothing
met them at home but what was deadly.  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) It now follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p2"></span>**21.** They have heard that I sign;
*there is* none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my
trouble; they are glad that thou hast done *it*; thou will bring the day
*that* thou hast called, and they shall be like unto me.

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p3"></span>**21.** Audierunt quod sum gemens,
(hoc est, quod sim in luctu,) nec quisquam consolator mihi; omnes
inimici mei audierunt malum meum, gavisi sunt quod tu feceris, et
adduxeris diem, quem tu vocasti; atqui erunt sicuti ego.

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p6"></span>The verb <span
id="iii.ii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>שמעו, *shemou*, is put down twice, but at
the beginning without a nominative case: hence the sentence is
defective, until in the second clause the word <span
id="iii.ii.xxviii-p6.2"></span>איבי *aibi*, is expressed. Jeremiah
evidently says, that enemies had *heard* of the evils under which the
people labored, even that they were *sighing*, and that no one showed
them any kindness; for it is commonly the case that sympathy is
manifested towards the miserable. By this circumstance he amplifies the
grievousness of their punishment, there being no one, as before said, to
administer any consolation. But it is repeated, that *enemies* had
*heard*; for as there is nothing more bitter than reproaches, we seek in
adversities to withdraw ourselves in a manner from the observation of
men; but our evil is especially doubled, when we become a spectacle to
enemies; for they derive joy from our adversities, and then exult over
us. When, therefore, the chosen people said, that *enemies* had *heard*,
they thus showed that nothing could be added to their miseries: *They
have heard*, then, that I was sighing and that no one comforted me. Who
had heard? all mine enemies; and they *have rejoiced that thou hast done
it*

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p7"></span>Jeremiah seems to intimate, that
their enemies, being fully persuaded that God was displeased with his
people, did on this account more freely rejoice; and at the same time
they believed that it was all over with those miserable people with whom
God was displeased. But I know not whether this view is well grounded. I
indeed do not reject it, nor will I dispute with any one who may hold
that the enemies rejoiced, because they thought that God was become the
enemy of that people, whom he had before chosen and also protected: nor
is this view unsuitable; for the reprobate then fully triumph when they
can boast that God is adverse to us. But when no such thought comes to
their minds, they yet cease not to rejoice when they see that we are
oppressed and afflicted. Though, then, they may not think of God’s hand,
yet they rejoice that it is *done*; that is, they rejoice that we are
distressed, though they understand not who the author is. We may then
take the meaning simply to be, that the enemies of the Church rejoiced
at that calamity, without considering who the author of it was.

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p8"></span>But, why is it expressed that *God
had done it*? even to shew that while the ungodly think that fortune is
unfavorable to us, it; is our duty to cast our eyes on God, for we ought
not to judge of things according to their blindness. As, then, they
ascribe not to God the glory due to him when they do not acknowledge him
as judge, it ever behooves us to see by the eyes of faith what is hid
from the natural perceptions of men, even that nothing happens to us
except through the righteous judgment of God. Though, then, enemies had
not wisdom to know how it was that the Church was afflicted, yet it
behooved the Church itself to use by means of faith such a language as
this, that God had *done* it; *they rejoiced that thou hast done it*

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p9"></span>And it follows, *Thou hast brought
the day which thou hast called,* or proclaimed; for <span
id="iii.ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>קרא, *kora*, has sometimes this meaning.
 <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) In short, the faithful now
confess not only that they were afflicted by God’s hand, but also that
what the prophets had so often threatened, and what had been despised,
was now fulfilled. For we have seen with what pertinacity that people
rejected the threatenings given by the prophets: God had often exhorted
them to repent, and also had proclaimed or fixed a time for them, but
without effect. Therefore the faithful now reflect on what had not been
sufficiently known before, even that the day was brought which had been
often proclaimed. And thus they confessed, not only that they were
worthy of punishment., but that it was the proper time for them to be
chastised, as they had not repented after having been so often warned.

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p14"></span>He adds, *But they themselves shall
be as I* am. Here the future tense may be considered as optative, for
presently a prayer follows which confirms this view. But we may also
take the meaning to be simply this, — that the faithful began to take
courage, as they looked forward to the time when God would render to the
wicked according to their proud and disdainful exultation’s. It follows,
—

<span id="iii.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p2"></span>**22.** Let all their wickedness come
before thee; and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for all my
transgressions: for my sighs *are* many, and my heart *is* faint.

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p3"></span>**22.** Veniet (aut, veniat) omnis
malitia eorum in conspectum tuum, et facias illis, quemadmodum fecisti
mihi super omnibus sceleribus meis; quia multa suspiria mea, et cor meum
debile (vel, moestum.)

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p6"></span>Here, no doubt, the faithful regarded
as a part of their comfort the judgment which God would at length
execute on the ungodly; and there is no doubt but that this kind of
imprecation had been suggested to God’s children by the Holy Spirit, in
order to sustain them when pressed down by heavy troubles; not that God
gave them thus loose reins to desire vengeance on their enemies, but
that while those perished who indulged their malice, the faithful might
derive from their ruin a hope of deliverance; for the vengeance of God
on the reprobate brings with it a token of paternal favor towards the
elect.

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p7"></span>And that we may better understand what
this imprecation means, we must first bear in mind that we cannot
complain of enemies, except they are also enemies to God. For should I
hurt any one, and should he, impelled by wrath, vex me, there could be
no access for my complaint to God, and in vain could I seek a covering
from this example; why? because whenever we go before God, it is
necessary, as I have said, that our enemies should be also his enemies.
But, secondly, it would not be sufficient, except our zeal were also
pure; for when we defend our own private cause, something excessive will
necessarily be in our prayers. Let us, then, know that we are not to
pronounce an imprecation on our enemies, except, first, they are God’s
enemies; and, secondly, except we disregard ourselves, and plead not our
own cause, but, on the contrary, undertake the cause of public safety,
having laid aside all turbulent feelings; and especially, except our
fervor arises from a desire to glorify God. With these qualifications,
then, we may adopt the form of prayer given us here by the Prophet. But
as this subject has been explained elsewhere, and often and very fully,
I touch on it here but briefly.

<span id="iii.ii.xxix-p8"></span>He then says, *Let all their wickedness
come before thee; do to them as thou hast done to me*. Here, again, the
faithful take upon themselves the blame for all the evils they were
suffering; for they do not expostulate with God, but pray only that he
would become the judge of the whole world, in order that the ungodly
might also at length have their turn, when God would be pacified towards
his children. But they afterwards more clearly express that they had
deserved all that they had suffered — *for all my sins*. Then they add,
*because my sighs are many and my heart is weak*. We, in short, see that
the faithful lay humbly their prayers before God, and at the same time
confess that what they had deserved was rendered to them, only they set
before God their extreme sorrow, straits, grieves, tears, and sighs.
Then the way of pacifying God is, sincerely to confess that we are
justly visited by his judgment, and also to lie down as it. were
confounded, and at the same time to venture to look up to him, and to
rely on his mercy with confidence. Now follows the second elegy, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc21009.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p11"></span> The word is not repeated in the early
Versions, nor by *Blayney* and *Henderson*. The word <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>איכה, means properly, “Whence thus?” and it
may be rendered, “How is this?” and the passage would be more emphatic,
—

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p12"></span>**1.** How is this? alone sits the city,
that was full of people!  
Like a widow is she that was great among nations!  
A princess among provinces is under tribute!

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p13"></span>**2.** Weeping she weeps in the night,
and her tear on her cheek!  
None to her a comforter of all her lovers!  
All her friends have deceived her, they are become her enemies!

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p14"></span>These were the various things which
created astonishment in the Prophet. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc21009.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9"></span> *Blayney* and *Horsley* agree in this
view; but *Gataker*, *Henry*, and *Henderson* take the previous view,
that is, that Judah went to exile on account of the oppression they
practiced, and the multiplied servitude they exacted, especially the
servitude or slavery to which servants were subjected, as recorded in
<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>[Jer
34](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>.
What confirms this view is the word “Judah,” which, as it implies the
greater part, could not be applied to the comparatively few who
voluntarily migrated.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p10"></span>**3.** Removed is Judah for oppression
and for much servitude;  
She dwells among nations without finding rest;  
All her pursuers seized her in the straits.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p11"></span>The *Targum* paraphrases “oppression” by
mentioning orphans and widows, and “servitude,” by referring to what
servants were subjected to, as related in <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Jeremiah
34](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>.
These were sins for which the Jews had often been threatened with
banishment. “Pursuers” rather than “persecutors;” and to be “seized in
(or, between) the straits,” is, as Lowth says, a metaphor taken from
hunters, who drive the game to narrow places, from which there is no
escape.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p12"></span>*Houbiqant* proposes to connect
“oppression and servitude” with the following words, and not with the
preceding, —

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p13"></span>Removed is Judah; for oppression and for
much servitude,  
She dwells among the nations without finding rest.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p14"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc21009.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="iii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p9"></span> Participles are used throughout this
verse, which express the present state of things, —

<span id="iii.ii.v-p10"></span>The ways of Sion are mourning, for none
are coming to the feasts;  
All her gates are made desolate, her priests are sighing;  
Her virgins are afflicted, and she, bitterness is to her.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p11"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc21009.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p5"></span>**5.** Become have her oppressors the
head,  
Her enemies have prospered;  
For Jehovah has afflicted her  
For the number of her transgressions;  
Her children are gone into captivity  
Before the face of the oppressor.

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p6"></span>The word <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>צר is not an” adversary,” but an oppressor,
one who straitens and oppresses another. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc21009.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p11"></span> The idea here is somewhat different:
the princes are compared to harts reduced and enfeebled by famine, so
that they were driven by their enemies like a herd of tame cattle. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc21009.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="iii.ii.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p8"></span> The versions and the *Targ*. are
evidently wrong here, and are not consistent with one another. There is
no meaning except <span id="iii.ii.x-p8.1"></span>ב be considered as
understood before <span id="iii.ii.x-p8.2"></span>ימי, “days.” The only
difference among critics is about the meaning of <span
id="iii.ii.x-p8.3"></span>מרוד. There is no different reading. It is
rendered “rejections — <span id="iii.ii.x-p8.4"></span>ἀπωσμῶν,” by the
*Sept*., “prevarication” by the *Vulg*., and “punishment” by the *Syr*
*Parkhurst* and *Blayney* derive it from <span
id="iii.ii.x-p8.5"></span>ירד, to come down, to descend. It means the
descending or abasement’s to which Jerusalem had been subjected, and has
the same meaning in <span id="iii.ii.x-p8.6"></span>[La
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.ii.x-p8.6"></span>.
“In the days of her affliction and of her abasement’s.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc21009.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="iii.ii.x-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p14"></span> There are in this verse four lines,
while there are only three in all the rest; but there is no ground for
supposing an interpolation, as some have thought; for it is found in
every Hebrew copy and in the versions, and the *Targum*. As to the last
word, it is rendered by the *Sept*., “habitation,” or according to the
Alexandrian copy, “emigration;” by the *Vulg*. “sabbaths;” and by the
*Syr*. “sorrow.” The word is nowhere found to signify the Sabbath. It is
either from <span id="iii.ii.x-p14.1"></span>שבה, to lead captive, as
*Parkhurst* thinks, and means captivity, emigration; or from <span
id="iii.ii.x-p14.2"></span>שבת, to cease, to come to an end, according
to *Blayney* and *Henderson*, and may be rendered “discontinuance,”
*i.e*., as a nation or a state, or “ruin.” But the former meaning
agreeing with the *Sept*. is to be preferred, —

<span id="iii.ii.x-p15"></span>When fall did her people, and she had no
helper,  
See her did oppressors, they laughed at her captivity.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p16"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc21009.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p9"></span>*“*<span
id="iii.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>*Venit summa dies et ineluctabile tempus  
Dardaniae: fuimus Troes; fuit Ilium et ingens  
Gloria Teucrorum: ferus omnia Jupiter Argos  
Transtulit: incensa Danai dominantur in urbe.”  
*Virg. AEn. 2.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc21009.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p13"></span>*“*<span id="iii.ii.xi-p13.1"></span>*O
patria! O divum domus Ilium! Et inclyta bello  
Moenia Dardanidum! Ferus omnia Jupiter Argos  
Transtulit.”* —*  
*AEn 2.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc21009.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p17"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p18"></span>*“*<span
id="iii.ii.xi-p18.1"></span>*Postquam res Asiae, Priamique everterre
gentem  
Immeritam visum Superis.”* —*  
*Virg. AEn. 3.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc21009.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p24"></span> “Fluctuation,” by the *Sept*.;
“instable,” by the *Vulg*.: “vagrant,” or wandering, by the *Targ*.; and
“horror”, by the *Syr*. The verb means to remove; and the reference here
is evidently to banishment, and not to uncleanness, as some take it,
because the noun is sometimes so taken, persons being removed from
society on account of uncleanness. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc21009.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p25"></span> “To turn back” or backward, is a phrase
which some regard as expressive of shame, as those who feel shame recede
from the public view and hide themselves. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc21009.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p9"></span> “She carries the marks of her sins in
the greatness of her punishment,” is Lowth’s remark, which seems to
favor this view. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc21009.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p8"></span> The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p9"></span>His hand has the oppressor expanded
over all her desirable things;  
Indeed she saw it: nations entered her sanctuary;  
Though thou hast commanded this, “They shall not come to thine
assembly.”

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p10"></span>“The desirable things” were sacred
things, and might be so rendered. To expand the hand over them was to
seize them, to take possession of them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc21009.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p9"></span> That is, she was treated as vile or
worthless: “dishonored” is the S*ept*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc21009.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p8"></span> It is evidently taken as <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>לו by the *Sept*., the *Vulg*., and the
*Targ*.; but as a negative by the *Syr*., and the sentence is taken as a
question: and this gives the best meaning. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc21009.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p8"></span> All the versions agree in rendering
<span id="iii.ii.xix-p8.1"></span>נשקד in the sense of watching; and
when they agree, there is a strong presumption that they are right. And
all agree as to <span id="iii.ii.xix-p8.2"></span>על being a
preposition, and not a noun, “yoke,” except the *Vulg.*, which hardly
gives any meaning. The Rabbins have invented a new meaning for the verb,
which it has in no other place, and some have followed them. It is
rendered impersonally by the *Sept*., “there has been watching,” but by
the *Vulg*., “he hath watched.” To “watch over transgressions,” is
similar to “watch upon (or over) the evil,” in <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p8.3"></span>[Da
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xix-p8.3"></span>; it is to watch over them in order to
punish them. The whole verse I render thus, —

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p10"></span>**14.** He hath watched over my
transgressions, by his hand they are twined; His yoke is upon my neck,
he hath made to fail my strength; Yea, given me hath the Lord into the
hands of *the oppressor*, I cannot stand.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p11"></span>The word “hands” is in a construct
form, which shews that there is a word left out. “I cannot stand,”
*i.e.*, against the oppressor; I cannot resist. The future is used in
the sense of the present; literally it is, “I shall not be able to
stand,” or resist. So it is exactly in Welsh; it is the future, but
understood as expressing what is present.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p12"></span>In the first line, “his hand” is
connected in all the versions with “twined,” or wreathed together. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc21009.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p8"></span> If the word be rendered “assembly,” or
congregation, the meaning is, the assembly of the Chaldeans, and an
allusion, as *Gataker* says, is made to the calling of the people to
their feasts. It is rendered “time” by the *Sept*. and the *Vulg.*, but
“assembly” by the *Syr*. To call against or upon one a fixed time, is no
suitable expression. Our version is no doubt right; and with it agree
*Blayney* and *Henderson*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc21009.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p12"></span> The words are as follows, —

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p13"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p14"></span>The winepress has the Lord trodden as to
the virgin,  
the daughter of Judah.

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p15"></span>The <span id="iii.ii.xx-p15.1"></span>ל
sometimes means “as to,” or, with respect to. “The daughter of Judah” is
in apposition with “virgin.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc21009.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p8"></span> Though the *Sept*. and *Vulg.* do not
repeat the “eye,” yet the *Targ*. has “my two eyes,” and the *Syr*.,
“mine eyes.” The repetition is in most copies, and it is very
emphatical. See a similar instance in <span
id="iii.ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>[Jer
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p10"></span>**16.** For these things I weep: mine
eye! mine eye! it brings down water; For far from me is a comforter, a
restorer of my life;  
Become desolate are my sons, for the enemy has prevailed.

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p11"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc21009.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p9"></span> The same word, <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>נדה occurs in <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p9.2"></span>[La
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p9.2"></span>, only there is a <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p9.3"></span>י in it; and the phrase in its form is
similar. The Versions, except the, *Syr*., and also the *Targ*., give to
it there the idea of wandering, but here of uncleanness. There seems to
be no reason for this change; and the end of the next verse favors the
idea of wandering: Jerusalem had become a wanderer, or a fugitive, among
her oppressors, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p11"></span>**17.** Expanded hath Sion her hands,
no comforter is to her;  
Commanded has Jehovah as to Jacob, *Let* those around him *be* his
oppressors; Become has Jerusalem a wanderer among them.

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p12"></span>The word <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p12.1"></span>נד is a fugitive, a wanderer, and as
Jerusalem is feminine, <span id="iii.ii.xxii-p12.2"></span>ה is added, a
feminine termination. “Jerusalem” here, as in <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p12.3"></span>[La
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p12.3"></span>, means its citizens. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc21009.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxiii-p8"></span> “Righteous he, Jehovah:” the pronoun
is used instead of the verb *is*, — a common thing in Hebrew. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc21009.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p9"></span> Troubled,” or disquieted, is the
rendering of all the versions, and also of the *Targ*. As it is a
reduplicate, the verb means greatly troubled or greatly disturbed, or
violently agitated. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc21009.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p10"></span> The rendering of the *Sept*. is, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p11"></span>Abroad the sword has bereaved me, as
death at home.

<span id="iii.ii.xxvii-p12"></span>To the same purpose is the S*yr*. and
*Arab*. Having before referred to death by famine, he now adds the
devastation of the sword. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc21009.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p10"></span> Our version is wrong in rendering
this clause in the future tense. The reference is not to the day of
vengeance to the Babylonians, but to the day of vengeance which God had
brought on his own people. The versions, except the *Syr*., give the
verb in the past tense.

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p11"></span>There are here two instances of
<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>כי being carried on to the next
clause, —

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p12"></span>**21.** Heard have they that I sigh,
*that* I have no comforter:  
All mine enemies have heard of my evil; they have rejoiced  
That thou hast done it, that thou hast brought the day thou hast
announced;  
But they shall be like myself.

<span id="iii.ii.xxviii-p13"></span> — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc21010.md)
