[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc21009)  [Next](cc21011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 21: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part V*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** How hath the Lord covered the
daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, *and* cast down from heaven
unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in
the day of his anger!

<span id="iii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quomodo obnubilavit in iracundia
sua Dominus filiam Sion, projecit a coelo in terram decorem Israel, et
non recordatus est scabelli pedum suorum in dic iracundiae!

<span id="iii.iii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.i-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p6"></span>The Prophet again exclaims in wonder,
that an incredible thing had happened, which was like a prodigy; for at
the first sight it seemed very unreasonable, that a people whom God had
not only received into favor, but with whom he had made a perpetual
covenant, should thus be forsaken by him. For though men were a hundred
times perfidious, yet God never changes, but remains unchangeable in his
faithfulness; and we know that his covenant was not made to depend on
the merits of men. Whatsoever, then, the people might be, yet it
behooved God to continue in his purpose, and not to annul the promise
made to Abraham. Now, when Jerusalem was reduced to desolation, there
was as it were all abolition of God’s covenant. There is, then, no
wonder that the Prophet here exclaims, as on account of some prodigy,
*How can it be that God hath clouded* or *darkened*, etc.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p7"></span>We must, however, observe at the same
time, that the Prophet did not mean here to invalidate the fidelity or
constancy of God, but thus to rouse the attention of his own nation, who
had become torpid in their sloth; for though they were pressed down
under a load of evils, yet they had become hardened in their
perverseness. But it was impossible that any one should really call on
God, except he was humbled in mind, and brought the sacrifice of which
we have spoken, even a humble and contrite spirit. (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>[Ps
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>.) It was, then, the Prophet’s object to
soften the hardness which he knew prevailed in almost the whole people.
This was the reason why he exclaimed, in a kind of astonishment, *How
has God clouded*, etc.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p19"></span>Some render the words, “How has God
raised up,” etc., which may be allowed, provided it be not taken in a
good sense, for it is said, *in his wrath;* but in this case the words
to raise up and to cast down ought to be read conjointly; for when one
wishes to break in pieces an earthen vessel, he not only casts it on the
ground, but he raises it up, that it may be thrown down with greater
force. We may, then, take this meaning, that God, in order that he might
with greater violence break in pieces his people, had raised them up,
not to honor them, but in order to dash them more violently on the
ground. However, as this sense seems perhaps too refined, I am content
with the first explanation, that God had *clouded the daughter of Zion
in his wrath*; and then follows an explanation, that he had *cast her
from heaven to the earth.* So then God covered with darkness his people,
when he drew them down from the high dignity which they had for a time
enjoyed. He had, then, *cast on the earth all the glory of Israel, and
remembered not his footstool*

<span id="iii.iii.i-p20"></span>The Prophet seems here indirectly to
contend with God, because he had not spared his own sanctuary; for God,
as it has been just stated, had chosen Mount Sion for himself, where he
designed to be prayed to, because he had placed there the memorial of
his name. As, then, he had not spared his own sanctuary, it did not
appear consistent with his constancy, and he also seemed thus to have
disregarded his own glory. But the design of the Prophet is rather to
shew to the people how much God’s wrath had been kindled, when he spared
not even his own sanctuary. For he takes this principle as granted, that
God is never without reason angry, and never exceeds the due measure of
punishment. As, then, God’s wrath was so great that he destroyed his own
Temple, it was a token of dreadful wrath; and what was the cause but the
sins of men? for God, as I have said, always preserves moderation in his
judgments. He, then, could not have better expressed to the people the
heinousness of their sins, than by laying before them this fact, that
God *remembered not his footstool*

<span id="iii.iii.i-p21"></span>And the Temple, by a very suitable
metaphor, is called the footstool of God. It is, indeed, called his
habitation; for in Scripture the Temple is often said to be the house of
God. It was then the house, the habitation, and the rest of God. But as
men are ever inclined to superstition, in order to raise up their
thoughts above earthly elements, we are reminded, on the other hand, in
Scripture, that the Temple was the *footstool of God*. So in the Psalms,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p22"></span>“Adore ye before his footstool,” (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>[Ps
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p23"></span>and again,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p24"></span>“We shall adore in the place where his
feet stand.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.i-p24.2"></span>[Ps
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p25"></span>We, then, see that the two expressions,
apparently different, do yet well agree, that the Temple was the house
of God and his habitation, and that yet it was only his footstool. It
was the house of God, because the faithful found by experience that he
was there present; as, then, God gave tokens of his presence, the Temple
was rightly called the house; of God, his rest and habitation. But that
the faithful might not fix their minds on the visible sanctuary, and
thus by indulging a gross imagination, fall into superstition, and put
an idol in the place of God, the Temple was called the footstool of God.
For as it was a footstool, it behooved the faithful to rise up higher
and to know that God was really sought, only when they raised their
thoughts above the world. We now perceive what was the purpose of this
mode of speaking.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p26"></span>God is said *not to have remembered his
Temple*, not because he had wholly disregarded it, but because the
destruction of the Temple could produce no other opinion in men. All,
then, who saw that the Temple had been burnt by profane hands, and
pulled down after it had been plundered, thought that the Temple was
forsaken by God; and so also he speaks by Ezekiel, (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>[Eze
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>.) Then this oblivion, or not remembering,
refers to the thoughts of men; for however God may have remembered the
Temple, yet he seemed for a time to have disregarded it. We must, at the
same time, bear in mind what I have said, that the Prophet here did not
intend to dispute with God, or to contend with him, but, on the
contrary, to shew what the people deserved; for God was so indignant on
account of their sins, that he suffered his own Temple to be profaned.
The same thing also follows respecting the kingdom, —

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** The Lord hath swallowed up all
the habitations of Jacob, and hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in
his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he hath brought
*them* down to the ground: he hath polluted the kingdom and the princes
thereof.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Perdidit Dominus, non pepercit
(hoc est, non parcendo, absque venia) omnia habitacula Jacob; diruit in
excandescentia sua munitiones filiae Jehudah; detraxit ad terram:
profanavit regnum ejus et principes ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>He pursues the same subject, but in
other words. He first says, that God *had without pardon destroyed all
the habitations of Jacob*; some read, “all the beauty (or the ornament)
of Jacob.” But the other rendering is more suitable, that he had
destroyed all the *habitations* of Jacob; and then that he had
*demolished in his indignation*, etc. The word is derived from what
means excess; but we know that all words signifying wrath are
transferred to God, but they do not properly belong to him. God, then,
*in his violent wrath had demolished all fortresses*, and *cast them to
the ground*; and afterwards, that he had *profaned*, etc.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>This profanation of the kingdom, and of
the princes, corresponds with the former verse, where he said that God
had not remembered his footstool for we know that the kingdom was
sacerdotal and consecrated to God. When, therefore, it was polluted, it
follows that God in a manner exposed his name to reproach, because the
mouth of all the ungodly was thus opened, so that they insolently poured
forth their slanders. That God, then, spared not the kingdom nor the
Temple, it hence followed that his wrath against the Jews was dreadful.
Now, as he is a righteous judge, it follows, that such was the greatness
of the sins of the Jews, that they sustained the blame for this extreme
sacrilege; for it was through their sins that God’s name was exposed to
reproach both as to the Temple and the kingdom.

<span id="iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
settest before us at this day those ancient examples by which we
perceive with what heavy punishments thou didst chastise those whom thou
hadst adopted, — O grant, that we may learn to regard thee, and
carefully to examine our whole life, and duly consider how indulgently
thou hast preserved us to this day, so that we may ever patiently bear
thy chastisements, and with a humble and sincere heart flee to thy
mercy, until thou be pleased to raise up thy Church from that miserable
state in which it now lies, and so to restore it, that thy name may,
through thine only-begotten Son, be glorified throughout the whole
world. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifth

<span id="iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p2"></span>**3.** He hath cut off in *his* fierce
anger all the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from
before the enemy, and he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire,
*which* devoureth round about.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p3"></span>**3.** Confregit in excandescentia irae
suae omne cornu Israelis: retraxit (*vel,* redire fecit*)* retrorsum
dexteram suam a facie inimici, et exarsit in Jacob tanquam ignis, flamma
devoravit in circuitu.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p6"></span>Jeremiah expresses the same thing in
various ways; but all that he says tends to shew that it was an evidence
of God’s extreme vengeance, when the people, the city, and the Temple,
were destroyed. But it ought to be observed, that God is here
represented as the author of that calamity: the Prophet would have
otherwise lamented in vain over the ruin of his own country; but as in
all adversities he acknowledged the hand of God, he afterwards added,
that God had a just reason why he was so grievously displeased with his
own people.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p7"></span>He then says, that *every horn* had been
*broken* by God. We know that by *horn* is meant strength as well as
excellency or dignity and I am disposed to include both here, though the
word breaking seems rather to refer to strength or power. But the whole
clause must be noticed, that God had *broken every horn of Israel in the
indignation of his wrath*. The Prophet intimates that God had not been
angry with his people as though he had been offended by slight
transgressions, but that the measure of his wrath had been unusual, even
because the impiety of the people had so burst forth, that the offense
given to God could not have been slight. Then, by *indignation of wrath*
the Prophet does not mean an excess, as though God had through a violent
impulse rushed forth to take vengeance; but he rather intimates that the
people had become so wicked, that it did not behoove God to punish in an
ordinary way an impiety so inveterate.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p8"></span>He then adds, that God had *withdrawn,
his right hand from before the enemy*, and that at the same time he had
*burned like a fire*, the flame of which had *devoured all around*. The
Prophet here refers to two things; the first is, that though God had
been accustomed to help his people, and to oppose their enemies, as they
had experienced his aid in the greatest dangers, yet now his people were
forsaken and left destitute of all hope. The first clause, then,
declares, that God would not be the deliverer of his people as formerly,
because they had forsaken him. But he speaks figuratively, that God had
*drawn back his right hand*; and God’s right hand means his protection,
as it is well known. But the Prophet’s meaning is by no means obscure,
even that there was hereafter no hope that God would meet the enemies of
his people, and thus preserve them in safety, for he had drawn back his
hand.  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) But there is a second
thing added, even that God’s hand *burned like fire.* Now it was in
itself a grievous thing that the people had been so rejected by God,
that no help could be expected from him; but it was still a harder
thing, that he went forth armed to destroy his people. And the metaphor
of fire ought to be noticed; for had he said that God’s right hand was
against his people, the expression would not have been so forcible; but
when he compared God’s right hand to fire which burned, and whose flame
consumed all Israel, it was a much more dreadful thing.  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p13"></span>Moreover, by these words the Israelites
were reminded that they were not to lament their calamities in an
ordinary way, but ought, on the contrary, to have seriously considered
the cause of all their evils, even the provoking of God’s wrath against
themselves; and not only so, but that God was angry with them in an
unusual degree, and yet justly, so that they had no reason to complain.
It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p2"></span>**4.** He hath bent his bow like an
enemy: he stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all *that
were* pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he
poured out his fury like fire.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Extendit arcum suum tanquam
inimicus, stetit dextera ejus tanquam adversarius, et occidit omnex
desiderabiles aspectu (oculo) in tabernaculo filiae Sion (*vel*, in
tabernaculum filiae Sion); effudit tanquam ignem Iracundiam suam.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p6"></span>He employs now another metaphor, that
God, who was wont to defend his people, now took up arms against them;
for stating a part for the whole, he includes in the *bow* every other
weapon. When, therefore, he says that God had bent his bow, it is the
same as though he said that he was fully armed. The bow, then, as we
have before seen, means every kind of weapon. He then adds, that *his
right hand stood as an adversary*. Here he more plainly describes what
he had before touched upon, even that God had not only given up his
people to the will of their enemies, but that he himself had held up a
banner to their enemies, and went before them with an armed hand. Nor is
there a doubt but that by the right hand of God he means all their
enemies; for it was necessary carefully to impress this fact on the
minds of the people, that the war had not been brought by the Chaldeans,
but that God had resolved thereby to punish the wickedness of the
people, and especially their desperate obstinacy, for he had omitted
nothing to restore the people to the right way.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7"></span>Whenever, then, there is mention made
here of God, let us know that the people are reminded, as I have already
said, that they had to do with God, lest. they should forget this, or
think that it was adverse fortune, or dream of some other causes of
evils, as men are wont in this respect to be very ingenious in deceiving
themselves. And we shall see this more clearly hereafter, where it is
said, that God had thought to destroy the wall of Jerusalem; but this
thought was the same as his decree. Then the Prophet explains there more
fully what is yet here substantially found, even that God was brought
forward thus before the people, that they might learn to humble
themselves under his mighty hand. The hand of God was not indeed
visible, but the Prophet shews that the Chaldeans were not alone to be
regarded, but rather that the hidden hand of God, by which they were
guided, ought to have been seen by the eyes of faith. It was, then, this
hand of God that stood against the people.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p8"></span>It then follows, *He slew all the chosen
men*; some read, “all things desirable;” but it seems more suitable to
consider men as intended, as though he had said, that the flower of the
people perished by the hand of God *in the tabernacle of the daughter of
Sion*; though the last clause would unite better with the end of the
verse, that *on the tabernacle of the daughter of Sion God had poured
forth his wrath*, or his anger, *as fire*

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p9"></span>He repeats the metaphor which he had
used in the last verse; and this is what we ought carefully to notice;
for God threatens by Isaiah that he would be a fire to devour his
enemies:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10"></span>“The light of Israel shall be a fire,
and his Holy One a flame of fire, and it shall devour all briers and all
kinds of wood.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10.2"></span>[Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p11"></span>There God threatened the Chaldeans, as
though he had said that his vengeance would be dreadful, when as a
patron and defender of his people he would contend with the Chaldeans.
He there calls himself the light of Israel and the Holy One; and hence
he said that he would be a fire and a flame as to the Chaldeans. But
what does he say here? even that God had poured forth lt is wrath as
fire, that its flame had devoured all around whatever was fair to be
seen in Israel. We hence see that the people had provoked against
themselves the vengeance of God, which would have been otherwise poured
forth on their enemies; and thus the sin of the people was doubled. It
follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p2"></span>**5.** The Lord was an enemy: he hath
swallowed up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: he hath
destroyed his strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Judah
mourning and lamentation.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Fuit Dominus tanquam hostis,
perdidit Israelem, perdidit omnia palatia ejus, corrupit munitiones
ejus, auxit in filia Jehudah fletum Et lamentationem.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p6"></span>These words might seem superfluous,
since the Prophet has often repeated, that God was become an enemy to
his own people; but we shall hereafter see, that though they were
extremely afflicted, they yet did not rightly consider whence their
calamity arose. As, then, they had become so stupified by their evils,
that they did not turn their eyes to God, they were on this account
often urged and stimulated, that they might at length understand by
their evils that God was a judge. Now, as it was difficult to convince
them of this truth, the Prophet did not think it enough briefly to touch
on it, but found it necessary to dwell on it at large, so that the
people might at length be roused from their insensibility.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p7"></span>He then says that God himself *was to
them as an enemy*, lest the Israelites should fix their eyes on the
Chaldeans, and thus think that they had been the chief movers of the
war. He therefore says, that they had undertaken that war through the
secret influence of God, and had carried it on successfully, because God
endued them with his own power. And hence the faithful ought to have
concluded, that nothing could have been more grievous than to have God
as their adversary; for as long as they had suffered themselves to be
defended by the hand of God, they were victorious, we know, over all
their enemies, so that they could then brave all dangers with impunity.
The Prophet now reminds them, that as they had been successful and
prosperous under the defense and protection of God, so now they were
miserable, for no other reason but that God fought against them. But we
ought at the same time to bear in mind the truth, which we have noticed,
that God is never angry with men without reason; and since he was
especially inclined to shew favor to his people, we must understand that
he would not have been thus indignant, had not necessity constrained
him.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p8"></span>*He has destroyed Israel*, he says; *he
has destroyed all his palaces*; and afterwards, *he has dissipated* or
demolished *all his fortresses*; and finally, *he has increased in the
daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation;* <span
id="iii.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>תאניה ואניה *tanie veanie*, words derived
from the same root, but joined together for the sake of amplifying, not
only in this place, but also in the twenty-ninth chapter of Isaiah, and
in other places. The meaning is, that God had not put an end to his
vengeance, because the people had not resolved to put an end to their
obstinate wickedness. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And he hath violently taken
away his tabernacle, as *if it were of* a garden: he hath destroyed his
places of the assembly: the LORD hath caused the solemn feasts and
sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation
of his anger the king and the priest.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et transtulit (vel, dissipavit,
vel evertit) tanquam hortum tabernaculum suum (alii vertunt,
tabernaculum suum tanquam hortum,) perdidit testimonium suum, oblitus
est Jehova in Sion conven tus solemnis (vel, sacrificii) et sabbathi, et
quidem sunt voces, sed ego non adeo scrupulose distinguo) regem et
sacerdotem.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p6"></span>Then he says first, that *his
tabernacle had been overthrown by God*. They who render it “cottage”
extenuate too much what is spoken of; nor does the Prophet simply
compare the sanctuary of God to a cottage. Then I take tabernacle in a
good sense. With regard to the verb <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>חמם, *chemes*, as it means to migrate,
they properly render it, as I think, who give this version, that God had
removed his tabernacle; nor do I disapprove of repeating the word
tabernacle. God, then, had removed his tabernacle, as though it were a
cottage in a garden. Watchmen, as it appears from the first chapter of
Isaiah, had then cottages in their gardens, but only for a time, as is
the case at this day with those who watch over their vineyards; they
have, until the time of vintage, small chests in which they conceal
themselves. The Prophet then says, that though God’s tabernacle was
honorable, and of high dignity, it was yet like a cottage in a garden.
It is not, however, a simple comparison, as before stated, and therefore
I reject the opinion of those who render it cottage, for it is not
suitable, and it would be unmeaning. *God*, then, *hath removed his
tabernacle as a garden*, that is, the sanctuary where he dwelt. And how
did he remove it? even as a garden-cottage. And as watchers of gardens
were wont to construct their little cots of leaves of trees and slight
materials, so the Prophet, in order to increase commiseration, says,
that the sacred habitation of God was like a cottage in a garden,
because it was removed from one place to another; and thus he intimates
that God regarded as nothing what he had previously adorned with
singular excellencies.  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md)

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p11"></span>He then adds, that God had *destroyed
his testimony*. By the word, <span id="iii.iii.viii-p11.1"></span>מועד,
*muod*, he means the same throughout; but some confine it to the ark of
the covenant, and of this I do not disapprove. We must yet bear in mind
the design of the Prophet, which was to shew that by the entire ruin of
the Temple the covenant of God was in a manner abolished. It is, indeed,
certain, that God had not forgotten his faithfulness and constancy, but
this abolition of his covenant refers to what appeared to men. He then
says, that the sanctuary which was, as it were, the testimony of God’s
favor, had been overthrown. Now, as he repeats again the word <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p11.2"></span>מועד, *muod*, it may be that he thus
refers to the Tabernacle, either because the holy assemblies met there,
or because it had been solemnly dedicated, that God might there hold
intercourse with his people. For <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p11.3"></span>מועד, *muod*, means a fixed time, it
means an assembly, it means a festival, and sometimes it means a
sacrifice; and all these signification’s are not unsuitable: yet when he
says that God had *destroyed his testimony*, I apply this to the
Tabernacle itself, or, if it seems to any preferable, to the ark of the
covenant; though the former is the most suitable, because it was a place
consecrated, as it has been stated, for mutual intercourse.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p12"></span>He afterwards says, that God had
*forgotten the assembly*, the sacrifice, or the tabernacle; for it is
the same word again, but it seems not to be taken in the same sense.
Then I think that <span id="iii.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>מועד, *muod*, is
to be taken here for the assembly. As he had previously said, that the
place where the holy assemblies met had been overthrown or destroyed, so
now he says, that God had no care for all those assemblies, as though
they had been buried in perpetual oblivion; for he mentions also the
*Sabbath*, which corresponds with the subject. God, then, had forgotten
all the assemblies as well as the Sabbath. There is, again, as to this
last word, a part stated for the whole, for this word was no doubt
intended to include all the festivals. The meaning of the passage then
is, that the impiety of the people had been so great, that God, having,
as it were, forgotten his covenant, had inflicted such a dreadful
punishment, that religion, for a time, was in a manner trodden under
foot.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p13"></span>He says, in the last place, that the
*king and the priest* had been rejected by God. We have already said,
that these were as two pledges of God’s paternal favor; for, on the one
hand, he who reigned from the posterity of David was a living image of
Christ; and on the other hand, there was always a high-priest from the
posterity of Aaron to reconcile men to God. It was then the same as
though God shewed himself in every way propitious to the chosen people.
Then their true happiness was founded on the kingdom and the priesthood;
for the kingdom was, as it were, a mark of God’s favor for their
defense, and the priesthood was to them the means by which
reconciliation with God was obtained. When, therefore, God wholly
disregarded the king and the priest, it became hence evident, that he
was greatly displeased with his people, having thus, in a manner,
obliterated his favors. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** The Lord hath cast off his altar,
he hath abhorred his sanctuary, he hath given up into the hand of the
enemy the walls of her palaces; they have made a noise in the house of
the LORD, as in the day of a solemn feast.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Abominatus est Dominus altare
suum, repulit (vel, rejecit procul ab animo suo) sanctuarium suum,
tradidit in manum hostis muros palatiorum ejus, vocem ediderunt in domo
Jehovae tanquam in die sacri conventus (vel, solemnis; iterum ponitur
nomen <span id="iii.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>מועד tamen accipitur vel pro
conventu vel pro die festo.)

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p6"></span>He proceeds with the same subject, and
adopts similar words. He says first, that God had *abominated his
altar*;  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) an expression not
strictly proper, but the Prophet could not otherwise fully shew to the
Jews what they deserved; for had he only spoken of the city, of the
lands, of the palaces, of the vineyards, and, in short, of all their
possessions, it would have been a much lighter matter; but when he says
that God had counted as nothing all their sacred things, — the altar,
the Temple, the ark of the covenant, and festive days, — when,
therefore, he says, that God had not only disregarded, but had also cast
away from him these things, which yet especially availed to conciliate
his favor, the people must have hence perceived, except they were beyond
measure stupid, how grievously they had provoked God’s wrath against
themselves; for this was the same as though heaven and earth were
blended together. Had there been an upsetting of all things, had the sun
left its place and sunk into darkness, had the earth heaved upwards, the
confusion would have hardly been more dreadful, than when God put forth
thus his hand against the sanctuary, the altar, the festal days, and all
their sacred things. But we must refer to the reason why this was done,
even because the Temple had been long polluted by the iniquities of the
people, and because all sacred things had been wickedly and
disgracefully profaned. We now, then, understand the reason why the
Prophet enlarged so much on a subject in itself sufficiently plain.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, He *hath delivered
all the palaces*, etc.; as though he had said, that the city had not
been taken by the valor of enemies, but that the Chaldeans had fought
under the authority and banner of God. He, in short, intimates that the
Jews had miserably perished, because they perished through their own
fault; and that the Chaldeans had proved victorious in battle, and had
taken the city, not through their own courage or skill, but because God
had resolved to punish that ungodly and wicked people.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p9"></span>It follows in the last place, that the
*enemies had made a noise in the temple of God as in the day of
solemnity*. Here also the Prophet shews, that God would have never
suffered the enemies insolently to exult and to revel in the very
Temple, had not the Israelites deserved all this; for the insolence of
their enemies was not unknown to God, and he might have easily checked
it if he pleased. Why, then, did he grant so much license to these
profane enemies? even because the Jews themselves had previously
polluted the Temple, so that he abhorred all their solemn assemblies, as
also he declares by Isaiah, that he detested their festivals, Sabbaths,
and new moons. (<span id="iii.iii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Isa.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ix-p9.1"></span>.) But it was a shocking change, when
enemies entered the place which God had consecrated for himself, and
there insolently boasted and uttered base and wicked calumnies against
God! But the sadder the spectacle, the more detestable appeared the
impiety of the people, which had been the cause of so great evils. For
we ought ever to remember what I have often stated, that these
circumstances were noticed by the Prophet, that the people might at
length acknowledge themselves guilty as to all these evils, which they
would have otherwise ascribed to the Chaldeans. That, then, the
Chaldeans polluted the Temple, that they trod under foot all sacred
things, all this the Prophet shews was to be ascribed to the Jews
themselves, who had, through their own conduct, opened the Temple to the
Chaldeans, who had exposed all sacred things to their will and pleasure.
It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p2"></span>**8.** The LORD hath purposed to destroy
the wall of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath
not withdrawn his hand from destroying: therefore he made the rampart
and the wall to lament; they languished together.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Cogitavit Jehova ut perderet murum
filiae Sion, extendit lineam, non retraxit manum suam a dissipatione;
itaque luxit antemurale, et murus; pariter corruerunt (*vel*, eversi
sunt.)

<span id="iii.iii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p6"></span>The verb to *think*, has more force than
what is commonly assigned to it; for it would be very flat to say, that
God *thought to destroy*; but to think here means to resolve or to
decree.  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) This is one thing. And
then we must bear in mind the contrast between this and those false
imaginations, by which men are wont to be drawn away, so as not to
believe that God is present in adversities as well as prosperity. As,
therefore, men go willfully astray through various false thoughts, and
thus withdraw themselves, as it were, designedly from God, the Prophet
says here that the *walls of Jerusalem* had not *fallen* by chance, but
had been overthrown through a divine decree, because God had so
determined, according to what we have seen in many places throughout the
book of Jeremiah: “See, these are the thoughts which God has thought
respecting Jerusalem, which he has thought respecting Babylon.” The
Prophet, then, in these instances, taught what he now confirms in this
place, that when the city Jerusalem was destroyed, it was not what
happened by chance; but because God had brought there the Chaldeans, and
employed them as his instruments in taking and destroying the city: God,
then, has *thought to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion*. It is,
indeed, true, that the Chaldeans had actively carried on the war, and
omitted nothing as to military skill, in order to take the city: but the
Prophet calls here the attention of the Jews to a different thought, so
that they might acknowledge that they suffered justly for their sins,
and that God was the chief author of that war, and that the Chaldeans
were to be viewed as hired soldiers.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, that God had
*extended a line* or a rule, as it is usually done in separating
buildings.  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) And then he says,
*He hath not drawn back his hand from scattering; and so it was, that
the ramparts and the walls mourned, and fell down together*  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) We now see that what the Prophet had
in view was to lead the Jews fully to believe that the destruction was
not to be ascribed to the Chaldeans, but, on the contrary, to God. Added
at the same time must be another part of what is here taught, that God
would not have been so displeased with the holy city which he had
chosen, had not the people extremely provoked him with their sins. It
now follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Her gates are sunk into the
ground; he hath destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes
*are* among the Gentiles: the law *is* no *more*; her prophets also find
no vision from the LORD.

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Demersae sunt in terra portae
ejus, perdidit et confregit vectes ejus, rex ejus et principes ejus in
gentibus (vel, ad gentes;) nulla lex, etiam Prophetae non reperiunt
visionem a Jehova.

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p6"></span>He again relates in other words what he
had said, that the walls of Jerusalem had fallen. But he now speaks of
the gates and says, that they had *sunk into the ground*, or had become
fixed in the ground; for it may be explained in both ways; as though he
had said, that the gates had been no hindrance to the enemies so as to
prevent them to enter the city. He thus derides the foolish confidence
of the people, who relied on their defenses and thought the city
impregnable. He then says that the *gates had sunk*, or had become fixed
*in the ground*

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p7"></span>He then says that God had *destroyed and
broken her bars*; for no doubt the gates had firm and strong bars. He
then says that neither the gates nor the bars were found sufficient,
when God stretched forth his hand to the Chaldeans, to lead them into
the city. He afterwards adds, that both the king and the princes had
been driven into exile; for when he says, *among the nations*, or to the
nations, he intimates that there was no more a king, for he and the
royal seed and the princes were gone into banishment. The rest I defer
until tomorrow.

<span id="iii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since so many
tokens of thy wrath meet us at this day, we may without delay return to
thee, and so submit to thee in true repentance, as to strive at the same
time to be reconciled to thee; and as a Mediator has been given to us to
lead us to thee, — O grant that we may by a true faith seek him, and
follow wherever he may call us, that having been purified from all
pollution’s, we may be glorified by thee our Father, and may so call on
thee, that we may find thy grace present in all our evils. Amen. —

<span id="iii.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixth

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p2"></span>Among the calamities of Jerusalem
which the Prophet deplores, he mentions this as one, that there was *no
law* or doctrine. The Chaldee Paraphraser thought that the reference is
to punishment, but he perverts the words of the Prophet. There follows
afterwards an amplification; after having said, *there is no law*, he
adds, *her prophets also have not found a vision from Jehovah*. There is
then no doubt but that the Prophet means that among the miseries of the
people this was the greatest, that they were without doctrine or
teaching, and without prophets. The word <span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>תורה, *ture*, is indeed used often by way
of excellency to designate the law, but it signifies also doctrine or
instruction; and the meaning here is the same, as though the Prophet had
said, that the Jews had been so forsaken by God, that they found no
consolation in their evils. This may be better understood by a similar
complaint in the Psalms:

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p3"></span>“Our signs we see not, there is not a
Prophet any more, there is no more any one who understands.” (<span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>[Ps
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p4"></span>The faithful there say, that they were
in a hopeless state, because God shewed them no signs of his favor; and
signs were given when God appeared propitious to them. Now, as God had
testified that there would be always faithful teachers to guide the
people, they therefore complained that there was no Prophet, that there
was no one any more who had a vision. And so in this place the Prophet
says, that there was *no law*, and that *the prophets* were without a
vision, even because God, as though wearied, had given up the care of
the people: for his paternal favor could not have been better known than
by this evidence, that he sent them prophets; and it is certain that all
prophecies ceased when the people were driven into exile.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p5"></span>A long time after, Daniel began to
exhort the faithful to hope for a return; and on this account it is said
by Isaiah,

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p6"></span>“Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,
will our God say.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p6.2"></span>[Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p7"></span>There Isaiah indicates that there
would be a temporary silence; for all the prophets would be mute, that
the people might lie in a hopeless state, and for this reason, because
they had long abused God’s patience, and had disregarded that singular
blessing, when God manifested by his servants that he was solicitous for
their well-being and safety, as he had often said, that he rose up early
and extended his hand to them by the prophets. As, then, the gift of
prophecy was to the people a sure pledge not only of God’s favor, but
also of the solicitude which he entertained for them; so when he
withheld prophets from the people, he departed from them, having
forsaken as it were his station among them.  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p9"></span>We now then understand what the
Prophet meant by saying, that there was *no doctrine* any more, and that
the *prophets* of Jerusalem *found no vision* any more *from Jehovah*;
for God, after his word had been long profaned, became silent, and
deigned not for a time to open his sacred mouth, because he had seen
that he had been treated with derision.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p10"></span>Now this passage teaches us, that
nothing is more desirable in evils, and that there is no better remedy,
than to have God’s promise, that he will at length be merciful to us.
For when any promise of God is set before us, it is like a small light
kindled in darkness. Though then our misery were like a thick darkness,
yet when God shews some token of favor by his promises, that ought to be
sufficient to give us hope and joy. On the other hand, when no promises
of God occur to us, it is a sure token of reprobation, unless that he
sometimes thus tries us, as we read here. But the faithful also
themselves, when they perceive no evidence of God’s paternal favor in
his promises, are as it were in a hopeless state, and sunk in the lowest
depths. Hence it is then only that we arise from death to life, and find
support so as not to be overwhelmed with despair, when God is pleased to
speak to us. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** The elders of the daughter of
Zion sit upon the ground, *and* keep silence: they have cast up dust
upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the
virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p3"></span>**10.** Sedent ad terram, silent senes
filiae Sion, attollunt pulverem super caput suum, accincti sunt saccis;
demiserunt (vel, demittunt) ad terram caput suum virgines (aut, puellae)
Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet here strikingly represents
the grievousness of the people’s calamity, when he says, that *the
elders*, as in hopeless despair, were lying *on the ground*, that they
*cast dust on their heads*, that they were *clad in sackcloth*, as it
was usually done in very grievous sorrow, and that the *virgins* bent
their *heads down to the ground*. The meaning is, that the elders knew
not what to do, and led others. to join them in acts of fruitless and
abject lamentation. We indeed know that young women are over-careful as
to their form and beauty, and indulge themselves in pleasures; and that
when they roll themselves with their face and hair on the ground, it is
a token of extreme mourning. This is what the Prophet means.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p7"></span>They were wont indeed to put on
sackcloth as a token of repentance, and to cast dust on their heads; but
their minds were often so confused, that they only thus set forth their
mourning and sorrow, and had no regard to God; and hypocrites, when they
put on sackcloth, pretended to repent, but it was a false pretense. Now
in this place the Prophet does not mean that the elders by adopting
these rites professed to repent and humbly to solicit pardon; but refers
to them only as tokens of sorrow; as though he had said, that the elders
had no resources, and that the young women had no hope nor joy. For the
elders did lie down on the ground, as it is usual with those who have no
remedy. We now understand the meaning of the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md) It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p2"></span>**11.** Mine eyes do fail with tears, my
bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the
destruction of the daughter of my people; because the children and the
sucklings swoon in the streets of the city.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p3"></span>**11.** Defecerunt in lachrymis oculi
mei, conturbata sunt viscera mea, effusum est ad terram jecur meum,
propter contritionem filiae populi mei, dum evanuit parvalus et sugens
Ubera in compitis urbis.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet himself now speaks, and says
that his *eyes were consumed with tears*, while weeping on account of
the calamities of the people: even in the deepest grief tears at length
dry up; but when there is no end of weeping, the sorrow, which as it
were never ripens, must necessarily be very bitter. Jeremiah then
expresses now the vehemence of his grief when he says that his *eyes
failed through shedding tears*. He said in <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>,
“Who will give me eyes for fountains?” that is, who will make my eyes to
turn into fountains, that they may continually flow? and this he said,
because he saw how dreadful a vengeance of God impended over the
obstinate. But now, when he sees accomplished what he had dreaded, he
says, that his eyes were consumed with weeping.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p7"></span>To the same purpose is what he adds,
that his *bowels were disturbed*. It is the same verb as we have seen
before, <span id="iii.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>חמרמרו, *chemermeru*; which
some render “bound,” as we also said then. I know not why one expositor
has changed what he had elsewhere said rightly; he puts here, “swollen
have my bowels.” But I see no reason why the verb should be taken here
in a different sense, for it immediately follows, *my liver is poured
forth on the ground*. He may, indeed, have included other parts of the
intestines by stating a part for the whole. The word here properly means
the liver, as when Solomon says,

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p8"></span>“He hath pierced my liver.” (<span
id="iii.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>[Pr
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p9"></span>But Jeremiah, in short, shews that all
his faculties were so seized with grief, that no part was exempt. He
then says that his *liver was poured forth*, but in the same sense in
which he said that his bowels were disturbed. They are indeed
hyperbolical expressions; but as to the meaning, Jeremiah simply
expresses his feelings; for there is no doubt but that he was incredibly
anxious and sorrowful on account of so great a calamity; for he not only
lamented the adversity in no ordinary way, but he also considered how
wicked was that obstinacy in which the people had hardened themselves
for almost fifty years; for he had spent himself in vain, not for a
short time, but for nearly fifty years he never ceased to speak to them.
He then, no doubt, thought within himself what the people had deserved,
so that he had no common dread of God’s vengeance. This, then, was the
reason why he said that his bowels were disturbed and his liver poured
forth.  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) He, however, mentions
the cause of his sorrow, even *the breach* or destruction *of the
daughter of his people*; and he mentions one thing in particular,
because the *little one and he who sucked the breasts vanished away in
the streets of the city*; for so I render the verb <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>עתף, *otheph*, which properly means to
cover; but its secondary meaning is to vanish away, as we shall again
presently see. It was, indeed, a miserable sight, when not only men and
women were everywhere slain, but when, through famine, little children
also fainted. We, indeed, know that infants move our pity, for the tears
of a child in hunger penetrate into our inmost souls. When, therefore,
little children and those who hung on their mothers’ breasts, cried
through the streets of the city, it must have touched the most iron
hearts. It was then not without reason that Jeremiah referred to this in
particular, that *little children and sucklings vanished away*, not in a
deserted and barren land, but in the very streets of the city. It
follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p2"></span>**12.** They say to their mothers,
Where *is* corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the
streets of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mother’s
bosom.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p3"></span>**12.** Matribus suis dicunt, Ubi
triticum et vinum? cum evanescunt (in evanescendo ipsos, ad verbum)
tanquam vulneratus (aut, mortuus; dum evanescunt Ergo tanquam vulnerati,
aut, mortui; est numeri enallage) in compitis urbis (iterum repetit,) et
cum se effundit (vel, effunditur) anima eorum in sinum matrum ipsorum.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p6"></span>There is either a personification in
the words of the Prophet, or he speaks now of another party, for he
cannot refer now to children sucking their mothers’ breasts, for they
could not have expressly said, *Where is corn and wine?* and the use of
wine is not allowed to infants. Then the words of the Prophets extend
further, for not infants, but children somewhat grown up, could have
thus spoken. And in this view there is nothing unreasonable or forced,
for he spoke of little children, and to little children he joined
infants.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) And now he refers only
to one party, even that children, who could now speak, complained to
their mothers that there was no bread nor wine, that is, no means of
support, no food.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p8"></span>If, however, any one prefers a
personification, I do not object; and this view would not be unsuitable,
that even infants by their silence cried for food; for the tears of
children speak more efficaciously than when one gives utterance to
words.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p9"></span>However this may be, the Prophet
intimates that such was the scarcity, that children died in the bosom of
their mothers, and in vain sought food and cried that they were without
support. He then says that they *said to their mothers*;  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) by which expression he means that
their complaints were the more pitiable, because their mothers could
afford them no help. And we know how tender and affectionate are the
feelings of mothers, for a mother would willingly nourish her own child,
not only with her own milk, but even, if possible, with her life. When,
therefore, the Prophet says that children cried to their mothers, he
means to represent a sad spectacle, and which ought justly to produce
horror in the minds of all. *Where is bread and wine?* he says, *even
when they vanished away* (some say “fainted,” but I prefer, as I have
said, this rendering) *as a dead man in the streets*; and further, *when
they poured out*, a sadder thing still, — *when they poured out their
souls into the bosom of their mothers*. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** What thing shall I take to
witness for thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of
Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin
daughter of Zion? for thy breach *is* great like the sea: who can heal
thee?

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Quid contestabor tibi (*vel*,
adducam tibi testes, *vel*, testificabor tecum?) quid simile tibi filia
Jerusalem (*vel*, cur? <span id="iii.iii.xvii-p3.1"></span> מה*potest
trans ferri utroque modo*;) quid (*vel,* cur) aequabo tibi quiequam
(*est repetitio, sed diverso verbo*) ut te Consoler, virgo filia Sion?
Quia magna sicut mare contritio tua; quis sanabit te?

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p6"></span>When we wish to alleviate grief, we
are wont to bring examples which have some likeness to the case before
us. For when any one seeks to comfort one in illness, he will say, “Thou
art not the first nor the last, thou hast many like thee; why shouldest
thou so much torment thyself; for this is a condition almost common to
mortals.” As, then, it is an ordinary way of alleviating grief to bring
forward examples, the Prophet says, “What examples shall I set before
thee? that is, why or to what purpose should I mention to thee this or
that man who is like thee? or, *What* then *shall I call thee to
witness,* or testify to thee?,” But I prefer this rendering, “To what
purpose should I bring witnesses to thee, who may say that they have
seen something of a like kind? for these things will avail thee
nothing.”  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md)

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p8"></span>The Prophet, then, means that comforts
commonly administered to those in misery, would be of no benefit,
because the calamity of Jerusalem exceeded all other examples, as though
he had said, “No such thing had ever happened in the world; God had
never before thundered so tremendously against any people; were I, then,
to seek to bring examples to thee, I should be utterly at a loss; for
when I compare thee with others in misery, I find that thou exceedest
them all. “We now, then, perceive the meaning of the Prophet: he wished
by this mode of speaking to exaggerate the grievousness of Jerusalem’s
calamity, for she had been afflicted in a manner unusual and unheard of
before; as though he had said that the Jews had become miserable beyond
all other nations. *Why* then *should I bring witnesses before thee? and
why should I make any one like thee? why should I make other miserable
people equal to thee?* He adds the reason or the end (for the <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p8.1"></span>ו, *vau*, here ought to be so rendered)
*that I might comfort thee*, that is, after the usual manner of men. He
afterwards adds, *because great as the sea is thy breach* or breaking;
that is, “Thy calamity is the deepest abyss: I cannot then find any in
the whole world whom I can compare to thee, for thy calamity exceeds all
calamities; nor is there anything like it that can be set before thee,
so that thou art become a memorable example for all ages.”

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p9"></span>But when we hear the Prophet speaking
thus, we ought to remember that we have succeeded in the place of the
ancient people. As, then, God had formerly punished with so much
severity the sins of his chosen people, we ought to beware lest we in
the present day provoke him to an extremity by our perverseness, for he
remains ever like himself. But whenever it may happen that we are
severely afflicted and broken down by his hand, let us still know that
there is yet some comfort remaining for us, even when sunk down in the
lowest depth. The Prophet, indeed, exaggerates in this place the evils
of the people; but he had previously begun to encourage the faithful to
entertain hope; and he will again repeat the same doctrine. But it was
necessary for the Prophet to use such words until those who were as yet
torpid in their sins, and did not sufficiently consider the design of
God’s vengeance, were really humbled. He adds, —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** Thy prophets have seen vain
and foolish things for thee: and they have not discovered thine
iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee false
burdens and causes of banishment.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Prophetae tui viderunt tibi
vanitatem et insulsitatem (vel, insipidum,) et non aperuerunt super
iniquitate tua (hoc est, non revelarunt tibi; aut, manifestarunt
iniquitatem tuam,) ut converterent captivitatem tuam (alii vertunt,
aversionem tuam, vel, defectionem) et viderunt tibi prophetias
vanitatis, et expulsiones.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet condemns the Jews
for that wantonness by which they had, as it were, designedly destroyed
themselves, as though they had willfully drunk sweet poison. They had
been inebriated with those fallacies which we have seen, when impostors
promised them a prosperous condition; for we have seen that false
prophets often boldly declared that whatever Jeremiah threatened was of
no account. Since, then, the Jews were inebriated with such flatteries,
and disregarded God’s judgment, and freely indulged themselves in their
vices, the effect was, that God’s wrath had been always and continually
kindled by them. Now, then, Jeremiah reproves them for such wantonness,
even because they willfully sought to be deceived, and with avidity cast
themselves into snares, by seeking for themselves flatterers as
teachers. Micah also reproves them for the same thing, that they sought
prophets who promised them a fruitful vintage and an abundant harvest.
(<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Mic
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.) The meaning of Jeremiah is the same.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p7"></span>He says that *prophets had
prophesied*, or had seen *vanity for them*; but the verb refers to
prophecies, as prophets are called seers. He then says that *the
prophets had seen vanity and insipidity*  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) This availed not to extenuate the
fault of the people; and Jeremiah does not here flatter the people, as
though they had perished through the fault of others; and yet this was a
common excuse, for most, when they had been deceived, complained that
they had fallen through being led astray, and also that they had not
been sufficiently cautious when subtle men were laying snares for them.
But the Prophet here condemns the Jews, because they had been deceived
by false prophets, as it was a just reward for their vainglory and
ambition. For they had very delicate ears, and free reproofs could not
be endured by them; in a word, when they rejected all sound doctrine,
the devil must have necessarily succeeded in the place of God, as also
Paul says,

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p11"></span>“that those were justly punished who
were blinded by God so as to believe a lie, because they received not
the truth.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p11.2"></span>[2 Thess.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p12"></span>We now perceive the design of the
Prophet: he says that the Jews had indeed been deceived by the false
prophets; but this had happened through their own fault, because they
had not submitted to obey God, because they had rejected sound doctrine,
because they had been rebellious against all his counsels. At the same
time, not only their crime seems to have been thus exaggerated, but also
their shame was brought before them, — because they had dared to set up
these impostors against Jeremiah as well as other servants of God; for
they had boasted greatly of these their false prophets whenever they
sought to exult against God. How great was this presumption! When the
false prophets had promised them security, they immediately triumphed in
an insolent manner over Jeremiah, as though they were victorious. As,
then, their wickedness and arrogance had been such against God, the
Prophet justly retorts upon them, “Behold now as to your false prophets;
for when they lately promised to you prosperity of every kind, I was
inhumanly treated, and my calling was disdainfully repudiated by you;
let now your false prophets come forward: be wise at length through your
evils, and acknowledge what it is to have acted so haughtily against God
and against his servants.” We now understand why the Prophet says, “They
have seen for you vanity and insipidity.”

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p13"></span>He adds, *they have not opened,* or
revealed, &c. The preposition <span id="iii.iii.xviii-p13.1"></span>על,
*ol*, is here redundant; the words are, “they have not revealed upon
thine iniquity.” There is, indeed, a suitableness in the words in that
language, that they had not applied their revelations to the iniquities
of the people, for they would have been thus restored to the right way,
and would have thus obviated the vengeance of God.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p14"></span>Now, this passage ought to be
carefully noticed: Jeremiah spoke of the fallacies of the false
prophets, which he said were insipid: he now expresses how they had
deceived the people, even because they *disclosed not their iniquities*.
Let us then know that there is nothing more necessary than to be warned,
that being conscious of our iniquities we may repent. And this was the
chief benefit to be derived from the teaching of the prophets. For the
other part, the foretelling of future things would have had but little
effect had not the prophets preached respecting the vengeance of God, —
had they not exhorted the people to repentance, — had they not bidden
them by faith to embrace the mercy of God. Then Jeremiah in a manner
detects the false doctrines of those who had corrupted the prophetic
doctrine, by saying that they *had not disclosed iniquities*. Let us
then learn by this mark how to distinguish between the faithful servants
of God and impostors. For the Lord by his word summons us before his
tribunal, and would have our iniquities discovered, that we may loathe
ourselves, and thus open an entrance for mercy. But when what is brought
before us only tickles our ears and feeds our curiosity, and, at the
same time, buries all our iniquities, let us then know that the refined
things which vastly please men are insipid and useless. Let, then, the
doctrine of repentance be approved by us, the doctrine which leads us to
God’s tribunal, so that being cast down in ourselves we may flee to his
mercy.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p15"></span>He afterwards adds, *that they might
turn back thy captivity*; some prefer, “thy defection” — and this
meaning is not unsuitable; but the Prophet, I have no doubt, refers to
punishment rather than to a crime. Then the captivity of the people
would have been reversed had the people in time repented; for we obviate
God’s wrath by repentance: “If we judge ourselves,” says Paul, “we shall
not be judged.” (<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p15.1"></span>[1Co
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p15.1"></span>.) As, then, miserable men anticipate
God’s judgment when they become judges of themselves, the Prophet does
not without reason say that the false prophets had not disclosed their
iniquities, so that they might remain quiet in their own country, and
never be driven into exile. How so? for God would have been thus
pacified, that is, had the people willingly turned to him, as it is said
in Isaiah,

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p16"></span>“And be converted, and I should heal
them.” (<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p16.1"></span>[Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p17"></span>Conversion, then, is said there to
lead to healing; for as fire when fuel is withdrawn is extinguished, so
also when we cease to sin fuel is not supplied to God’s wrath. We now,
then, perceive the meaning of the Prophet; he, in short, intimates that
people had been destroyed because they sought falsehoods, while the
false prophets vainly flattered them; for they would have in due time
escaped so great evils, had the prophets boldly exhorted the people to
repentance.  <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md)

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p21"></span>He then adds, *And they saw for thee
prophecies of vanity and expulsions*. Though the word <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p21.1"></span>משאת, *meshat*, is often taken in a bad
sense for a burden, that is, a hard prophecy which shews that God’s
vengeance is nigh, yet it is doubtful whether the Prophet takes it now
in this sense, since he speaks of prophecies which gave hope of impunity
to the people; and these were not <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p21.2"></span>משאות, *meshaut*, that is, they were not
grievous and dreadful prophecies. But when all things are well
considered, it will be evident that Jeremiah did not without reason
adopt this word; for he afterwards adds an explanation. The word, <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p21.3"></span>משאה, *meshae*, is indeed taken
sometimes as meaning any kind of prophecy, but it properly means what is
comminatory. But now, what does Jeremiah say? *They saw for thee
burdens* which thou hast escaped. For to render odious the doctrine of
the holy man, they called whatever he taught, according to a proverbial
saying, a burden. Thus, then, they created a prejudice against the holy
man by saying that all his prophecies contained nothing but terror and
trouble. Now, by way of concession, the Prophet says, “They themselves
have indeed been prophets to you, and they saw, but saw at length
burdens.”

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p22"></span>While, then, the false prophets
promised impunity to the people, they were flatterers, and no burden
appeared, that is, no trouble; but these prophecies became at length
much more grievous than all the threatenings with which Jeremiah had
terrified them; and corresponding with this view is what immediately
follows, *expulsions*. For the Prophet, I doubt not, shews here what
fruit the vain flatteries by which the people had chosen to be deluded
had produced: for hence it happened, that they had been expelled from
their country and driven into exile. For if the reason was asked, why
the people had been deprived of their own inheritance, the obvious
answer would have been this, because they had chosen to be deceived,
because they had hardened themselves in obstinacy by means of falsehoods
and vain promises. Since, then, their exile was the fruit of false
doctrine, Jeremiah says now that these impostors saw burdens of vanity,
but which at length brought burdens; and then they saw, <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p22.1"></span>מדוחים *meduchim*,  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) expulsions, even those things which
had been the causes of expulsion or exile.

<span id="iii.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iii.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though thou
chastisest us as we deserve, we may yet never have the light of truth
extinguished among us, but may ever see, even in darkness, at least some
sparks, which may enable us to behold thy paternal goodness and mercy,
so that we may especially be humbled under thy mighty hand, and that
being really prostrate through a deep feeling of repentance, we may
raise our hopes to heaven, and never doubt but that thou wilt at length
be reconciled to us when we seek thee in thine only-begotten Son. —
Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Seventh.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p2"></span>**15.** All that pass by clap *their*
hands at thee; they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of
Jerusalem, *saying,* *Is* this the city that *men* call The perfection
of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p3"></span>**15.** Plauserunt super te manibus
suis (*id est,* comploserunt manus suas) omnes transcuntes per viam,
sibilarunt, et moverunt caput suum super filia Jerusalem, An haec urbs
de qua dixcrunt, perfecta decore, gaudium totius terrae?

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet here reminds the Jews of
the miseries by which they had been already in an extreme measure
afflicted, so that these words seem redundant and somewhat unkind; for
unseasonable is reproof when one lies down, as it were, worn out with
evils. As this was the condition of the people, the Prophet ought not to
have made more bitter their grief. But we have already referred to the
reason for this, even because the Jews, though they mourned and were
extremely sorrowful in their calamities, did not yet consider whence
their evils came. It was therefore necessary that they should be more
and more awakened; for it is but of little profit for any one to suffer
evils, except he has regard to God’s judgment. We hence perceive the
design of the Prophet, why he so much at large speaks of the miseries
which were seen by all, and could not escape the notice of the Jews, who
were almost overwhelmed with them; for it was not enough for them to
feel their miseries, except they also considered the cause of them.

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p7"></span>He then says, *All who have passed by
clapped their hands and hissed and moved the head*, either in token of
mockery, or of abhorrence, which is more probable. He then says, that
they *moved* or *shook the head at the daughter of Jerusalem*,  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) *Is this the city of which they said,
It is perfect in beauty, and the joy of the whole earth?* I know not why
some render <span id="iii.iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>כלילת, *calibat*, a
crown; it comes, as it is well known, from <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p8.2"></span>כלל *calal*, which means fullness, or
anything solid. He then says, that Jerusalem had been *perfect in
beauty*, because God had adorned it with singular gifts; he had
especially favored it with the incomparable honor of being called by his
name. Hence Jerusalem was in a manner the earthly palace of God, that
is, on account of the Temple; and further, it was there that the
doctrine of salvation was to be found; and remarkable was this promise,

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p9"></span>“From Sion shall go forth the law,  
and rite word of God from Jerusalem.” (<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.2"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p10"></span>God had also promised to Ezekiel, that
this city would be the fountain and origin of salvation to the whole
world. (<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Eze
47:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>.) As, then, Jerusalem had been adorned
with so remarkable gifts, the Prophet introduces here strangers, who
ask, “Could it be that a city so celebrated for beauty had become a
desolation?”

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p11"></span>He calls it also *the joy of the whole
earth*; for God had poured there his gifts so liberally, that it was a
cause of joy to all. For we delight in beautiful things; and wherever
God’s gifts appear, we ought to have our hearts filled with joy. Some
give a more refined explanation — that Jerusalem had been the joy of the
whole earth, because men have no peace except God be propitious to them;
and there God had deposited the testimony and pledge of his favor: and
thus Jerusalem made glad the whole world, because it invited all nations
to God. This, at the first view, is plausible; but it seems to me more
refined than solid. I am, therefore, content with this simple view, that
Jerusalem was the joy of the whole earth, because God had designed that
his favor should appear there, which might justly excite the whole world
to rejoice.  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p2"></span>**16.** All thine enemies have opened
their mouth against thee: they hiss and gnash the teeth: they say, We
have swallowed *her* up: certainly this *is* the day that we looked for;
we have found, we have seen *it*

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p3"></span>**16.** Aperuerunt  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) super te os suum cuncti hostes tui,
sibilarunt et frenduerunt dente (*vel*, dentibus;) dixerunt,
Devorabimus; utique hic dies quem expectavimus; invenimus, vidimus.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p6"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p7"></span>Here, also, the Prophet introduces
enemies as insolently exulting over the miseries of the people. He first
says, that they had opened the mouth, even that they might loudly
upbraid them; for he is not said to open the mouth who only speaks, but
who insolently and freely utters his calumnies. God is, indeed,
sometimes said emphatically to open his mouth, when he announces
something that deserves special notice; and so Matthew says, that Christ
opened his mouth when he spoke of true happiness. (<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>[Mt
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>.) But in this place and in others the
enemy is said to open his mouth, who, with a full mouth, so to speak,
taunts him whom he sees worn out with evils. Hence, he refers to
petulance or insolence, when he says, that enemies had *opened their
mouth*

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p8"></span>He then adds, that they had *hissed*.
By hissing he no doubt means scoffing or taunting; for it immediately
follows, that they had *gnashed with* their *teeth*, as though he had
said, that enemies not only blamed and condemned them, but had also
given tokens of extreme hatred; for he who gnashes with his teeth thus
shews the bitterness of his mind, and even fury; for to gnash the teeth
is what belongs to a wild beast. The Prophet then says, that enemies had
not only harassed the people with taunts and scoffs, but had also
cruelly and even furiously treated them. Now we know that to men of
ingenuous minds, such a treatment is harder than death itself: for it is
deemed by many a hard thing to fall in battle — and we see how men of
war expose themselves to the greatest danger; but a disgraceful death is
far more bitter. The Prophet, then, no doubt, amplifies the miseries of
the people by this circumstance, that they had been harassed on every
side by taunts. And he mentions this on purpose, because reproofs by the
prophets had not been received by them; for we know how perversely the
Jews had rebelled against the prophets, when they reproved them in God’s
name. As, then, they would not have borne the paternal reproofs of God,
they were thus constrained to bear the reproaches of enemies, and to
receive the just reward of their pride and presumption. Nor is there a
doubt, as I have said, but that the Prophet related reproaches of this
kind, and the scoffs of enemies, that the people might at length know
that they had been exposed to such evils, because they had proudly
rejected the reproofs given them by the prophets.

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p9"></span>He says, that enemies spoke thus, *We
have devoured; surely this is the day which we have expected*; as though
they triumphed when they saw that they got the victory, and that they
could do with the people as they pleased. And as I have said, this in
itself was a very bitter thing to the people; but. when the Prophet
related, as in the person of the enemies, what was already sufficiently
known to them, the people ought to have called to mind the reason why
they had been so severely afflicted; and this is what the Prophet
clearly sets forth in the next verse; for he, adds, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>**17.** The LORD hath done *that*
which he had devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded
in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he
hath caused *thine* enemy to rejoice over thee, he hath set up the horn
of thine adversaries.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span>**17.** Fecit Jehova quod
cogitaverat, complevit sermonem suum quam praeceperat a diebus
anitiquis: diruit (vel, evertit) et non perpercit; et exhilaravit super
te inimicum, et extulit corum hostium tuorum.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6"></span>Had the Prophet related only the
boastings of enemies, the people would have probably become more
hardened in their sorrow. But now, on the other hand, he assumes a
different character. After having represented how insolently the enemies
conducted themselves, he now says, *Jehovah hath done what he had
determined*; and thus from the taunts of enemies he calls the attention
of the people to the judgment of God. For when enemies insult us, we:
indeed feel hurt, but afterwards grief in a manner blunts our feelings.
Our best remedy then is, not to have our thoughts fixed on the insolence
of men, but to know what the Scripture often reminds us, that the wicked
are the scourges of God by which he chastises us. This, then, is the
subject which the Prophet now handles. He says that God had *done*,
etc.; as though he had said, that however enemies might exceed
moderation, yet if the people attended to God there was a just cause why
they should humble themselves.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7"></span>He says, first, that *Jehovah had
done what he had determined:* for the word to *think* is improperly
applied to God, but yet it is often done, as we have before seen. He
then says, that he *had fulfilled the word* which he had formerly
commanded; for had the Prophet touched only on the secret counsel of
God, the Jews might have been in doubt as to what it was. And certainly,
as our minds cannot penetrate into that deep abyss, in vain would he
have spoken of the hidden judgments of God. It was therefore necessary
to come down to the doctrine, by which God, as far as it is expedient,
manifests to us what would otherwise be not only hidden, but also
incomprehensible; for were we to inquire into God’s judgments, we should
sink into the deep. But when we direct our minds to what God has taught
us, we find that he reveals to us whatever is necessary to be known; and
though even by his word, we cannot perfectly know his hidden judgments.
yet we may know them in part, and as I have said, as far as it is
expedient for us. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet, after
having spoken of God’s counsels and decrees, adds *the word*

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8"></span>Let us then hold to this rule, even
to seek from the Law and the Prophets, and the Gospel, whatever we
desire to know respecting the secret judgments of God; for, were we to
turn aside, even in the smallest degree, from what is taught us, the
immensity of God’s glory would immediately swallow up all our thoughts;
and experience sufficiently teaches us, that nothing is more dangerous
and even fatal than to allow ourselves more liberty in this respect than
what behooves us. Let us then learn to bridle all curiosity when we
speak of God’s secret judgments, and instantly to direct our minds to
the word itself, that they may be in a manner enclosed there. Moreover,
the Prophet was also able, in this manner, more easily to check whatever
the Jews might have been otherwise ready to object: for we know that
they were always wont to murmur, and that as soon as the prophets spake,
they brought forward many exceptions, by which they attempted to confute
their doctrine.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9"></span>As, then, they were an unteachable
people, Jeremiah did not only speak of God’s hidden judgments, of which
some doubt might have been alleged; but, in order to cut off every
occasion for disputes and contentions, he mentioned *the word* itself;
and thus he held the Jews as it were convicted; for, as it is said by
Moses, they could not have objected and said,

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10"></span>“Who shall ascend into heaven? who
shall descend into the deep? who shall pass over the sea?” (<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>[De
30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11"></span>for in their mouth was God’s word,
that is, God had sufficiently made known his judgments, so that they
could not complain of obscurity. We now then perceive another reason why
the Prophet joined the word to God’s judgments and decrees or counsel.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p12"></span>But he says that this *word* had
been published *from ancient days*; and here he touches on the
untameable obstinacy of the people; for had they been admonished a few
days or a short time before, they might have expostulated with God; and
there might have been some specious appearance that God had as it were
made too great haste in his rigor. But as prophets had been sent, one
after another, and as he had not ceased for many years, nay, for many
ages, to exhort them to repentance, and to threaten them also that they
might repent, hence their inveterate impiety more fully betrayed itself.
This is the reason why the Prophet now mentions the *ancient days*, in
which God had published his word.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p13"></span>He at length adds, *he hath
subverted and not spared*. He does not here charge God with too much
rigor, but rather he reproves the Jews, so that from the grievousness of
their punishment they might know how intolerable had been their
iniquity. He would then have them to judge of their sins by their
punishment, for God does not act unjustly towards men. It hence follows,
that when we are severely afflicted by his hand, it is a proof that we
have been very wicked.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p14"></span>He then concludes that it was God
who had *exhilarated their enemies, and raised up their horn*  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) By these words he confirms the
doctrine, on which I have already touched, that we ought to turn our
eyes to God, when men are insolent to us, and exult over our miseries;
for such a reproach might otherwise wholly overwhelm us. But when we
consider that we are chastised by God, and that the wicked, however
petulantly they may treat us, are yet God’s scourges, then we resolve
with calm and resigned minds to bear what would otherwise wear us out by
its acerbity. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>**18.** Their heart cried unto the
Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river
day and night: give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thine eye
cease.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p3"></span>**18.** Clamavit cor corum ad Dominum;
Mure filiae Sion, deducas tanquam fluvium lachrymas (vel, tanquam
fluvius) die et nocte; ne des requiem Tibi, ne silcat (hoc est, ne
quiescat) pupilla oculi tui.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p6"></span>He means not that their *heart* really
*cried to God,* for there was no cry in their heart; but by this
expression he sets forth the vehemence of their grief, as though he had
said, that the heart of the people was oppressed with so much sorrow,
that their feelings burst forth into crying; for crying arises from
extreme grief, and when any one cries or weeps, he has no control over
himself. Silence is a token of patience; but when grief overcomes one,
he, as though forgetting himself, necessarily bursts out into crying.
This is the reason why he says that their *heart cried to Jehovah*

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p7"></span>But we must observe, that the piety of
the people is not here commended, as though they complained of their
evils to God in sincerity and with an honest heart: on the contrary, the
Prophet means that it was a common cry, often uttered even by the
reprobate; for nature in a manner teaches this, that we ought to flee to
God when oppressed by evils; and even those who have no fear of God
exclaim in their extreme miseries, “God be merciful to us.” And, as I
have said, such a cry does not flow from a right feeling or from the
true fear of God, but from the strong and turbid impulse of nature: and
thus God has from the beginning rendered all mortals inexcusable. So,
then, now the Prophet says, that the Jews *cried* to God, or that *their
heart cried*; not that they looked to God as they ought to have done, or
that they deposited with him their sorrows and cast them into his bosom,
as the Prophet encourages us to do; but because they found no remedy in
the world — for as long as men find any comfort or help in the world,
with that they are satisfied. Whence, then, was this crying to God? even
because the world offered them nothing in which they could acquiesce;
for it is indigenous, as it were, in our nature (that is, corrupt
nature) to look around here and there, when any evil oppresses us. Now,
when we find, as I have said, anything as a help, even an empty specter,
to that we cleave, and never raise up our eyes to God. But when
necessity forces us, then we begin to cry to God. Then the Prophet means
that the people had been reduced to the greatest straits, when he says
that their *heart cried to God*

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8"></span>He afterwards turns to the *wall* of
Jerusalem, and ascribes understanding to an inanimate thing. *O wall* of
Jerusalem, he says, *draw down tears as though thou wert a river*; or,
as a river; for both meanings may be admitted. But by stating a part for
the whole, he includes under the word *wall*, the whole city, as it is
well known. And yet there is still a personification, for neither
houses, nor walls, nor gates, nor streets, could shed tears; but
Jeremiah could not, except by this hyperbolical language, sufficiently
express the extent of their cry. This was the reason why he addressed
the very *wall* of the city, and bade it *to shed tears like a river*
 <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md)

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p12"></span>There seems to be some allusion to
the ruins; for the walls of the city had been broken down as though they
were melted. And then the Prophet seems to allude to the previous
hardness of the people, for their hearts had been extremely stupified.
As, then, they never had been flexible, whether addressed by doctrine,
or exhortations, or threatenings, he now by implication brings forward
in contrast with them the walls of the city, as though he had said,
“Hitherto no one of God’s servants could draw even one tear from your
eyes, so great was your hardness; but now the very walls weep, for they
dissolve, as though they would send forth rivers of waters. Therefore
the very stones turn to tears, because ye have hitherto been hardened
against God and all prophetic instruction.”

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *Spare not
thyself, give not thyself rest day or night, and let not the daughter of
thine eye*, or the pupil of thine eye, *cease*, literally, be silent;
but to be silent is metaphorically taken in the sense of ceasing or
resting. He intimates that there would be, nay, that there was now, an
occasion of continual lamentation; and hence he exhorted them to weep
day and night; as though he had said, that sorrow would continue without
intermission, as there would be no relaxation as to their evils. But we
must bear in mind what we have before said, that the Prophet did not
speak thus to embitter the sorrow of the people. We indeed know that the
minds of men are very tender and delicate while under evils, and then
that they rush headlong into impatience; but as they were not as yet led
to true repentance, he sets before them the punishment which God had
inflicted, that they might thereby be turned to consider their own sins.
It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p2"></span>**19.** Arise, cry out in the night: in
the beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the
face of the Lord: lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young
children, that faint for hunger in the top of every street.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p3"></span>**19.** Surge, Clama nocte principio
excubiarum (custodiarum ad verbum, sed significat vigilias nocturnas;)
effunde tanquam aquas cor tuum coram facie Domini; attolle ad ipsum
manus tuas propter Animam parvulorum tuorum, qui deficiunt fame in
capite omnium compitorum.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p6"></span>The Prophet now explains himself more
clearly, and confirms what I have lately said, that he mentioned not the
calamities of the people except for this end, that those who were almost
stupid might begin to raise up their eyes to God, and also to examine
their life, and willingly to condemn themselves, that thus they might
escape from the wrath of God.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p7"></span>The Prophet then bids them to *rise*
and *to cry*. Doubtless they had been by force constrained by their
enemies to undertake a long journey: why then does he bid them to rise,
who had become fugitives from their own country, and had been driven
away like sheep? He regards, as I have said, the slothfulness of their
minds, because they were still lying torpid in their sins. It was then
necessary to rouse them from this insensibility; and this is what the
Prophet had in view by saying, *Rise*  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) And then he bids them to *cry at the
beginning of the watches*, even when sleep begins to creep on, and the
time is quieter; for when men go to bed, then sleep comes on, and that
is the main rest. But the Prophet bids here the Jews to cry, and in
their uneasiness to utter their complaints at the very time when others
take their rest. et he did not wish them heedlessly to pour forth into
the air their wailings, but bade them to present their prayers to God.
Then as to the circumstances of that time, he repeats what we have
already seen, that so great was their mass of evils, that it allowed the
people no relaxation; in short, he intimates that it was a continual
sorrow.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p9"></span>But, as I have said, he would have the
Jews not simply to cry, but after having exhorted them to *pour out
their hearts like waters*, he adds, *before the face of Jehovah*. For
the unbelieving make themselves almost hoarse by crying, but they are
only like brute beasts; or if they call on God’s name, they do this, as
it has been said, through a rash and indiscriminate impulse. Hence the
Prophet here makes a difference between the elect of God and the
reprobate, when he bids them to pour forth their hearts and their cries
*before* God, so as to seek alleviation from him, which could not have
been done, were they not convinced that he was the author of all their
calamities; and hence, also, arises repentance, for there is a mutual
relation between God’s judgment and men’s sins. Whosoever, then,
acknowledges God as a judge, is at the same time compelled to examine
himself and to inquire as to his own sins. We now understand the meaning
of the Prophet’s words.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p10"></span>For the same purpose he adds, *Raise
up to him thy hands*. This practice of itself is, indeed, not
sufficient; but the Scripture often points out the real thing by
external signs. Then the elevation of the hands, in this place and
others, means the same thing as prayer; and it has been usual in all
ages to raise up the hands to heaven, and the expression often occurs in
the Psalms, (<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>[Ps
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.xxv-p10.2"></span>[Ps
134:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p10.2"></span>;) and when Paul bids prayers to be made
everywhere, he says,

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p11"></span>“I would have men to raise up pure
hands without contention.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p11.2"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p12"></span>God has no doubt suggested this
practice to men, that they may first go beyond the whole world when they
seek him; and, secondly, that they may thus stimulate themselves to
entertain confidence, and also to divest themselves of all earthly
desires; for except this practice were to raise up our minds, (as we are
by nature inclined to superstition,) every one would seek God either at
his feet or by his side. Then God has planted in men this feeling, even
to raise upwards their hands, in order that they may go, as I have said,
beyond the whole world, and that having thus divested themselves of all
vain superstition, they may ascend above the heavens. This custom, I
allow, is indeed common among the unbelieving; and thus all excuse has
been taken away from them. Though, then, the unbelieving have been
imbued with gross and delirious fantasies, so as to connect God with
statues and pictures, yet this habit of raising up the hands to heaven
ought to have been sufficient to confute all their erroneous notions.
But it would not be enough to seek God beyond this world, so that no
superstition should possess our minds, except our minds were also freed
from all worldly desires. For we are held entangled in our lusts, and
then we seek what pleases the flesh, and thus, for the most part, men
strive, to subject God to themselves. Then the elevation of the hands
does also shew that we are to deny ourselves, and to go forth, as it
were, out of ourselves whenever we call on God. These are briefly the
things which may be said of the use of this ceremony or practice.

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p13"></span>But we must remember what I have
referred to, that the Prophet designates the thing itself by an outward
sign, when he bids them to *raise up the hands* to God. He afterwards
shews the necessity of this, *because of the soul of thy little ones,
who faint in famine*;  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) but the
<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>ב, *beth*, is redundant here, —
*who*, then, *through famine faint* or fail, and that openly. For it
might have happened that those who had no food pined away at home, and
thus fainted because no one gave them aid, because their want was not
known. But when infants in public places breathed out their souls
through famine, hence was evident that extreme state of despair, which
the Prophet intended here to set forth by mentioning *at the head of all
the streets*. It follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>**20.** Behold, O LORD, and consider
to whom thou hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit, *and*
children of a span long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in
the sanctuary of the Lord?

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p3"></span>**20.** Vide, Jehova, et aspice cui
feceris sic; an comedent mulieres fructum suum (hoc est, foetus suos,)
parvulos educationis? An occidetur in sanctuario Domini sacerdos et
propheta?

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p6"></span>Here, also, Jeremiah dictates words,
or a form of prayer to the Jews. And this complaint availed to excite
pity, that God had thus afflicted, not strangers, but the people whom he
had adopted. Interpreters do, indeed, give another explanation, “See,
Jehovah, To whom hast thou done this?” that is, Has any people been ever
so severely afflicted? But I do not think that the comparison is made
here, which they seek to make, but that the people only set before God
the covenant which he had made with their fathers, as though they said,
“O Lord, hadst thou thus cruelly raged against strangers, there would
have been nothing so wonderful; but since we are thine heritage, and the
blessed seed of Abraham, since thou hast been pleased to choose us as
thy peculiar people, what can this mean, that, thou treatest us with so
much severity?”

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p7"></span>We now, then, perceive the real
meaning of the Prophet, when, in the person of the people, he speaks
thus, *See, and look on, Jehovah, to whom thou hast done this*; for thou
hast had to do with thy children: not that the Jews could allege any
worthiness; but the gratuitous election of God must have been abundantly
sufficient to draw forth mercy. Nor do the faithful here simply ask God
to see, but they add another word, *Look on*. By the two words they more
fully express the indignity of what had happened, as though they said,
that it was like a prodigy that God’s people should be so severely
afflicted, who had been chosen by him: *see*, then, *to whom thou hast
done this*

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p8"></span>And this mode of praying was very
common, as we find it said in the Psalms,

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p9"></span>“Pour forth thy wrath on the nations
which know not thee, and on the kingdoms which call not on thy name.”
(<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>[Ps
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p10"></span>And a similar passage we have before
observed in our Prophet. (<span id="iii.iii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>[Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>.) The sum of what is said is, that there
was a just reason why God should turn to mercy, and be thus reconciled
to his people, because he had not to do with aliens, but with his own
family, whom he had been pleased to adopt. But the rest I shall defer
until tomorrow.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="iii.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thy
Church at this day is oppressed with many evils, we may learn to raise
up not only our eyes and our hands to thee, but also our hearts, and
that we may so fix our attention on thee as to look for salvation from
thee alone; and that though despair may overwhelm us on earth, yet the
hope of thy goodness may ever shine on us from heaven, and that, relying
on the Mediator whom thou hast given us, we may not hesitate to cry
continually to thee, until we really find by experience that our prayers
have not been ill vain, when thou, pitying thy Church, hast extended thy
hand, and given us cause to rejoice, and hast turned our mourning into
joy, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p1"></span>Lecture Eighth

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p2"></span>We explained yesterday the complaint
of the Prophet, when he set before God his own covenant. For it might
have appeared unreasonable that God should deal with so much severity
with the Church which he had adopted. Hence the Prophet said, *See,
Jehovah, to whom thou hast done this*. He now mentions some things
calculated to produce horror, and thus to obtain pardon from God,
*Should women eat their own fruit?* that is, their own foetus, *the
infants of nursings?* This, as I have said, was a horrible thing: for we
see that mothers often forget their own life in their concern for the
safety of their infants. That a child, then, should be devoured by its
mother, was a most abominable thing; and yet we know that it was done.
It hence appears, that; the Israelites, when blinded by God, had fallen
into this barbarity: for it happened in the siege of Samaria, as sacred
history declares; and the Prophet now mentions the same thing as having
taken place in his time, and he repeats the same in the fourth chapter.
And Josephus also says, that when the city was besieged by Titus, the
state of things was such, that mothers agreed to eat their own children,
and that they cast lots who should first slay their child, and that they
stole a leg or an arm from one another. Though it was so inhuman a
thing, yet the Prophet seeks to turn God to mercy by adducing so great;
an enormity. He then says, that it was by no means right, that *mothers
should eat their own children, the children of nursings*, or nurturings.
 <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md)

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *Should the
priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?* This was
another indignity, by which he sought to lead God to shew mercy. We
indeed know that the priests and the prophets were deemed sacred; and in
the Psalms, where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are referred to, God, in
order to shew how much they were to be regarded, says,

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p8"></span>“Touch not my Christ’s, and to my
prophets do no harm.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p9"></span>As, then, the priests and the
prophets were especially under the protection of God, what is here said
was an intolerable atrocity. But when the profanation of the Temple was
added, it was still a greater prodigy. Jeremiah then complains, not only
that the priests and the prophets were slain, but that they were slain
in the sanctuary. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p2"></span>**21.** The young and the old lie on
the ground in the streets: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the
sword; thou hast slain *them* in the day of thine anger; thou hast
killed, *and* not pitied.

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p3"></span>**21.** Jacuerunt in terra per compita
puer et senex; virgines meae et adolescentes mei ceciderunt gladio;
occidisti in die irae tuae; mactasti et non pepercisti.

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p6"></span>Here he relates in the person of the
Church another calamity, that the young and the aged were lying
prostrate in the streets; and he joins children to the old men, to shew
that there was no difference as to age. Then he says that dead bodies
were lying promiscuously in public places. He adds, that *virgins* and
*young men* had *fallen by the sword*; by which he confirms the previous
clause, for there is nothing new said here, but only the manner is shewn
by which they had been slain; for slain by the sword had been the young
men and young women without any distinction; the enemies at the same
time had not spared the old, while they killed the very flower of the
people.

<span id="iii.iii.xxix-p7"></span>But the Prophet at the same time shews
that all this was to be ascribed to God, not. that the Jews might
expostulate with him, but that they might cease vainly to lament their
calamities, and in order that they might on the contrary turn to God.
Hence he does not say that the young and the old had been slain by the
enemies, but by God himself. But it was difficult to convince the Jews
of this, for they were so filled with rage against their enemies, that
they could not turn their thoughts to the consideration of God’s
judgments. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet makes God the
author of all their calamities; *Thou*, he says, *hast slain in the day
of thy wrath; thou hast killed and not spared*. And though the people
seem here in a manner to contend with God, we must yet bear in mind the
design of the Prophet, even to teach the people to look to God himself,
so that they might know that they had to do with him. For there ought to
be a passing from one truth to another, so that men, conscious of their
sins, should first give glory to God, and then humbly deprecate the
wrath which they have deserved. It follows at length, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Lamentations
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p2"></span>**22.** Thou hast called as in a solemn
day my terrors round about, so that in the day of the LORD’S anger none
escaped nor remained: those that I have swaddled and brought up hath
mine enemy consumed.

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p3"></span>**22.** Vocasti tanquam ad diem festum
terrores meos undique, et nou fuit in die indignationis Jehovae
superstes ac residuus; quos enutrivi et educavi, hostis meus consumpsit
cos (sed abundat relativum.)

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p6"></span>Here he uses a most appropriate
metaphor, to show that the people had been brought to the narrowest
straits; for he says that *terrors* had on every side surrounded them,
as when a solemn assembly is called. They sounded the trumpets when a
festival was at hand, that all might come up to the Temple. As, then,
many companies were wont to come to Jerusalem on feast-days — for when
the trumpets were sounded all were called — so the Prophet says that
terrors had been sent by God from every part to straiten the miserable
people: *thou hast, then, called my terrors all around,* — how? *as to a
feast-day,* the day of the assembly; for <span
id="iii.iii.xxx-p6.1"></span>מועד, *muod*, means the assembly as well as
the place and the appointed time.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md)

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p10"></span>But we must ever bear in mind what I
have already referred to, that though enemies terrified the Jews, yet
this was to be ascribed to God, so that every one might acknowledge for
himself, that the Chaldeans had not come by chance, but through the
secret impulse of God. He afterwards adds, *in the day of Jehovah’s
wrath* (he changes the person) *there was none alive*, or remaining;
nay, he says *the enemy has consumed those whom I had nursed and brought
up*. Here he transfers to enemies what he had before said was done by
God, but in this sense, that he understood God as the chief author, and
the Chaldeans as the ministers; of his vengeance. Now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc21010.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p8"></span> The verb here is in the future tense,
and the clause might be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.iii.i-p9"></span>Why should the Lord in his wrath
becloud  
the daughter of Sion?

<span id="iii.iii.i-p10"></span>And if <span
id="iii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>ישבה, in <span
id="iii.iii.i-p10.2"></span>[La
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.iii.i-p10.2"></span>,
be in the future tense, as it may be, that clause may be rendered in the
same way, —

<span id="iii.iii.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.i-p12"></span>Why should sit alone the city *that was*
full of people?

<span id="iii.iii.i-p13"></span>Then follows here, as in the former
instance, a description of what had happened to Sion, —

<span id="iii.iii.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.i-p15"></span>He hath cast from heaven to earth the
glory of Israel,  
And not remembered his footstool in the day of his wrath.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p16"></span>At the same time, the clauses may both
be rendered as proposed in a note on <span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>[La
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>,
and the tenses of the verbs be preserved. The verb here is clearly in
the future tense, and the verb in the former instance may be so; and the
future in Hebrew is often to be taken as the present, as the case is in
Welsh.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p17"></span>How this! in his wrath becloud does the
Lord the daughter of Sion!

<span id="iii.iii.i-p18"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc21010.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p9"></span> *Gataker, Henry, Blayney*, and
*Henderson*, consider “the right hand” as that of Israel — that God drew
back or restrained the right hand of Israel, so that he had no power to
face his enemies. But *Scott* agrees with *Calvin*; and favorable to the
same view are the early versions, except the *Syr*., for they render the
pronoun, “his own — <span id="iii.iii.v-p9.1"></span>suam:” the *Targ*.
also takes the same view. Had the word been “hand,” it might have been
applied to Israel; but it is “the right hand,” which commonly means
protection, or rather God’s power, as put forth to defend his people and
to resist enemies. This is farther confirmed by what is said in the
following verse, that God “stood with his right hand as an adversary.”
See <span id="iii.iii.v-p9.2"></span>[Ps
74:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.iii.v-p9.2"></span>
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc21010.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p10"></span> The last clause may be literally
rendered thus, —

<span id="iii.iii.v-p11"></span>And he burned in Jacob as fire,  
the flame devoured around.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p12"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc21010.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p7"></span> The word <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>שכו is rendered by the versions in the
sense of <span id="iii.iii.viii-p7.2"></span>סכו, “his tabernacle;” but
by so doing they make it the same in effect with <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.3"></span>מועדו, “his place of meeting,” in the
following clause. The verb <span id="iii.iii.viii-p7.4"></span>חמס never
means what *Calvin* says, to migrate or to remove, but to cast off, or
to throw down, that is, with force or violence. Then <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.5"></span>שר, a fence or enclosure, is what suits
the verb, —

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p9"></span>**6.** And he has thrown down as that
of a garden his enclosure,  
He has destroyed his assembling-place; Forgotten hath Jehovah in Sion
the assembly and the Sabbath; And has cast off, in the foaming of his
wrath, the king and the priest.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p10"></span>The “enclosure,” or fence, refers to
the courts which surrounded the Temple; hence the place where the people
assembled was destroyed. God had regarded it no more than the fence of a
common garden. There is “fence” understood after <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p10.1"></span>כ, no uncommon thing in Hebrew. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc21010.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p7"></span> Our version, “cast off,” gives the real
meaning of the verb. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc21010.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p7"></span> The verb is often used in this secondary
sense, to purpose or resolve or determine, as the result of thinking.
The *Vulg*. and the *Targ*. very improperly retain its primary meaning,
but the *Syr*. gives that of resolving or determining. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc21010.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p9"></span> It was the line of destruction as
mentioned in <span id="iii.iii.x-p9.1"></span>[Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p9.1"></span>, designed to point out what was to be
destroyed. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc21010.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p10"></span> The verbs <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.1"></span>אבל, to mourn, and <span
id="iii.iii.x-p10.2"></span>אסל, to be faint, to fail, when applied to
inanimate things, mean to be desolate and to decay. This clause then
ought to be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.iii.x-p11"></span>So that he has made desolate the rampart
and the wall,  
They are become wholly decayed together.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p12"></span>The connection shows that the where must
be rendered, “so that;” and as the last verb has the last letter
doubled, the word “wholly” ought to be introduced. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc21010.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p8"></span> “No law.” *Gataker* understood this
to refer to the fact, that the law written on the tables of stone,
deposited in the temple, was lost, having been destroyed by the
Chaldeans. Others say, “no law” was observed respecting God’s worship,
the temple having been destroyed. The law, moral, ceremonial and
judicial, was given to Israel, and formed the condition on which they
were to inherit the land. When banished, because they kept not the law,
they had in exile as it were no law; the covenant respecting the land,
dependent on the law, was during the exile made void or suspended. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc21010.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p8"></span> The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p10"></span>**10.** They sit on the ground, they
are silent, the elders of the daughter of Sion; They have cast dust on
their head, they have girded on sackcloth; They have bent to the ground
their head, the daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p11"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc21010.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p10"></span> The verbs here are all in the past
tense, and the versions so render them. Our version is wrong, as well as
that of *Blayney* and *Henderson,* in rendering them in the present
tense; for the Prophet is describing how he felt when he witnessed the
destruction of Jerusalem, —

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p12"></span>**11.** Consume with tears did my eyes,
agitated were my bowels,  
Poured out on the ground was my liver, for the breach of the daughter of
my people, When faint did the child and the suckling in the streets of
the city.

<span id="iii.iii.xv-p13"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc21010.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p7"></span> That young children and infants are
spoken of, is evident from the end of the verse; the one died in the
streets, and the other in the mother’s bosom. The question, “Where is
corn,” &c., is to be understood of the children, young boys and girls. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc21010.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p10"></span> To correspond with the former verse,
the versions render this, “They said to their mothers.” The verb is,
indeed, in the future tense, and it might be rendered, “To their mothers
would they say;” for the Hebrew future may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p12"></span>**12.** To their mothers would they
say,” Where is corn and wine?”  
When they fainted as one wounded in the streets of the city,  
When they poured out their life into the bosom of their mothers.

<span id="iii.iii.xvi-p13"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc21010.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xvii-p7"></span> The simpler rendering would be, “What
shall I testify (or declare) to thee?” So the *Sept*: or, “What shall I
call thee to witness?” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc21010.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p8"></span> So it means when applied to
eatables, but folly or absurdity when applied to words. It comes from
<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p8.1"></span>נפל, to fall, in the sense of
decaying or degenerating. It is what is neither wise nor true. Hence it
is rendered “foolishness” by the *Sept*.; “foolish” by the *Vulg*.; and
“without substance” by the *Targ*. —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p9"></span>Thy prophets, they have seen vanity
and folly.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p10"></span>What they had seen were both “vain,”
useless, and “foolish,” absurd. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc21010.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p18"></span> The verb rendered “turn back,”
means also to turn away or aside, and this is the meaning given it here
by the *Syr.*, and most suitable to the passage, —

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p19"></span>And they discovered not thine
iniquity,  
to turn aside thy captivity.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p20"></span>That is, as the *Syr.* Expresses it,
to avert it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc21010.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p23"></span> There seems to be a mistake in this
word of a <span id="iii.iii.xviii-p23.1"></span>ד for an <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p23.2"></span>ר, two letters very similar; for the
*Targ.,* the *Syr.*, and the *Arab*., must have so read the word, as
they render it in the sense of what is deceptive, fallacious, or
imaginary. It is in the last rendered “phantasms.” The word occurs in
<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p23.3"></span>[Jer
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p23.3"></span>, and is applied to chambers through
which air or wind passed freely. It may be rendered here winds or airy
things. Such was the character of their prophecies. This is far more
suitable to the passage than expulsions or rejections, as given by the
*Sept*. and *Vulg*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc21010.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p8"></span> Jeremiah relates what had taken place,
the verbs being in the past tense. Our version is not correct in
rendering the verbs in the present tense. The old versions follow the
Hebrew. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc21010.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxi-p12"></span> The words may be rendered, “the joy
of the whole land,” *i.e.*, the land of Israel; which was strictly true.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc21010.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxii-p4"></span> This verse begins with <span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p4.1"></span>פ, and the next with <span
id="iii.iii.xxii-p4.2"></span>ע; thus the alphabetical order is
deranged. The same thing occurs in the two next chapters, though in the
first chapter the usual order of the letters is preserved. Many
conjectures have been made on the subject, but no satisfactory reason
has been assigned. The *Targ*. and the early versions, except the
*Syr*., follow in the three places the present text; only the *Sept*.,
very strangely, prefix the letters in their alphabetical order, and yet
give the verses as they now are. When, added to this, we find the
meaning favors the present arrangement, we cannot but conclude that it
was the original one, though the reason why Jeremiah changed, as to
these two letters, even in three instances, the alphabetical order,
cannot now be discovered. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc21010.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p15"></span> Literally it is, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p16"></span>And he hath made to rejoice over
thee the enemy,  
He hath exalted the horn of thine oppressors.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p17"></span> — *Ed*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc21010.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p9"></span> The meaning suggested by the
*Vulgate* is the most appropriate. The words may be rendered thus, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p10"></span>Cried has their heart to the Lord,  
“O the wall of the daughter of Sion!” —  
Bring down like a torrent the tear, day and night;  
Give no rest to thyself.  
Let not cease the daughter of thine eye.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiv-p11"></span>Their exclamation was, “O the wall,”
etc. Then follow the words of Jeremiah to the end of the chapter; but
the daughter of Sion, not the wall, is exhorted to weep and repent. “The
daughter of the eye,” may be the tear, as suggested by *Blayney* and
approved by *Horsley*; and it would be more suitable here. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc21010.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p8"></span> The simpler meaning, as stated by
*Gataker*, is, “Rise” from thy bed; for she is exhorted to cry in the
night. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc21010.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxv-p14"></span> Rather, “who fainted through famine;”
for he refers to what had taken place. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc21010.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>*Educationum*. Our version is nearly the
*Vulg.* It is paraphrased by the *Sept*., “who suck the breasts;” and
the *Targ*. is, “who are clad in silks.” *Blayney* rightly says, that
<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p3.2"></span>טפח is the open palm of the hand;
and he gives this as the literal rendering of the words, “children of
palms;” that is, children of sufficient age to be carried about. His
version of this line is, “Little ones dandled on the hands.” *Horsley*
approves of this meaning.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p4"></span>The previous word, <span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>פדים, has been a difficulty to most, the
final *mem* being masculine. “Fruit,” in the sense of offspring, is
applied to men as well as to women. We may take the final *mem* in <span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p4.2"></span>נשים, as a pronoun, “their wives;” the
same are meant as in <span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p4.3"></span>[La
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xxviii-p4.3"></span>, “their voice,” *i.e.*, the citizens of
Jerusalem. Thus the construction will be quite grammatical.

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p5"></span>Should their own wives eat their
offspring,  
Infants dandled on the hands!  
Should they be killed in the sanctuary of the Lord,  
The priest and the prophet!

<span id="iii.iii.xxviii-p6"></span>It is the language of humble
expostulation. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc21010.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xxx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p7"></span> The verb for calling or summoning is
in the future tense, and must, be so, to preserve the alphabetical
character of the elegy, but it is rendered as in the past tense by all
the versions, but the reason why does not appear. The future in Hebrew
is often to be rendered as a subjunctive, potential, or optative: so
here, —

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p8"></span>Shouldest thou summon, as on a festival
day,  
My terrors all around! —  
And there was not, in the day of Jehovah’s wrath,  
A fugitive or a survivor;  
Whom I dandled and brought up,  
My enemy has consumed them.

<span id="iii.iii.xxx-p9"></span>The first two lines are a kind of
expostulation: “My terrors” mean my terrifiers, according to the
*Vulg.*, the abstract for the concrete. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc21011.md)
