[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cma28)  [Next](cma30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIWZ6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Creation Myths of Primitive America*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1898\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NORWAN

NEXT to "Olelbis" stands "Norwan," both for value and interest. This
remarkable myth recalls forcibly the Helen of Troy tale, both in its
general plan and in many particulars.

The great war among the first people is caused by the woman Norwan.
Norbis Kiemila, who claims to be her husband, is descended from the
heavenly white oak which forms part of Olelpanti Hlut, the divine
mansion in the "Central Blue."

Norwan's full name is Pom, Norwan en Pitchen, that is, daughter of the
land on the southern border. She has another name: Hluyuk Tikimit, which
means the dancing porcupine. Her residence, or hlut, was Norwan Buli,
Norwan Mountain. The Yana name of this mountain is Wahkanopa, which
means the son of Wahkalu. Wahkalu is Mount Shasta, and Wahkanopa
Lassen's Butte.

Norwan, or Hluyuk Tikimit, the dancing porcupine, has still a third
name, Bastepomas pokte, the food-giving or food-producing woman. In her
quality of producer she occupies a position in Wintu mythology similar
to that of the divine descendant of the earth and the sun in the
Algonkin religious system. This Algonkin myth is one of the most
beautiful and significant, not among creation, but among action myths.
And here I beg to call attention again to the distinction which I make
between the two classes of myths.

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

Creation myths relate always to what was done among the "first people in
the world which preceded this," while creation was going on, or more
correctly, perhaps, during the time of those transformations or
metamorphoses from which resulted the present world and the order of
things contained therein.

Action myths relate to ever-recurrent processes in nature which began as
soon as the sun had his course marked out for him and the physical world
around us received its present form and fashion; this happened before
all the "first people" were metamorphosed. The vast majority had
received the physical bodies which they have at present, but a few were
left, and they remained in various places till they saw or heard the new
race, the Indians. Action myths, therefore, relate to various processes
in nature which never cease. For us the most important are those
involved in the relations between the sun and the earth.

The great Algonkin sun and earth myth which has many variants and vast
wealth of detail, describes those relations more profoundly and broadly
than any other Indian myth devoted to the same subject.

The Algonkin myth in its most extended form describes the earth maiden
as becoming a mother through being looked at by the sun. She gives birth
to a daughter who is called Wakos ikwe, the fox woman; this daughter
becomes the mother of a great hero, the highest benefactor of aboriginal
man in America. He is the giver of food and of every good gift by which
life is supported.

Of this myth there is a shorter version in which the hero is born of the
earth directly; he is her son, not her grandson.

This benefactor and food-giver is no other than that warm air which we
see dancing and quivering above the earth in fine weather. Descended
from the sun and the earth, this warm air supports all things that have
vegetable or animal existence.

This myth in its more extended form, the one to which I have referred
first, is similar to that which Schoolcraft pieced together and which
Longfellow took as the foundation of his beautiful poem "Hiawatha,"
though not identical with it.

Schoolcraft, with his amazing propensity to make mistakes, with his
remarkable genius for missing the truth and confusing everything

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

with which he came in contact, gave the name Hiawatha to his patchwork.

Hiawatha is an Iroquois name connected with Central New York. The
Iroquois were mortal enemies of the Algonkins, and the feud between
these two stocks was the most inveterate and far reaching of any in
America. It was, in fact, the only Indian tribal hatred that rose to
historical importance, and it was by the adherence of the Iroquois, the
"Five Nations" of New York, that English dominion in North America was
established.

The Algonkin force of America was on the French side, but the Iroquois
held all water communication between Lake Erie and Ontario, the greatest
strategic position on the continent at that period. They cut the
Algonkins in two, and prevented France from receiving their undivided
assistance.

Had the whole Algonkin power aided the French, they would have had great
chances of victory. Had the Iroquois been friends of the Algonkins and
acted with them, there could have been no doubt of the triumph of France
at that juncture. But the Algonkins and Iroquois were mortal enemies;
the Algonkins were friendly to the French, the Iroquois to the English.

In the face of all this Schoolcraft makes Hiawatha, who is peculiarly
Iroquois, the leading personage in his Algonkin conglomerate; Hiawatha
being an Iroquois character of Central New York (he is connected more
particularly with the region about Schenectady), while the actions to
which Schoolcraft relates him pertain to the Algonkin Chippewas near
Lake Superior.

It is as if Europeans of some future age were to have placed before them
a great epic narrative of French heroic adventure in which Prince
Bismarck would appear as the chief and central Gallic figure in the
glory and triumph of France. The error and absurdity would be, as the
Germans say, *colossál*, but not greater or more towering than in
Schoolcraft's Hiawatha. Longfellow, of course, could not free himself
from the error contained in his material; but the error, which was not
his own and which be had no means of correcting at that time, did not
prevent him from giving his work that peculiar charm which is
inseparable from everything which he did.

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

In the original Algonkin myth the hero to which Hiawatha has been
accommodated was a child of the sun and the earth. Whatever his names in
the numerous versions found in the twenty-eight languages of this
richest and most varied Indian stock of North America, he is always the
bounteous benefactor of man, the kindest of all divine powers that have
ever appeared upon earth. He is always in reality that warm light which
dances and quivers before us in fine weather, and through which every
man, beast, reptile, insect, fish, bird, and plant lives and flourishes.

This myth has received on the Pacific coast, or more correctly on parts
of it, a different treatment from that given it east of the Rocky
Mountains. There the benefactor is a female, a daughter of the earth.
Nothing is said as to who her father was. It is significant that she
dances all day, that she is called the quivering porcupine and the
food-producing woman.

In Indian myths from New York to California the porcupine is ever
connected with light; in some cases it is the sun himself. In
"Tulchuherris" of this volume, Sas (the sun) carries a porcupine quiver,
and is advised never to lay it aside, for as long as he keeps it on his
shoulder he is safe from his children the grizzlies (the clouds) who
wish to kill him.

In California Norwan, daughter of the earth, occupies in part the place
of the Algonkin hero, the child of the sun and the earth. Her usual life
is of the housekeeping order; she has great supplies of food in her
hlut, or residence, and she goes on dancing each day until evening. The
great and characteristic event of her life, her departure from the dance
with her partner, is of the same scope and meaning as the last journey
of Hiawatha when he sails to the west and vanishes in the regions of
sunset. The hero of the Algonkin myth must go, he cannot stay; he must
vanish in the ruddy glow of evening because he is the warm dancing air
of the daytime. He must go whether he will or not. Before he goes,
however, he cheers all whom he leaves behind by telling them that
another will come from the east to take his place and comfort them. Next
morning, of course, the comforter comes, for the life career of the
Algonkin hero is included in the compass of a single day, and a
successor is bound to come as surely as he himself is bound to go.

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

Norwan dances, and then goes away with her partner, to the desperate
vexation of Norbis Kiemila, her would-be husband, who wishes to have her
to himself exclusively. She dances, as she says, without knowing it and
goes away unconsciously. She dances with this partner because she cannot
help it, and departs imperceptibly to herself.

Who are the rivals for her person?

Norbis means "living in the south;" he lives in the southeast, the land
of greatest productiveness, in the region of Hlihli Piu Hlut Ton, that
most beautiful of houses on earth, and second only to the divine mansion
in the "Central Blue." He is descended from one of the white oaks in the
heavenly house.

The person who was metamorphosed afterward into the red win bird (Tede
Wiu) is his rival, the person with whom Norwan left the dance, thus
causing the first war in the world. Was this person the red of evening
which became Tede Wiu afterward? If we acknowledge that he was, and if
we are willing to admit Norbis as the representative of all people
living east of the west, we have at once the two parties to an
irreconcilable rivalry in the most vital of questions, the possession of
warm sunlight, and that most vital of questions is embodied in the
person of a woman. That was the cause of the first war in the world and
of fell strife. A story substantially the same as this was, we may
think, the ultimate basis of the Iliad. The mythic origin of the
particular tale from which Homer constructed his epic had been
forgotten, that may be granted, but there is little doubt that in rustic
Greece men might have found a similar tale which was mythologic beyond
peradventure; and the Helen of that tale, or her equivalent, was a
person like Norwan. With the materials at our command even now, we have
enough to indicate this, for was not Helen the daughter of Leda and the
divine swan, a person to be fought for with all available energy in the
world at that period, and to be fought for in a war which surpassed in
importance all that have ever succeeded it?

Helen of Troy, the daughter of Leda and of Zeus, the overarching heaven,
with all its light; Norwan, daughter of the earth, with Lassen's Butte,
California, for her residence; and the Algonkin hero whose place is
taken by Hiawatha, are all different representatives

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

of the same person, different expressions for the same phenomenon; and
that person or phenomenon is the warm air which dances above the earth
in fine weather. This air, in one case noted here, is conceived as the
greatest benefactor of man, that being who gives the choicest and most
necessary gifts to all, and, in the other two cases, as a priceless
treasure, in the form of a woman who is to be fought for with all the
valor that can possibly be summoned, and in a manner that in Helen's
case inspired the noblest epic known to the world thus far.

These three cases show clearly the methods of mythology, and prove the
absolute need of knowing that we must deal (to borrow mathematical
language) with constants and variables taken together,--knowing clearly,
meanwhile, which are constants,--and not with variables only, supposing
them to be constants, or with constants and variables mixed together
without being able to distinguish which belong to one class and which to
the other. Were some writer to deal with the prehensile capacity in
animated creatures, and describe how it is exercised, he would find a
variety in the organs used for grasping things which would represent
very well the variety of methods employed by primitive man in mythology
to represent the same phenomenon or force in nature.

If man be considered as standing on his hind feet, his fore feet (the
hands) are his grasping instruments. With the elephant the nose is
prehensile; with some monkeys the tail performs this office, in part at
least. With tigers and lions, dogs and cats, the mouth and teeth are
prehensile instruments of great force and precision. With the bear the
forepaws are almost hands. The two feet with their talons, which
correspond to the hind feet in quadrupeds, are the graspers with birds
of prey, working instruments with domestic fowl, and weapons with some
other birds, as, for instance, the ostrich.

Take another case, the teeth, one office of which is to reduce food to
fine particles; with all mammals they serve this purpose, and, in many
cases, others also. Birds have no teeth, but they have a substitute in
the gizzard, which they line with gravel and other hard particles; and
this second stomach, by contraction, grinds to pulp grain and other food
already softened in the crop or

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

first stomach. The boa-constrictor has no teeth and no second stomach;
it chews by crushing between its body and a tree the beast which it is
to swallow. The chewing mouth of the boa has for one jaw the tree, for
the other its own body; between those two jaws it reduces to a soft mass
the carcass of the creature to be swallowed.

In considering the various personages in mythology, it is all important
to discover, first of all, what they are, and, next, what they do. The
office filled by a certain personage in a group of myths belonging to a
given race or tribe may be filled by an entirely different kind of
character in a similar set of myths of another tribe. This results
sometimes from different geographic and climatic conditions, and
sometimes from looking at the phenomenon or process of nature in another
way. There is as much variety in the treatment of one subject by various
tribes as there is variety in prehensile members and the use of them
among grasping creatures, or as there is difference in the manner of
reducing food to fineness among quadrupeds, birds, and boa-constrictors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tulchuherris](cma30.md)
