[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cma30)  [Next](cma32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIWZ6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Creation Myths of Primitive America*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1898\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEDIT AND THE TWO BROTHERS HUS

Sedit was in favor of death for men, and gives his reasons. It cannot be
said that he brought death into the world, but he stopped the work which
would have kept it out.

His discourse with the Hus brothers is curious; it represents the
immortality and goodness of a weak and limited creature like man as
barren and monotonous. The comparison of this conversation with the
account of Adam and Eve before and after the Fall is not without
interest.

The critical, unbelieving, disobedient Sedit, who is so willing to make
life in the world varied and interesting through death, so long as the
question stands apart from his own immortality, and his great concern
and anxiety when he thinks that he must himself die, is brought out in
good relief.

The earnest and honest Hus brothers stand in strong contrast to the
sneering Sedit. The Hus character is a lofty one in Wintu mythology.
This may seem strange to a new student of Indian ideas, when he
remembers what a foul creature the turkey buzzard is.

The buzzard is considered as a purifier on earth, and surely in regions
like Central America the service rendered by the bird in this regard is
memorable. The buzzard is everywhere the most frequent and striking
figure in Guatemala and Southern Mexico, both in city and country. In
California there is a fine of five dollars for killing one.

The original Hus character is conceived by the Wintus as striving toward
religious purification as strenuously as the earthly buzzard works at
cleaning the earth of carrion of various descriptions.

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

The following remarks accompanied this tale when published in "The
Sun":--

This tale of Sedit and the Hus brothers is a splendid bit of aboriginal
American philosophy, and touches on topics which have exercised many
minds besides those of primitive America. The subject of life and death
is treated here so simply, and at the same time so well, that I believe
few readers would ask for explanation or comment.

Some statements, however, touching Sedit are not out of place, I think.
The coyote is very prominent in the mythology of every region where he
is found. The basis of his character is the same in all myths that I
have collected. He is a tremendous glutton, boastful, talkative,
cunning, exceptionally inclined to the other sex, fall of curiosity, a
liar, a trickster, deceiving most adroitly, and is deceived himself at
times. He comes to grief frequently because of his passions and peculiar
qualities. He is an artful dodger, who has points in common with the
devil of European folk-lore, being in many cases an American counterpart
of this curious and interesting personage.

Of Northern Pacific coast tribes in the United States, the Modocs have
given most distinction to the coyote. Among them the chief coyote is a
trickster on the grandest scale, and has obtained possession of the
indestructible disk of the sun, through which he is immortal, or, at
least, is renewed every day to carry that luminary. Because of his
vanity and boastfulness, the coyote undertakes various enterprises in
which he fails through his passions.

Sacred springs and small lakes in the mountains are very prominent in
the Modoc religion. A young man who hopes to be a magician or a doctor
goes to these mountain springs before he is married or knows woman.
There he fasts and watches a week or longer until he is nearly
exhausted. If he is to be a magician or doctor, spirits appear to him in
this interval. A coyote went to those mountains (in the time before men
were on earth, of course), hoping to gain great magic power, but on the
way be ate various kinds of food hateful to the spirits of the springs.
These spirits were disgusted with the odor of food that came from him,
struck him with mange, drove him away, made him hungry, foul, and

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

wretched forever. He ran away, howling and lamenting, without hope of
pardon. From this coyote are descended an especially bad breed of
coyotes in Oregon. They are all foul and hungry to this day. In dark
windy nights the mangy descendants of that glutton are heard bewailing
the fault of their ancestor, their own fallen state and lost happiness.

The Shasta Indians have a long tale of a coyote whose fond grandmother
tried to make him a great sorcerer. When the time came, she sent him to
the sacred mountain and gave every instruction. He was not to stop, eat,
or drink on the road, or to speak to any one. When about two-thirds of
the distance, he passed near a house; inside was loud thumping and
hammering; a frog woman was pounding seeds and singing; her house was
full of food; coyote caught the odor of it, stopped, could not resist
the temptation to go in. He went in, ate and drank everything put before
him. In Indian mythology frog women are not vestals; so breaking his
fast and gluttony were not his only offences. He had fallen past
redemption. On leaving the frog woman's house he went through a series
of unmentionable adventures, at the end of which there was nothing left
but his head, which was in a pool by the wayside, and just as much alive
as ever.

Two sisters, afterwards ducks, who were going that way, found and pitied
the unfortunate. It was not easy to carry him, but the younger promised
to do so if he would shut his eyes and not open them till she set him
down on his grandmother's threshold. This condition was to prevent him
from seeing how she carried him. When half-way home, curiosity overcame
him. Though only a head, he opened his eyes and fell to the ground.

The duck woman had pity again, and took him to his grandmother. Loud was
her wailing at sight of her lost and ruined grandson.

Sedit came to grief through peculiarities of character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hawt](cma32.md)
