[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
America](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cma35)  [Next](cma37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIWZ6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Creation Myths of Primitive America*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1898\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

### THE MAKING OF DOCTORS AMONG THE WINTUS

THE chief assists always in this ceremony, because a doctor can be made
only in a sweat-house. Two chiefs may consult together and agree with
old doctors in this matter, or one chief may do so if it suits him. If
doctors begin, they must consult the chief, because he owns the
sweat-house. The doctors and the chief or chiefs agree upon the time,
and then give out the news that on a certain night they are going to
create doctors. Young persons who wish to be doctors go to the
sweat-house; most of the old people stay at home.

The men heat the sweat-house, shut it up closely, and sit down. Sweat
pours from them like rain. When they have sweated sufficiently, all go
to the river and swim. After that the people, men and women, go into the
sweat-house. One doctor or two will begin to sing. Young unmarried men
or women who are candidates present themselves. The doctors suck out of
these all that is bad in them, all that is impure, unclean. They suck
the forehead, breast, back, arms. At times they suck out blood; at times
something sharp like a fine bone comes out. They suck out everything
that is evil. When they have finished sucking, the doctor sings again,
and puts a yellowhammer's feather into each ear of the candidate. The
feather may go in out of sight, or the doctor puts it on the person's
head, and the feather may sink through his skull. Now the people dance,
and especially the candidates for the dignity of doctor. The chief goes
out, stands on the housetop, and calls to all the yapaitu in the rocks,
in the water, in Olelpanti, in the trees, in bathing springs, to come.
"We are going to make doctors," says the chief; "you must come and help
my people."

After this the chief goes in, and they close every hole, every chink in
the sweat-house; close them all safely. There is no fire, no light,
inside. When they have begun to talk in the sweat-house, one doctor
calls to all the spirits of yapaitu in the east, west, north, south to
come. Pretty soon a spirit may be heard on the

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

housetop; spirits make a whistling noise when they come. That moment a
man or woman falls down, and all know that the spirit has gone into that
person's head.

Now the doctor calls, "One more; one more!"

In a moment another whistling may be heard as the spirit touches the
housetop and goes in. Another man or woman falls; the spirit has entered
that one. The persons into whom spirits have entered know nothing. They
become as if crazy, as if they had lost their wits. They try to go to
the housetop. Some try to climb the central pole; some want to leave the
sweat-house; they know nothing for half an hour perhaps.

One doctor keeps on calling spirits, and they come one at a time. Many
doctors may be made in one night, or a few, or none. There are always
many people in the sweat-house to whom spirits will not come. The
spirits never go into people unless they like them. The spirit looks
straight through a man and knows him immediately.

The people dance all night. There is no light in the sweat-house; the
place is very hot, though there is no fire there. Next day those to whom
spirits have come tell the doctors and chief what spirits are with them.
If not, the chief may give them food offensive to the spirits, and the
spirits would kill them if they ate. Some spirits may stay two or three
days with a person, who would then sit inside all the time. The old
doctors have to ask this spirit what it wishes, and make it go away for
a time, so that the person possessed may eat something. Each spirit has
its own kind of food. If we give a man something that the spirit has
never eaten, it will kill him right away if he eats. The old doctors ask
his spirit what it wants, and it tells. The salmon spirit, for instance,
likes leaves or water; a sucker of the mountains would eat mountain pine
nuts, but a valley sucker needs nuts off the digger pine. If strange
food is placed before a spirit, it is afraid; and if the man possessed
eats this food, the spirit will kill him. Some spirits don't like
buckskin, and the man to whom they have come must not wear it.

The bad spirits are numerous; the sucker is one of these, and so is Kele
(the mountain wolf). This wolf is dangerous; it may hurt you in this
way: you may think that you see a good-looking

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

man or woman on the mountain or in the woods. If you go toward this
person or this person comes toward you, comes near you, speaks to you,
and you agree with it, the next thing you know this strange man or woman
turns into a wolf, runs away, and your mind is gone; the wolf has taken
it. The sucker does the same, but disappears before your eyes or turns
into something ugly.

There are three causes of sickness. The first is when a good yapaitu
spirit is angry with a man and strikes him with his spirit point;
second, when a bad spirit puts his missile in a man and makes him sick
(the spirit in this case does it at his own instance); third, when an
evil spirit sends his missile into a man at the request or prayer of a
doctor.

When the dokos or missile that has been sent into a man is drawn out by
the spirit which assists the curing doctor, the doctor forces the dokos
to tell what yapaitu sent it, and at the prayer of what doctor. But the
dokos does not tell the truth in every case, and sometimes accuses the
wrong person. It is very difficult, therefore, to know surely what
doctor is guilty of making a man sick. A doctor, if the spirit is in him
when he comes to see a sick man, is able to look right through the body
of the patient and see where the dokos lies. Sometimes he is not able to
draw it out; he can see where the dokos is, that is all; but if his
spirit were stronger than the one who put it there, he could draw it out
and cure the patient.

There is danger, however, in drawing out a very powerful dokos by
sucking, for when it is coming out of the sick man's body it may be sent
down through the mouth of the doctor into his body by the spirit who
owns it, and the doctor is killed in this way.

A doctor may have twenty or thirty spirits, but he rarely calls on more
than two or three, and it is seldom that any great number are fitted to
work together in a given case.

The office of doctor is very dangerous, especially if the doctor is
powerful. If he has many spirits to help him, each has to be pleased in
its own special way; each has its own food, prefers certain kinds, and
dislikes others. The doctor must not eat food hateful to his spirits: if
he does, he is liable to be killed. A man who

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

his twenty or thirty spirits is greatly limited, therefore, in his
manner of living.

Some spirits do not like venison, others do not eat fish; the doctor who
commands these spirits must eat neither venison nor fish, and so with
other kinds of food in the case of other spirits.

The man who seeks to be a doctor cannot choose his spirits they come to
him; he cannot refuse to receive them, and must live in a way to please
them.

Every dokos can be extracted from a sick man's body by the aid of a
spirit stronger than the one who put it in.

Among other spirits, doctors have the spirit of the sun, the spirits of
stars and the clouds to help them. These are good spirits. Sedit's
spirit cannot help doctors much. They call it sometimes, but it doesn't
do much; it has not the power. Suku (dog) is very powerful and bad. If
Suku wants to kill a man, he does it quickly. A doctor who has the Suku
spirit in his service is great. If a man has been made sick by Suku, he
will vomit blood, or bleed from his nostrils all the time. The Suku
spirit is a good one to send to kill people. Chir (the sucker fish) is
an evil spirit too. When Chir wants to kill a man, it makes him giddy
and crazy right away. He becomes senseless and dies, unless some doctor
cures him, and generally doctors can do nothing against Chir. The Chir
sickness is the worst that spirits bring. It is called chiruntowi,
sickness from the sucker. The man who has it dies; he cannot tell where
he is troubled; he grows dizzy and senseless. No one can cure him unless
by great luck. Something tried by some doctor may save him--just by
chance, just because it happens so. Kele is also an evil spirit. He has
a song, the same which his two daughters sang on the mountain top (see
the tale "Kele and Sedit "), and which Sedit heard far away in the west.
This is a poison song, and draws people after it. Kele is here now,
suppose, in Cottonwood or in Tehama, and sees a man up at Yreka. Kele
sings, and the song goes as straight as a string to the man. It draws
him and draws him; he is drawn as water is when people pump it. The man
must follow the song; he has got to do so, he cannot help himself, he is
sick; his sickness is called lubeluntowi (sickness from lubelis). The
man will

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

keep going and going and going; he will not know what makes him go.
Suppose I am listening to Kele's song. I go, and it is the song that
draws me. I hear it; but nobody else does. The spirits of the Kele girls
drew Sedit to them; he couldn't help himself, he couldn't stop; he had
to go, and he never went home again; he had to stay up at Kele's. The
spirits of Chir and Kele always make people crazy.

Many Wintu women lose their minds, and are killed by Kele's sons. Many
Wintu men have been lost through Kele's daughters. Suppose I am out here
in the wood, I see a woman coming, a nice woman. She stops and talks; I
talk to her. If I have sense in me, I look at her toes to see if she is
one of those Kele women. If she is, she has a bunch of hair on the tip
of her foot, and if I see it, I say right there, "You are a Kele!" At
these words she will leave me and run. When ten feet away, she will turn
to a mountain wolf, and I shall see that Kele running away very fast.

Suppose some woman is out in the woods. She is thinking of some man that
she likes, and right away she sees the very man she is thinking of. He
is coming to meet her. He comes up and asks, "Where are you going?" The
woman is glad to see him. She tells. He carries her to the mountain, and
never again will that woman be seen by her friends or by others. It was
one of Kele's sons who took the form of the man she was thinking of, so
as to entice her away and destroy her. If the woman has sense she will
look down at the foot of the stranger, see the tuft of hair, and say,
"You are Kele; go off." He turns to a wolf on the spot, and runs away to
the mountain. All Wintus went barefoot in old times, and this tuft could
be seen, if a person had sense enough left to look for it. As every one
wears shoes or moccasins now, it might not be easy to find it. But to
this day the Keles lead people astray. All the Wintus know them, and are
afraid.

They live on Wenempuidal, a high mountain near the left bank of the
Little Sacramento. Dekipuiwakut, a small creek, comes down from Kele's
Mountain and falls into the Sacramento. White men call it Hazel Creek.
The Keles live at the head of this creek. The whole mountain is their
sweat-house. They are up

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

there now, and almost any night you may hear them howling on the
mountain when the evil brothers are going home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Songs of Spirits](cma37.md)
