[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cma48)  [Next](cma50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIWZ6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Creation Myths of Primitive America*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1898\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JUIWAIYU

This myth has many and very valuable elements,--the importance of
dreams, the stopping or slackening the course of the sun, the music of
Juiwaiyu as he moves, the choice of the right road, the storm of vermin,
Jupka as monitor and helper, the summons to send Damhauja's daughters to
meet him, the inexhaustible venison no larger than a walnut, Juiwaiyu's
marvellous music on the mountain, the bringing home of countless deer in
the body of a fawn, the race with Damhauja's sons-in-law, the meeting
with the poison spider, the rattlesnake and the grizzly bear, the storm,
the drowning of Damhauja and his resurrection,--make this one of the
richest of Yana tales.

Playing with two bones was very much like playing ball. Near both ends
of the field barriers were set up, and each side had to put the bones
past the barrier toward which they faced.

The starting-point was in the middle of the field, at an equal distance
from both barriers. At the opening of the game all the players gathered
at this middle point; the bones were thrown up, and all struggled for
them. Whoever caught the bones on his stick either hurled them toward
the barrier beyond which he

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

wished to put them, or he ran toward it, bearing them on the point of
his stick. If there were swifter runners than he, they took the bones
from him, or if he hurled them ahead, they ran and threw them or carried
them toward one barrier or another. The bones were fastened together by
a string some inches long.

In Yana tales, Damhauja, the moon during the last quarter, plays or
rather played, a great part. I say played, since, unfortunately, we have
but a fragment of Yana lore left after the events of 1864. Damhauja's
sons-in-law on the west side of the river, in this tale, were various
Mapchemaina people,--that is, beings who somewhat later became beasts,
birds, plants, rocks, and insects on earth. All the stars were his
children. His daughters, stars, were married to Mapchemaina people,
except the two of whom Juiwaiyu had dreamed. His sons, stars also, lived
near him, and were at enmity with his sons-in-law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Flight of Tsanunewa and Defeat of Hehku](cma50)
