[Sacred-Texts](../index)  [Esoteric](../eso/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](eudoxus)  [Next](goldtrac.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Freher's Process in the Philosophical Work

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Process in the Philosophical Work  
considered as thoroughly analogical  
with that in Man's Redemption through Jesus Christ;  
and represented by positions given thereof,  
as to its principal points in Behmen's Signatura Rerum, chapters, vii,
x, xi, xii.  
  
1. Adam's primeval state in Paradise, and the manner of his spoiling
himself, his whole created being, by his lustful imagination after the
knowledge of good and evil, is rightly by this author, not only spoken
of in the first beginning of his description, but also frequently
repeated and variously expressed throughout his whole discourse. For if
Man understandeth not his own corrupted nature, and that curse which he
himself lieth under, how can he be imagined to be able for an
understanding of the nature and curse of the Earth? Or upon what ground
can he presume to deliver such or such a particular thing from that
curse; or to be instrumental in this deliverance? which is the true
Artist's chiefest, nay only business.

2\. As long as Adam stood in a pure paradisical innocency, the Eternal
Word and power of life (called by the author the Heavenly Mercury), was
his leader, and had pre-dominance in him. His life, which was a clear
flaming fire, burned in and was nourished by that pure spiritual oil of
the Divine substantiality; which, together with the holy water of
eternal life, is generated in the angelical world: and this, therefore,
could not but give forth a glorious bright shining light.

3\. Through the power of his imagination, or lust after the knowledge of
good and evil, that which then was still kept under in him, and was so
hidden from him, viz., the outward watery property, came to be manifest
in his holy oil, and got predominance therein. This oil therefore, now
overpowered thereby, could no more be such an agreeable food, and
well-doing to his fire, as it could and did before. And so his fire not
only lost its shining light, but came also to be spoiled itself, for it
was obscured, and made all impotent. And his Mercury, which before in
his holy oil, had caused and raised up paradisical joy and triumph,
according to his moving and stirring property, was now made a stinging
anguishing poison, according to his own natural constitution, which he
doth and must stand in, when before or without the light.

4\. Nothing of the Divine substantiality was hereby spoiled, poisoned,
or turned into evil: though sometimes this or that expression, which
must be made use of with respect to Man, may seem in outward appearance,
to say something the like. For that which was in Man of the Divine
substantiality, faded disappeared, or died indeed, but only with respect
to Man; seeing that this disappearing, was but an entering into its own
secret original, and so but a returning unto God the giver thereof. When
contrariwise the creatural Mercury, that is, Man's own life, went forth
with its will, desire and lust, out of eternity into time: so that the
former union was broken, and upon this breach, its own natural property
and propriety could not but be made manifest immediately: and because of
this manifestation, which never should have been made, according to the
will of God, it is now rightly called spoiled, poisoned, and turned into
evil; when yet all this doth not reach the Divine substantiality, nor
the holy life of God, but only that of Man.

5\. This is the sum and substance of what Behmen largely and more
circumstantially declareth concerning Man's paradisical state, and
falling away from it under the curse. Where he brings in also for a
clearer illustration hereof, not only the fall of Lucifer, saying of
him, that his desire was to try the fiery Mercury, like as Man desired
to try the watery; but also the serpent with its poison, saying, that in
the strongest and most poisonous Mercury, the highest tincture lieth,
yet not in its own natural property, etc. All which he represents as a
most proper, and pertinent introduction to this discourse of the
Philosophical Work.

6\. Immediately after the fall of Man, God said unto the serpent, I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed: her seed shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.
And herein the philosopher's stone or tincture lieth implicitly. For
though this primarily concerneth Man, yet secondarily it concerneth the
whole Creation also; and this bruising of the serpent's head is done
both spiritually and corporeally, and both in time and in eternity, and
though in different degrees, yet in a parallel process or method, both
here and there.

7\. The serpent's sting points at the Wrath-fire, and the woman's seed
at the Light and Love-fire. These two are in every thing: and in the
curse that former came to be predominant in outward Nature. This latter
must now be raised up again, and, by its shining through the Wrath, it
must subdue and keep it under, and take away from it its predominant
power, so that it may keep and exercise only its true natural office, as
a servant in and to the light. And that these two may no more stand in
contrariety and opposition to each other, but be one only thing,
reharmonized by Light and Love, and reintroduced into Paradise. And when
now thus the dark poisoned Mercury is tinctured, his anguishing death is
turned into triumphing life and joy, and his former dark desire into a
new Light and Love-desire; which of itself is now able to make in itself
a pure Love and Light substantiality, viz., a heavenly body out of an
earthly.

8\. The whole work consists summarily therein, that two things must be
reduced back into one, even into such a one as they were from the
beginning before they came to be two. A heavenly thing and an earthly
one are to be joined. That former must be admitted or received into
itself by this latter, and must change it into its own heavenly quality.
Earth must be turned in, and Heaven out, etc. Which the Mercury, that is
therein, doth all himself; the Artist is not to do it, neither can he do
it: he is only to join together those ingredients that are requisite,
and to leave the work to be done by that workman, which is therein
already. Yet nevertheless Understanding and Faith is in him required;
and by this latter especially he is to co-operate, if his design shall
take effect. For his design is nothing less than to fetch out a body
from the curse, and to raise it up from the dead; which never can be
done by him, that is still dead himself, both in his understanding, and
as to his internal life.

9\. With all this, the process in the regeneration of Man runs parallel
exactly. Consider only with thyself the heavenly humanity of the
Regenerator, and the earthly of poor fallen Man, that is to be
regenerated. Consider, that the former must be received or taken in by
the latter, and that this must suffer itself to be subdued, changed,
kept under, and turned in by that. Consider that faith in Man is
absolutely required, by which he must in a sense co-operate indeed, but
that for all this he cannot make himself a Child of God; but must suffer
himself to be made so by the eternal speaking Word, which in the
philosophical process is called by Behmen, the Heavenly Mercury. Which
also at the end of time, as in the completest period of the
regeneration, will raise up his body again, which then shall no more be
earthly, but heavenly, and conformable to his own glorified body.
Consider, I say, all this in its true coherence, and dependence upon the
only love and free grace of God: and you will certainly find, that all
the description of this process, is nothing else but a sound, true and
solid paraphrase and explanation of these words of St. John, saying: "As
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name."

10\. In these words also lieth plainly, the possibility for obtaining
the perfection in the Philosophical Work; which is rightly and firmly
grounded hereupon by Behmen. For if God gave us, out of his infinite
love, that which is the greatest and the highest, how could he have
withheld from us, that which is much lesser and lower? If Man, in this
divine power, bestowed upon him by free grace, can verily rule and
triumph again over sin, death, devil, and hell, whom he made himself
subject unto by his lust, Why should he not also be enabled thereby, to
rule and triumph again over the curse in the Earth, he brought into it
by the same lust, when this latter is but a natural consequence of that
former; nay an inconsiderable one in comparison to that? Truly it is
inseparable therefrom, if that former be really attained unto, and
provided that all the qualities that are requisite thereto, be verily
found in the Artist or philosopher.

11\. All these qualities are, as in their principal sum and substance,
concentrated in this, that the Artist first must have the curse in
himself transmuted into the Heavenly Blessing, through the holy
tincturing blood of Jesus Christ. Which Behmen sometimes also thus
expresses, "He must first be, and have really that same in himself,
which he will make or introduce into metals without himself". And this
he frequently presseth home unto every one, warning earnestly and
calling Heaven and Earth to witnesses, that none shall presume to meddle
with the curse in the Earth, before he be really delivered, as to his
inward Man, from that curse in himself; or else he may expect to earn
nothing else but curse instead of blessing. Before this his own internal
deliverance, he may have indeed so many fine notions of this work in his
brain; but the real process cannot be manifest in him, and so not
understood by him, in that experimental fullness and exactness which is
required.

12\. The same he offers also to the serious consideration of such a one,
under these and the like philosophical terms - He is to know that his
Mercury is kindled in the fiery Mars, and burns in the eternal Saturn,
in the terrible impression of darkness; his Venus is captivated, his
water dried up, his Jupiter is become a fool, his Sun is darkened, and
his Moon turned into a black night. And now there is no other remedy but
to take Venus (the eternal love of God) and to introduce that into his
poisoned Mercury and Mars, that they may be tinctured thereby, and then
his Sun will shine again and Jupiter rejoice, etc. Which he further
illustrates, by plain intelligible words, all representing most
excellently his own way, practice and experience.

13\. Yet all this, though really attained unto, will not be yet fully
sufficient. For there is not only such a sufficient ability for this
work, and a sufficient understanding of its process required, which I
doubt not but Behmen had; but there is also required an especial calling
thereunto, which he had not. Without this calling the Artist goes but in
his own will; though his meaning and intent, as to his thinking were
never so good and pure. And this call he must be able to discern, by his
own internal character, which it carrieth along with and in itself, from
his own natural impulse. Which easily may delude him, under the specious
appearance of a divine call; and whereby the spirit of this world, which
from its own internal constitution, is mightily for such an undertaking,
will certainly mislead him into various dangers.

14\. When now these two more general requisites viz., (1) An
experimental understanding, from the Artist's process in his own
regeneration, and (2) a divine call for this understanding, are truly
found in him, two other more particular qualities will still be required
in him, when he now is to make a beginning of his work. And these are
represented by Behmen from that parable of our Lord, concerning a man
which went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and was robbed and wounded by
highwaymen. Saying, "That the Artist must truly and wholly stand in the
figure of the merciful Samaritan and must have both his will and eyes."
His will, that he may desire nothing else, but to heal and restore that
which is wounded and broken. And his eyes, that he may be able to
discern that wounded body which he is to heal, and which is not easily
to be discerned, and not by every one, because of its great corruption.

15\. These eyes he shall have the greatest need of in his very first
beginning, when he is to choose the proper matter for this Philosophical
Work. This is called by Behmen and described parabolically - "That evil
child, which is run from its mother's house (from Jerusalem to Jericho)
and desired to be in self, or to stand by itself upon its own bottom".
And this must be sought for in Saturn; which Saturn therefore, the
Artist must have sharp and piercing eyes to look into, both as to
eternal and temporal nature. For the Wrath of God, by its strong
astringent impression (says he further) hath shut it up into the chamber
of death. Not hath it turned the same into Saturn. \[Which I think is to
say so much, as that it is not turned into lead.\], but it keeps it
imprisoned in the Saturnish death, in the first cold, hard, dark,
astringent Property; which is called the great still standing death,
because as yet there is no mobility of life therein.

16\. When this proper matter is found in Saturn, the Artist may go to
work, but so, that he do consider and follow that same process, which
God observed in the redemption and restoration of mankind through Jesus
Christ, (in which twofold holy Name, the general process was clearly
understood by Behmen from the language of Nature), even from his
conception and nativity, unto his Resurrection and Ascension. So doing,
he may come to find the joyful feast of Pentecost, viz., that desirable
tincture in outward Nature, which is answering unto that holy spiritual
tincture, whereby St Peter, in his first public sermon, on the day of
Pentecost, tinctured three thousand souls at once.

17\. When the human Mercury, the outspoken word of the human life, was
infected and poisoned by the serpent, or manifest and predominant in its
own natural quality, which it hath in itself, before and without the
Light, God did not reject the humanity, so as to annihilate it wholly,
and to make another new, and strange Adam, but he restored or
regenerated that which thus was spoiled. And this he effected not by any
such new or strange thing, as which the humanity had not had in it
before; but by that self-same holy divine Mercury, which was at first
breathed into Adam, for to make him an image and likeness of God. This
he re-introduced into the poisoned humanity, and made thereby a good,
sure and solid disposition to the new regeneration thereof. And this was
done in the immaculate conception of Jesus Christ. For therein
conjunction was made, between the eternal speaking, and the human
outspoken Word, Mercury, or human life, now poisoned in Man, and full of
self or own will.

18\. This must be the first consideration of the Artist, well to be
observed, that so he may be sure to act accordingly, and to bring not
his subject matter to the fire, without such a previous conjunction; if
he will not work in vain, and make himself ridiculous. And for an
illustration hereof this may serve: in the Second Principle, of Light,
the Love-desire, that is, the first property of Eternal Nature, but
considered as in the fifth, makes a pure crystalline substantiality. And
therein the divine Mercury is the eternal holy Word and understanding:
but in the first principle, wherein the harsh astringent desire makes a
dark obscure substantiality, the same Mercury is a principal part, or
chief property of the Wrath of God, and an original of all mobility, and
moving power. This Mercury therefore (considered as in the outspoken
Word, or life of Man) after it was turned away from the second
principle, of Love and Light, and was made manifest according to its own
wrathful property in the first; could not have been restored or brought
back again, but by that very same Mercury, which was first breathed into
Man, and was not altered in the Light and Love of God, though it was
altered in Man, in whom it disappeared and lost its former pre-dominion.
Now the getting this lost pre-dominion again, either in Man, or in any
other creature, according to its own kind, is nothing else, but that
same tincturing and transmuting, which in all this discourse is spoken
of; and which restored pre-dominion therefore of that Heavenly Mercury
must needs reproduce again such a pure light's substantiality, as that
which disappeared in Man, by his fall, and in the Earth by the curse.

19\. In the relation of St. Luke, concerning what the child Jesus did
with his parents, in the twelfth year of his age, a representation is
seen of the inward and outward world, and of their different wills. For
the inward will in Jesus broke first the natural will of his parents,
when he remained in the temple, without their knowing and consent, nay
said also, like as rebuking them, "How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye
not that I must be about my Father's business?" And then again, the will
of this outward world in his parents, broke the inward will in Jesus,
for he went down with them to Nazareth, and was subject unto them. This
showeth to the Artist, that in his work he shall soon find such a
two-fold will also. The will of the inward world, will not in the
beginning presently condescend and be subject to his will. But if he
ceaseth not to seek after it, as Mary did, and wrestleth with it all the
night like Jacob, with a full resignation of his own will, which is the
will of this outward world, this divine Will, will at length condescend
to him, and go down with him; for it is as it were broken or conquered
by his will, according to what was said to Jacob: thou has wrestled with
God and Man and hast prevailed.

20\. Here the Artist, or magus is to know, that he is not to bring that
will or tendency to the perfection, into his Matter from without, but
that it lieth therein already before. He must only first in himself be
capable of the Divine Will, and then with his renewed, or tinctured
will, which here is his magical faith, he must handle his subject
matter; that so thereby the will towards perfection, which lieth in the
matter indeed, but still and unmoveable, may be stirred up and brought
into conjunction with his human tinctured will, and so also with the
Divine Will. And that further this Divine Will may press forward or
outwards, meet with and bless that outward will, which presseth
backwards or inwards from the corruption into God's Love and mercy.

21\. Highly is this point unto the Artist recommended, not only for to
consider and understand, but also to make it his continual practice.
Because herein the Philosophical Baptism, as to the greatest or chiefest
deal consisteth, and this practice is the very first beginning thereof.
This only can make him able to baptize truly and rightly, for he is to
baptize his matter, not only with the water of the outward, but also
with that of the inward world. Of which baptism more must be said now by
and by.

22\. The poor fallen humanity, considered so barely as it was in and to
itself, viz., as broken, spoiled, poisoned, was not cast immediately
into the fiery furnace, and melted down by the Wrath of God; but, as
mentioned above, a conjunction was first made between the Earthly and
Heavenly humanity. Neither came the great fiery trial upon it,
immediately after this conjunction; but a long and wonderful process was
held, before it came to that great earnest. First, the humanity was to
be baptized with water in the Jordan, and with water from above the
firmament. Further it was led into the wilderness, for to be tempted by
the Devil, which devil (N.B.) was not put into the humanity, but
permitted to stand over against it, and to offer unto it all that the
first Adam was tempted with. And all this time of forty days, no outward
food was given to this new baptized humanity, but it was to live upon
its own life's Mercurius, viz., the Eternal Word proceeding from the
mouth of God, according to the answer the Lord Jesus gave unto the
Devil. After this he came forth in public, preached, and did great
wonders and miracles in all the seven Properties of Nature. And though
at length even his human body was really glorified upon the Holy Mount,
and seen so by three of his disciples, yet by all this, the full
perfection was not yet wrought out, but the very greatest, sharpest and
most severe trial was still behind, etc. Answerably to all this process,
the Philosophical Work also must be carried on, and the Artist will see
a continual parallelism; but at length he will find also, that all this,
though it was shown him in never so glorious an appearance, is still
short of perfection, and all but as it were preliminary, which now
further distinctly shall appear.

23\. By the Philosophical Baptism, if it be truly performed, in the dead
Mercury, which lieth in impotence, and hungers only after its own
Property, being of itself not capable, either of desiring after, or of
admitting into it any other, the hunger after the divine or heavenly
substantiality is stirred and raised up again. And by this hunger, that
heavenly substantiality is drawn in, with its own peculiar will, desire,
or natural inclination, which is nothing else but a readiness, or
tendency to become manifest with its life in the death. And herein is
the first beginning of a new body, or rather of a seed, from which a new
body is to come forth in its due time.

24\. What this Philosophical Baptism is, and the absolute necessity
thereof, may thus be shortly represented: Every hunger is a desire after
such a thing as is agreeable and conformable to that hunger: for after
that which is disagreeing and contrary, or destructive to it, no hunger
in anything can be. The dead corrupted Mercury then hath a hunger
indeed, but only (according to its condition in the Curse), after death,
wrath and poison, etc. If now to this hunger such a dead and wrathful
thing is given, as it hungers after, the death therein must needs
increase, and its wrathfulness cannot but be strengthened thereby. But
if to this hunger the life is presented, or a loving, heavenly property
is offered, the death is not at all able to receive it. Unto this death
therefore, the death and Wrath of God must be given, but in this death
and Wrath the heavenly substantiality. And this is the Philosophical
Baptism, for this is that Earthly and Heavenly water, in the first of
which is death, and in the second life: both which must be together; for
the reason is now plain, why neither by this nor by that alone, this
baptism can be performed. But when it is thus rightly done, this
baptism, viz., that which is heavenly swalloweth up into death that
which is earthly and wrathful, and exalts its own new life therein;
though not immediately, like as it was also not done in Christ
immediately after his baptism.

25\. This Philosophical Baptism is nothing else but a conjunction, to be
made between the fiery and watery Mercury. The fiery must be baptized
with the watery. And this is what Behmen means by saying obscurely:
"Have a care only for this, that thou baptisest the mercury with his own
baptism." For this watery Mercury is his own, viz., it is that, which
before the Fall and Curse he enjoyed and rejoiced in, as his most
precious treasure; whereby his fiery poisonous Wrath, was kept under,
and prevented from being manifest. But when these two were separated
from each other, a breach was made, which cannot be healed again, but by
a renewed conjunction between them. Like as it is in animals and in
fallen Man also the same thing, only in different in degrees. The
conjunction of male and female, which is absolutely required, to the
multiplication of every kind of living creatures (which hath in
vegetables also something answering thereunto), may be a good
illustration thereof.

26\. And therefore it is that by Behmen this very same, which here now
is called the Philosophical Baptism, is called also and compared to a
matrimony or espousal, when he plainly says, not only that to the
Earthly wrathful Mercury, a fair loving virgin of his own kind must be
given in marriage; but also that this same giving is the Philosophical
Baptism. And again says he, "The woman's (not the man's) seed shall
bruise the serpent's head." The man hath in his tincture the
fire-spirit, and the woman in hers the water-spirit. This latter must
baptize, soften , appease and overcome that former, and so transmute its
strong fiery hunger after Wrath, into a tender Love-desire; and herein
lieth the baptism of Nature. In this steadfast Love-desire, these two
are at last turned into one, so that they are not more male and female,
fire and water in contrariety, but a masculine virgin with both
tinctures in union. But before this be wholly effected, and as long as
they are in the way or process thereunto, Behmen calleth them in all
this discourse, the young man and the virgin, or also the Bridegroom and
the Bride.

27\. Immediately after the baptism of Christ, he was led by the Spirit
into the wilderness, to be tempted by the devil. And a serious
consideration of the whole process in this threefold temptation, is
highly unto the Artist recommended; for in his Philosophical Work the
same must be done also, in a total answerableness to the three
particulars therein, relating to the three first properties. All which
is largely by Behmen declared, and much insisted upon, but would be too
long for to relate particularly. Yet the sum and substance thereof is
this:-

28\. The human Soul, or the whole humanity as an image of the eternal
speaking Word, was now tried, after God had re-introduced into it a
spark of his Eternal Love, whether it would enter again into its
primeval state and place and be an instrument of God, to be played upon
by his holy Spirit, in his Love; or whether it would rather continue in
its own will, and suffer the Devil to play upon its instrument in the
Wrath and Anger of God. And so in the Philosophical Work also, the
earthly poisonous Mercury, after he is now joined again to the heavenly,
is tried, whether he will go out from his own natural wrathful property,
and suffer himself to be turned into his first, pure and crystalline
condition, wherein he stood before the curse: or whether he will rather
continue in his own awakened and now predominant quality.

29\. In our Lord Jesus Christ, the human will rejected all the devil's
presentations and offerings, resigned itself, and entered wholly into
the first mother's womb, according to his words to Nicodemus, etc. And
so in the Philosophical Work, if it goes well and right the Artist will
see, that when the tempter comes on, the young man, or Mercury gives
himself up wholly into the first Mother, and that this will swallow him
up as into nothing. At which the Artist will be amazed and terrified,
thinking that all is lost and undone, for he sees nothing, and hath lost
all the appearance of heaven. But he must have patience, that which is
impossible in his sight, is not so in the powers of Nature.

30\. The wilderness wherein the temptation is done, is, in this
Philosophical Work, the outward, earthly, dry, desolate and barren body.
Wherein the Mercury or young man, is not able to stand against the
devil, except he lay hold on his virgin, and be by her supported. He is
therefore to unite with her, to cast his will and desire into her love,
and to eat of her bread, not of his own natural quality, like as Christ
our Lord, all the forty days of his temptation, did eat only of the
eternal speaking Word, and would not eat of that bread, which he could
have made out of the stones. All which is nothing else but that the
Mercury must admit and receive into its own poisonous quality, the
Heavenly Tincture, and suffer the serpent's head, the fiery wrathful
property, to be bruised thereby in himself. Which if doth not, the Devil
will prevail, and detain him captive in that state, wherein he is when
separated from his Virgin. But if he doth the Devil must withdraw, and
the Virgin takes his seed from him into her womb.

31\. What the Devil is in this work, the Artist, says Behmen, will
easily know, but he calls him not by any plain or distinct name:
doubtless it is such another wrathful dark and poisonous matter, as may
be fitly compared to the devil, and may be able to do in this process,
the devil's office, because of the qualities alike in both. For this
will appear afterwards, as to my thinking, plainly enough, and here also
it may be seen in part, from that instruction and warning, he gives to
the Artist, viz., He shall have a care, to suffer not. Thus, says he, he
shall have a care, to suffer not, that his tempting devil be too
furious, or too wrathful, but proportionable, etc. And again, on the
other hand, that he be not too weak or impotent, for else the Mercury
should not be assaulted by him sufficiently, and might as a hungry wolf,
swallow up his baptism, return to his own wrathful property, and
continue still that same poisonous thing, which he was before.

32\. At the end of forty days, when the Devil had ended all the
temptation, he must depart from the Lord Christ, and the angels came and
ministered unto him. This also the Artist is especially well to observe,
for he himself stood here in the trial also, and may now perceive
infallibly, whether or no, he be fit for, and accounted worthy of this
work. If at the end of forty days, in answerableness to the process of
Christ, the angels do not appear, he may surely think of himself, that
he is not yet fit and worthy; and of his fiery masculine Mercury, that
this doth not yet stand in a due internal union with the watery
feminine, but that it is still that same, in its own wrathful quality,
which it was before, and that the tempting devil hath prevailed. But if
he seeth the sign of the Angels, he may rejoice and be sure, that the
Bridegroom is in his Bride, and she in him, and that his work can
prosper. What this sign of the angels is, the author doth not tell us
expressly; it must be some new delightful appearance, by its own
character so intelligible to the Artist, as that was intelligible to
him, when before he saw nothing, and had lost the appearance of heaven.

33\. Immediately after this temptation, and overcoming of the devil, the
Lord Christ began his public office, not only by preaching, reproving
and instructing the people, but also, by working many great miraculous,
amazing things, through all the Properties of Nature. For instance: in
Saturn, he raised up the dead; in Luna, he transmuted water into wine,
and fed with five loaves of bread five thousand men; in Jupiter, he made
out of the simple and ignorant fishermen, the most wise and
understanding apostles. In Mercury, he made the deaf hearing, the dumb
speaking, and healed the lepers. In Mars he expelled devils from the
possessed. In Venus, he loved his brethren and sisters, as to the
humanity, and gave freely his life for them into death. Only six of the
properties are here enumerated, and the seventh which is Sol, standing
in the midst and uniting three and three, is here not mentioned, because
this belongeth to the full perfection, which then only was attained
unto, when he was risen from the dead, ascended up to heaven, and had
poured out the holy Tincturing Spirit, on the day of Pentecost. But that
there is a good ground for Behmen's referring distinctly to the seven
Properties of Nature, all the miraculous deeds of Christ, could be made
out from him sufficiently, were it needful and not too large.

34\. All this now the Artist shall distinctly see, that it hath a true
and exact answerableness in the Philosophical Work, when the forty days
temptation with good success is ended. For instance, in Saturn, he shall
see, that now the Mercury raiseth up from death that same dead
substance, wherein he was shut up before. In Luna, that he feedeth and
nourisheth that substance, when there is nothing outwardly wrought,
which it could be fed and nourished with: and again, that the deadly
water is exalted and turned into wine, by having now got (like as wine
hath) an union of a fiery and watery virtue. In Jupiter, he shall see
the four elements each by itself, and their colours, and the rainbow
upon which Christ sitteth for judgment, in the outspoken Mercury. So
that he highly shall be amazed at it, and perceive that the wisdom of
God playeth and delighteth therein as in a jestful play. For the
friendly Jupiter showeth forth herein his properties, after such a
manner as that is, in which God will, in its time change this world and
transmute it into Paradise. In Mercury, he shall see that Heaven
separates itself from the Earth, and that it sinks down again into the
Earth, and changeth the same into its own colour, and that
Mercurypurifieth the matter, etc. In Mars, he shall see, that Jupiter in
the Mercury, casts out from the matter upwards a black fire smoke, which
will be coagulated like as a soot in the chimney. And this is the
poisonous hunger in the Mercury, rightly to be compared to the devil,
because it hath, according to its own kind, the devil's qualities. What
Christ did in Venus, the Artist shall see most gloriously in the
Philosophical Work. For as soon as this black devil is expelled from the
matter, Venus in her virginity appears, in great beauty and glory, which
is a fine type or emblem of the great love of Christ.

35\. Now here, when this appears, the Artist is rejoiced, and thinks
reasonably his work is finished, and he hath got the treasure of the
World; but soon shall he find himself extremely disappointed. For when
he trieth it, he shall find, it is but Venus, still a female, and not
yet a pure and perfect virgin, with both tinctures united into one. Like
as in Christ, the Eternal speaking Word had indeed wrought out through
his humanity, all these wondrous deeds; and yet the full perfection
could not be made manifest therein, his human body could not be
glorified, and much less could he have poured out the Holy Ghost, before
he was passed through the great Anger of God or Death and Hell. So also
in this Philosophical Work, though all these glorious things have
appeared in the Properties of Nature, yet the universal Tincture is not
yet fixed and manifest, but all what was seen hitherto, was only
transient, and the greatest work to be done, for this fixation and
manifestation, is still behind. For all the seven Properties must be
made totally pure and crystalline, before they can be Paradisical, and
each of them hath its own peculiar process, when it is to go out from
the wrathful into the Paradisical life; wherein they must all seven have
but one will, viz., that of Love, and all their former own will, wherein
each was for itself, in opposition to the others, must be utterly
swallowed up. And then only they are fixed, and able to abide the fire,
for then no Turba can be more therein. Which is now further effected by
a process answering to that which was observed in the suffering and
death of Christ.

36\. As soon as the regenerator of mankind came into this World from
above, and had the name of a king given unto him, the civil government
thereof could not endure him; but presently he was by Herod persecuted,
and at length by Pilate crucified, notwithstanding that he had plainly
declared that his kingdom was not of this world. And because this
newborn king came not not with a royal state and splendour, nor in such
an outward power, as the Jews expected and hoped for, at the coming of
their Messiah, the Ecclesiastical government in the high priest and
Pharisees, would not receive him. And since he owned himself to be the
Son of God, and a king of truth, and said he was come to save his people
from their sins and darkness, and from the Wrath to come, the Devil also
could not endure him; but he was immediately a strong opposition against
these three together in conjunction. So also in this Philosophical Work,
as soon as Venus thus appears in her beauty, with her own natural
character, and in order to perfection, there is a great alarm,
opposition and insurrection against her, manifest in Saturn, Mercury and
Mars. The first of which is a true figure of the civil government, the
second of the Ecclesiastical state, and the third of the Devil. And as
these three jointly were the same chief agents, that brought the Lord of
Life and Glory unto death; so in this Philosophical Work, the three
inferior wrathful Properties, Saturn, Mercury and Mars, are rightly
called by Behmen the three murderers of Venus.

37\. This great opposition and uproar against the Lord Christ, had, in
the internal truth and reality no other ground but this, that he was
from above, when all these three were from beneath. Deep, great, and
many things are in these few words comprised, and the essential nature
of a Principle (taken in Behmen's sense) is understood therein. If the
Lord had been out of their own dark, harsh, bitter and wrathful root,
and if he had appeared, for to preserve and establish the same, in its
own selfish and willful qualities, they would have received him very
kindly, and no opposition could have been made. But he was from another
Principle, and came only for to destroy the works of the Devil in this
world, and to recall its inhabitants unto Light, Love and Truth. Now all
this was bad news in the ears of all these three parties, for none of
them was willing to be stripped of its selfish greatness, dignity,
strength and power; and therefore they all three at length agreed for
his crucifixion. So also in this Philosophical Work, there is no other
ground for this great opposition, but this very same, that Venus is from
above, when these three are from beneath; united in one wrathful sphere,
and unwilling to be deprived of their natural power and pre-dominion.
Heaven stands now in Hell, upon Earth, and will transmute them both into
Paradise; and Hell perceiveth its ruin is inevitable, if it receives
into it this child from heaven; and therefore it swelleth up against it,
and opposeth all what it can. But by this same opposition, it must and
doth but promote its own destruction; as it was done also in the process
of Christ.

38\. Here might be objected, How can all this be consistent with what
was done and declared above, viz., that the matter was purified, the
devil expelled, and the sign of the angels appeared, etc? For if so,
whence can now such a wrathful, hellish opposition arise? But it is
easily to be answered, and the answer Behmen gives to it (though but
implicitly and not so directly) is of the greatest importance, not only
in this process of the Philosophical Work, but also especially in that
of Man's Regeneration. When Mercury, (says he) is awakened from the
death of Saturn's strong impression, and receiveth Manna (heavenly food,
Light's and Love's substantiality, his own true Virgin, the Water of
Life, the Philosophical Baptism) into the mouth of his poisonous
Property, a joyful crack ariseth indeed; for it is like as if a light
were kindled in the darkness, and a paradisical joy and Love springeth
in the midst of Wrath. When now Mercury thus gets a twinkling glimpse
thereof in Mars, the wrathfulness is terrified at the Love, and falleth
back or sinketh down, like as in the generation of the second Principle
out of the first; and the angelical properties appear as in a glimpse.
And so this is (N.B. not yet a transmutation but) like as a
transmutation, but only transient not yet constant or fixed. If
therefore a fixed and radical transmutation shall be done, the same
process, that was in this like a transmutation, must be repeated again;
but in a far higher or rather deeper degree; And the same can also be
repeated again, because the harsh, bitter, wrathful hellish Properties
were hitherto suppressed only in part, but not fully rooted out, and
radically turned into one only will. And they therefore are now raised
afresh by this appearance of Venus, nay even much more than ever before,
they stand up in opposition against her, for to maintain their own
natural right. So that here also, in a sense, the words of Christ are
true, saying I am come to kindle a fire, and to bring upon Earth a
sword, enmity, strife, persecution, war and opposition.

39\. This opposition is, in this Philosophical Work, between three and
three; like as it is also in the generation of Eternal Nature. Yet this
is to be understood in such a sense, as the foregoing 38th position can
bear, wherein there was asserted, that here nothing as yet is permanent
and fixed. So it was also in the process with the Lord Christ: when he
now was a going into the strong severity of the Wrath and Anger of God,
in order to the full consummation of his great work, he said expressly
of himself, "I am not alone, but the Father is with me." He had then
with him on the one side, or as we may say, from above, the Father, and
him unalterably, in one sense, though changeably in another, relating to
the sensibility of his outward human person. Which may appear, by his
woeful crying out on the cross, "My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken
me?" For that which here by some is now objected, concerning a wrong
translation of these words, is not to be regarded, because the sense
wherein they are taken is not liable to such ill constructions and
consequences as they put upon it. And on the other side, or as from
beneath, he had with him, though in a very low and inconsiderable sense,
the common ignorant people which received and accompanied him with great
joy and acclamations, when he came riding upon an ass into Jerusalem. So
also in this Philosophical Work, Venus is not alone; but, as it were,
from above, Jupiter is with her, and from beneath Luna, which is a true
figure of that vulgar, simple, ignorant crew. This Luna holds with Venus
(like as also the Disciples themselves did with Christ), so long as it
goes well with her, or at least tolerably; that is, so long as Saturn,
Mercury, and Mars do not actually and manifestly exert their malice
against her. But when these three murderers arise, and will forcibly put
her to death, or swallow her up into their wrathful pit, then Luna also
changeth her colour and inclination; like as the vulgar people changed
their will, and instead of their former "Hosanna", cried now out,
"Crucify, crucify him."

40\. In the process of Christ, when it cometh to the Great Earnest, not
only that which was done with him outwardly, by the Pharisees, High
Priests, etc., but also that which was done within his own person, in
Body, Soul and Spirit must be considered. The two Internal Worlds or two
Eternal Principles, viz. the strong Fire-world with the properties of
Wrath and anger, and the Holy Light-world, with the pure Love and
Light's substantiality, or heavenly flesh and blood, were both manifest
in him, and stood open the one against the other; And the great work of
redemption could not have been performed, except they entered into one
another essentially: for else no solid, permanent and fixed
transmutation of the first into the second, could have been effected.
This now made an inexpressible terror in the humanity of Christ, viz.,
in his whole person, considered in all the three Worlds or Principles.
For the Love was struck with terror, and trembled at the rough, harsh
and bitter death, which it was to give up itself into; so as to be
swallowed up by the wrathful properties of anger, all now distinctly
raised up and qualifying according to their own nature. And the Anger
also was struck with terror, and trembled at the appearance of Love,
wherein it was to lose its own wrathful and now predominant life. And so
from hence the outward human body also, in this third Principle, was so
violently struck with terror and trembling, that the sweat thereof was,
as it were great drops of blood, falling down to the ground. Yet he said
then, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,
nevertheless not my will, but thine be done." Which words are to be
understood, as spoken by the whole person of Christ, viz., in each World
and Property, according to the different condition of each. For the
first Principle, or Anger said, "Let this cup of Love be removed from
me, that I may keep my dominion in men, because of their transgression";
like as we may see an excellent type thereof in Moses, when the Wrath of
God said unto him, "Let me alone, that I may devour this disobedient
people." But Moses in the figure of Christ, and Christ in the highest
operation of Love, would not let him, but replied, first indeed as it
were to the same purpose, "If it be possible let this cup of Anger pass
from me", but added also immediately, "Nevertheless not my will, but
thine be done." Whereby now the human will of Christ as to this Third
Principle resigned wholly and submitted itself to the will of the angry
father, and was obedient unto him, even unto the death on the Cross, and
unto all what was to be inflicted upon him outwardly also, by the
instruments of God's Anger. So also in this Philosophical Work, when it
cometh to this Great Earnest, the Artist shall plainly perceive a great
terror and trembling therein; he shall see, that Mercury especially,
which is the principal agent against Venus (like as the High Priests and
Pharisees, were also the principal opposers and persecutors of Christ),
trembleth at the appearance of Venus, and that Venus also not only
trembleth at this opposition of the three wrathful murdering properties,
but also that it is with her like as if a sweat did break out from her
body: and that nevertheless she is not stirring, but quiet and patient,
resigned and ready for to suffer all what they can inflict upon her, and
to be wholly swallowed up by them into their wrathfulness.

41\. In the process of Christ, the Devil said, or thought within
himself, "I am alone the great monarch in the Fire, Saturn is my might,
and Mercury my life, and I am in, and through them, a Prince and God of
this world, and will therefore not suffer, that such another one as
calls himself a Prince of Love, should rule therein, but I will devour
him in my Wrath, together with his Love." This he intended indeed, but
being he could not effect it as by himself alone, without concurrence of
the two chief principalities of this outward world, he stirred up
Mercury and Saturn, the Ecclesiastical and the Civil government. And so
these all three went out together, or sent their emissaries, apprehended
the Lord, bound and carried him from the one unrighteous judge to the
other, etc. Thus also in the Philosophical Work the Artist shall plainly
see, that Venus, which is all passive and wholly resigned and ready to
enter into the dragon's jaws, is surrounded on every side by Saturn,
Mars and Mercury. And so as it were apprehended or captivated by these
three in conjunction, nay also further that they lay hold on her, and
bind her, by darting their several poisonous rays upon her; and then
moreover, that they do, as it were, carry her from the one Property of
wrathfulness to the other, like as to be by them tried, examined and
judged.

42\. In the first place, Mars bringeth Venus to Mercury, like as the
devil's agents instruments in the Wrath of God, brought the Lord Christ
first to the High Priest. But as this was already beforehand
pre-possessed with hatred against him, and did not truly or duly try
him, nor could look into his Internal will and work of Love, but looked
upon him only from without, examined him superficially, and concluded,
that since he stood not with them, in the same will, way and form, he
was not to be tolerated among the living. But seeing that he could not
bring in execution his design to kill him, he sent him to Pilate, with
the character of an evil doer, that had deserved death. So also in this
Philosophical Work, this very same is the true internal signature of
Mercury, against Venus. He was before already before possessed with his
own hateful quality, and stood in opposition against her, and is
therefore not able to try, much less to approve of the loving Property
of Venus, but hath only a will and ability to murder her. But seeing
that there is in Venus another living Mercury, from above, he cannot
destroy her by his own power, but must confederate himself with Saturn;
and unto him he delivereth this Venus, for to be killed. Like as Christ
was delivered to Pontius Pilate for to be crucified.

43\. Pilate, a governor or Lord in the dark Saturnish impression, did
little enquire after, or concern himself about the spiritual doctrine,
Light, Love and Truth of Christ, but only about the government; and upon
this only account of Christ's being against Caesar, and his own coveting
to be accounted Caesar's friend, he sentenced him unto death. So here
also in the Philosophical Work, Saturn, the dark astringent property,
does not at all concern itself, with this or that internal loving
quality of Venus, being not able to receive anything thereof into its
own essence; but only for the pre-dominion is all this great contest.
Saturn will not lose the friendship of Mars and Mercury, which both are
with him in the same sphere, and jointly make up therein their own
government, which needs must be overthrown, if Venus should be permitted
to arise, and shine therein, with her Light and Love. And therefore he
puts in execution that which is well pleasing unto them, and which they
think may make for the preservation their wrathful government.

44\. Pilate sent the Lord Christ unto Herod, and this mocked him, and
put on him a long white garment. In this Philosophical Work, Herod the
king answereth unto Sol, who is a king also in his own Principle. And
this Sol puts upon Venus a simple, lunarish white colour; for it
perceiveth that there lieth in Venus a solarish kingly power, and
therefore it giveth unto her the white colour, from the Eternal
liberty's Property, and would fain see, that she might open therein her
powers from the Fire's centre, and show forth herself in a golden lustre
(like as Herod would fain have seen a miracle wrought before him),
which, if Venus did, she would be indeed a master and ruler over Mars
and Mercury, but only in this outward world, a ruler in the Wrath, like
as this Sol is also such a one. But as the Lord said unto Pilate, "My
kingdom is not of this world", and would answer nothing unto Herod, nor
his expectation by working any miracle before him; because in this white
garment he stood only before the justice of God, and represented the
poor, fallen Adam, in his false love of himself, whereof this white robe
was an excellent and very significant figure, deeply by Behmen declared.
So also in the Philosophical Work a breaking forth of the solarish
power, in a golden lustre from the Fire's centre, and tincturing this
white lunarish appearance of Venus, is all in vain expected; because the
pure union, and universal tincture cannot be made manifest, except first
all the dark Wrath and poison of Saturn, Mercury and Mars, be wholly
drowned and swallowed up in blood and death.

45\. Herod sent the Lord Christ back again to Pilate, and this, by his
soldiers, stripped him, put on him a scarlet robe, scourged him, put
upon his head a crown of thorns, and showed him to the multitude, which
all cried out, "Crucify, crucify him", etc. So also in the Philosophical
Work, Venus is delivered again unto Saturn, and he, with his strong,
dark impression, lays hold on her, strips her of her fair robe, and puts
on her a scarlet (purple) colour, wherein the Wrath of Mars is lodged.
This colour (which will be adorned as with a glance or splendour in a
flash), is from Saturn's and Mercury's Property, mixed with the fiery
Mars, as the Artist shall distinctly see. When now the Lord Christ, in
this royal robe, which was put upon him but in scorn and mockery, was
presented to the Pharisees, Priests, and common people, they all cried
out unanimously, "Away with him, he is but a false king, we own no other
king but Caesar, etc." So also, when Venus in this royal colour, appears
unto Mercury, Saturn and Mars and Luna also; this later being now
changed in its will, joined herself with the three chief murdering
Properties, and all together, with one consent, reject her, and as it
were, cry out the very same; which is as much as to say, they dart forth
their malignant, poisonous, fiery rays upon, and imprint the same into
her, by the sharp impression of Saturn, so that the Artist shall see
distinctly, that Venus is like as scourged and full of stripes. And
moreover, which is indeed the greatest wonder, he shall exactly see the
crown of thorns, with its sharp, stinging prickles, is put upon her. For
as the whole process, in the suffering and death of Christ, is a
circumstantial representation of all what the first Adam had acted in
his transgression, in a quite contrary way, which is distinctly shown
and declared by Behmen: And as the condition of Man in the Fall, is the
same with the Earth's condition in the Curse, only different from it in
degree, which he also not only answereth, but also demonstrateth
sufficiently. So also the manner and process of their restoration,
cannot but be alike in both. And as the Lord Christ in all his
sufferings was most profoundly humble, and only passive, opening not his
mouth but enduring all things most patiently, in a full submission to
the pleasure of his Father: so also, in this Philosophical Work, the
Artist shall see that Venus is wholly passive, standing all quiet and
unmoveable, without any moving or stirring.

Many particulars more are by this author observed, and discoursed of,
and this even so, that his discourse carried along with itself a plain
and perceptible testimony of solidity. But for brevities sake they shall
be but mentioned in short. The three nails wherewith Christ was nailed
to the cross, are referred to the three first sharp, and piercing
wrathful properties.

The two figures of the Virgin Mary and St. John, standing under the
cross, are referred to the young man's and the virgin's life, now
appearing in distinction, which the Artist (saith he) may see, if he
hath eyes and understanding..

The words of Christ spoken on the Cross, "Father, forgive them, they
know not what they do", are deeply and excellently declared. (1) as to
the redemption of mankind, by showing, when Jesus destroyed death and
selfhood in the humanity, he did not throw away that human property,
wherein the Anger of God was kindled before, but even then he took it
rightly and truly unto himself, that is, he took even then rightly the
outward, out-spoken kingdom of wonders into the inward. And (2) As to
this Philosophical Work, by showing that the three murderers, when
drowned in the lion's blood, do not pass away or are not annihilated,
but they are forgiven, that is, their former hatred and wrathfulness, is
turned into the highest Love-desire and they keep all their natural
qualities, in their true order and office having lost nothing at all,
but only their false and selfish predominion.

The two thieves, crucified with Christ, the one on the right hand, and
the other on the left; the one mocking him, and the other turning unto
him, and receiving the gracious promise "this day thou shalt be with me
in Paradise"; are in this Philosophical Work referred to the kingdom of
the Devil in the Wrath, and to the Kingdom of Love in the Light. Which
two kingdoms are now separated the one from the other, etc. Thou shalt
be with me in Paradise, says the Love, that is out of thy fiery,
anguishing condition, thou shalt be turned and transmuted into me, etc.
Here, saith Behmen, Venus in the Philosophical Work gets her Soul, for
when Mars and Mercury die to the dark impression of Saturn, then Venus
takes them in; then Anger and Love come to be one only being, Mars and
Mercury become the Soul of Venus; all the strife ceaseth, the enmity is
reconciled; Mercury is now all pure and hath no poison more in it, etc.

The words of Christ, saying to his mother, "Woman, behold thy son", and
to St. John, "Behold thy mother", are excellently discoursed of by
Behmen, not only with reference to the redemption of mankind, and to the
universal Christian Church, but also to this Philosophical Work; wherein
the Artist is to know, that he must imitate St. John, that all his work
and operation is done only in or about the Mother, that is the kingdom
of outward Nature, from which Christ here departeth; that his work in
this world never will become totally and absolutely celestial, that he
cannot manifest therein the Paradise, so as that God should appear
therein face to face. But that he must abide all the time of this world,
in the Mother only, though he verily obtaineth the universal Tincture in
this Mother. Like as the mother of Christ also obtained it, in her being
called by the angel, the Blessed among the women; notwithstanding, which
she was afterwards to pass through temporal death, etc. So also the
Artist obtaineth the blessing in this miserable world, so that he may
tincture his corrupted earthly body, and preserve it in health, unto the
terminus or end of his highest constellation, which is (N.B.) after or
under Saturn. \[When Saturn therefore is at his end and limit, and
leaveth that life, which he hath been a leader of, no universal Tincture
can prolong that life any longer.\]

Concerning the words of Christ, "I thirst", and the vinegar mingled with
gall, which when he had tasted, he would not drink, are profoundly
declared -

\(1\) as an outward, most significant figure of what was transacted
inwardly between the holy name Jesus, and the Anger of God awakened in
the human soul. The name Jesus thirsted after the salvation of men, and
would fain have tasted the pure living water in the human Property; but
the Anger of God in the soul, gave itself into this thirsting
Love-desire, which the Love would not drink, but yielded up itself, in a
full resignation and obedience thereunto. Vinegar and gall are the
proper figure of the human soul, viz., of these properties wherein the
human soul essentially standeth, when considered as to its own proper
being, without the Light. The soul, now here given again into the Holy
Light's substantiality, which was in Adam, disappeared, etc. This caused
such a two-fold great crack, as in the generation of Eternal Nature was
explained. The first terrible crack made the Earth to quake, and rent
the rocks asunder, etc. The second joyful crack raised the dead bodies
of them that had hoped and waited for the coming of the Messias, and
rent also the vail in the temple, from the top to beneath, uniting now
the human time with Eternity, etc.

\(2\) And as to the Philosophical Work, wherein Venus also thirsteth
after the manifestation and pre-dominion of the Fire of love; but
Mercury, in the sulphur of Mars and Saturn, presseth itself into her,
with his killing Menstruum, which is the greatest poison, of the dark
Wrathful source. But Venus, instead of drinking the same down, yieldeth
up herself wholly thereunto, as if she did actually die. And from hence
the great darkness in the Philosophical Work ariseth, so that the whole
matter cometh to be so black as a raven.

When the inward sun of the Eternal Light's Principle, in the humanity,
had given up itself into the dark Wrath and Anger of God, the outward
sun in this third principle, which taketh all its glance and lustre from
that Inward, as a representation, figure, or mirror thereof, could not
shine. For if its root or deepest ground (considered as in the region of
this world) was gone down into darkness, for to renew this principle
into the Light, the outbirth of this root, that is the outward Sun, must
needs have been darkened, contrary to the common course of Nature; And
this even from the sixth hour of the day unto the ninth, which was the
time of the first Adam's sleep, etc. In the Philosophical Work, as the
Artist shall see, all what God hath done, in and with the humanity, when
he was to redeem and bring it again into Paradise; so he shall see also
in answerableness to this particular of the great supernatural darkness
mentioned above, that when Venus thus yieldeth up her life, which all
her glance and lustre dependeth upon, all her beauty must disappear, and
darkness cometh up instead thereof. Nay, he shall see also, that not
only Venus, in the three wrathful Properties, but also that these three
themselves, in Venus, do lose their life altogether, and that all is now
so black and dark as a coal. For here now life and death lie still and
quiet together in the will of God, and to his only disposition. The
whole is now reduced to the beginning, and standeth in that order,
wherein it stood before the Creation. Nature's end is now attained unto,
and all is fallen home unto, or into, the power of the first Fiat.

After this, the Lord cried out, "My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" The
eternal, speaking Word stood now still, in the humanity, that is, it did
not operate therein, so as to be sensibly felt thereby. For the heavenly
humanity, which in Adam was disappeared, and in Christ quickened again,
was to bruise the head of the Wrath, in the fiery soul, and to change
the Soul's Fire into a clear, shining sun. That now this might be done,
the humanity must be introduced into this Wrath, by the Eternal speaking
Word, and by the same also, through this Wrath and death, into the
solarish or paradisical life. When now this was done, the humanity could
not but feel that Wrath in the soul, and in the same instant of this
feeling, it could not feel the presence and power of the Eternal
speaking Word, so as it could and did before, etc. And this was the
forsaking.

So also in the Philosophical Work, when the wrathful properties swallow
up the life of Venus, which is to change them into Sol, and to make that
all seven may be one. Venus is forsaken. And this makes her lose her
colour, and to be turned into Darkness, etc.

As the Lord Christ, after all his powerful works, miracles, overcoming
of the Devil in the Temptation, and Transfiguration of his human body,
was to go through all these sufferings, and at length wholly to die on
the Cross, whereby he frustrated in a sense and manner, the hope and
expectation of all his disciples. And as he had no other way or gate,
than death, through which he could have entered into his glory, and
drawn after him his members: So also in this Philosophical Work, the
Artist hath hitherto seen indeed many wonderful things, and very
glorious appearances, which made him to have a very great hope and
expectation; yet for all this, now his expectation is in a sense quite
overthrown and frustrated. For now the whole nature dieth in his work,
and he must see that all is changed into a dark night. All the
Properties, Powers, and Virtues, must now cease to be and do, what they
were and did before, and must fall into the end of Nature. All yieldeth
up its former life and activity, there is no more any stirring, moving,
or operating. All the Properties are in the Crown-number, scattered in
thousand, and so entered into the first Mysterium, in that state wherein
they were before the Creation. The meaning is not that the outward
materiality is made invisible, or quite annihilated, but only, that all
the Powers therein which the outspoken Properties had from the Eternal
speaking Word, and which were raised up against each other, in
contrariety, each of them according to its own nature, are now at an end
of their activity in self-will, and earthly inclination, and are fallen
home again into the power of the Eternal speaking Word, having no other
way, nor gate, but this death, through which they could enter from the
curse into their primitive blessing. But when thus they are in death to
themselves, and in the hand of the eternal Word, this cannot but raise
them up again unto glory, as by a new Creation, and in answerableness
the Resurrection of Christ.

The Lord Christ died indeed, as to the humanity from this world, but he
took the same human body again in his Resurrection, and lost or left
nothing thereof behind, but only the government of the four elements,
wherein the Wrath, curse, and mortality lieth, etc. So in this
Philosophical Work also, the first matter is not abolished or
annihilated, but only the curse therein is destroyed, in the four
elements, and the first life in the one Eternal Element is raised up
again; and therefore it is now fix, and can abide the Fire. A glorious
new body is now raised up out of the black darkness, in a fair white
colour, but such a one as hath a hidden glance in it, so that the colour
cannot be exactly discerned, until it resolveth itself, and the new
Love-desire cometh up. And then in Saturn's centre, but in Jupiter's and
Venus's Property, the Sun ariseth. This is in the Fiat, like as a new
Creation, and when this is done, all the Properties cast forth
unanimously their desire into Sol. And then the colour is turned into a
mixture of white and red, from Fire and Light in union, that is, into
yellow, which is the colour of majesty.

The appearance of love, to the wrathful properties of darkness, causeth,
as mentioned above, a great crack, or terror. The wrathfulness is
mightily exasperated by this appearance of Love, and presseth vehemently
into her, for to swallow her up into death, which it doth also actually.
But seeing that no death can be therein, the Love sinketh only down,
yieldeth up herself into these murdering properties, and displayeth
among them her own loving essentiality, which they must keep in them,
and cannot get rid thereof. But even this is a poison unto death, and a
pestilence unto Hell. For the wrathful Properties are also mightily
terrified at this entering of Love into them, which is so strange and
contrary to their own qualities, and which makes them all weak and
impotent, so that they must lose their own will, strength, and
pre-dominion, etc. So was it done in the death of Christ, and after such
a manner (largely and excellently declared by Behmen). Death and curse
in the humanity, was killed and destroyed, in and by the death of
Christ, who, after his Resurrection, had no more the form of a male in
his human body, but that of a paradisical Virgin, as Adam had before his
fall. And so also is it, in this Philosophical Work. In this terror,
crack, and mutual killing (though there is properly no death, but only a
transmutation, or union of two into one), when Venus yieldeth up her
life to the wrathful Properties, and when these, having lost their
pre-dominion, are raised up again to a new life, the Virgin giveth her
pearl to the young man, for a propriety. And so the life of the anger,
and the life of the Love, are no more two, but only one; no more a male
and female property, but a whole Virgin, with both tinctures united into
one. When then the Artist seeth the red blood of the young man rise from
death, and come forth out of the black darkness, together in union with
the white colour of the virgin, he may then know that he hath the great
Arcanum of the world, and such a treasure as is inestimable. Several
things more could be brought forth from Behmen, which would afford many
excellent considerations. But these may be sufficient, to show that
harmonious analogy which is between the Restoration of fallen Man,
through Jesus Christ, and the Restoration of cursed Nature, in the
Philosophical Work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Golden Tractate of Hermes Trismegistus](goldtrac.md)

  
