[Sacred-Texts](../index)  [Esoteric](../eso/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mirror)  [Next](rbacon2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# On the Philadelphian Gold

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## A Conference betwixt Philochrysus and Philadelphus On the Philadelphian Gold. 

**Philochrysus:** This was upon me to ask you. You may remember then
that you told me how the description of your city which we then read,
was more literal, than is easy to be believed, and withal more mystical
than it is possible for the wisest of mortals to comprehend. And in
particular you told me that it was built first of true and substantial
Gold; secondly of fine Gold; thirdly of transparent or glassy Gold; and
fourthly of living Gold.  
I desire now that you would answer me to all these particulars in order.
Do you then say that this city is built of true Gold, and that it is not
only metaphorically said to be built of Gold? Is it as real and
substantial, is it as visible and palpable, and has it as many good
qualities as this which I have now in my hand?

**Philadelphus:** Yes, Philochrysus, I can assure you that it is built
of true and not metaphorical Gold, as some would have it only to be.
This Gold, I say, is no less real and substantial, and no less visible
and palpable to its inhabitants and has as many, yea more, good
qualities that that which you hold in your hand, and seem so pleased
with. I know that this is a strange language, and I shall have much ado
to make myself understood by you but in any degree. Because I must speak
of that which you have never seen, or handled; though others have both
seen and handled of it, and you also may come in time to do the same. So
that it will be almost as hard a matter for one that is born blind to
understand the philosophy of colours, or one born deaf the nature and
distinction of sounds, as for you to comprehend what I am about to say
of a certain substance that is visible to some but not to you, palpable
to some but not to you; and which therefore you have no kind of
apprehension of.

**Philochrysus:** I promise to be very attentive. Do me the favour but
to satisfy me as far as you can.

**Philadelphus:** Well, I will endeavour your satisfaction, after that
you shall have answered me a question or two that I have to propose to
you.

**Philochrysus:** I am very ready to do it.

**Philadelphus:** Why do ye believe that piece of Gold which ye showed
me, to be true, real and substantial, and not shadowy, figurative and
accidental?

**Philochrysus:** Why do I believe so? I am not such a stranger to the
truth, as not to be able to distinguish it from a shadow. A shadow will
fly from me if I go to catch at it, but this I can grasp fast enough. A
shadow depends on the substance, and on the position of the Sun which
casts it. It has no figure but from the substance, and that is always
very faint and weak; it cannot be touched, it has no ponderosity, no
light, no power in it. But this is ponderous, bright and powerful. You
see me touch it, and its figure is not faint or weak but vivid and
strong, without depending upon anything else. Wherever I move it, and
whatever the position of it may be to the Sun or light, it still retains
the same shape and the same substance. And now I have it fast, I dare
venture its flying away.

**Philadelphus:** I see you are well satisfied with yourself. But pray
tell me, how would you give a description of it, to satisfy another that
had never seen it, or perhaps never heard of it; or if ever heard of it,
yet not otherwise than as a figurative sound to please children with, or
as a rattle, a picture, a shadow, a name without substance, without
reality? How would you make it to be understood to a Philosopher, and
how to a merchant that is no philosopher, supposing them both to be
strangers to the nature and use of this sovereign metal?

**Philochrysus:** Truly, Philadelphus, you begin to puzzle me. And
besides I cannot see whither all your windings and turnings will at last
lead me. Indeed, it would be a difficult matter to resolve
satisfactorily either a Philosopher or a merchant concerning this dear
precious metal, if they have not some manner of notice of it beforehand.
But since it is not unlawful to make such a supposition, I am ready also
to make such an answer as I can.  
I would therefore endeavour to satisfy them, by making use of such
ideas, images and conceptions which they are already acquainted with;
and by compounding them and dividing them, I would strive to frame in
the inquirer an idea, image and conception hereof, which might approach
as near as possible to the truth. As for instance, if I were to
discourse with a philosopher, whom I will suppose to live in the
remotest part of Tartary, or in some dark corner near to the Northern
Pole where mines of Gold were never so much as heard of, and no name
even found for it in the language of the country. I would think in the
first place what to call it, that he might in some sort apprehend me,
while I am discoursing with him. Now because some Copper mines may be
near to him, and he may have both seen and handled and also tried
several experiments upon this metal, therefore I will call it fine
Copper or perhaps fine Brass, if this be likewise known to him. Then
because I must speak to him in his own terms, and he has used himself to
those of Mercury and Sulphur, I will tell him this fine Copper is
compounded of a pure Mercurial Water and a pure Sulphureous earth,
exactly proportioned and duly maturated and concocted by the Sun-beams
in some proper matrix or vessel.  
Next I will, as far as I am able, show him the difference, both in
quantity and quality, of the compounding principles of this fine Copper,
and of his Copper. Whereupon I tell him that the Mercurial Water, which
enters into the composition of this fine Copper, is not only more
subtle, defecated and pure, than that which is in that Gothic Copper of
his, but also that it is there in a much greater quantity. Likewise I
tell him that the quantity of the Brimstone or Sulphureous Earth, which
enters into the composition of the Gothic copper is greater than that
which is in this fine (which I call for distinction the Peruvian)
Copper, but that in the former it is more coarse than in the latter.
Herein lies the main difference of the Peruvian and the Gothic Copper
(which I must make my philosopher understand) as to the composition of
the principles both in the one and the other. Which are both essentially
the same, but diversified as well according to quality as quantity. He
must then confess to me, that the Mercury in the Gothic Copper must
needs be originally infected and poisoned, and that there must be a
defect in its proportion: as likewise that the coarseness, the
superfluity and the combustibleness of its Sulphur are no inconsiderable
impediments to the perfection of this metal. And he will grant me to
this, I believe, though he never have seen the fine metal of Peru, that
there may be such a Copper there found as I do describe, if there may be
but a Mercury, or water of Life, freed from its original infection and
poison, and then fitly adapted and conjoined with a proper Sulphur that
shall be pure and of an incombustible nature, so as not to diminish in
the severest fires.  
However perhaps he will maintain, that I ought not altogether to despise
the Sulphureous Earth of his Gothick Copper; for that though it were not
so pure, fixed and permanent as that of the other, yet it was of the
very same essence and nature with it, and therefore also might possibly
come to be in like manner purified and made incombustible.  
And when I have brought him thus far, then I may speak unto him of the
several properties of our fine copper, and leave him to compare them
with those of that coarse sort which is only known to him. And here if I
could give him an exact calculation of the weight of a cubical inch of
the Peruvian Copper, comparing it with a cubical inch of the Gothick and
showing the preponderancy of that above this, I should settle in him a
just idea as to one property of it. Another property is purity and
clarity, which I must in the next place give him to understand by
deduction from such ideas or conceptions which he has already admitted.
A third is its tincture, and here as I must heighten that idea which he
has entertained on one side, so I must lessen it on the other, that this
man may exactly quadrate with the original. A fourth and main property
which I am to tell him of is Fixation, or the immortality and
indefectibility of the tincture, life or soul of this metallic body.
Besides all which I may in the fifth place discourse to him of the
extreme ductability or rarefaction of it; if it might not be too
prodigious for his belief; and sixthly, of its medicinal uses and
qualities, which would afford me a great variety of matters to entertain
him with.  
And thus I shall have in some degree satisfied my Tartarian or my
Gothick Philosopher, that the fine Copper of Peru is not metaphorical or
symbolical, as his poor country men, who have never seen it, would
persuade him: but that it is as truly, really and substantially of a
metallic nature and consistence, as that which he daily handles for
such. And he now begins to understand how this fine copper, which I
otherwise call Gold, is compounded of the same (yet better graduated)
principles, with a more exact proportion than his, and that it is not
metaphorically, but really a metallic substance, more ponderous, and
brighter than the other, also of a bitter (though not so deep) Tincture,
more fixed and ductile, and lastly more proper for human bodies, to be
used internally or externally, when prepared according to Art.  
So I take my leave of my Philosopher, and go next to my merchant. Here I
shall not have so much to do, as with the former. I need only to mind
him in brief of the several properties about which I discoursed my
philosopher, and then declare unto him the great and excellent use
thereof in commerce, so as more than four hundred times to answer the
other in common valuation, and often more than five hundred.

**Philadelphus:** Tis enough, I find you like well the subject that you
are upon, but hope it will serve to lead you into one that is far
better. Of all that you have now said, nothing will be found to be in
vain, when I shall come to examine you. The tables may come perhaps to
be turned upon yourself. Wherefore let me persuade you to try
thoroughly, whether that be indeed gold, which you believe to be so. But
since you have been pleased to satisfy me as to what I demanded, I am
now most ready to satisfy you, as to what was propounded; only I must
first premise two or three things that I may be understood by you.
Wherefore be now attentive and consider well what I am about to say.

**Philochrysus:** I will be sure Sir, to attend your motion, for I begin
to be very jealous, that you have been carrying on all this while some
plot to undermine me. But pray let us hear your premises, and I promise
to make the best use of all the ears and eyes which I have.

**Philadelphus:** The first thing that I wish then to premise is this,
That the Divine Blessing was originally spoken forth upon the whole
Creation of God. Or as some would rather choose to express it - It was
outspoken into the Creation, that is, by a real, vital and essential
infusion engrafted into it. So that whatever come out of the hands of
God was good. No evil should ever be derived from the Divine Being, who
notwithstanding the supreme liberty of Will, is necessitated when He
acts, to act according to Goodness. No sin nor death, no barrenness or
drought, no weakness or disproportion could at all proceed from him.
Wherefore he rejoicing, as it were, in the works of his hands,
pronounced them both severally and universally to be good, yea very
good, as considered in their whole system, and harmonious union with
each other.

**Philochrysus:** I must grant that you say. But I would fain see to
what purpose It will serve you.

**Philadelphus:** You may yet, before we part.

**Philochrysus:** I cannot deny but that God blessed the whole Creation
and that all the works of his hands are good. Make your best of it.

**Philadelphus:** The second thing that I have to premise is but as a
corollary from the former, and is strengthened by universal experience.
It is this, The Works of the Creation are not Now in the same State, as
they were when they first came out of the hands of God, or as when the
Divine Blessing was pronounced upon them, or outspoken onto them, yet
with this limitation, so far as they are within our Sphere or Orb. For
experience doth at this day too sufficiently attest that the creatures,
whether they be of the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdom, cannot be
all said to be good, howsoever they be considered, either separately by
themselves, or conjunctly in harmony with the rest. And whatever may be
pleaded on their behalf by some acute philosophers and divines, that all
the creatures are, even at this day, good; though not positively, yet
relatively, and with respect both to their present constitution and the
constitution of the world in general, it is evident, to me at least, if
either the undoubted records of scripture, or the natural light of
reason may judge of the appeal, that all that they can say will, if it
prove any thing, certainly conduce to the very overturning of the
positive goodness of the Divine Being,and the introducing in the room
thereof a certain relative, hypothetical and imaginary goodness, and to
the building up a very odd and irregular system of the Universe.  
This if it were necessary, I might at large deduce through several
particulars, proving the absurdity and inconsistency of such a
supposition, that has been taken up of late by some men of name, and by
them too mush authorised to the dishonour of God, though they might not
perhaps design it so, as I am apt both to hope and believe. But this
would lead me out very far and keep me too long from the resolution of
the question in hand. However, Philochrysus, if at any other time you
think it worth your while to demand a particular satisfaction as to this
point, I shall be most willing to give it to you.

**Philochrysus:** I thank you, Philadelphus. At present I am well enough
satisfied in this matter; yea so much as I have often with my self
admired, even when bit by a flea, how any could be serious in pleading
for the perfection of the present constitution of the World of Nature,
as if it never had been better, or was never to be better; but after it
shall have lasted out such a term, that it must return back again into
its primitive state of nothingness; by the most dreadful dissolution
through Fire. This their catastrophe of Our World, I must confess, did
never very well please me; but did always stick.

**Philadelphus:** Its is then granted by you that the present
constitution of this terrestrial world in which we live, is not so
perfect and good as it was originally brought forth by God, and that it
may, by the gift of god, recover again its original constitution.

**Philochrysus:** It is granted.

**Philadelphus:** Well! Answer me now this one question. Which do you
now think best deserves to be called by this or that name, that which is
most perfect in its kind, and that which comes up most really to the
true and original frame of its nature, or that which falls short of it,
and is very Imperfect as to its kind?  
As for instance, you take two sheep, or two horses, and of these let one
be placed at the right hand and the other at the left. Suppose now the
horse at the right hand to have all the most excellent features and
proportions of an horse, and that at the left to have none of them at
all, but to be very mean and despicable. Suppose also the sheep at the
right hand, to be very plump and fat, and to wear a Golden Fleece upon
its back, and that at the left to be lean, deformed and leprous. Will
you hereupon say that the horse at the left hand is a real horse, but
that at the right a metaphorical one? Or that the sheep at the left is a
true sheep, but not that at the right? And will you not rather say that
these by approaching nearer to the perfection of their nature, and to
the original integrity and beauty in which they were first both brought
forth from the Divine exemplar, do less deserve to be called figurative
or allegorical than the other.

**Philochrysus:** So indeed it seems to me, if either of these may be
called a figurative sheep, or a figurative horse, it must be the
left-handed ones, who come not up to the primitive constitution of their
nature, into which the divine blessing was spoken, but have fallen under
the curse, and suffered the depravation of their first pure form,
according to the supposition that is granted you. And if any one had
ever seen such an other but such lean and deformed sheep, or such ill
conditioned and disproportioned jakes, verily I say should much condemn
his rashness, if he should say there were no other, but positively
conclude these to be the best of the kind, and that above them are but
hypothetical metaphors, or poetical expressions of somewhat transcending
nature. Yea I should be a little angry if he should be so obstinate as
to stand out against the authentic relations of ocular witness, or go to
oblige me to deny my own senses, because his have not had the same
experience which mine also had.

**Philadelphus:** Suppose also that you have two bushels of wheat, the
one whereof is half full of chaff, the other perfectly cleansed, the one
blighted, the other large grained and sound. Would you say that the
blighted and chaffy corn is only real and substantial, but the sound and
the cleansed to be no more than a metaphor or a shadow. I believe not.  
Suppose once more that you have two pips of Spanish wine, the one
natural and unsophisticated, clean and sprightly, the other pipe
sophisticated and filled up half with water: and that you have tasted
only of the latter. Would you say that this only is true wine, and not
the other?

**Philochrysus:** No, Philadelphus, I think I should not so far expose
my own judgment. And though I should not have tasted of the finest wine,
yet would I not say there is no better than that I have tasted; and
assert that what I am told of the other is only fancy or figure.

**Philadelphus:** Now my dear Philochrysus, Hold to your words. For I
see two pieces of gold, the one as at your right hand, the other is at
your left, the one celestial gold, the other terrestrial gold, like as
there are bodies celestial and bodied terrestrial. The gold of your left
hand you see and handle, and say therefore that it is substantial. The
gold of the right hand you see not neither can you handle, and conclude
therefore that it is shadowy. The reason whereof is this. The former has
a peculiar virtue in it to blind that eye by which the former Gold may
be discerned, and to induce such a paralytic numbness and deadness on
all one part of the man that has a lust after it, that he cannot
possibly feel or handle the other till his disease be first removed from
him. But as for me, that Gold which you call substantial, I should of
the two rather choose to call shadowy Gold, and that which you think to
be shadowy and figurative, I must call substantial and real, on far
greater reasons than you have produced to move me to the contrary.

**Philochrysus:** I cannot but believe my senses. You shall not easily
persuade me out of them. For if they deceive me, I can be certain of
nothing.

**Philadelphus:** Be not afraid: you may keep your senses still for me.
Since the senses deceive none; but it is the judgment which is made upon
them that may be erroneous. Take care therefore that you judge not
amiss, and think that to be in the object itself which is nothing but an
impression produced by it upon the sensory. But tell me, do you ever
dream?

**Philochrysus:** Yes I do.

**Philadelphus:** You may then remember how you thought that you have
seen, felt and handled various objects which have vanished away as soon
as you awakened.

**Philochrysus:** I do. And particularly I call to mind, how I have
sometime thought myself to be rolling among bags of gold. So that it has
been no small trouble to me to find myself undeceived in the morning.

**Philadelphus:** Forget not this. The application will not be
difficult, and very nearly concerns you, my friend. Philochrysus, you
are in a dream at this very instant, and you will certainly find
yourself undeceived in the morning, when your senses that are now locked
up in sleep shall recover themselves.

**Philochrysus:** In a dream say you? Nay, then the whole world is a
dream. All that I do is dream and fancy, and whatever I behold or handle
is but a shadow. Will you make all the world beside yourself to be in a
dream? Will you make all the hurly-burlies in it, all the traffickings,
negotiations, and wars, with all manner of transactions, private and
public, civil and religious, to be nothing more but the sportive
imaginations of the night? Will you make nothing to be real or
substantial of what is seen, felt , heard or understood by us poor
mortals? Sure,Phildelphus, you are no sceptic.

**Philadelphus:** No, I am an eclectic. But yet I have found the good of
scepticism, as to many things that you believe. And if it go not too
far, it is the foundation of all solid knowledge, natural, political or
divine. Wherefore, however strange it may appear to you, it is not very
far from the truth, to say that this world, with all that is in it, is
but a dream or a shadow when compared with the invisible worlds. I am
afraid to press you too much with these matters, and therefore I only
said it is not very far from the truth to say so, but the indubitable
records wherein in manifestly the finger of God, would bear me out, if I
should say that it is the very truth itself. Search into these and you
will find enough to open your eyes and let you see that the form of this
World passeth away, and that all that belongs to it is no more than as a
vision of the might, which flies away with the day break. My thoughts
have been formerly the same with yours: the poisoned cup from the hand
of the Fair Harlot, whom I have mentioned to you, cast me into a deep
sleep. And in it I remember, I had just the same dreams which you have
now. I thought terrestrial gold was as substantial as you imagine it to
be, and of the celestial gold I had no manner of apprehension; but was
contented to look on it as a figure and not as a substance. But I was
roused out of my sleep by a swift messenger out of the Heavenly
Philadelphia, upon which all the enchanted scenes of the night
immediately fled away, and I awakened recovering the senses which had
been before chained up, and then I quickly perceived my errors. Ah!
Philochrysus! Awake! Awake! There stands now at your right hand one of
the citizens of that beautiful city, who holds before him a medal made
of the same gold, which he would present to you, if you would but suffer
your eyes to be opened, and would not hold so fast the shadow.

**Philochrysus:** What mean you to do with me? Oh! A little more sleep,
a little more slumber, a little more of this worlds, and then I awake.
Disturb me not.

**Philadelphus:** He talks in his sleep. Ho! Ho! Philochrysus. You will
not yet be awakened I find. I will therefore for a little time grant you
your hearts desire, and this once, suppose that you are not asleep while
you sleep, but that your dream is a reality, and all the conclusions
that you have made from the exercise of your outward senses to be true.
For by parity of reason (even granting what you say) as you do conclude
the terrestrial gold to be true, real and substantial, I do conclude the
celestial to be so, and much more so. If you plead sensation for yours,
I know those that plead it for ours, and that deserve as much (at least)
to be believed as any that you bring. But lest you might not so readily
believe or apprehend perhaps the witnesses that I could produce, I will
proceed with you as you would do with your Goth or Tartar, that had
never heard of the gold mines of Peru. Wherefore I must needs tell you
that if the Peruvian gold be true gold, then the Philadelphian gold
deserves also of right so to be called, yea is much better qualified of
the two to bear this name, as it is more perfect in its kind, and as it
more nearly approaches then the former to the true and original frame of
pure and undefiled nature, exactly compounded according to the divine
exemplar, and duly concocted in the bowels of the everlasting mountains,
the mountains of the Sun and the Mountains of the Moon. Whence,
supposing the difference of Philadelphian and Peruvian Gold to be, as
the difference of Peruvian and Gothic Copper; this will not hinder but
that the Philadelphian Gold, both according to the greater purity of its
constituent principles (as without the least alloy of the curse) and the
most exact proportion of then, may well deserve to be looked on no less
real than the Peruvian.

**Philochrysus:** If it be so, pray dear Philadelphus, give me some of
it, that I may make a proof.

**Philadelphus:** You are not yet out of your dream, you know not what
you say. For you neither understand what manner of Gold this is, neither
who it is that can give it. It may be called to you by a thousand names,
but I do assure you that it is true and proved gold. And let me tell you
that your gold, or the false brass of Peru, is not constituted of
Principles altogether pure and defected, but mixed with some close and
inherent imperfections. Neither are the proportions adjusted according
to perfect Nature, but only according to the perfect constitution of
this terrestrial orb. The curse that has entered into the whole lower
Creation has also entered into this, and it is not a perfect metal,
except with respect to the lapsed and broken frame of this our Earth.

**Philochrysus:** Hah! Philadelphus! I am wondering where you will run
at last. I am not so much in a dream, but I can laugh at these
amusements of yours. Did ever any before deny Gold to be a perfect
metal?

**Philadelphus:** Mistake me not. I do not deny it to be a perfect metal
with respect to the present order of things in their Fallen State. But I
do positively aver that it is not a perfect metal with respect to that
primitive and original order of Beings which proceeded immediately from
God through His Word, wherein and whereby they subsist; but that it
partakes of the curse, as well as all the other subjects of the mineral
or metallic kingdom, though not in the same degree. Now there is an
Inherent curse, and there is also an Adherent Curse, and of both of
these it more or less participates.

**Philochrysus:** Pray what do you mean by an Inherent Curse, and how do
you appropriate it to the Terrestrial Gold.

**Philadelphus:** Know what is the Blessing and you cannot fail to know
what is the Curse in Nature. There is an Inherent Blessing in every
creature, and there is also an Adherent Blessing. Without the former God
could never have pronounced them good, and without the latter they could
never have been serviceable to man, or to the rest of their fellow
creatures. A privation, or loss, in either of these kinds, is called the
Curse. And as it has diverse degrees and is variously specified, so
takes it up diverse names, as Death, Darkness, Hades, Sheol, the Turba,
the Left Hand, the Seed of the Serpent, the Mist out of the Earth,
Lilith, Arimanius, Poison, the Blood of the Old Dragon, the Prisons, the
North, and many others.  
The benediction now of both kinds may be lessened, hidden or removed
either in part of in whole. The Adherent Benediction may possibly admit
of a total remove and separation, but the inherent can never do this
without the destruction and annihilation of the subject wherein it is.
Whence though it may be hid, yet can it never be separated without the
entire disunion of its constituent and vital principles. Which are not
perishable, but endure the same, notwithstanding all the cortices,
veils, and coverings, wherewith they may be overcast or oppressed, and
which are said to be under the president-ship of so many evil Angels.  
Behold then here is Wisdom to take away the Inherent Curse from the
creature, and to cause the disappeared Blessing to reappear, and exert
forth itself. Now shall you understand how this curse is to be
appropriated to the terrestrial Gold, and how the contrary Blessing is
to be predicated of the celestial. But in the first place you are to
take notice, that as the inherent is here less than in any other
subjects of the same Kingdom and Order, so the Adherent Curse is
greater. In the second place you are to observe that the primary and
Radical principles being (as to us) invisible in themselves, the
secondary and elementary, which may be made visible, can be here only
examined into.  
In the third place, I am now to acquaint you that these elementary
principles, which I call also Spermatical, as I call the former Seminal,
are vastly different in the state of pure and of corrupt Nature.  
For in pure nature there is found a bright living crystalline water,
full of spirit, power and energy; but in Nature corrupted there is a
water that is opposite to this, being without Light, Life, or purity,
without spirituality or strength, and void of all benign efficacy.
Wherefore as a stagnated pool remote from the sun beams, or as a dead
insipid phlegm, is not to be regarded or valued, so likewise there is
found a bright, living and crystalline earth (such as hath been, and
such as will be, and such as is even at this time, when it appears not,
except to some few) which is sometimes compared to fine silver, and is
called the Salt of the Earth. And in this Blessed earth is locked up the
Spirit, Energy and Seed of the Mineral and vegetable kingdoms in their
purest constitution, yea and of the animal too. For that it contains in
itself the Fire of Nature, by which the wheel of her Magia, according to
all the seven forms and spirits is set to work.  
On the contrary there is a dull, dead and opaceous earth that is mixed
more or less with all terrestrial subjects, and that may by Art be
separated from them. This is the Curse of the Earth which must be taken
away and dissolved, before the Blessed and new Earth can appear,
wherefore it is called the Damned Earth.

**Philochrysus:** I hope you will not say that there is any of what the
Chymists call Damned Earth in this our Gold. For I cannot bear the
thought of it. Pray therefore explain yourself here a little.

**Philadelphus:** It is you yourself that make the particular
application, for I did not. And indeed, Sir, I was almost afraid to
touch you so near the quick. But if your Gold, Philochrysus, be a
terrestrial subject (which you will scarce deny) then I am sure it must
have some share of this Damned earth in it. For the Curse has not a
command to stop when it came to a mine of Gold, but like a leaven it
passed through and through, and infected the whole earth, and all that
belonged to it. There might not indeed so much of it here abide as
elsewhere, and therefore I said there was less of the Inherent Curse in
this, than in any other subject of the same kingdom or order. Yet there
is some, and that too very considerable, if either reason or experience
may be allowed to pass the judgment. But this would lead us too far into
a Philosophical disquisition.  
Let it suffice at present to consider whether what a vulgar and ordinary
artist may be able to give an ocular demonstration of in the greatest
part of earthly subjects, an expert master may not be as able to give
the same in All?  
Wherefore be not angry, dear sir, at what I have asserted, but learn to
bear the thought of what will be so much your disappointment, as to let
you see the fair idol of your heart is not so lovely as you have
imagined it to be, and that it is not all true gold that glisters in
your hand.  
There is a Damned Earth Terra Damnata et Maledicta that cleaves so fast
to it, as is not (easily) to be separated by the refiners art. And I am
informed from credible testimonies, that whosoever shall be
understanding in heart and skillful in hand, to separate this vile earth
from the precious Solar Earth in the body of Terrestrial Gold, shall
find the quantity of the former (however small when compared to the
inferior metals) to exceed the other. And if what is related concerning
the degradation of Gold by an eminent and curious eye-witness of this
nation, whom all the philosophical and Christian world stands obliged to
(and who had this generous and noble design to vindicate Religion from
all sectarian polity or partiality, and to establish it upon solid and
immutable grounds, be true; and if also the daily experiments) made even
in ordinary laboratories of the possibility of its supergradation and
Exaltation, by losing in its weight, and so possessing an higher
Tincture and Clarity, may deserve any credit: Then is it certain that it
may still arrive to an higher degree both of Fixation and Purity, than
it could ever meet with in the Bowels of the Accursed earth.  
But whether this can ever be quite set free from its Inherent Curse or
no, is not so material to our present purpose. However there is a vein,
I can assure you, of Paradisical Gold, which not having been with it
infected, is by Moses pronounced to be good, (Genesis 2, 12). And yet
even this is no more to be compared with the Philadelphian or Sionitical
Gold, than the Peruvian is with it. Hereby you may, in part I hope
apprehend what is meant both by the Blessing and the Curse, which are
inherent in this Metallic body.

**Philochrysus:** I do, I think, pretty well understand you. But pray
what do you mean by an Adherent Curse, and how is that to be
appropriated to the Terrestrial Gold?

**Philadelphus:** The Adherent Curse is that which adheres or cleaves to
the Creature, by external application, and not by Internal Constitution,
or composition. And here by external application I mean not barely any
outward abuse of the same whatever, but also (and chiefly) any degree of
adhesion of the Human Soul to it, how intrinsic soever, and the more
intrinsic still the more dangerous, it being foreign, incongruous, and
extrinsic both to the Soul, and to the creature which she seeks to
cleave as to her blessing. Now though your terrestrial Gold has indeed
not so much of the inherent, yet has it far more of the Adherent Curse,
which is much the worst of the two. And though it should be never so
perfect as to its composition, that avails not if this other Curse
sticks to it. Yea, on the contrary, this will be so much the greater and
the heavier, as in the case of the Tartarization \[2 Peter, 2, 4.\] of
those angels who kept not their first estate of adhesion to the Original
Beauty and Goodness, and in that of the Golden Calf of Israel,
concerning which the Jews have to this very day a celebrated proverb,
that no punishment is ever inflicted upon them in which there is not
some portion of this calf. And I fear the same may be justly applicable
not to them alone. What Evil of Sin is there in the whole world that is
not perpetrated for the sake of it? And what Evil of pain, or dreadful
judgments by the Divine nemesis have not already been pulled down upon
particular persons, upon families and upon whole kingdoms? Behold, and
consider the times of old; what examples all histories both sacred and
profane doth give you. To conclude, how many are there that for the sake
of this, labour the greatest part of their lives in the very fire, who
at length reap nought but smoke and dross, in the room of those Golden
Mountains which they hereby imagined to themselves? And how many weary
themselves all their lives for very vanity, while being deceived with
the false show of an adhering blessing, they find only misery and
repentance; who, had they taken but half that pains to discover the
Paradisical or Philadelphian mine of Gold, would never have been left in
such plunges at the last? Behold all this proceeds from its Adherent
Curse. Remember, prithee Philochrysus, the dying aphorism of the richest
Subject of the world at that time, as well as the best politician, and
the most faithful servant; which famous aphorism is, I suppose, not
unknown to you.

**Philochrysus:** You mean, I know the saying of that great man, which
he left in his legacy to posterity: Had I but taken but half that pains
to serve my God, as I took to serve my Prince, he would not now have
deserted me.

**Philadelphus:** I do so. And withal I assure you, my good friend, that
if you were but half as diligent in seeking after the celestial, as you
are in seeking after the terrestrial Gold, you would be experimentally
convinced that I have spoken nothing to you all this while but the very
Truth, and you would find yourself possessed of substance instead of
vanity.

**Philochrysus:** I am at a loss. I know not what to make of that which
you say. Disturb me not out of my sleep. For I would rather dream on at
the old rate, than be molested. Have pity on me, and depart from me. For
I am Philochrysus. I am a lover of that what you have contemptibly
nick-named terrestrial Gold. The which to me is a Celestial substance.
But you will hardly allow it to be a substance at all, that so you may
the more exalt the Gold (as you call it) of your own country, which I
must call imaginary. Tell me not then that mine is vanity, or the shadow
only of a substance. Neither speak to me of labouring for smoke and
dross. I know what is substance, I thank my stars, and I can distinguish
between what is true and what is counterfeit. Mine hath been tried in
the Fire, and weighed in the balance. It hath stood in the one; and in
the other hath been found to have its just weight. Can you also pretend
to this?

**Philadelphus:** Yes, more than pretend. Mine is indeed Gold tried in
the Fire, and it has been also weighed in the balance as well as yours.
And let me tell you besides, that your gold shall never be able to
endure this fire-trial, but shall fly away in it as lead and dross. And
one grain of the Gold of my City if put into the balance will
preponderate this whole room full of yours. Whence the Crown that is mad
out of this Gold is called emphatically a weight of Glory and an
Hyperbolical or excessive weight, yea a far exceeding and Hyperbolically
Hyperbolical weight \[2 Corinthians 4,17.\] So far exceeds the celestial
Gold in preponderosity the terrestrial Gold when weighed together, as no
hyperbole can reach. It exceeds in like manner in clarity and lustre, in
fixation and permanency, in the superexcellency of its Tincture, in
ductibility and divisibility; and in all manner of medicinal uses both
for Spirit, Soul and Body, all which it revives, exhilarates and
perfects. And in the last place all the merchandise of your World is not
to be compared with it. This alone can truly and really and lastingly
make you rich. It would not be difficult to particularize each of these,
and to show hereby the reality and substantiality of this Gold that I
plead for, not only equally with, but far above that which is dug out of
the Earth. But all that can be said hereupon, would but serve so much
the more to exasperate you if you comprehend it not, or will not attend
to it. In vain therefore would it be for me to give you (at present) a
particular description of its several properties, as also of its
constituent principles and the manner of their union. I must wait to do
that till those senses which are fallen asleep in you shall come to be
awakened. But I am therefore sent that I might rouse you out of your
sleep. Forgive me that I thus wake you. O Philochrysus! what has become
of the eye-salve of Sophia? Arise and anoint your eyes.

**Philochrysus:** Hold! I think I now begin to see. I must confess that
I can now see the possibility of what you drive at, but that it is
actually so, I cannot yet perceive. I remember I was once a little
acquainted with one that might possibly be of your society, and I did
hear him exclaim from the pulpit in this manner: "Think ye, ye shall be
set up as pillars in the Temple of God to uphold it? or that you shall
be full of gold in you pockets, of the finest gold tried in the Fire,
like the rich men of the Earth? and to ruffle it in silks, and fine
raiment as those in princes' courts? Do you think that these things are
here meant in these promises made to the Seven Churches? No, No, dream
of no such things, for I say there is not one word true according to the
letter.

**Philadelphus:** I do say that every word, every syllable, every letter
is true, and that there are real and substantial pillars in the Temple
of God, real and substantial Gold in the City of God, and real and
substantial raiment worn by the citizens thereof. And yet at the same
time, I do assert that there is no Word, syllable or letter true, if
strictly taken according to that low idea which the natural man has
fixed to these words. For as much as there is a more than hyperbolical
excess in the difference of one from the other. As each property by
itself considered will manifest. And if you are convinced of the
possibility (at least) of what I have said, you must acknowledge the
actual existence hereof. For that there can be no other reason invented
whereby you deny it, but its impossibility and inconsistency.

**Philochrysus:** I resign therefore, and yield to you, that the City of
Philadelphia may be built of true, real and substantial Gold, which has
nothing of the curse either Inherent or Adherent sticking to it,
according to the sense that the describer means, or that you explain,
though not according to that which the natural man would have.

**Philadelphus:** You comprehend me right. I shall therefore proceed. I
said then, in the second place, that it is built of fine Gold, much more
fine and higher graduated than any you can ever have seen. This you may
in part already understand by what has been said hitherto. But here I
shall much more stand in need of words whereby to express myself.

**Philochrysus:** I long greatly to hear you speak distinctly of this
Superfine and supergraduated Gold. I shall not forget what you have
said. Therefore proceed on.

**Philadelphus:** You need but remember your Gothic philosopher.
Consider also that there is a twofold body, There is a material and
elementary body, and there is an spiritual and a heavenly body. The one
is gross, the other fine.

**Philochrysus:** I can understand perfectly what you mean by the
former, but the notion of an immaterial body seems to me the very same
contradiction as that of an immaterial substance seemed to an eminent
asserter of materialism called Philautus. If you had but him to deal
with, he would make work, I believe, with your non-elementary and
spiritual body.

**Philadelphus:** It may be so. But I never feared the strength of
reasoning in Philautus, though I know him pretty well, and all his
principles whether in Philosophy, Divinity or politics are opposite to
mine. He is the express character of the natural man throughout, and in
his works everywhere you have the most lively image of the Fallen State
of Nature, whereof great advantage may be made by the wise, it being no
where that I know so deeply and philosophically handled. This indeed he
mistakes for the true and original State of Nature; but herein he speaks
well enough, and true enough, as a natural or animal Man, and without
deviating, most exactly follows his principles wherever they lead him.
On the other side the most learned and profound of all his answerers
very admirably both describes and demonstrates the true and original
state of Nature, such as it was, and such as it shall be again, but not
such as it is at present. As for Philautus he is not dead, but lives in
his disciples, and will live as long as the present corrupt state of
Nature shall remain upon the Earth. For the Psyche in man is never able
to penetrate beyond the image; only the pure spirit of Sophia can reach
to the life, which is so imaged out in discourse. Hence he who had only
the Psyche, was not able to distinguish betwixt the one and the other,
but he took them both to be the same. So finding in the origination of
several languages that a Spirit was imaged forth or signified by Breath,
he presently concludes that the Spirit and Breath were one and the same,
and consequently that all Spirits (as such) were material and corporeal
beings. he in the like manner, finding in the verbal image of substance
was expressed that which stands under, or props up somewhat, entertained
immediately a most gross and sensible conception hereof, and tied it
down to matter. So then nothing could be a greater absurdity to him, or
a more manifest contradiction, than to believe an immaterial substance,
that is an immaterial matter. Now among those who have a great and just
abhorrence for his sentiments, all are not set free themselves from the
very same method of argumentation, as from a numerous induction of
instances might be verified if need were.  
Wherefore I shall only beg of you what is highly necessary in order to
your understanding of what I speak, and to your passing a judgment
thereupon, that you content not yourself with the lax and popular sense
of a word, as that which is generally very equivocal, but that you seek
out the strict and close idea that is to be affixed to it, for the
removal of all ambiguity in the terms, and the distinction of the image
from its original, or (as the Schools would rather speak) of the Signum
from Signatum, the sign from the thing signified.

**Philochrysus:** It is very just what you require, Phildelphus. None
can gainsay this method, after what the celebrated author of An Essay on
Human Understanding, together with a French philosopher of the first
magnitude , have written on it, shall be looked into. Wherefore tell me
in the first place, what you mean by Substance?

**Philadelphus:** Hereby I understand that which hath both Essence and
Existence, being created by God, and made capable of bearing up, or
supporting various modes of Being.

**Philochrysus:** What do you mean by Body?

**Philadelphus:** Hereby I understand a substance that is extended, and
is capable of various modes of Extension. Two of which modes are
penetrability and impenetrability.

**Philochrysus:** Is penetrability then a mode of extension? I always
thought that all matter was impenetrable.

**Philadelphus:** True. All Matter is impenetrable, but all body is not.
And penetrability is as much a mode of extension as impenetrability. For
where there is no co-extension there is no penetration, and where there
is no penetration there can be no life. Without therefore all Nature
were dead, it remains that extended substances may be penetrated. Now
there are extended substances, or rather one extended substance (of
which I may speak to you hereafter) which can penetrate others, but
which cannot be penetrated by any. There are also extended substances
which can penetrate others by co-extension, and which may themselves
also be penetrated by others. lastly there are extended substances or
bodies which cannot penetrate others, but which may be penetrated by
them. Thus by the outward light of this world, which is a body of the
second order, the Earth may be penetrated, which can neither penetrate
it or any other substance.

**Philochrysus:** What do you mean by Matter?

**Philadelphus:** Hereby I understand a body that is impenetrable, and
divisible, and which is capable of various modes of division. So that
all Matter is Body, but all Body is not Matter. By impenetrable I mean
not that which cannot be at all penetrated, but I mean that which is not
to be penetrated by any thing of its own order, and which itself can
penetrate nothing.

**Philochrysus:** How can the same Body be impenetrable and divisible?

**Philadelphus:** Because it is impenetrable, therefore it is divisible
into parts. For if it could be penetrated, then would there be no need
of division, or separation of the parts? Wherefore that which is
penetrable is also indivisible, or rather indiscerpible, and
consequently incorruptible.

**Philochrysus:** I comprehend your meaning. And now I conceive what is
your notion of an immaterial or Spiritual Body called likewise a
Non-elementary (which is a Quintessential) or heavenly Body; Namely,
that it is an extended substance, penetrable, penetrative, indivisible,
indiscepible, and incorruptible. As on the contrary your notion of a
material and elementary body must be this, that it is an extended
substance, impenetrable, penetrated, divisible, discerpible and
corruptible. I begin consequently to understand a little your notion of
Material and Spiritual, of Elementary and Heavenly Gold, and why you
call the one gross and the other fine Gold. But notwithstanding that I
conceive how the Material and Elementary Gold is an extended Substance
which is impenetrable to all terrestrial bodies, and may be penetrated
by the Celestial, which is also divisible into parts, yea Discerpible
into the minutest atoms, yet can I not easily yield that it should be
corruptible.

**Philadelphus:** All that is compounded of Elements must be more or
less corruptible. And though certain elementary bodies may have arrived
at some degree of incorruptibility, yet it is but a degree, it being
impossible for them to be ever perfectly freed from corruption, but by a
dissolution and a resuscitation. For this is a most assured maxim, that
all things must be perfected upon the cross and all things must be tried
by Fire Without passing through the Cross there is no resurrection,
without passing through the Fire there is no Fixation or Incorruption,
no Purification or Spiritualization. Hence the messenger of the Covenant
of Immortality is by a certain prophet compared to a refiners Fire, who
saith of him that he shall purify the Priesthood and purge them as Gold
that they may rightly offer the sacrifice of Minha to Jehovah. Hence
also a great and wise King saith, the word (or outflowing emanation of
the Lord is refined; and again he cries out Thy Word is exceedingly
refined most fine and pure. And likewise this very Word of the Lord or
the Word the Lord saith to the shepherds of Israel: I will refine them
as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried. And elsewhere
he saith, I have refined thee melted thee down, and then brought thee
out of the furnace. For this cause the precious Sons of Zion are
compared to fine gold, and the Angelical man who appeared to Daniel had
his loins Girded with fine Gold of Ophir. From this also an account may
be given why the Altar of Incense was made of refined Gold, together
with the Ark and the Cherubims, also why Wisdom's oracle is so often
compared to fine Gold; and lastly why the Shulamite describes both the
head and the feet of her beloved to be as of fine Gold, that is such an
indivisible, indiscerpible and incorruptible substance, as being
extended is therefore a body, and as possessing all the properties of
the material and gross Gold, is therefore a spiritual body, or
immaterial and celestial gold.

**Philochrysus:** I must confess that I have always taken a spiritual
body to be a contradiction in terms, for I never heard otherwise before
but that Spirit and Body were contraries. But now I begin to mistrust
that I have not been used rightly to apply ideas to words.

**Philadelphus:** Your diffidence is well grounded. For I do not find
that Spirit and Body are anywhere opposed as contraries in those
writings which command the greatest authority and deference above all
others to them. I find indeed frequently spirit and flesh to be set as
opposites, but spirit and body never. Nay I find it there expressly
asserted that there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.
And so in like manner there is a natural Gold and there is a spiritual,
which surpasseth the former, as the spiritual Body of the Resurrection
doth this Natural and Elementary body which we now wear about us.
Moreover the same highly mystic author tells those who being immersed in
the flesh had no notion of a Spiritual or Heavenly Body, any more than
you had.

**Philochrysus:** There are also Celestial Bodies (of a spiritual and
heavenly property) and Bodies Terrestrial (of a material and earthly
property as common gold but the Glory of the Celestial is one, and the
glory of the Terrestrial is another; that is, the glory of the
Philadelphian Gold differs from the glory of the Peruvian, as far as
heaven is from Earth.

**Philochrysus:** You extremely amaze me, good Philadelphus, to tell me
that the City from whence you are named is built of such fine gold. But
pray now go on, if you are not weary, to satisfy me in the third place,
whether it be built of Transparent and Glassy Gold.

**Philadelphus:** Be not over hasty, but take time to meditate upon what
I (through the assistance of the Good Spirit) have freely communicated
to you. Neither have I done yet with the former, for I am not yet come
to the top of the ladder with you. Perhaps your head may be giddy in
endeavouring to reach it at this present. Wherefore though I cannot be
ever weary of discoursing these matters, yet I will now take my leave of
you with one parallel instance, which you may digest against we meet the
next time. Consider what difference there is betwixt the faeces of any
terrestrial subject, from which the spirit is separated, and the Spirit
itself of that very subject (which is a Spiritual Body) when seven times
rectified; and hereby as in a glass you may discern how far that Gross
and Earthly Gold I am speaking of, wherewith the Holy City of my
brethren is built. In the meanwhile I shall leave with you this
Hieroglyphical figure of a star being the mark of this Gold, and also of
the city, showing its constituent parts the Water and Fire of the
Philadelphians; it manifold and wonderful properties, how it is formed,
and how it is made to multiply itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tract on the Tincture and Oil of Antimony by Roger
Bacon](rbacon2)

  
