[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tsm04)  [Next](tsm06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### CHAPTER II

# The Coming of Angus and Bride

All the long winter Beira kept captive a beautiful young princess named
Bride. She was jealous of Bride's beauty, and gave her ragged clothing
to wear, and put her to work among the servants in the kitchen of her
mountain castle, where the girl had to perform the meanest tasks. Beira
scolded her continually, finding fault with everything she did, and
Bride's life was made very wretched.

One day Beira gave the princess a brown fleece and said: "You must wash
this fleece in the running stream until it is pure white."

Bride took the fleece and went outside the castle, and began to wash it
in a pool below a waterfall. All day long she laboured at the work, but
to no purpose. She found it impossible to wash the brown colour out of
the wool.

When evening came on, Beira scolded the girl, and said: "You are a
useless hussy. The fleece is as brown as when I gave it to you."

Said Bride: "All day long have I washed

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

it in the pool below the waterfall of the Red Rock."

"To-morrow you shall wash it again," Beira said; "and if you do not wash
it white, you will go on washing on the next day, and on every day after
that. Now, begone! and do as I bid you."

It was a sorrowful time for Bride. Day after day she washed the fleece,
and it seemed to her that if she went on washing until the world came to
an end, the brown wool would never become white.

One morning as she went on with her washing a grey-bearded old man came
near. He took pity on the princess, who wept bitter tears over her work,
and spoke to her, saying: "Who are you, and why do you sorrow?"

Said the princess: "My name is Bride. I am the captive of Queen Beira,
and she has ordered me to wash this brown fleece until it is white.
Alas! it cannot be done."

"I am sorry for you," the old man said.

"Who are you, and whence come you?" asked Bride.

"My name is Father Winter," the old man told her. "Give me the fleece,
and I shall make it white for you."

Bride gave Father Winter the brown fleece, and when he had shaken it
three times it turned white as snow.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

The heart of Bride was immediately filled with joy, and she exclaimed:
"Dear Father Winter, you are very kind. You have saved me much labour
and taken away my sorrow."

Father Winter handed back the fleece to Princess Bride with one hand,
and she took it. Then he said: "Take also what I hold in my other hand."
As he spoke he gave her a bunch of pure white snowdrops. The eyes of
Bride sparkled with joy to behold them.

Said Father Winter: "If Beira scolds you, give her these flowers, and if
she asks where you found them, tell her that they came from the green
rustling fir-woods. Tell her also that the cress is springing up on the
banks of streams, and that the new grass has begun to shoot up in the
fields."

Having spoken thus, Father Winter bade the princess farewell and turned
away.

Bride returned to the mountain castle and laid the white fleece at
Beira's feet. But the old queen scarcely looked at it. Her craze was
fixed on the snowdrops that Bride carried.

"Where did you find these flowers?" Beira asked with sudden anger.

Said Bride: "The snowdrops are now growing in the green rustling
fir-woods, the cress is springing up on the banks of streams, and the
new grass is beginning to shoot up in the fields."

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

"Evil are the tidings you bring me!" Beira cried. "Begone from my
sight!"

Bride turned away, but not in sorrow. A new joy had entered her heart,
for she knew that the wild winter season was going past, and that the
reign of Queen Beira would soon come to an end.

Meanwhile Beira summoned her eight hag servants, and spoke to them,
saying: "Ride to the north and ride to the south, ride to the east and
ride to the west, and I will ride forth also. Smite the world with frost
and tempest, so that no flower may bloom and no grass blade survive. I
am waging war against all growth."

When she had spoken thus, the eight hags mounted on the backs of shaggy
goats and rode forth to do her bidding. Beira went forth also, grasping
in her right hand her black magic hammer. On the night of that very day
a great tempest lashed the ocean to fury and brought terror to every
corner of the land.

Now the reason why Beira kept Bride a prisoner was because her fairest
and dearest son, whose name was Angus-the-Ever-Young, had fallen in love
with her. He was called "the Ever Young" because age never came near
him, and all winter long he lived on the Green Isle of the West, which
is also called the "Land of Youth."

Angus first beheld Bride in a dream, and when he awoke he spoke to the
King of the Green Isle,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

saying: "Last night I dreamed a dream and saw a beautiful princess whom
I love. Tears fell from her eyes, and I spoke to an old man who stood
near her, and said: 'Why does the maiden weep?' Said the old man: 'She
weeps because she is kept captive by Beira, who treats her with great
cruelty.' I looked again at the princess and said: 'Fain would I set her
free.' Then I awoke. Tell me, O king, who is this princess, and where
shall I find her?"

The King of the Green Isle answered Angus, saying: "The fair princess
whom you saw is Bride, and in the days when you will be King of Summer
she will be your queen. Of this your mother, Queen Beira, has full
knowledge, and it is her wish to keep you away from Bride, so that her
own reign may be prolonged. Tarry here, O Angus, until the flowers been
to bloom and the grass begins to grow, and then you shall set free the
beautiful Princess Bride."

Said Angus: "Fain would I go forth at once to search for her."

"The wolf-month (February) has now come," the king said. "Uncertain is
the temper of the wolf."

Said Angus: "I shall cast a spell on the sea and a spell on the land,
and borrow for February three days from August."

He did as he said he would do. He borrowed

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

three days from August, and the ocean slumbered peacefully while the sun
shone brightly over mountain and glen. Then Angus mounted his white
steed and rode eastward to Scotland over the isles and over the Minch,
and he reached the Grampians when dawn was breaking. He was clad in
raiment of shining gold, and from his shoulders hung his royal robe of
crimson which the wind uplifted and spread out in gleaming splendour
athwart the sky.

An aged bard looked eastward, and when he beheld the fair Angus he
lifted up his harp and sang a song of welcome, and the birds of the
forest sang with him. And this is how he sang:--

Angus hath come--the young, the fair,  
The blue-eyed god with golden hair--  
The god who to the world doth bring  
This morn the promise of the spring;  
Who moves the birds to song ere yet  
He bath awaked the violet,  
Or the soft primrose on the steep,  
While buds are laid in lidded sleep,  
And white snows wrap the hills serene,  
Ere glows the larch's <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) vivid green  
Through the brown woods and bare. All hail!  
Angus, and may thy will prevail. . . .  
He comes . . . he goes. . . . And far and wide  
He searches for the Princess Bride.

Up and down the land went Angus, but he

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

could not find Bride anywhere. The fair princess beheld him in a dream,
however, and knew that he longed to set her free. When she awoke she
shed tears of joy, and on the place where her tears fell there sprang up
violets, and they were blue as her beautiful eyes.

Beira was angry when she came to know that Angus was searching for
Bride, and on the third evening of his visit she raised a great tempest
which drove him back to Green Isle. But he returned again and again, and
at length he discovered the castle in which the princess was kept a
prisoner.

Then came a day when Angus met Bride in a forest near the castle. The
violets were blooming and soft yellow primroses opened their eyes of
wonder to gaze on the prince and the princess. When they spoke one to
another the birds raised their sweet voices in song and the sun shone
fair and bright.

Said Angus: "Beautiful princess, I beheld you in a dream weeping tears
of sorrow."

Bride said: "Mighty prince, I beheld you in a dream riding over bens and
through glens in beauty and power."

Said Angus: "I have come to rescue you from Queen Beira, who has kept
you all winter long in captivity."

Bride said: "To me this is a day of great joy."

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Said Angus: "It will be a day of great joy to all mankind ever after
this."

That is why the first day of spring--the day on which Angus found the
princess--is called "Bride's Day". <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

Through the forest came a fair company of fairy ladies, who hailed Bride
as queen and bade welcome to Angus. Then the Fairy Queen waved her wand,
and Bride was transformed. As swiftly as the bright sun springs out from
behind a dark cloud, shedding beauty all round, so swiftly did Bride
appear in new splendour. Instead of ragged clothing, she then wore a
white robe adorned with spangles of shining silver. Over her heart
gleamed a star-like crystal, pure as her thoughts and bright as the joy
that Angus brought her. This gem is called "the guiding star of Bride ".
Her golden-brown hair, which hung down to her waist in gleaming curls,
was decked with fair spring flowers--snowdrops and daisies and primroses
and violets. Blue were her eyes, and her face had the redness and
whiteness of the wild rose of peerless beauty and tender grace. In her
right hand she carried a white wand entwined with golden corn-stalks,
and in her left a golden horn which is called the "Horn of Plenty".

The linnet was the first forest bird that hailed Bride in her beauty,
and the Fairy Queen said:

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Ever after this you shall be called the 'Bird
of Bride'." On the seashore the first bird that chirped with joy was the
oyster-catcher, and the Fairy Queen said: "Ever after this you shall be
called the 'Page of Bride'."

Then the Fairy Queen led Angus and Bride to her green-roofed underground
palace in the midst of the forest. As they went forward they came to a
river which was covered with ice. Bride put her fingers on the ice, and
the Ice Hag shrieked and fled.

A great feast was held in the palace of the Fairy Queen, and it was the
marriage feast of Bride, for Angus and she were wed. The fairies danced
and sang with joy, and all the world was moved to dance and sing with
them. This was how the first "Festival of Bride" came to be.

"Spring has come!" the shepherds cried; and they drove their flocks on
to the moors, where they were counted and blessed.

"Spring has come!" chattered the raven, and flew off to find moss for
her nest. The rook heard and followed after, and the wild duck rose from
amidst the reeds, crying: "Spring has come!"

Bride came forth from the fairy palace with Angus and waved her hand,
while Angus repeated magic spells. Then greater growth was given to the
grass, and all the world hailed Angus and Bride as king and queen.
Although they were

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

not beheld by mankind, yet their presence was everywhere felt throughout
Scotland.

Beira was wroth when she came to know that Angus had found Bride. She
seized her magic hammer and smote the ground unceasingly until it was
frozen hard as iron again--so hard that no herb or blade of grass could
continue to live upon its surface. Terrible was her wrath when she
beheld the grass growing. She knew well that when the grass flourished
and Angus and Bride were married, her authority would pass away. It was
her desire to keep her throne as long as possible.

"Bride is married, hail to Bride!" sang the birds.

"Angus is married, hail to Angus!" they sang also.

Beira heard the songs of the birds, and called to her hag servants:
"Ride north and ride south, ride east and ride west, and wage war
against Angus. I shall ride forth also."

Her servants mounted their shaggy goats and rode forth to do her
bidding. Beira mounted a black steed and set out in pursuit of Angus.
She rode fast and she rode hard. Black clouds swept over the sky as she
rode on, until at length she came to the forest in which the Fairy Queen
had her dwelling. All the fairies fled in terror into their green mound
and the doors were shut.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Angus looked up and beheld Beira drawing nigh.
He leapt on the back of his white steed, and lifted his young bride into
the saddle in front of him and fled away with her.

Angus rode westward over the hills and over the valleys and over the
sea, and Beira pursued him.

There is a rocky ravine on the island of Tiree, and Beira's black steed
jumped across it while pursuing the white steed of Angus. The hoofs of
the black steed made a gash on the rocks. To this day the ravine is
called "The Horse's Leap".

Angus escaped to the Green Isle of the West, and there he passed happy
days with Bride. But he longed to return to Scotland and reign as King
of Summer. Again and again he crossed the sea; and each time he reached
the land of glens and bens, the sun broke forth in brightness and the
birds sang merrily to welcome him.

Beira raised storm after storm to drive him away. First she called on
the wind named "The Whistle", which blew high and shrill, and brought
down rapid showers of cold hailstones. It lasted for three days, and
there was much sorrow and bitterness throughout the length and breadth
of Scotland. Sheep and lambs were killed on the moors, and horses and
cows perished also.

Angus fled, but he returned soon again. The next wind that Beira raised
to prolong her winter

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

reign was the "Sharp Billed Wind" which is called "Gobag". lasted for
nine days, and all the land was pierced by it, for it pecked and bit in
every nook and cranny like a sharp-billed bird.

Angus returned, and the Beira raised the eddy wind which is called "The
Sweeper". Its whirling gusts tore branches from the budding trees and
bright flowers from their stalks. All the time it blew, Beira kept
beating the ground with her magic hammer so as to keep the grass from
growing. But her efforts were in vain. Spring smiled in beauty all
around, and each time she turned away, wearied by her efforts, the sun
sprang forth in splendour. The small modest primroses opened their
petals in the sunshine, looking forth from cosy nooks that the wind,
called "Sweeper", was unable to reach. Angus fled, but he soon returned
again.

Beira was not yet, however, entirely without hope. Her efforts had
brought disaster to mankind, and the "Weeks of Leanness" came on. Food
became scarce. The fishermen were unable to venture to sea on account of
Beira's tempests, and could get no fish. In the night-time Beira and her
hags entered the dwellings of mankind, and stole away their stores of
food. It was, indeed, a sorrowful time.

Angus was moved with pity for mankind, and tried to fight the hags of
Beira. But the fierce

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

queen raised the "Gales of Complaint" to keep him away, and they raged
in fury until the first week of March. Horses and cattle died for want
of food, because the fierce winds blew down stacks of fodder and
scattered them over the lochs and the ocean.

Angus, however, waged a fierce struggle against the hag servants, and at
length he drove them away to the north, where they fumed and fretted
furiously.

Beira was greatly alarmed, and she made her last great effort to subdue
the Powers of Spring. She waved her magic hammer, and smote the clouds
with it. Northward she rode on her black steed, and gathered her
servants together, and called to them, saying: "Ride southward with me,
all of you, and scatter our enemies before us."

Out of the bleak dark north they rode in a single pack. With them came
the Big Black Tempest. It seemed then as if winter had returned in full
strength and would abide for ever. But even Beira and her hags had to
take rest. On a dusky evening they crouched down together on the side of
a bare mountain, and, when they did so, a sudden calm fell upon the land
and the sea.

"Ha! ha!" laughed the wild duck who hated the hag. "Ha! ha! I am still
alive, and so are my six ducklings."

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

"Have patience! idle chatterer," answered the Hag. "I am not yet done."

That night she borrowed three days from Winter which had not been used,
for Angus had previously borrowed for Winter three days from August. The
three spirits of the borrowed days were tempest spirits, and came
towards Beira mounted on black hogs. She spoke to them, saying: "Long
have you been bound! Now I set you at liberty."

One after another, on each of the three days that followed, the spirits
went forth riding the black hogs. They brought snow and hail and fierce
blasts of wind. Snow whitened the moors and filled the furrows of
ploughed land, rivers rose in flood, and great trees were shattered and
uprooted. The duck was killed, and so were her six ducklings; sheep and
cattle perished, and many human beings were killed on land and drowned
at sea. The days on which these things happened are called the "Three
Hog Days".

Beira's reign was now drawing to a close. She found herself unable to
combat any longer against the power of the new life that was rising in
every vein of the land. The weakness of extreme old age crept upon her,
and she longed once again to drink of the waters of the Well of Youth.
When, on a bright March morning, she beheld Angus riding over the hills
on his white steed,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

scattering her fierce hag servants before him, she fled away in despair.
Ere she went she threw her magic hammer beneath a holly tree, and that
is the reason why no grass grows under the holly trees.

Beira's black steed went northward with her in flight. As it leapt over
Loch Etive it left the marks of its hoofs on the side of a rocky
mountain, and the spot is named to this day "Horse-shoes". She did not
rein up her steed until she reached the island of Skye, where she found
rest on the summit of the "Old Wife's Ben" (Ben-e-Caillich) at
Broadford. There she sat, gazing steadfastly across the sea, waiting
until the day and night would be of equal length. All that equal day she
wept tears of sorrow for her lost power, and when night came on she went
westward over the sea to Green Island. At the dawn of the day that
followed she drank the magic waters of the Well of Youth.

On that day which is of equal length with the night, Angus came to
Scotland with Bride, and they were hailed as king and queen of the
unseen beings. They rode from south to north in the morning and
forenoon, and from north to south in the afternoon and evening. A gentle
wind went with them, blowing towards the north from dawn till midday,
and towards the south from midday till sunset.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

It was on that day that Bride dipped her fair white hands in the high
rivers and lochs which still retained ice. When she did so, the Ice Hag
fell into a deep sleep from which she could not awake until summer and
autumn were over and past.

The grass grew quickly after Angus began to reign as king. Seeds were
sown, and the people called on Bride to grant them a good harvest. Ere
long the whole land was made beautiful with spring flowers of every hue.

Angus had a harp of gold with silver strings, and when he played on it
youths and maidens followed the sound of the music through the woods.
Bards sang his praises and told that he kissed lovers, and that when
they parted one from another to return to their homes, the kisses became
invisible birds that hovered round their heads and sang sweet songs of
love, and whispered memories dear. It was thus that one bard sang of
him:--

When softly blew the south wind o'er the sea,  
Lisping of springtime hope and summer pride,  
And the rough reign of Beira ceased to be,  
         Angus the Ever-Young,  
The beauteous god of love, the golden-haired,  
         The blue mysterious-eyed,  
Shone like the star of morning high among  
         The stars that shrank afraid  
When dawn proclaimed the triumph that he shared <span id="page_49">p.
49</span>  
         With Bride the peerless maid.  
Then winds of violet sweetness rose and sighed,  
         *No conquest is compared*  
*To Love's transcendent joys that never fade*.

In the old days, when there was no Calendar in Scotland, the people
named the various periods of winter and spring, storm and calm, as they
are given above. The story of the struggle between Angus and Beira is
the story of the struggle between spring and winter, growth and decay,
light and darkness, and warmth and cold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[38:1](tsm05.htm#fr_5.md) The larch is the first
tree in Scotland which turns a bright green in springtime.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[40:1](tsm05.htm#fr_6.md) February 1st old style,
February 13th new style.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Combats that Never End](tsm06.md)
