[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tsm11)  [Next](tsm13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### CHAPTER IX

# A Vision of the Dead

There once dwelt in Nithsdale a woman who was enabled by fairy aid to
see the spirits of the dead in the Other World. This was how it came
about. One day she sat spinning wool in her house. Her baby lay in a
cradle beside her, listening to the soft humming sound of the spinning
wheel and her mother's sweet song. Suddenly a rustling, like the
rustling of dead leaves in the wind, was heard at the door. The woman
looked up and saw a beautiful lady, clad in green and carrying a baby.
She entered, and smiling sweetly, spoke and said: "Will you nurse my
bonnie baby until I return?"

The woman answered: "Yes, I shall do that."

She took the baby in her arms, and the lady went away, promising to
return. But the day went past and night came on, and still she did not
come back for her child. The woman wondered greatly, but she wondered
even more next morning when she awoke to find beside her bed beautiful
new clothes for her children, and some

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

delicious cakes. Being very poor she was glad to dress her children in
the new clothes, and to find that they fitted well. The cakes were of
wheaten bread and had a honey flavour. It was a great delight to the
children to eat them.

The lady did not return that day or the next day. Weeks went past, and
the woman nursed the strange child. Months went past, and still the lady
stayed away. On many a morning wheaten cakes with honey flavour were
found in the house, and when the children's clothes were nearly worn
out, new clothing was provided for them as mysteriously as before.

Summer came on, and one evening the lady, clad in green, again entered
the house. A child who was playing on the floor stretched forth her
hands to grasp the shining silver spangles that adorned her gown, but,
to his surprise, his hands passed through them as if they were sunbeams.
The woman perceived this, and knew that her visitor was a fairy.

Said the fairy lady: "You have been kind to my bonnie baby; I will now
take her away."

The woman was sorry to part with the child, and said: "You have a right
to her, but I love her dearly."

Said the fairy: "Come with me, and I shall show you my house."

The woman went outside with the fairy. They

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

walked through a wood together, and then began to climb a green hill on
the sunny side. When they were half-way to the top, the fairy said
something which the woman did not understand. No sooner had she spoken
than the turf on a bank in front of them lifted up and revealed a door.
This door opened, and the two entered through the doorway. When they did
so, the turf came down and the door was shut.

The woman found herself in a bare chamber which was dimly lighted.

"Now you shall see my home," said the fairy woman, who took from her
waist-belt a goblet containing a green liquid. She dropped three drops
of this liquid in the woman's left eye, and said: "Look now."

The woman looked, and was filled with wonder. A beautiful country
stretched out in front of her. There were green hills fringed by trees,
crystal streams flashing in sunshine, and a lake that shone like
burnished silver. Between the hills there lay a field of ripe barley.

The fairy then dropped three drops of the green liquid in the woman's
right eye, and said: "Look now."

The woman looked, and she saw men and women she had known in times past,
cutting the barley and gathering fruit from the trees.

She cried out: "I see many who once lived on

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

earth and have long been dead. What are they doing here?"

Said the fairy: "These people are suffering punishment for their evil
deeds."

When she had spoken thus, the fairy woman passed her hand over the
woman's eyes, and the vision of green hills and harvest fields and
reapers vanished at once. She found herself standing once more in the
bare, dimly-lighted chamber. Then the fairy gave her gifts of cloth and
healing ointments, and, leading her to the door, bade her farewell. The
door opened, the turf was lifted up, and the woman left the fairy's
dwelling and returned to her own home.

For a time she kept the power of seeing the fairies as they went to and
fro near her house. But one day she spoke to one of them, and the fairy
asked: "With which eye do you see me?"

Said the woman: "I see you with both my eyes."

The fairy breathed on her eyes, and then was lost to sight. Never again
did the woman behold the fairies, for the power that had been given her
was taken away from her eyes by this fairy to whom she had spoken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Story of Michael Scott](tsm13)
