[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Shinto](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](kgsh4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

# PART III <span class="small">CRITICAL NOTES</span>

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

# CRITICAL NOTES

 <span id="note_1"></span>[1](kgsh4.htm#fr_1). Japan was so termed in
ancient times.

 <span id="note_2"></span>[2](kgsh4.htm#fr_2). *I.e.*,
Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami or the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Goddess. The
Goddess has an aspect of the deification of the sun as well as a trace
of a human ancestress who once actually existed.

 <span id="note_3"></span>[3](kgsh4.htm#fr_3). In ancient Japanese
mythology, the name of the Moon-God is Tsukuyomi-no-Mikoto or
His-Augustness-Moon-Night-Possessor (or Moon-Night-Darkness), *i.e.*,
the God of the Night-Dominion.

 <span id="note_4"></span>[4](kgsh4.htm#fr_4). Correctly expressed,
Takehaya-Susano-O-no-Mikoto or His-Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness
is surely the deification of the rainstorm, although we admit that there
are also some traces of an historical human being in him.

 <span id="note_5"></span>[5](kgsh4.htm#fr_5). *Vide* Dr. G. Katō’s
Article on *Ame-no-Minakanushi-no-Kami* in *T.A.S.J.*, as regards this
God, who probably is the highest God worshipped in the so-called
primitive monotheism of Japan.

 <span id="note_6"></span>[6](kgsh4.htm#fr_6). (1) In the Maeda
manuscripts, (2) in the manuscript of the *Kogoshūi* to which reference
is made by Mikannagi-Kiyonao (a Shintō priest of the Ise Shrine), as
being preserved in the house of a certain Kawasaki-Kiyoatsu, (3) in the
book *Kogoshūi-Genyosho* by Tatsuno-Hirochika (Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">I</span>, p. 10), (4) in the textual passage of the
*Kogoshūi* quoted in the *Ruiju-Jingi-Hongen* <span id="page_58">p.
58</span> (Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">III</span>, p. 21.
The *Zoku-Zoku-Gunsho-Ruijū*), (5) in the *Gengenshū* (Japanese edition,
vol. <span class="small">II</span>, p. 11), etc., we read:

 “When Heaven and Earth separated, the God named
Ame-no-Minakanushi-no-Kami, who was born in the midst of Heaven, had
three sons of whom the eldest, Takami-Musubi-no-Kami, *i.e.*,
Sumeragamutsu-Kamurogi-no-Mikoto, is the ancestor of the Tomo and Saeki
families; the second son, Tsuhaya-Musubi-no-Kami, *i.e.*,
Sumeragamutsu-Kamuromi-no-Mikoto, is the ancestor of the Nakatomi family
of Asomi rank; and the youngest one, Kamumi-Musubi-no-Kami, is the
ancestor of the Ki family of Atae rank.”

 In the divine genealogy of the *Sendai-Kuji-Hongi*,
Tsuhaya-Musubi-no-Mikoto (the word “Mikoto” is used indifferently with
“Kami”) has a son, called Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto, who is the ancestor
of the Nakatomi family of Muraji rank (*I.e.*, the seventh of the eight
classes of nobility created by the Emperor Temmu in <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 684, and given to the heads of certain
corporations. *Vide* the *Sendai-Kuji-Hongi*. The *Kokushi-Taikei*,
Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">VII</span>, p. 177).

 In the *Shinsen-Shōjiroku* or *Catalogue of Family Names Newly Compiled
by Prince Manta*, the writer states that Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto is the
great grandson of Tsuhaya-Musubi-no-Kami (*Vide* the late Prof. Kurita,
The *Shinsen-Shōjiroku-Kōshō* or *Commentary on the Catalogue of Family
Names Newly Compiled by Prince* <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> *Manta*,
Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">VIII</span>, pp. 537, 538.
vol. <span class="small">XVI</span>, p. 1017).

 <span id="note_7"></span>[7](kgsh4.htm#fr_7). *Vide* Sir Ernest Satow’s
Article on the *Toshigoi-Matsuri-no-Norito* or *Shintō Ritual of Praying
for Harvest*, elucidating the meaning of the names
Sumeragamutsu-Kamurogi and Kamuromi-no-Mikoto (*T.A.S.J.*, vol. <span
class="small">VII</span>, p. 114).

 <span id="note_8"></span>[8](kgsh4.htm#fr_8). The second of the eight
classes of Court Nobles established by the Emperor Temmu (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 684). The eight classes are:—the first Mabito,
the second Asomi, the third Sukune, the fourth Imiki, the fifth
Michi-no-Shi, the sixth Omi, the seventh Muraji, and the eighth Inaki.
*Vide* W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">II</span>. p.
365.

 <span id="note_9"></span>[9](kgsh4.htm#fr_9). In the *Nihongi*, he is
called Amatsu-Hiko-Hikoho-no-Ninigi-no-Mikoto. *Vide* W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 64.

 <span id="note_10"></span>[10](kgsh4.htm#fr_10). The third of the eight
classes of Court Nobles. The title implies an hereditary rank of
nobility.

 <span id="note_11"></span>[11](kgsh4.htm#fr_11). In the *Nihongi*
version, the ancestor of the Imbe family of Ki-I Province. *Vide* W. G.
Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 81.

 <span id="note_12"></span>[12](kgsh4.htm#fr_12). Ha-Akarutama in one
account of the *Nihongi* appears to be Kushi-Akarutama-no-Mikoto. *Vide*
W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 37. The
late Prof. Kurita of the Tōkyō Imperial University identified
Kushi-Akarutama-no-Mikoto with Toyo-tama-Hime-no-Mikoto of the *Nihongi*
(*ibid.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 47) and Ame-no-Akarutama
of the same book (*ibid.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 49).
*Vide* the late Prof. Kurita’s *Shinsen-Shōjiroku-Kōshō* or *Commentary*
<span id="page_60">p. 60</span> *on the Catalogue of Family Names Newly
Compiled by Prince Manta* (Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">XI</span>, p. 791).

 The Tamatsukuri or Jewel-making family is a sub-division of the Imbe
family resident in Izumo Province.

 <span id="note_13"></span>[13](kgsh4.htm#fr_13). In ancient Japan, a
rare jewel being regarded as a divine object, possessed a magical
influence, and was a kind of fetish; so, for the simple-minded Japanese
of old, it was possible that through the magical virtue of the jewels a
child was born.

 In the *Sendai-Kuji-Hongi*, the Japanese reader is very familiar with a
certain jewel of magical virtue, called “Makaru-Kaeshi-no-Tama,” *i.e.*,
the “Jewel endowed with a miraculous power of restoring the dead to
life” (*Vide* the *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">VII</span>, pp. 321, 322).

 The *Nihongi* also mentions two notable magical gems, which
Hikohohodemi-no-Mikoto used as amulets, talismans or charms, in time of
peril. They are known as the Shiomitsu-Ni and Shiohiru-Ni, *i.e.*, the
Tide-flowing and Tide-ebbing Jewels (*Vide* W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol.
<span class="small">I</span>, p. 94).

 The *Kojiki* mentions a divinized jewel, which being the necklace of
the God Izanagi was actually regarded as a divinity called
Mikuratana-no-Kami (B. H. Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*, p. 43).

 From the *Kojiki* we learn that the divine emblem of the Himekoso
Shrine is a crimson jewel (B. H. Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*, p. 258).

 <span id="note_14"></span>[14](kgsh4.htm#fr_14). Akatsu-no-Mikoto is an
abbreviation of Masaka-Akatsu-Kachihayahi-Ame-no-Oshihomimi-no-Mikoto,
<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> usually abbreviated as
Ame-no-Oshihomimi-no-Mikoto (B. H. Chamberlain, *ibid.*, pp. 48, 93).

 As regards the expression “wakigo” in connection with this, *vide* K.
A. Florenz’s German translation of the *Kogoshūi* (*Die Historischen
Quellen der Shintō-Religion*, S. 448) and Nasa-Katsutaka’s *Giosai*.
Imbe-no-Hironari’s etymological explanation of the words “wakigo” and
“wakago” is hardly credible.

 <span id="note_15"></span>[15](kgsh4.htm#fr_15). This passage will bear
three constructions; *viz.*, the first being that of the author of the
*Kogoshūi*: Susano-O’s “Setting up rods at the rice-fields” may indicate
that he claimed the possession of the rice-fields. Sometimes he used
dividing ropes, in place of rods, as signs of ownership. Secondly, as
Aston thinks, “Setting up combs at the rice-fields” might be interpreted
as having a magical meaning, but this explanation is not quite
satisfactory (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>,
p. 48). And thirdly, we ourselves rather agree with Dr. K. A. Florenz
who interpreted the action of erecting rods in the deep mud of the
rice-fields to be simply a mischievous design to injure the barefooted
Japanese peasantry labouring in the paddy fields (K. A. Florenz, English
translation of the *Ōharai-no-Norito*. *T.A.S.J.*, vol. <span
class="small">XXVII</span>, pp. 80, 81).

 <span id="note_16"></span>[16](kgsh4.htm#fr_16). The author of the
*Kogoshūi*, misled by the Chinese character “he” (戶) which literally
means “door,” gave the above-quoted interpretation, but the true meaning
of the word <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> “kusohe” is simply “to
discharge excreta,” and in the present instance, as regards both the
*Kojiki* and *Nihongi* accounts, it can be readily seen that the rude
Susano-O-no-Kami’s bad intention was to pollute his divine sister’s
Sacred Hall before the Autumnal Harvest Festival, by evacuating his
excreta in that building

 <span id="note_17"></span>[17](kgsh4.htm#fr_17).
“Ame-no-Yasu-no-Kawara” in Japanese. Aston translates as “The Bank of
the Tranquil River of Heaven,” but he seems to have been misled by the
Chinese characters used in the *Nihongi*, and so to have rendered them
too literally. The true meaning seems to be that which we have rendered
into English in the present text.

 <span id="note_18"></span>[18](kgsh4.htm#fr_18). According to the
*Ōtonohogai-no-Norito* or *Ritual of the Luck-wishing of the
Great-Palace* (*Ritual for Bringing Good Fortune to the Great Palace*),
not “measures of varying size,” but “consecrated axes, large and small,”
may seem to be meant. *Vide* Sir E. Satow, *Ancient Japanese Rituals*,
part <span class="small">III</span>, No. 8 (*T.A.S.J.*).

 <span id="note_19"></span>[19](kgsh4.htm#fr_19). According to the
*Nihongi* (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p.
43), the Yasakani, or Yasaka Jewels, *i.e.*, the Ever-bright Curved
Jewels.

 <span id="note_20"></span>[20](kgsh4.htm#fr_20). The identity of this
tree is uncertain. Some Japanese commentators say that the word “oke”
was probably inserted here by mistake.

 <span id="note_21"></span>[21](kgsh4.htm#fr_21). With regard to the
parallel passages in the *Kojiki* and the *Nihongi*, “ukefuse” signifies
“to put a tub bottom upwards,” <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> and in
this instance Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto performed a divine dance on the
tub, stamping until it resounded like a drum, and thereby coming into
union with the Divine, *i.e.*, as though she were herself possessed by
the divine spirit. The original expression “ukefuse” never conveys the
idea of an oath, which the author of the *Kogoshūi* erroneously
accepted.

 <span id="note_22"></span>[22](kgsh4.htm#fr_22). “Shimenawa” is the
ordinary form of the rather archaic “shirikumenawa.” According to B. H.
Chamberlain, in perfect agreement with the learned Moto-Ori,
“shirikumenawa” denotes straw rope so constructed that the roots of the
straw project and are visible at the end of the rope. Moto-Ori’s
explanation shows that this is more likely to be the proper significance
of the word than “back-limiting-rope” (“shirihe-kagiri-me-nawa”) which,
as Kamo-Mabuchi had previously suggested, might have originated when the
event narrated in the legend was described (B. H. Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*,
p. 59). According to our view, “shime” may mean “to forbid,” just as
“shimeno” denotes a “forbidden field,” so that the land encircled by a
rope is simply taboo, *i.e.*, a sacred precinct forbidden to be
approached or trodden upon by ordinary unclean feet. Since the entrance
to the Rock-Cave was barred by a similar rope, this “shimeno” was
probably a tabooed forbidden ground or sanctuary, which laymen must not
enter. We cannot understand the explanation given in a note in the
*Kogoshūi* that this rope represents “the sun’s shadow.”

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

 <span id="note_23"></span>[23](kgsh4.htm#fr_23). *I.e.*, the Goddess of
the Great August Palace. Sir Ernest Satow considers that this Goddess is
simply a “Personification of the successive generations of the Mikado’s
consorts” (*T.A.S.J.*, vol. <span class="small">VII</span>, p. 122).
*Vide* note [56](#note_56).

 <span id="note_24"></span>[24](kgsh4.htm#fr_24). Literally, “tayo”
means “abundant, strong or powerful,” and “iwa” “rock,” but in this case
its true meaning is “strong, enduring, eternal,” and “mado” is a
“window,” or “gate.” So Toyo-Iwamado-no-Mikoto signifies “the Powerful
God of the Strong Gate.”

 <span id="note_25"></span>[25](kgsh4.htm#fr_25).
Kushi-Iwamado-no-Mikoto means “the Wonderful God of the Strong Gate.”

 <span id="note_26"></span>[26](kgsh4.htm#fr_26). The culture hero
Ōnamuchi-no-Kami is better known as Ōkuninushi-no-Kami, who first ruled
over Izumo Province, as a local god.

 <span id="note_27"></span>[27](kgsh4.htm#fr_27). Nowadays it is very
difficult to ascertain the location of the Tokoyo-no-Kuni, for it is
referred to in different ways by the *Kojiki* and the *Nihongi*. In our
opinion, the word Tokoyo-no-Kuni possibly had three different meanings:
the first, literally speaking, being the “Eternal Land,” or the “Land of
Eternal Bliss,” or “Paradise”; the second, the “Land of Eternal
Night-Darkness” or “Underworld”; and the third, a most distant country,
although it exists somewhere on the earth, very far away from Japan.

 <span id="note_28"></span>[28](kgsh4.htm#fr_28). According to the
*Nihongi*, this Edict was issued by Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami alone (W. G.
Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 77).

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

 <span id="note_29"></span>[29](kgsh4.htm#fr_29). Both the *Kojiki* and
*Nihongi* accounts of this tradition mention three Sacred Treasures,
namely, the Jewels, the Mirror, and the Sword, which have been handed
down in the Imperial family as the Divine Heirlooms, without whose
possession no Emperor can legitimately ascend the Throne of Japan.
However, the *Ōtonohogai*—a Shintō Ritual in the *Engishiki* (10th
century <span class="small">A.D.</span>)—mentions only the Sacred Mirror
and the Divine Sword, in this agreeing with the *Jingiryō* or *Shintō
Administrative Law* in the 8th century <span class="small">A.D.</span>
Clearly, therefore, Imbe-no-Hironari mentioned this fact, as it is
stated in the *Jingiryō* and in the *Ōtonohogai*, but the oldest
traditions clearly include the Jewels in the Divine Imperial Heirloom,
and that there are three is the universally held belief as witnessed by
the expression “Sanshu-no-Shinki” (Three Kinds of Divine Insignia). In
the *Nihongi* it is not two deities (Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami and
Takami-Musubi-no-Kami), but only one deity (Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami) that
confers the Divine Imperial Heirloom upon the Heavenly Grandson (*Vide*
W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 76).

 <span id="note_30"></span>[30](kgsh4.htm#fr_30). In one account the
*Nihongi* ascribes this Edict to Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami alone, and he who
receives her command is not the Heavenly Grandson but her son
Ame-no-Oshihomimi-no-Mikoto. *Vide* W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, p. 83.

 <span id="note_31"></span>[31](kgsh4.htm#fr_31). In both the *Kojiki*
and *Nihongi* accounts, five instead of three heavenly attendants,
called the “Gods of the Five Hereditary Corporations”, are mentioned—the
two additional divinities being Ishikoritome-no-Mikoto and
Tamanoya-no-Mikoto.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

 <span id="note_32"></span>[32](kgsh4.htm#fr_32). The *Nihongi* ascribes
the first half (“We.....welfare of the Heavenly Grandson”) of this Edict
to Takami-Musubi-no-Kami alone. *Vide* W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, pp. 81, 82.

 <span id="note_33"></span>[33](kgsh4.htm#fr_33). In the *Nihongi*, the
words of this Edict, “Guarding him in your attendance under the same
roof against all emergencies,” are ascribed to Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami alone
(W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 83).

 <span id="note_34"></span>[34](kgsh4.htm#fr_34). The passage, “Serving
him with the rice of the consecrated above,” is ascribed to
Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami alone in the *Nihongi* account. *Vide* W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 83.

 <span id="note_35"></span>[35](kgsh4.htm#fr_35). Certain commentators
on the *Kujiki* (*Chronicles of the Old Matters of Former Ages*) explain
that “those Gods” are the Thirty-Two Gods, mentioned in the *Kujiki*,
who, besides the “Gods of the Five Hereditary Corporations,” accompanied
the Heavenly Grandson towards the earth.

 <span id="note_36"></span>[36](kgsh4.htm#fr_36). The *Nihongi* ascribes
the Edict to Takami-Musubi-no-Kami alone. *Vide* W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*,
vol. <span class="small">I</span>,. p. 81.

 <span id="note_37"></span>[37](kgsh4.htm#fr_37). *I.e.*,
Chimata-no-Kami.

 <span id="note_38"></span>[38](kgsh4.htm#fr_38). Later, Saruta-Hiko,
Ame-no-Uzume, Chimata-no-Kami (or the God Yachimata-Hiko and the Goddess
Yachimata-Hime), Sae-no-Kami, Dōsojin, and Funado-no-Kami constitute a
class of Japanese phallic gods (as well as guardian gods of travellers
and <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> divine warders against epidemic
diseases), and curiously enough Saruta-Hiko, an ancient phallic god, is
represented as a moral teacher in the writings of certain authors
(*e.g.*, Yamazaki-Ansai) during the Tokugawa Régime.

 <span id="note_39"></span>[39](kgsh4.htm#fr_39). *Cf.* B. H.
Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*, p. 110, note 33 and p. 113, note 2.

 <span id="note_40"></span>[40](kgsh4.htm#fr_40). According to the
compilers of the *Nihongi*, this is
Hiko-nagisatake-Ugaya-Fuki-Aezu-no-Mikoto, who is no other than the
father of Japan’s first human Emperor, Jimmu-Tennō, whose enthronement
ceremony took place, according to tradition, in 660 B.C.

 <span id="note_41"></span>[41](kgsh4.htm#fr_41). Most modern scholars,
whether native or foreign, are of opinion that the reign of that Emperor
really began some hundreds of years later.

 <span id="note_42"></span>[42](kgsh4.htm#fr_42). The Emperor Jimmu
started on an expedition for the so-called “Eastern Conquest” from
Kyūshū, the western districts of Japan, to Yamato in the east, so the
“eastern provinces” here referred to denotes the Yamato districts.

 <span id="note_43"></span>[43](kgsh4.htm#fr_43). By this Nagasune-Hiko
is meant. He was one of the most stubborn opponents of the Emperor Jimmu
and was killed by Nigihayahi-no-Mikoto, according to the *Nihongi*
account (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p.
128).

 <span id="note_44"></span>[44](kgsh4.htm#fr_44). According to the
*Nihongi*, this man met the Emperor Jimmu at the port of Hayasui in
Bungo Province and was employed in the service of the Imperial army
whilst *en route* to Usa in Buzen Province, and afterwards he was
ordered to ascend Mt. Kagu in <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> Yamato in
disguise and there obtain a small lump of earth which it was
indispensable to use when invoking the gods for victory. He succeeded in
bringing it back safely to the Imperial camp despite the vigilance of
his foes (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p.
112).

 <span id="note_45"></span>[45](kgsh4.htm#fr_45). *Vide* W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 116.

 <span id="note_46"></span>[46](kgsh4.htm#fr_46). In archaic Japanese
“mi-araka” means “august or divine abode,” *i.e.*, “Imperial Palace.”

 <span id="note_47"></span>[47](kgsh4.htm#fr_47). Here the Sovereign
Grandson means the Emperor Jimmu.

 <span id="note_48"></span>[48](kgsh4.htm#fr_48). “Miki” means “august
wood,” *i.e.*, “sacred timbers.”

 <span id="note_49"></span>[49](kgsh4.htm#fr_49). This is another Awa in
the Kantō, in contradistinction to that of Shikoku, where the
descendants of Hiwashi-no-Mikoto dwelt. It is often called Bōshū, and is
now a portion of Chiba Prefecture. So in this text Awa-Kōri means the
present Awa or Bōshū Province.

 <span id="note_50"></span>[50](kgsh4.htm#fr_50). *I.e.*,
Takami-Musubi-no-Kami and Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami, according to the author of
the *Kogoshūi*.

 <span id="note_51"></span>[51](kgsh4.htm#fr_51). *Vide* [p.
17](kgsh4.htm#page_17).

 <span id="note_52"></span>[52](kgsh4.htm#fr_52). *Vide* [p.
17](kgsh4.htm#page_17).

 <span id="note_53"></span>[53](kgsh4.htm#fr_53). This is a divine
spirit who takes charge of a person’s soul and prevents it from going
astray, leaving its body behind. Hence, we have the
Mitamashizume-no-Matsuri or Ceremony for Calming the August Spirit of an
Emperor at the Enthronement <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> Ceremony
(*Vide* W. G. Aston, *Shintō,* or *the Way of the Gods*, p. 292).

 <span id="note_54"></span>[54](kgsh4.htm#fr_54). This is a Divine
Spirit who inspires men with life.

 <span id="note_55"></span>[55](kgsh4.htm#fr_55). Through the influence
of this Divine Spirit, one’s physical health is received and
invigorated. This God is probably another aspect of the Divine Spirit
Iku-Musubi.

 <span id="note_56"></span>[56](kgsh4.htm#fr_56). *Vide* pp.
[22](kgsh4.htm#page_22), [64](#page_64). In the Shintō Ritual of
*Ōtonohogai* (*Luck-wishing or Blessing of the Great Palace*) or *Shintō
Prayer to the Guardian Gods of the Imperial Palace* the favour of the
same Goddess is invoked for the protection of the Imperial Palace from
every ill. Hirata identified this Goddess with Ame-no-Uzume or
Miyabi-no-Kami (Hirata-Atsutane, The *Miyami-no-Kami-Godenki*. The
C*ollected Works*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">XV</span>,
note 20 b).

 <span id="note_57"></span>[57](kgsh4.htm#fr_57). This is a divine son
of Ōkuninushi-no-Kami of Izumo Province, who, on Kotoshironushi’s stern
warning, willingly sacrificed his life through loyalty to the Emperor,
after surrendering the governance of his country to the Heavenly
Grandson Ninigi-no-Mikoto. So to the end Kotoshironushi-no-Kami remained
exceedingly faithful to the Imperial cause, and therefore according to
some Japanese commentators he was afterwards looked up to as one of the
guardian spirits of the Imperial House.

 <span id="note_58"></span>[58](kgsh4.htm#fr_58). *I.e.*, the Goddess of
Food; hence some of the Japanese commentators have identified her with
Toyouke-Hime or Toyouke-Daijin of the Outer Shrine in Ise.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

 <span id="note_59"></span>[59](kgsh4.htm#fr_59). *I.e.*, the Shintō
Priestesses at the Imperial Court who were attached to the Jingikan or
Department for the Worship of the Shintō Gods.

 <span id="note_60"></span>[60](kgsh4.htm#fr_60). Kushi-Iwamado-no-Kami
(*supra* [note 25](#note_25)), the Wonderful God of the Strong Gate,
*i.e.*, the Divine-Wonderful-Strong-Gate-Keeper. Toyo-Iwamado-no-Kami
(*supra* [note 24](#note_24)), the Powerful God of the Strong Gate,
*i.e.*, the Divine-Abundant-Strong-Gate-Keeper. Moto-Ori suggests that
either name is used in the *Kojiki* (Moto-Ori, The *Kojiki-Den* or
Commentary on the *Kojiki*, vol. <span class="small">XV</span>. The
*Collected Works*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">I</span>,
p. 877) to indicate one and the same God, Ame-no-Iwatowake-no-Kami. Both
Gods are divine guardians of the Imperial Gates, according to one of the
Shintō Rituals of the *Engishiki* or *Institutes of the Engi Period*
(<span class="small">A.D.</span> 901-923). As regards the eight deities
enshrined at the Jingikan, *i.e.*, the Department for the Worship of the
Shintō Gods, Sir Ernest Satow’s learned comments deserve our attention
(*Vide* *T.A.S.J.*, vol. <span class="small">VII</span>, p. 109 and pp.
120-123).

 <span id="note_61"></span>[61](kgsh4.htm#fr_61). What the “God of
Ikushima” really means is not very clear, but it appears to be the chief
local guardian spirit by whose virtue the locality or country (region or
island) exists.

 <span id="note_62"></span>[62](kgsh4.htm#fr_62). *I.e.*, Japan, as then
known.

 <span id="note_63"></span>[63](kgsh4.htm#fr_63). The meaning of the
word “Ikasuri” is a burning question in learned disputations, but it
seems to us that the Gods are special guardian spirits of the Imperial
Court-Grounds. According to the commentators Ikebe and Kubo, “Ikasuri”
is <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> “Igashiri” which means “dwelling
place,” hence the word “Ikasuri” in the text means the grounds of the
Imperial Court, and the author of the *Kogoshūi* probably understood by
it the special guardian spirits of the Imperial Court-Grounds.

 <span id="note_64"></span>[64](kgsh4.htm#fr_64). The sword here
referred to is the Murakumo Sword, which Susano-O-no-Mikoto found in the
tail of the monster serpent when he slew it in Izumo; and the
Yata-no-Kagami or Eight-hand-span or Large Mirror is believed to be the
same mirror which Ishikoritome-no-Mikoto constructed and with which he
induced the Sun-Goddess Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami to quit her retreat in the
Rock-Cave and restore blessings to mankind by illuminating the heavens
and the earth with the radiance of her bounteous light.

 <span id="note_65"></span>[65](kgsh4.htm#fr_65). This Ritual is
included in the *Engishiki* or *Institutes of the Engi Period*. *Vide*
Sir E. Satow’s English translation of the same (*T.A.S.J.*, vol. <span
class="small">IX</span>, p. 190).

 <span id="note_66"></span>[66](kgsh4.htm#fr_66). By this
Imbe-no-Hironari may mean either some other book than the *Kogoshūi*
that he himself wrote, or a book very well known to him, but the reader
should not mistake it for the *Engishiki*, which was not yet compiled in
Hironari’s time.

 <span id="note_67"></span>[67](kgsh4.htm#fr_67). The case is similar to
the above.

 <span id="note_68"></span>[68](kgsh4.htm#fr_68). The heavenly offences
are such, for example, as were committed by Susano-O-no-Mikoto, brother
of the Sun-Goddess Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami, in Heaven.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

 <span id="note_69"></span>[69](kgsh4.htm#fr_69). The earthly offences
mentioned in the *Engishiki* or *Institutes of the Engi Period* are the
following: “Abnormal offences against nature, such as cutting the living
skin; cutting the dead skin; being an albino; being affected with
excrescences; the offence of a son’s intercourse with his own mother, or
that of a father with his own daughter; the offence of one’s cohabiting
with both a mother and her daughter; the offence of cohabiting with
animals; calamity caused by crawling worms (or accidents through being
bitten by snakes or centipedes, etc.); calamity brought by the gods on
high (or calamity sent by the Thunder-Gods, *i.e.*, being struck by
lightning); calamity caused by the birds on high (calamity caused, or
damage done, by birds in the air); killing animals belonging to other
people; the offence of using magical incantations.”

 I have here taken the liberty to quote with slight alteration from Dr.
K. A. Florenz’s English translation of the *Ōharai-no-Norito* or *Ritual
of the Great Purification* (*T.A.S.J.*, vol.<span
class="small">XXVII</span>, p. 61).

 <span id="note_70"></span>[70](kgsh4.htm#fr_70). *Vide* *ibid.*, the
*Ōharai-no-Norito* or *Ritual of the Great Purification* (*T.A.S.J.*,
vol.<span class="small">XXVII</span>).

 <span id="note_71"></span>[71](kgsh4.htm#fr_71). *Vide* [p.
30](kgsh4.htm#page_30) *supra*.

 <span id="note_72"></span>[72](kgsh4.htm#fr_72). The present
Shiki-no-Kami and Shiki-no-Shimo in Yamato Province.

 <span id="note_73"></span>[73](kgsh4.htm#fr_73). This old village,
which the late Dr. Yoshida-Tōgo mentions in his book
*Dainihon-Chimei-Jisho* or *Dictionary of the Geographical Names in
Japan Considered Historically* (Japanese <span id="page_73">p. 73</span>
edition, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 271), is not yet
identified. It was possibly located at Chihara in Ota-Mura, according to
the *Shigaku-Zosshi* or *Historical Magazine* referred to in the same
book of Dr. Yoshida-Tōgo.

 <span id="note_74"></span>[74](kgsh4.htm#fr_74). The meaning of this
song is not quite clear. Even the Japanese commentators find
difficulties in apprehending it, and differ in their explanations. The
song may mean:—

 “What a delightfully happy evening this grand banquet gives us
courtiers, who at the Ceremony of the Removing of the Divine Insignia
greatly enjoy ourselves throughout the whole night! O how auspicious is
the snow scene this night!”

 Or, the song may be read as follows:—

 “We courtiers present at the Ceremony of the Removal of the Divine
Insignia now enjoy great pleasure at the grand banquet throughout the
whole night in the fine sacred Yuki Hall!”

 As we see above, some commentators understand “snow” by the word
“yuki,” whilst others interpret it as the name of a Shintō Worship Hall
(or Pavilion), “Yuki” (or “Yuki-Den”), which is newly built for the
Shintō Rites held at each Emperor’s Enthronement.

 Taking into consideration what Ban-Nobutomo suggests in his autographic
annotations to the *Kogoshūi* and in reference to certain passages in
the *Nihon-Sandai-Jitsuroku* describing the scenes of the Daijō Feast at
the Enthronement Ceremony of the Emperor Kōkō on the 23rd and 25th days
of the 11th month in <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> the 8th year (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 884) of Gengyō (*Vide* the
*Nihon-Sandai-Jitsuroku*, vol. <span class="small">XLVI</span>. The
*Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">IV</span>,
p. 648), we may interpret the obscure meaning of the song as follows:

 “Let us courtiers make merry the whole night through! Oh, how fine for
us courtiers is the sacred ‘sake’ drink!”

 “What a fine long robe each courtier wears at the Ceremony of Removing
the Divine Insignia; it reaches below the knees!”

 <span id="note_75"></span>[75](kgsh4.htm#fr_75). According to
Tachibana-no-Moribe, one of the ablest scholars of the Tokugawa Régime,
it reads as follows:—

 “The courtiers’ fine long robes, reaching below the knees; how
magnificent they look!”

 (*Vide* Tachibana-no-Moribe, The *Kagura-Uta-Iriaya*. The
*Moribe-Zenshū* or *Collected Works*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">VII</span>, p. 57).

 Another interpretation advanced by Ikebe-no-Mahari for the first song
in question is this:

 “We courtiers have enjoyed ourselves greatly until late at night,
singing, dancing, and gently striking the knees with our hands. O how
happy and pleasant it is to-night at the Ceremony of Removing the Divine
Insignia!”

 The same author renders the meaning of the second song as follows:

 “What a fine, long robe each courtier in the suite wears at the
Ceremony of the Removing of the Divine Insignia! It reaches to the
knees. Oh, how splendid is the procession to the Divine <span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> Insignia!”

 *Vide* Ikebe-no-Mahari, The *Kogoshūi-Shinchu*, or *A New Commentary on
the Kogoshūi*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">VI</span>, p.
22.

 *Cf.* B.H. Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*, p. 298. The Emperor Ingyō.

 Two other similar songs of the same sort, according to the
*Kōtaijingū-Gishikichō*, were sung at the Ise Shrine of the Sun-Goddess,
on the occasion of the Sacred Feast. These songs are:

 “The courtiers are enjoying themselves very much striking their knees
gently, the sound re-echoes through the Sacred Hall!”

 “At the joyous divine feast in the Sacred Hall at Isuzu, the sound of
the courtiers’ striking their knees echoes and re-echoes all over the
Hall!”

 (The *Kōtaijingū-Gishikichō* or *Book on the Ceremonial Rites for Each
Month round the Whole Year at the Inner Shrine of Ise*. The
*Gunsho-Ruijū* edited by the Keizaizasshi-Sha, vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, p. 39).

 <span id="note_76"></span>[76](kgsh4.htm#fr_76). *I.e.*, the Emperor
donated some rice-fields for tillage to the shrines together with
husbandmen.

 <span id="note_77"></span>[77](kgsh4.htm#fr_77). Makimuku is in
Shiki-no-Kami-Kōri, Yamato.

 <span id="note_78"></span>[78](kgsh4.htm#fr_78). According to the
tradition recorded in the *Nihongi* and the *Kojiki*,
Yamato-Hime-no-Mikoto is a daughter of Hihasu-Hime-no-Mikoto, a consort
of the Emperor Suinin, and not his daughter by Saho-Hime. *Vide* W. G.
Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 174. Also, B.H.
Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*, p. 183.

 <span id="note_79"></span>[79](kgsh4.htm#fr_79). *Vide* [p.
29](kgsh4.htm#page_29).

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

 The author of the *Kogoshūi* took the Abstinence Palace to be the abode
of the Guardian Priestess Yamato-Hime-no-Mikoto, but this is incorrect.
That the palace or shrine was for the Sun-Goddess herself is proved by
the description given in the *Nihongi*.

 “In compliance, therefore, with the instruction of the Great Goddess, a
shrine was erected to her in the province of Ise. Accordingly, an
Abstinence Palace was built beside the River Isuzu” (*Vide* W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, pp. 41, 176).

 Moto-Ori and Kubo agreed with the view expressed by the compilers of
The *Nihongi* (Moto-Ori, The *Kojiki-Den*, vol. <span
class="small">XV</span>. The *Collected Works*, Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">I</span>, p. 859. Kubo, The *Kogoshūi-Kogi* or
*Studies and Notes on the Kogoshūi*, p. 90).

 <span id="note_80"></span>[80](kgsh4.htm#fr_80). According to the
*Harima-Fudoki* or *Ancient Topography of Harima*, Ame-uo-Hihoko came to
Japan from Korea in the Divine Age, and the *Nihongi* states that he
arrived in the Emperor Suinin’s reign, whilst the *Kojiki* dates his
arrival long before the Emperor Ōjin’s time.

 According to the *Kojiki* and the *Engishiki*, the Izushi Shrine is
Sacred to the Eight Divine Objects, which Ame-no-Hihoko brought with him
to Japan.

 <span id="note_81"></span>[81](kgsh4.htm#fr_81). *Vide* [note
77](#note_77).

 <span id="note_82"></span>[82](kgsh4.htm#fr_82). *Vide* pp.
[24](kgsh4.htm#page_24), [45](kgsh4.htm#page_45),
[46](kgsh4.htm#page_46).

 <span id="note_83"></span>[83](kgsh4.htm#fr_83). Legend ascribes
several miraculous virtues to this Sword.

 Not only did Susano-O-no-Kami obtain it by slaying the <span
id="page_77">p. 77</span> monster serpent or Japanese Python, whose tail
contained it, but tradition has it that wherever the Sword might be,
there also was a mass of clouds. Moreover, according to the *Nihongi*
tradition (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p.
205), it was by its miraculous power that Prince Yamatotakeru himself
narrowly escaped being burnt to death by his treacherous enemy in the
field of Yaitsu in Suruga Province. It is surely a divine object whose
supernatural presence protected the Hero-Prince from personal danger,
and the primitive natives regarded it as divine, although modern critics
assert that it was some kind of talisman or fetish. Wherever that Sword
was, the Prince was safe (as the *Kogoshūi* relates), whilst through its
absence he was finally led to ruin, when climbing Mt. Ibuki. In old
Japan the sword was considered to be endowed with supernatural,
miraculous powers. The same is true of the Kusanagi Sword. Compare the
chapter “On the Sword” in the *Heike-Monogatari*, where the miraculous
virtues of the sword are specifically described (A. L. Sadler’s English
translation of the *Heike-Monogatari*, the *Book of Swords*, *T.A.S.J.*,
vol. <span class="small">XLIX</span>, p. 325).

 <span id="note_84"></span>[84](kgsh4.htm#fr_84). According to the
*Nihongi* (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p.
241) and the *Shoryō-Shiki* of the *Engishiki* (The *Kokushi-Taikei*,
Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">XIII</span>, p. 677), we may
assert with some show of probability that the Empress Jingo dwelt in the
Wakasakura Palace at Iware, in Toichi-Kōri, Yamato Province, although
the learned Moto-Ori in his *Kojiki-Den* discussed and contradicted
<span id="page_78">p. 78</span> such a view (Moto-Ori, The *Collected
Works*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">III</span>, pp.
2229-2231).

 <span id="note_85"></span>[85](kgsh4.htm#fr_85). The Three Gods of
Suminoe (now called Sumiyoshi) are Uwazutsu-no-O, Nakazutsu-no-O, and
Sokozutsu-no-O. They played a prominent part among the divine guardians
who accompanied the expeditionary army to Korea which the Empress Jingō
commanded, and, on its return to Japan in triumph, a shrine was erected
at Suminoe in Settsu Province in honour of these Gods. Cf. W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 226. B. H. Chamberlain,
*E.T.K.*, pp. 231, 233.

 <span id="note_86"></span>[86](kgsh4.htm#fr_86). *I.e.*, Karu in
Takechi-Kōri, Yamato Province.

 <span id="note_87"></span>[87](kgsh4.htm#fr_87). Kuso, King of Kudara,
sent to Japan the learned Wani, who was descended from the Emperor Kōso
(Koa-Tsu) of the Kan (Han) Dynasty.

 <span id="note_88"></span>[88](kgsh4.htm#fr_88). In Chinese characters,
弓月 or \#\#\#通王. In the 14th year of the Emperor Ōjin (according to
the *Nihongi*) Yutsuki arrived in Japan from Kudara and tendered his
allegiance. W. G. Aston says Yutsuki in Korean would be “Kung-Wol” (W.
G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 261).

 <span id="note_89"></span>[89](kgsh4.htm#fr_89). The ancestors of the
Hata family or Shin (Chin) people and the Aya or Kan (Han) were Chinese
immigrants who came through Korea to Japan.

 <span id="note_90"></span>[90](kgsh4.htm#fr_90). “Wakasakura” literally
means “early cherry blossoms.” According to the *Nihongi* (W .G. Aston
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 307), when the Emperor
Richū made a feast in a boat on the Pond of <span id="page_79">p.
79</span> Ichishi at Iware, a cherry blossom flowering out of season in
winter fell into the Emporor’s cup of “sake,” and this incident
particularly attracting the Emperor’s attention, His Majesty was pleased
to name his palace after it, and the author of the *Kogoshūi* called it
“Nochi-no-Iware-Wakasakura-no-Miya” or “Later Iware-Wakasakura Palace”
in contradistinction to the palace of the same name at Iware where the
Empress Jingō had dwelt. Aston throws doubt on the origin of the name,
pointing out that Jingō’s palace had already borne the same title. The
present commentators however are of different opinion and consider that
there is no doubt that the Emperor Richū dwelt in the Wakasakura Palace
and that it owed its name to the pretty story of the *Nihongi* mentioned
above. In support of their opinion, they would point out that the name
of the Empress Jingō’s palace is mentioned only in a note in the
*Nihongi* (The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, p. 170), and that it is not as is customary
given in the main text describing the chief events at the beginning of
her reign. It should be mentioned moreover that the copy of *Nihongi*
made during the Eikyō Era (15th century) omits this note entirely
(Iida-Takesato, The *Nihonshoki-Tsūshaku*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">XXXVI</span>, p. 1955). It is true the text mentions that,
in the 69th year of her reign the Empress Jingō died in the Wakasakura
Palace, but it must be remembered that the *Nihongi* was not compiled
till the 4th year of Yōrō (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 720) in the
Empress Genshō’s reign, and the name Wakasakura becomes prominent for
the <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> first time in the reign of the
Emperor Richū when we find the Wakasakura-Be (Corporation) formed. It
was also bestowed during the Emperor Richū’s reign as a family name.
*Vide* the *Kojiki* (B. H. Chamberlain, *E.T.K.*, p. 291), the *Nihongi*
(W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, pp. 306, 307)
and the *Shinsen-Shōjiroku* (*Kurita-Hiroshi*, The
*Shinsen-Shōjiroku-Kōshō*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">II</span>, pp. 734, 735, 1068 and vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, pp. 317, 318, 319).

 <span id="note_91"></span>[91](kgsh4.htm#fr_91). *Vide* “Imikura” in
the Emperor Temmu’s reign, [p. 44](kgsh4.htm#page_44).

 <span id="note_92"></span>[92](kgsh4.htm#fr_92). According to
tradition, Achi-no-Omi crossed over to Japan in the 20th year of the
Emperor Ōjin’s reign and Wani in the 16th year of the same reign.

 <span id="note_93"></span>[93](kgsh4.htm#fr_93). The name of a place in
Shiki-Kōri, Yamato Province.

 <span id="note_94"></span>[94](kgsh4.htm#fr_94). “Uzu” or “Utsu” may
mean rare and precious, and “masa” fine, superior, therefore the
sub-family name might mean a family under whose care rare silks of fine
quality are produced.

 <span id="note_95"></span>[95](kgsh4.htm#fr_95). *I.e.*,
Imbe-no-Hironari’s day.

 <span id="note_96"></span>[96](kgsh4.htm#fr_96). *I.e.*, the Government
Treasury.

 <span id="note_97"></span>[97](kgsh4.htm#fr_97). The family in the East
of the Capital (*i.e.*, in Yamato Province) is descended from
Achi-no-Omi, ancestor of the Aya (or Kan) family of Atae rank, whilst
the family in the West of the Capital (Kōchi) is descended from the
learned Wani of Kudara.

 <span id="note_98"></span>[98](kgsh4.htm#fr_98). *I.e.*, the
descendants of Achi-no-Omi.

 <span id="note_99"></span>[99](kgsh4.htm#fr_99). The name of a place in
Takechi-Kōri, Yamato Province.

 <span id="note_100"></span>[100](kgsh4.htm#fr_100). Some commentators
surmise that “Byakuchi” might have been mistaken for “Byakuhō,” while
others say that “Byakuhō” <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> is correct as
it stands, because it is mentioned in the *Taishokukan-Kamatari-Den* or
Biography of *Fujiwara-no-Kamatari*, where the author says that the 5th
year of Byakuhō falls in the 5th year of Byakuchi in the Emperor
Kōtoku’s reign. *Vide* the *Gunsho-Ruijū*, or *A Collection of
Miscellaneous Works* (Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">LXIV</span>). Dr. H. Hoshino (and perhaps others), one of
the present collaborators, advances the opinion that the expression
Byakuhō or White Phœnix is simply the idealized expression of Byakuchi
or White Pheasant, so that possibly “Byakuhō” and “Byakuchi” are
identical, even though it is true that this has been a subject of some
controversy among Japanese scholars, for, as is seen in the Emperor
Shōmu’s Edict of <span class="small">A.D.</span> 724 (the 1st year of
Shinki), it is next to impossible to determine which is the exact date
of the so-called Byakuhō and Sujaku Eras (The *Shoku-Nihonki*, vol.
<span class="small">IX</span>. The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition,
vol. <span class="small">II</span>, pp. 151, 152). *Vide* W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 373.

 <span id="note_101"></span>[101](kgsh4.htm#fr_101). Toyosaki-no-Miya,
the Emperor Kōtoku’s Palace, is identified by some historians with the
present Honjō, or Toyosaki Village, in Nishinari-Kōri, Settsu Province,
while others opine that Toyosaki was on the site where Ōsaka Castle now
stands.

 <span id="note_102"></span>[102](kgsh4.htm#fr_102). Nagara is in Settsu
Province.

 <span id="note_103"></span>[103](kgsh4.htm#fr_103). Naniwa in Settsu
Province is the present Ōsaka.

 <span id="note_104"></span>[104](kgsh4.htm#fr_104). Sakashi, according
to the *Kachō* or *Lineage Book of the Imbe Family*, an historical
writing preserved by the Imbe family, is the son of Komaro, whose remote
ancestor Tamakuahi-no-Mikoto, <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> mentioned
in the *Engishiki* or *Institutes of the Engi Period*, descended from
Ame-no-Tomi-no-Mikoto. Moreover, the same book says that
Imbe-no-Muraji-Kōbe (or Kobito) was among those who compiled a history
of Japan, which was begun in the year <span class="small">A.D.</span>
681, in the Emperor Temmu’s reign. The *Nihongi* also mentions the same
fact (*Vide* Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">II</span>, p.
350). And Sakashi was the grandfather of Imbe-no-Muraji-Kōbe.

 <span id="note_105"></span>[105](kgsh4.htm#fr_105). This court
ceremonial cap is made of cloth of gold brocade with a pattern of
Shōhakusen, a sacred mountain of ancient Chinese legends. Its brim, made
of the same cloth, has also a pattern of Taihakusen, another legendary
Chinese sacred mountain. With this ceremonial cap, the courtier wore a
scarlet robe. *Vide* Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span
class="small">II</span>, p. 229.

 <span id="note_106"></span>[106](kgsh4.htm#fr_106). Some commentators
consider that it was added by some other person later than the time of
Imbe-no-Hironari.

 <span id="note_107"></span>[107](kgsh4.htm#fr_107). On the first and
last days of the Divine Ceremony, the two Uraha-no-Kami, the Gods who
preside over divination, were invoked, according to the *Engishiki* or
*Institutes of the Engi Period* (Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, *Jingi*, <span class="small">I</span>,
*Shijisai-Jō*).

 Also *vide* W .G. Aston, *Shintō*, or *the Way of the Gods*, pp.
337-345.

 Uraha-no-Kami, Futonorito-no-Kami and Kushi-Machi-no-Kami.
Ban-Nobutomo, The *Seibokukō*, vol. <span class="small">I</span>. The
*Ban-Nobutomo-Zenshū*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">II</span>, p. 454.

 <span id="note_108"></span>[108](kgsh4.htm#fr_108). Kiyomihara, a place
at Asuka, in Takechi-Kōri, Yamato.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

 <span id="note_109"></span>[109](kgsh4.htm#fr_109). *I.e.*, the reign
of the Emperor Mommu (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 697-707).

 <span id="note_110"></span>[110](kgsh4.htm#fr_110). Of the fact that
the first worship of the Shintō gods of the nineteen shrines in Japan
was conducted by the State in the 3rd year of Keiun (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 706), when it was reported that the divine
names had been recorded in the documents kept in the Shintō Bureau
(*Vide* the *Shoku-Nihongi*, vol. <span class="small">III</span>. The
*Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">II</span>,
p. 41).

 <span id="note_111"></span>[111](kgsh4.htm#fr_111). The reign of the
Emperor Shōmu (<span class="small">A.D.</span> 724-749).

 <span id="note_112"></span>[112](kgsh4.htm#fr_112). At this time
Imimaro was the chief of the Nakatomi family.

 <span id="note_113"></span>[113](kgsh4.htm#fr_113). When the Heavenly
Grandson came to earth the divine attendants in his suite were
Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto, Futotama-no-Mikoto, Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto,
Ame-no-Oshihi-no-Mikoto, etc., while those who accompanied the Emperor
Jimmu were Hi-no-Omi-no-Mikoto of the Ōtomo family, Shiinetsu-Hiko,
Yatagarasu, Ame-no-Tomi-no-Mikoto, Ame-no-Taneko-no-Mikoto,
Nigihayahi-no-Mikoto, etc.

 <span id="note_114"></span>[114](kgsh4.htm#fr_114). *I.e.*, the
Heavenly Grandson is Amatsu-Hiko-no-Mikoto, commonly known as
Ninigi-no-Mikoto, and the first human Emperor is the Emperor Jimmu.

 <span id="note_115"></span>[115](kgsh4.htm#fr_115). The *Kojiki* or
*Records of Ancient Matters*, the *Nihongi* or *Chronicles of Japan*,
*etc*.

 <span id="note_116"></span>[116](kgsh4.htm#fr_116). *I.e.*,
Amaterasu-Ō-Mikami and Takami-Musubi-no-Mikoto.

 <span id="note_117"></span>[117](kgsh4.htm#fr_117). Kaisui or
Kai-Shi-Sui (Chieh-Tzu-Tui) was a retainer of <span id="page_84">p.
84</span> Bunkō (Wen-Kung +628 <span class="small">B.C.</span>),
otherwise known as Chōji (Chung-Erh), who later on became Feudal Lord of
Shin (Chin) in China. Because Kenkō (Hsien-Kung +651 B.C.), father of
Bunkō, under the evil influence of his favorite concubine Riki (Li-Chi),
killed his eldest son Shinsei (Shen-Sheng), his heir apparent, Chōji,
his second son, ran away to foreign lands. During his wanderings in
various countries, Chōji had a most faithful companion, named
Kai-Shi-Sui. When the fugitive heir, impoverished and forlorn, was
overtaken by hunger and fatigue, this loyal retainer Kai-Shi-Sui was
willing to serve him, with flesh torn off his own thighs. Some five
years after Kenkō’s death, Chōji returned to his native country and
restored peace and order there, after which he became Lord of Shin, when
his retainers who accompanied him during his wanderings, were all duly
rewarded, except Kai-Shi-Sui.

 Kai-Shi-Sui, greatly incensed by the injustice of his master Chōji’s
unfair rewards, retired to the Menjō mountain (Meen-Shang-Shan) as a
recluse, and abandoned the world. Then the repentant Chōji never failed
to send his servants to the mountain to seek for Kai-Shi-Sui, but in
vain, for, sad to say, Kai-Shi-Sui had been burnt to death, since in
their eagerness to find him, some thoughtless persons set fire to the
forest of the mountain, hoping thus to force Kai-Shi-Sui to quit it in
response to his former master’s invitation. *Vide* the *Shiki*
(Shih-Chi). H. A. Giles, *A Chinese Biographical Dictionary*, <span
class="small">NO</span>. 353, p. 139.

 <span id="note_118"></span>[118](kgsh4.htm#fr_118). This intruder was a
Buddhist priest, named Dōgyō, who <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> meant
to return to Shiragi (Silla) with the Divine Sword. *Vide* W. G. Aston,
*E.T.N.*, vol. <span class="small">II</span>, p. 290.

 <span id="note_119"></span>[119](kgsh4.htm#fr_119). Some commentators,
both Japanese and foreign, as, for example, Watanabe-no-Ikarimaro and
Prof. K. A. Florenz, understand by the Chinese characters 聖皇 the
Emperor Shun (舜, Shun) of Ancient China. They see therefore in the
passage \#\#\# a description of the religious ceremonies performed by
him when he ascended the Throne in succession to the famous Emperor Gyō
(堯, Yao). They base their opinion simply on the ground of the passage
being identical with that in the Chinese classical book *Shokyō* or
*Shu-Ching* (書經) \[*Shun-Ten* or *Shun-Tien* (蕣典)\]. In our opinion,
however, Imbe-no-Hironari, the Japanese scholar, made use of the passage
cited above merely, because of its rhetorical value in describing a
similar event at the Enthronement Ceremony of his own Emperor. The
present translators are inclined to support this latter view agreeing
with some native commentators (Kubo, The *Kogoshūi-Kōgi*, Japanese
edition, p. 115. Prof. K. A. Florenz, *Die Historischen Quellen der
Shintō Religion*, S. 447. Tatsuno-Hirochika, The *Kogoshūi-Genyoshū*,
Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">III</span>, p. 8).

 <span id="note_120"></span>[120](kgsh4.htm#fr_120). Up to the Emperor
Sujin’s time the Sacred Mirror had remained under the same roof with the
sovereigns in the Imperial Palace. *Vide* [p. 37](kgsh4.htm#page_37).

 <span id="note_121"></span>[121](kgsh4.htm#fr_121). *Vide* [p.
21](kgsh4.htm#page_21).

 <span id="note_122"></span>[122](kgsh4.htm#fr_122). *I.e.*,
Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto. *Vide* [p. 21](kgsh4.htm#page_21).

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

 <span id="note_123"></span>[123](kgsh4.htm#fr_123). *Vide* [p.
32](kgsh4.htm#page_32).

 <span id="note_124"></span>[124](kgsh4.htm#fr_124). *Vide* [pp.
31](kgsh4.htm#page_31)-33.

 <span id="note_125"></span>[125](kgsh4.htm#fr_125). These two
tabernacles are called the “Yuki-no-Miya” (“Yuki-Den”) and
“Suki-no-Miya” (“Suki-Den”).

 <span id="note_126"></span>[126](kgsh4.htm#fr_126). In Japanese,
“Ōniematsuri” or “Daijōsai.”

 <span id="note_127"></span>[127](kgsh4.htm#fr_127). As to the two
ceremonies here mentioned, *vide* [p. 31](kgsh4.htm#page_31).

 When the Emperor Jimmu subjugated the Yamato districts,
Ame-no-Tomi-no-Mikoto was the chief priest of the Imbe family, who
officiated at both ceremonies, and not Futotama-no-Mikoto. *Vide* [p.
31](kgsh4.htm#page_31).

 <span id="note_128"></span>[128](kgsh4.htm#fr_128). The Hōki Era (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 770-780), *i.e.*, the reign of the Emperor
Kō-Nin (+<span class="small">A.D.</span> 782).

 <span id="note_129"></span>[129](kgsh4.htm#fr_129). *Vide* the
*Shoku-Nihongi*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">XXXII</span>, 1st month, 4th year of Hōki (The
*Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">II</span>,
p. 566).

 <span id="note_130"></span>[130](kgsh4.htm#fr_130). Apparently the
Government Authorities did not accept Imbe-no-Hironari’s protest, for
nearly the same expression as “Nakatomi with Imbe under him” is retained
in the *Engishiki* or *Institutes of the Engi Period* (*Vide* the
*Engishiki*, vol. <span class="small">XXXI</span>. The *Kokushi-Taikei*,
Japanese edition, vol. <span class="small">XIII</span>, p. 891).

 <span id="note_131"></span>[131](kgsh4.htm#fr_131).
Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto of the Nakatomi family and Futotama-no-Mikoto of
the Imbe family were in the Heavenly Grandson’s escort, when he
descended from the Plain of High Heaven, and Ame-no-Taneko-no-Mikoto of
the Nakatomi family and Ame-no-Tomi-no-Mikoto of the Imbe family were
actually in <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> the Emperor Jimmu’s suite on
his journey from Kyūshū to Yamato. Both families equally participated in
Shintō celebrations.

 <span id="note_132"></span>[132](kgsh4.htm#fr_132). The Enryaku Era
(<span class="small">A.D.</span> 782-805), *i.e.*, the Emperor Kammu’s
reign.

 <span id="note_133"></span>[133](kgsh4.htm#fr_133). This princess was
the Emperor Kammu’s daughter and her appointment as Guardian Priestess
of the Ise Shrine was made in the 1st year of Enryaku (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 782). She was entrusted with the same sacred
office as her distinguished Imperial predecessors,
Toyosukiiri-Hime-no-Mikoto and Yamato-Hime-no-Mikoto, had held some
centuries before.

 <span id="note_134"></span>[134](kgsh4.htm#fr_134). The *Ryō-no-Shūge*
states that in the 5th year of Shinki (<span class="small">A.D.</span>
728), by Imperial Command, the Seventh Court Rank was conferred on the
hierarch Nakatomi, the offical priest attached to serve the Imperial
Guardian Priestess at Ise, whilst Imbe in the same Bureau received the
Eighth Court Rank, notwithstanding that this was contrary to the ancient
customs and usages. At any rate one thing is certain, *viz.*, that
Nakatomi’s seniority to Imbe by one grade in Court Rank was not first
inaugurated in the Enryaku Era of the Emperor Kammu, when his Imperial
daughter was appointed to the Ise Shrine, as Imbe-no-Hironari
erroneously states here in the text.

 <span id="note_135"></span>[135](kgsh4.htm#fr_135). In medieval Japan,
popularly known as “Dazaifu” in Kyūshū.

 <span id="note_136"></span>[136](kgsh4.htm#fr_136).
Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto was a mirth-provoking figure of an inspired
prophetess who danced before the Heavenly Rock-Cave, <span
id="page_88">p. 88</span> when myriads of gods anxiously desired to
induce the Sun-Goddess to emerge from it; and from that time her
descendants Sarume-no-Kimi played an important part as inspired court
diviners in the Chinkonsai or Spirit-quieting Ceremony for the Emperor’s
Sake (*Vide* the *Sendai-Kuji-Hongi*, vol. <span class="small">V</span>,
the *Tenson-Hongi* and the *Tennō-Hongi*. The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese
edition, vol. <span class="small">VII</span>, pp. 264, 322).

 As for the idea attached to “spirit” by the ancient Japanese, vide W
.G. Aston, *Shintō*, or the *Way of the Gods*, p. 27, and his *E.T.N.*,
vol. <span class="small">I</span>, p. 61. Also consult his *E.T.N.*,
vol. <span class="small">II</span>, p. 373, as regards the origin and
nature of this “Spirit-quieting Ceremony.”

 <span id="note_137"></span>[137](kgsh4.htm#fr_137). The ancestral god
of the Kagamitsukuri is Ishikori-tome-no-Kami (*vide* [p.
20](kgsh4.htm#page_20), *et passim*), that of the Tamatsukuri is
Kushi-Akarutama-no-Mikoto ([p. 17](kgsh4.htm#page_17)), that of the
Tatenui is Hikosashiri-no-Kami (The *Sendai-Kuji-Hongi*, the
*Tenson-Hongi*. The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition, vol. <span
class="small">VII</span>, p. 225), that of the Shizuri is
Ame-no-Hazuchio-no-Kami ([p. 20](kgsh4.htm#page_20)), that of the Omi is
Nagashiraha-no-Kami, and the Ancestral Goddess of the Kanhatori is
Ame-no-Tanabata-Hime-no-Kami ([p. 20](kgsh4.htm#page_20)).

 <span id="note_138"></span>[138](kgsh4.htm#fr_138). The 9th year of
Shōhō (*i.e.*, Tempyō-Shōhō) of the Emperor Kōken’s reign falls in <span
class="small">A.D.</span> 757.

 <span id="note_139"></span>[139](kgsh4.htm#fr_139). A case, contrary to
this Imperial Ordinance, occurred in the 2nd year of Tempyō-Hōji (<span
class="small">A.D.</span> 758), when Kawachi-no-Kimi,
Imbe-no-Sukune-Hitonari, and Nakatomi-no-Asomi-Ikemori, <span
id="page_89">p. 89</span> were appointed Imperial Envoys to the Ise
Shrine (*Vide* the *Shoku-Nihongi*, vol. <span class="small">XXI</span>.
The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition. vol. <span
class="small">II</span>, p. 356).

 <span id="note_140"></span>[140](kgsh4.htm#fr_140). The tutelary god of
a locality, or the god of land. Some (not very convincingly) identify
this god with the Ōkuninushi-no-Kami of Izumo Province.

 <span id="note_141"></span>[141](kgsh4.htm#fr_141). Mitoshi-no-Kami,
the God of Rice-Crops, is said to be a grandson of Susano-O-no-Kami.

 <span id="note_142"></span>[142](kgsh4.htm#fr_142). The meaning of the
words “katakannagi” and “hijikannagi” is not very clear. Some conjecture
that they represent two kinds of diviners (whether male or female is
uncertain), one is literally “shoulder-diviner,” and the other
“elbow-diviner;” the one being an augur who obtains an omen by means of
a bird called “shitodo” (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span
class="small">II</span>, p. 345, note 3) or a Japanese meadow bunting
(*emberiza ciopsis*), the other, a diviner by means of rice-grains and a
domestic cooking-furnace ring. Some commentators surmise that
“katakannagi” is a diviner who takes charge of the divination for an
ordinary dry field, while “hijikannagi” is a diviner for a wet
rice-field, so entrusted with the work of divination for it (*Cf.*
Ban-Nobutomo, The *Seibokukō* or *Enquiries into Genuine Divination*.
The *Ban-Nobutomo-Zenshū* or *Collected Works*, Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">II</span>, pp. 533-536. Hirata-Atsutane, the
*Koshiden* or *Exposition of the Ancient Histories*, Japanese edition,
vol. <span class="small">XIX</span>, pp. 26-29).

 And, moreover, in ancient Japan, the domestic cooking furnace <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> was regarded as a god and enjoyed an offical
worship. *Vide* the *Engishiki*. The *Kokushi-Taikei*, Japanese edition,
vol. <span class="small">XIII</span>, p. 135.

 W. G. Aston left the two difficult words “hijikannagi” and
“katakannagi” untouched in his book on Shintō (*Vide* W. G. Aston
*Shintō*, or *the Way of the Gods*, p. 196).

 Matsushita-Kenrin seems to understand by the *Kogoshūi* passage in
question a kind of divination practised by means of the bones of the
“shitodo” bird, the Japanese meadow bunting. *Vide* the *Isho-Nihonden
or Exposition of the Foreign Notices of Japan*. (Japanese edition, vol.
<span class="small">I</span>, 1, p. 11).

 <span id="note_143"></span>[143](kgsh4.htm#fr_143). Anciently a white
wild boar, but in later times a white pig, when white wild boars became
unobtainable. A somewhat parallel passage is extant in the Mahāyāna
Buddhist Sūtra *Bussetsu-Jokyō-Saigen-Kyō* or the *Sūtra on Removing
Fear, Misfortune, and Anxiety* (Skt. *Śrīkaṇṭha Sūtra*. Nanjiō’s
*Catalogue*, No. 398).

 The Sūtra says that when the Buddha Śākyamuni was staying in the
Veṇuvanavihāra at Rājagṛha a terribly virulent epidemic disease was
raging in Vaiśāh, of which countless people there died daily. The
Government Authorities were at a loss how to act. A Brahman priest
proposed to propitiate the angry gods, or demons, by erecting an altar
in their honour. Another Brahman priest advised that a great temple be
erected at the cross-roads in the capital to propitiate these gods, or
demons. A third advised a still more efficacious remedy, *viz.*, to
worship the gods or demons by offering several hundreds of
white-coloured animals <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> —horses, camels,
cows, sheep, cocks, and dogs.

 A very similar case is mentioned in a history of China, entitled
“Sui-Shu” (隋書), published by command of the Chinese Government under
the supervision of Wei-Chêng (魏徵) in <span class="small">A.D.</span>
636. Some old religious customs of Chên-La (真臘), the modern Cambodia,
are described as follows:—

 “During the 5th and 6th months every year, when the climate is very
unhealthy, the people offer white wild boars, white oxen, and white
sheep in sacrifice outside the western gate of the citadel, believing
that if they did not do so the harvest of ‘five cereals’ would be bad,
their ‘six domestic animals’ die, and the people suffer from pestilence”
(The *Sui-Shu*, Chinese edition, vol. <span class="small">LXXXII</span>,
*vide* the *Chên-La*).

 <span id="note_144"></span>[144](kgsh4.htm#fr_144). Scrophularia
Oldhami Oliv.

 <span id="note_145"></span>[145](kgsh4.htm#fr_145). Belamcanda punctata
Moench (=B. chinensis Lem.).

 <span id="note_146"></span>[146](kgsh4.htm#fr_146). Coix Lacryma-Jobi
L.

 <span id="note_147"></span>[147](kgsh4.htm#fr_147). Xanthoxylum
piperitum D C.

 <span id="note_148"></span>[148](kgsh4.htm#fr_148). Juglans.

 <span id="note_149"></span>[149](kgsh4.htm#fr_149). We find the myth of
Pan-Ku in a certain Chinese book, entitled *Teiō-Goun-Rekinenki*
(*Ti-Wang-Wu-Yun-Li-Nien-Chi*). *Cf.* Nimbō, The *Jutsu-I-Ki* (Jen-Fang,
The Shu-I-Chi).

 We venture to use Aston’s quotation from Mayer’s *Chinese Manual* (p.
174), which says, “Pan-Ku came into being in the Great Waste. His origin
is unknown. When dying, he gave birth to the existing material universe.
His breath was transmuted <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> into the wind
and clouds; his voice into thunder; his left eye into the sun, his right
eye into the moon; his four limbs and five extremities into the four
quarters of the globe and the five great mountains, his blood into the
rivers; his muscles and veins into the strata of the earth, his flesh
into the soil, etc.” (W. G. Aston, *E.T.N.*, vol. <span
class="small">I</span>, p. 28). A similar idea is also found in the *Ṛg
Veda* (x, 9) which, like the Chinese myth of Pan-Ku, says that the moon
came from the God Brahmā’s mind, the sun from his eye, the great Gods,
Indra and Agni, from his mouth; whilst the Wind-God Vāyū came from his
breath, and the earth and sky were formed from his feet and head.

 Another Buddhist Sūtra similarly described the Brahmanistic God
Maheśvara:

 “The God Maheśvara,—the ethereal heaven is his head, the earth is his
body, the water is his urine, the mountains are his excrements, all the
living beings are worms in his belly, the wind is his vital breath, the
air his bodily heat, both good and evil are the Karma or constituents of
his character” (The *Gedō-Shōjō-Nehan-Ron*. Nanjiō’s *Catalogue*, No.
1260).

 <span id="note_150"></span>[150](kgsh4.htm#fr_150). An allusion to the
*Tendainofu* (Tien-Tai-Fu) by Sonshaku (Sun-Cho) in the *Monzen*
(*Wen-Hsuan*), one of the Chinese Classics. *Vide* also the *Shūsuihen*
(*Chiu-Shui-Pien*), by Sōshi (Chuang-Tzu), a follower of Rōshi (Lao-Tzu)
and contemporary of Mōshi (Meng-Tzu, Mencius) in the 4th century <span
class="small">B.C.</span>, according to the Chinese tradition.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

 <span id="note_151"></span>[151](kgsh4.htm#fr_151). In other words,
Japan.

 <span id="note_152"></span>[152](kgsh4.htm#fr_152). Gyō (Yao) and Shun
(Shun) are the prototype of ideal Emperors in ancient China.

 <span id="note_153"></span>[153](kgsh4.htm#fr_153). *I.e.*, all over
the world.

 <span id="note_154"></span>[154](kgsh4.htm#fr_154). In certain editions
we find the dates differently mentioned, e.g., “the 12th month in the
3rd year of Daidō” or “the 2nd month in the 3rd year of Daidō,” or “the
12th month in the 2nd year of Daidō,” instead of “the 2nd month in the
2nd year of Daidō,” an attempt to synchronize with the date when
Imbe-no-Hironari had already been promoted to the Lower Grade of the
Junior Fifth Court Rank (he was actually promoted to the Lower Grade of
that rank on the 17th day of the 11th month in the 3rd year of Daidō),
as mentioned at the beginning of the popular edition of the *Kogoshūi*,
which enjoys a large circulation.

 This is no doubt an addition by some scribe at a later date than the
time the original manuscript was written by Imbe-no-Hironari himself. In
the Hōryūji or Ryakunin manuscript we find no date mentioned at all at
the end of it. And one of the Maeda manuscripts mentions that there is a
sort of manuscript with no such date at all.

 *Vide* [pp. 5](kgsh3.htm#page_5)-9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Shinto](../index) [Index](index)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
