[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01240)  [Next](sbe01242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

## THIRD ADHYÂYA <span id="fr_745"></span>[1](#fn_743).

1\. Pratardana, forsooth, the son of Divodâsa (king of Kâ*s*î), came by
means of fighting and strength to the beloved abode of Indra. Indra said
to him 'Pratardana, let me give you a boon to choose.' And Pratardana
answered: 'Do you yourself choose that boon for me which you deem most
beneficial for a man.' Indra said to him: 'No one who chooses, chooses
for another; choose thyself,' Then Pratardana replied: 'Then that boon
to choose is no boon for me.'

Then, however, Indra did not swerve from the truth, for Indra is truth.
Indra said to him: 'Know me only; that is what I deem most beneficial
for man, that he should know me. I slew the three-headed son of
Tvash*tri*; I delivered the Arunmukhas, the devotees, to the wolves
(sâlâv*ri*ka); breaking many treaties, I killed the people of Prahlâda
in heaven, the people of Puloma in the sky, the people of Kâlakañ*g*a on
earth <span id="fr_746"></span>[2](#fn_744). And not one hair of me was
harmed there. And he who knows me thus, by no deed of his is his life
harmed, not by the murder of

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

his mother, not by the murder of his father, not by theft, not by the
killing of a Brahman. If he is going to commit a sin, the bloom <span
id="fr_747"></span>[1](#fn_745) does not depart from his face.'

2\. Indra said: 'I am prâ*n*a, meditate on me as the conscious self
(pra*g*ñâtman), as life, as immortality. Life is prâ*n*a, prâ*n*a is
life. Immortality is prâ*n*a, prâ*n*a is immortality. As long as prâ*n*a
dwells in this body, so long surely there is life. By prâ*n*a he obtains
immortality in the other world, by knowledge true conception. He who
meditates on me as life and immortality, gains his full life in this
world, and obtains in the Svarga world immortality and
indestructibility.'

(Pratardana said): 'Some maintain here, that the prâ*n*as become one,
for (otherwise) no one could at the same time make known a name by
speech, see a form with the eye, hear a sound with the car, think a
thought with the mind. After having become one, the prâ*n*as perceive
all these together, one by one. While speech speaks, all prâ*n*as speak
after it. While the eye sees, all prâ*n*as see after it. While the car
hears, all prâ*n*as hear after it. While the mind thinks, all prâ*n*as
think after it. While the prâ*n*a breathes, all prâ*n*as breathe after
it.'

'Thus it is indeed,' said Indra, 'but nevertheless there is a
pre-eminence among the prâ*n*as <span id="fr_748"></span>[2](#fn_746).

3\. Man lives deprived of speech, for we see dumb people. Man lives
deprived of sight, for we see

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

blind people. Man lives deprived of hearing, for we see deaf people. Man
lives deprived of mind, for we see infants. Man lives deprived of his
arms, deprived of his legs, for we see it thus. But prâ*n*a alone is the
conscious self (pra*g*ñâtman), and having laid hold of this body, it
makes it rise up. Therefore it is said, Let man worship it alone as
uktha <span id="fr_749"></span>[1](#fn_747). What is prâ*n*a, that is
pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness); what is pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness),
that is prâ*n*a, for together they (pra*g*ñâ and prâ*n*a) live in this
body, and together they go out of it. Of that, this is the evidence,
this is the understanding. When a man, being thus asleep, sees no dream
whatever, he becomes one with that prâ*n*a alone <span
id="fr_750"></span>[2](#fn_748). Then speech goes to him (when he is
absorbed in prâ*n*a) with all names, the eye with all forms, the ear
with all sounds, the mind with all thoughts. And when he awakes, then,
as from a burning fire sparks proceed in all directions, thus from that
self the prâ*n*âs (speech, &c.) proceed, each towards its place; from
the prâ*n*as the gods (Agni, &c.), from the gods the worlds.

Of this, this is the proof, this is the understanding. When a man is
thus sick, going to die, falling into weakness and faintness, they say:
'His thought has departed, he hears not, he sees not, he speaks not, he
thinks not.' Then he becomes one with that prâ*n*a alone. Then speech
goes to him (who is absorbed in prâ*n*a) with all names, the eye with
all

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

forms, the ear with all sounds, the mind with all thoughts. And when he
departs from this body, he departs together with all these <span
id="fr_751"></span>[1](#fn_749).

4\. Speech gives up to him (who is absorbed in prâ*n*a) all names, so
that by speech he obtains all names. The nose gives up to him all
odours, so that by scent he obtains all odours. The eye gives up to him
all forms, so that by the eye he obtains all forms. The ear gives up to
him all sounds, so that by the ear he obtains all sounds. The mind gives
up to him all thoughts, so that by the mind he obtains all thoughts.
This is the complete absorption in prâ*n*a. And what is prâ*n*a is
pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness), what is pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness) is
prâ*n*a. For together do these two live in the body, and together do
they depart.

Now we shall explain how all things become one in that pra*g*ñâ
(self-consciousness).

5\. Speech is one portion taken out <span
id="fr_752"></span>[2](#fn_750) of pra*g*ñâ (self-conscious knowledge),
the word is its object, placed outside. The nose is one portion taken
out of it, the odour is its object, placed outside. The eye is one
portion taken out of it, the form is its object, placed outside. The ear
is one portion taken out of it, the sound is its object, placed outside.
The tongue is one portion taken out of it, the taste of food is its
object, placed outside. The two hands

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

are one portion taken out of it, their action is their object, placed
outside. The body is one portion taken out of it, its pleasure and pain
are its object, placed outside. The organ is one portion taken out of
it, happiness, joy, and offspring are its object, placed outside. The
two feet are one portion taken out of it, movements are their object,
placed outside. Mind is one portion taken out of it, thoughts and
desires are its object, placed outside.

6\. Having by pra*g*ñâ (self-conscious knowledge) taken possession of
speech, he obtains by speech all words. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken
possession of the nose, he obtains all odours. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken
possession of the eye, he obtains all forms. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken
possession of the ear, he obtains all sounds. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken
possession of the tongue, he obtains all tastes of food. Having by
pra*g*ñâ taken possession of the two hands, he obtains all actions.
Having by pra*g*ñâ taken possession of the body, he obtains pleasure and
pain. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken possession of the organ, he obtains
happiness, joy, and offspring. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken possession of
the two feet, he obtains all movements. Having by pra*g*ñâ taken
possession of mind, he obtains all thoughts.

7\. For without pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness) speech does not make known
(to the self) any word <span id="fr_753"></span>[1](#fn_751). 'My

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

mind was absent,' he says, 'I did not perceive that word.' Without
pra*g*ñâ the nose does not make known any odour. 'My mind was absent,'
he says, 'I did not perceive that odour.' Without pra*g*ñâ the eye does
not make known any form. 'My mind was absent,' he says, 'I did not
perceive that form.' Without pra*g*ñâ the ear does not make known any
sound. 'My mind was absent,' he says, 'I did not perceive that sound.'
Without pra*g*ñâ the tongue does not make known any taste. 'My mind was
absent,' he says, 'I did not perceive that taste.' Without pra*g*ñâ the
two hands do not make known any act. 'Our mind was absent,' they say,
'we did not perceive any act.' Without pra*g*ñâ the body does not make
known pleasure or pain. 'My mind was absent,' he says, 'I did not
perceive that pleasure or pain.' Without pra*g*ñâ the organ does not
make known happiness, joy, or offspring. 'My mind was absent,' he says,
'I did not perceive that happiness, joy, or offspring.' Without
pra*g*ñâ, the two feet do not make known any movement. 'Our mind was
absent,' they say, 'we did not perceive that movement.' Without pra*g*ñâ
no thought succeeds, nothing can be known that is to be known.

8\. Let no man try to find out what speech is, let him know the speaker.
Let no man try to find out what odour is, let him know him who smells.
Let no man try to find out what form is, let him know the seer. Let no
man try to find out what sound is, let

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

him know the hearer. Let no man try to find out the tastes of food, let
him know the knower of tastes. Let no man try to find out what action
is, let him know the agent. Let no man try to find out what pleasure and
pain are, let him know the knower of pleasure and pain. Let no man try
to find out what happiness, joy, and offspring are, let him know the
knower of happiness, joy, and offspring. Let no man try to find out what
movement is, let him know the mover. Let no man try to find out what
mind is, let him know the thinker. These ten objects (what is spoken,
smelled, seen, &c.) have reference to pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness), the
ten subjects (speech, the senses, mind) have reference to objects. If
there were no objects, there would be no subjects; and if there were no
subjects, there would be no objects. For on either side alone nothing
could be achieved. But that (the self of pra*g*ñâ, consciousness, and
prâ*n*a, life) is not many, (but one.) For as in a car the circumference
of a wheel is placed on the spokes, and the spokes on the nave, thus are
these objects (circumference) placed on the subjects (spokes), and the
subjects on the prâ*n*a. And that prâ*n*a (breath, the living and
breathing power) indeed is the self of pra*g*ñâ (the self-conscious
self), blessed, imperishable, immortal. He does not increase by a good
action, nor decrease by a bad action. For he (the self of prâ*n*a and
pra*g*ñâ) makes him, whom he wishes to lead up from these worlds, do a
good deed; and the same makes him, whom he wishes to lead down from
these worlds, do a bad deed <span id="fr_754"></span>[1](#fn_752). And
he is the guardian of the world, he is

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

the king of the world, he is the lord of the universe,--and he is my
(Indra's) self, thus let it be known, yea, thus let it be known!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_743"></span>[293:1](sbe01241.htm#fr_745) The object now is
to explain the true Brahma-vidyâ, while the first and second chapters
are only introductory, treating of the worship of the couch
(paryaṅkopâsanâ) and of the worship of prâ*n*a.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[293:2](sbe01241.htm#fr_746) This refers to
heroic deeds performed by Indra, as represented in the hymns of the
Rig-veda. See Rig-veda V, 34, 4, and Sâya*n*a's commentary; Ait. Brâhm.
VII, 28. Weber, Indische Studien I, 410-418, has tried to discover an
original physical meaning in the heroic deeds ascribed to Indra. A
curious remark is made by the commentator, who says that the skulls of
the Arunmukhas were turned into the thorns of the desert (karîra) which
remain to this day,--a very common phase in popular tradition.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[294:1](sbe01241.htm#fr_747) Professor Cowell
compares Taittirîya-Sa*m*hitâ III, 1, 1, nâsya nîta*m* na haro vyeti.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[294:2](sbe01241.htm#fr_748) Prâ*n*âs, in the
plural, is supposed to stand for the five senses as modifications of
breath. It would be better if we could read prâ*n*asya ni*hs*reyasam.
See before, II, 14.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[295:1](sbe01241.htm#fr_749) Uktha, hymn, is
artificially derived from ut-thâpayati, to raise up, and hence uktha,
hymn, is to be meditated on as prâ*n*a, breath, which likewise raises up
the body. See Ait. Âr. II, 1, 15.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[295:2](sbe01241.htm#fr_750) He is absorbed in
prâ*n*a. Or should it be prâ*n*a*h* as nominative?

<span id="fn_749"></span>[296:1](sbe01241.htm#fr_751) According to
another reading we might translate, 'Speech takes away all names from
that body; and prâ*n*a, in which speech is absorbed, thus obtains all
names.'

<span id="fn_750"></span>[296:2](sbe01241.htm#fr_752) I read udû*lh*am
or udû*dh*am, instead of adû*dh*am, explained by the commentator as
adûduhat. Professor Cowell translates, 'Speech verily milked one portion
thereof,' which may have been the original purport of the writer.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[297:1](sbe01241.htm#fr_753) Professor Cowell
has translated a passage from the commentary which is interesting as
showing that its author and the author of the Upanishad too had a clear
conception of the correlative nature of knowledge. 'The organ of sense,'
he says, 'cannot exist without pra*g*ñâ (self-consciousness), nor the
objects of sense be obtained without the organ, therefore--on the
principle, that when one thing cannot exist without another, that thing
is said to be identical with the other--as the cloth, for instance,
being <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> never perceived without the
threads, is identical with them, or the (false perception of) silver
being never found without the mother of pearl is identical with it, so
the objects of sense being never found without the organs are identical
with them, and the organs being never found without pra*g*ñâ
(self-consciousness) are identical with it.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[299:1](sbe01241.htm#fr_754) The other text
says, 'whom he wishes to draw after him; and whom he wishes to draw away
from these worlds.' Râmatîrtha, in <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> his
commentary on the Mait. Up. 3, 2, quotes the text as translated above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adhyâya IV](sbe01242)
