[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01014)  [Next](sbe01016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## MEANING OF THE WORD UPANISHAD.

How Upanishad became the recognised name of the philosophical treatises
contained in the Veda is difficult to explain. Most European scholars
are agreed in deriving

<span id="page_lxxx">p. lxxx</span>

upa-ni-shad from the root sad, to sit down, preceded by the two
prepositions ni, down, and upa, near, so that it would express the idea
of session, or assembly of pupils sitting down near their teacher to
listen to his instruction. In the Trikâ*nd*a*s*esha, upanishad is
explained by samîpasadana, sitting down near a person <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md).

Such a word, however, would have been applicable, it would seem, to any
other portion of the Veda as well as to the chapters called Upanishad,
and it has never been explained how its meaning came thus to be
restricted. It is still more strange that upanishad, in the sense of
session or assembly, has never, so far as I am aware, been met with.
Whenever the word occurs, it has the meaning of doctrine, secret
doctrine, or is simply used as the title of the philosophic treatises
which constitute the *g*ñânakâ*nd*a, the knowledge portion, as opposed
to the karmakâ*nd*a, the work or ceremonial portion, of the Veda.

Native philosophers seem never to have thought of deriving upanishad
from sad, to sit down. They derive it either from the root sad, in the
sense of destruction, supposing these ancient treatises to have received
their name because they were intended to destroy passion and ignorance
by means of divine revelation <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md), or
from the root sad, in the sense of approaching, because a knowledge of
Brahman comes near to us by means of the Upanishads, or because we
approach Brahman by their help. Another explanation proposed by
*S*aṅkara in his commentary on the Taittirîya-upanishad II, 9, is that
the highest bliss is contained in the Upanishad (para*m* *s*reyo 'syâ*m*
nisha*nn*am).

These explanations seem so wilfully perverse that it is difficult to
understand the unanimity of native scholars. We ought to take into
account, however, that very general tendency among half-educated people,
to acquiesce in any etymology which accounts for the most prevalent
meaning of a word. The Âra*n*yakas abound in

<span id="page_lxxxi">p. lxxxi</span>

such etymologies, which probably were never intended as real
etymologies, in our sense of the word, but simply as plays on words,
helping to account somehow for their meaning. The Upanishads, no doubt,
were meant to destroy ignorance and passion, and nothing seemed more
natural therefore than that their etymological meaning should be that of
destroyers <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md).

The history and the genius of the Sanskrit language leave little doubt
that upanishad meant originally session, particularly a session
consisting of pupils, assembled at a respectful distance round their
teacher.

With upa alone, sad occurs as early as the hymns of the Rig-veda, in the
sense of approaching respectfully <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md):--

Rig-veda IX, 11, 6. Námasâ ít úpa sîdata, 'approach him with praise.'
See also Rig-veda X, 73, II; I, 65, I.

In the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad VI, 13, I, a teacher says to his pupil,
atha mâ prâtar upasîdathâ*h*, 'come to me (for advice) to-morrow
morning.'

In the same Upanishad VII, 8, I, a distinction is made between those who
serve their teachers (pari*k*aritâ), and those who are admitted to their
more intimate society (upasattâ, comm. samîpaga*h*, antaraṅga*h*,
priya*h*).

Again, in the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad VII, I, we read of a pupil
approaching his teacher (upâsasâda or upasasâda), and of the teacher
telling him to approach with what he knows, i.e. to tell him first what
he has learnt already (yad vettha tena mopasîda <span
id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44).md).

In the Sûtras (Gobhilîya G*ri*hya-sûtra II, 10, 38) upasad is the
recognised term for the position assumed by a pupil with his hands
folded and his eyes looking up to the teacher who is to instruct him.

It should be stated, however, that no passage has yet been met with in
which upa-ni-sad is used in the sense of pupils approaching and
listening to their teacher. In the

<span id="page_lxxxii">p. lxxxii</span>

only passage in which upanishasâda occurs (Ait. Âr. II, 2, 1), it is
used of Indra sitting down by the side of Vi*s*vâmitra, and it is
curious to observe that both MSS. and commentaries give here
upanishasasâda, an entirely irregular form.

The same is the case with two other roots which are used almost
synonymously with sad, viz. âs and vi*s*. We find upa + âs used to
express the position which the pupil occupies when listening to his
teacher, e*g*. Pâ*n*. III, 4, 72, upâsito gurum bhavân, 'thou hast
approached the Guru,' or upâsito gurur bhavatâ, 'the Guru has been
approached by thee.' We find pari + upa + âs used with regard to
relations assembled round the bed of a dying friend, *Kh*ând. Up. VI,
15; or of hungry children sitting round their mother, and likened to
people performing the Agnihotra sacrifice (*Kh*ând. Up. V, 24, 5). But I
have never met with upa-ni-as in that sense.

We likewise find upa-vis used in the sense of sitting down to a
discussion (*Kh*ând. Up. I, 8, 2), but I have never found upa + ni + vis
as applied to a pupil listening to his teacher.

The two prepositions upa and ni occur, however, with pat, to fly, in the
sense of flying down and settling near a person, *Kh*ând. Up. IV, 7, 2;
IV, 8, 2. And the same prepositions joined to the verb *s*ri, impart to
it the meaning of sitting down beneath a person, so as to show him
respect: B*ri*h. Âr. I, 4, II. 'Although a king is exalted, he sits down
at the end of the sacrifice below the Brahman,' brahmaivântata
upani*s*rayati.

Sad, with upa and ni, occurs in upanishâdin only, and has there the
meaning of subject, e*g*. Satap. Brâhm. IX, 4, 3, 3, kshatrâya tad
vi*s*am adhastâd upanishâdinî*m* karoti, 'he thus makes the Vi*s*
(citizen) below, subject to the Kshatriya.'

Sometimes nishad is used by the side of upanishad, and so far as we can
judge, without any difference of meaning <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md).

All we can say therefore, for the present, is that upanishad,

<span id="page_lxxxiii">p. lxxxiii</span>

besides being the recognised title of certain philosophical treatises,
occurs also in the sense of doctrine and of secret doctrine, and that it
seems to have assumed this meaning from having been used originally in
the sense of session or assembly in which one or more pupils receive
instruction from a teacher.

Thus we find the word upanishad used in the Upanishads themselves in the
following meanings:

1\. Secret or esoteric explanation, whether true or false.

2\. Knowledge derived from such explanation.

3\. Special rules or observances incumbent on those who have received
such knowledge.

4\. Title of the books containing such knowledge.

I. Ait. Âr. III, 1, 6, 3. 'For this Upanishad, i.e. in order to obtain
the information about the true meaning of Sa*m*hitâ, Târukshya served as
a cowherd for a whole year.'

Taitt. Up. 1, 3. 'We shall now explain the Upanishad of the Sa*m*hitâ.'

Ait. Âr. III, 2, 5, 1. 'Next follows this Upanishad of the whole speech.
True, all these are Upanishads of the whole speech, but this they
declare especially.'

Talav. Up. IV, 7. 'As you have asked me to tell you the Upanishad, the
Upanishad has now been told you. We have told you the Brâhmî Upanishad,'
i.e. the true meaning of Brahman.

In the *Kh*ând. Up. III, II, 3, after the meaning of Brahman has been
explained, the text says: 'To him who thus knows this Brahma upanishad
(the secret doctrine of Brahman) the sun does not rise and does not
set.' In the next paragraph brahma itself is used, meaning either
Brahman as the object taught in the Upanishad, or, by a slight change of
meaning, the Upanishad itself.

*Kh*ând. Up. I, 13, 4. 'Speech yields its milk to him who knows this
Upanishad (secret doctrine) of the Sâmans in this wise.'

*Kh*ând. Up. VIII, 8, 4. When Indra and Virokana had both misunderstood
the teaching of Pragâpati, he says: 'They both go away without having
perceived and without having known the Self, and whoever of these two,
whether

<span id="page_lxxxiv">p. lxxxiv</span>

Devas or Asuras, will follow this doctrine (upanishad), will perish.'

II\. In the *Kh*ând. Up. I, i, after the deeper meaning of the Udgîtha
or Om has been described, the advantage of knowing that deeper meaning
is put forward, and it is said that the sacrifice which a man performs
with knowledge, with faith, and with the Upanishad, i.e. with an
understanding of its deeper meaning, is more powerful.

III\. In the Taittirîya-upanishad, at the end of the second chapter,
called the Brahmânandavallî, and again at the end of the tenth chapter,
the text itself says: Ity upanishad, this is the Upanishad, the true
doctrine.'

IV\. In the Kaushîtaki-upanishad II, I; 2, we read: 'Let him not beg,
this is the Upanishad for him who knows this.' Here upanishad stands for
vrata or rahasya-vrata, rule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[lxxx:1](sbe01015.htm#fr_40.md) Pânini I, 4, 79,
has upanishatk*ri*tya.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[lxxx:2](sbe01015.htm#fr_41.md) M. M., History of
Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 318; Colebrooke, Essays, I, 92; Regnaud,
Matériaux, p. 7.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[lxxxi:1](sbe01015.htm#fr_42.md) The distinction
between possible and real etymologies is as modern as that between
legend and history.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[lxxxi:2](sbe01015.htm#fr_43.md) See M. M.'s
History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 318.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[lxxxi:3](sbe01015.htm#fr_44.md) See also *Kh*and.
Up. VI, 7, 2.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[lxxxii:1](sbe01015.htm#fr_45.md) Mahâbhârata,
*S*ântiparva, 1613.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Works on the Upanishads](sbe01016.md)
