[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01013)  [Next](sbe01015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_lxxi">p. lxxi</span>

## CRITICAL TREATMENT OF THE TEXT OF THE UPANISHADS.

With regard to a critical restoration of the text of the Upanishads, I
have but seldom relied on the authority of new MSS., but have
endeavoured throughout to follow that text which is presupposed by the
commentaries, whether they are the work of the old *S*aṅkarâ*k*ârya, or
of the more modern *S*aṅkarânanda, or *S*âya*n*a, or others. Though
there still prevails some uncertainty as to the date of
*S*aṅkarâ*k*ârya, commonly assigned to the eighth century A.D., yet I
doubt whether any MSS. of the Upanishads could now be found prior to
1000 A.D. The text, therefore, which *S*aṅkara had before his eyes, or,
it may be, his ears, commands, I think, a higher authority than that of
any MSS. likely to be recovered at present.

It may be objected that *S*aṅkara's text belonged to one locality only,
and that different readings and different recensions may have existed in
other parts of India. That is perfectly true. We possess various
recensions of several Upanishads, as handed down in different *S*âkhâs
of different Vedas, and we know of various readings recorded by the
commentators. These, where they are of importance for our purposes, have
been carefully taken into account.

It has also been supposed that *S*aṅkara, who, in writing his
commentaries on the Upanishad, was chiefly guided by philosophical
considerations, his chief object being to use the Upanishads as a sacred
foundation for the Vedânta philosophy, may now and then have taken
liberties with the text. That may be so, but no stringent proof of it
has as yet been brought forward, and I therefore hold that when we
succeed in establishing throughout that text which served as the basis
of *S*aṅkara's commentaries, we have done enough for the present, and
have fulfilled at all events the first and indispensable task in a
critical treatment of the text of the Upanishads.

But in the same manner as it is easy to see that the text

<span id="page_lxxii">p. lxxii</span>

of the Rig-veda, which is presupposed by *S*âya*n*a's commentary and
even by earlier works, is in many places palpably corrupt, we cannot
resist the same conviction with regard to the text of the Upanishads. In
some cases the metre, in others grammar, in others again the collation
of analogous passages enable us to detect errors, and probably very
ancient errors, that had crept into the text long before *S*aṅkara
composed his commentaries.

Some questions connected with the metres of the Upanishads have been
very learnedly treated by Professor Gildemeister in his essay, 'Zur
Theorie des *S*loka.' The lesson to be derived from that essay, and from
a study of the Upanishads, is certainly to abstain for the present from
conjectural emendations. In the old Upanishads the same metrical freedom
prevails as in the hymns; in the later Upanishads, much may be tolerated
as the result of conscious or unconscious imitation. The metrical
emendations that suggest themselves are generally so easy and so obvious
that, for that very reason, we should hesitate before correcting what
native scholars would have corrected long ago, if they had thought that
there was any real necessity for correction.

It is easy to suggest, for instance, that in the
Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ-upanishad, verse 5, instead of tad antar asya
sarvasya, tadu sarvasyâsya bâhyata*h*, the original text may have been
tad antar asya sarvasya tadu sarvasya bâhyata*h*; yet *S*aṅkara
evidently read sarvasyâsya, and as the same reading is found in the text
of the Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ, who would venture to correct so old a
mistake?

Again, if in verse 8, we left out yâthâtathyata*h*, we should get a much
more regular metre,

Kavir manîshî paribhû*h* svyambhû*h*  
arthân vyadahâ*k* *kh*âsvatîbhyai samâbhya*h*.

Here vyada forms one syllable by what I have proposed to call
synizesis <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38), which is allowed in the
Upanishads as well as in the hymns. All would then seem right, except

<span id="page_lxxiii">p. lxxiii</span>

that it is difficult to explain how so rare a word as yâthâtathyata*h*
could have been introduced into the text.

In verse 10 one feels tempted to propose the omission of eva in anyad
âhur avidyayâ, while in verse 11, an eva inserted after vidyâ*m* ka
would certainly improve the metre.

In verse 15 the expression satyadharmâya d*ri*sh*t*aye is archaic, but
perfectly legitimate in the sense of 'that we may see the nature of the
True,' or 'that we see him whose nature is true.' When this verse is
repeated in the Maitr. Up. VI, 35, we find instead, satyadharmâya
vish*n*ave, 'for the true Vish*n*u.' But here, again, no sound critic
would venture to correct a mistake, intentional or unintentional, which
is sanctioned both by the MSS. of the text and by the commentary.

Such instances, where every reader feels tempted at once to correct the
textus receptus, occur again and again, and when they seem of any
interest they have been mentioned in the notes. It may happen, however,
that the correction, though at first sight plausible, has to be
surrendered on more mature consideration. Thus in the
Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ-upanishad, verse 2, one feels certainly inclined
to write evam tve nânyatheto 'sti, instead of eva*m* tvayi nânyatheto
'sti. But tve, if it were used here, would probably itself have to be
pronounced dissyllabically, while tvayi, though it never occurs in the
Rig-veda, may well keep its place here, in the last book of the
Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ, provided we pronounce it by synizesis, i. e. as
one syllable.

Attempts have been made sometimes to go beyond *S*aṅkara, and to restore
the text, as it ought to have been originally, but as it was no longer
in *S*aṅkara's time. It is one thing to decline to follow *S*aṅkara in
every one of his interpretations, it is quite another to decline to
accept the text which he interprets. The former is inevitable, the
latter is always very precarious.

Thus I see, for instance, that M. Regnaud, in the Errata to the second
volume of his excellent work on the Upanishads (Matériaux pour servir à
l'histoire de la philosophie de l'Inde, 1878) proposes to read in the
B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka upanishad IV, 3, 1-8,

<span id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span>

sam anena vadishya iti, instead of sa mene na vadishya iti. *S*aṅkara
adopted the latter reading, and explained accordingly, that
Yâ*g*ñavalkya went to king *G*anaka, but made up his mind not to speak.
M. Regnaud, reading sam anena vadishya iti, takes the very opposite
view, namely, that Yâ*g*ñavalkya went to king *G*anaka, having made up
his mind to have a conversation with him. As M. Regnaud does not rest
this emendation on the authority of any new MSS., we may examine it as
an ingenious conjecture; but in that case it seems to me clear that, if
we adopted it, we should have at the same time to omit the whole
sentence which follows. *S*aṅkara saw clearly that what had to be
accounted or explained was why the king should address the Brahman
first, samrâ*d* eva pûrvam papra*kkh*a; whereas if Yâ*g*ñavalkya had
come with the intention of having a conversation with the king, he, the
Brahman, should have spoken first. This irregularity is explained by the
intervening sentence, in which we are reminded that on a former
occasion, when *G*anaka and Yâ*g*ñavalkya had a disputation on the
Agnihotra, Yâ*g*ñavalkya granted *G*anaka a boon to choose, and he chose
as his boon the right of asking questions according to his pleasure.
Having received that boon, *G*anaka was at liberty to question
Yâ*g*ñavalkya, even though he did not like it, and hence *G*anaka is
introduced here as the first to ask a question.

All this hangs well together, while if we assume that Yâ*g*ñavalkya came
for the purpose of having a conversation with *G*anaka, the whole
sentence from 'atha ha ya*g* *g*anaka*s* *k*a' to 'pûrvam papra*kkh*a'
would be useless, nor would there be any excuse for *G*anaka beginning
the conversation, when Yâ*g*ñavalkya came himself on purpose to question
him.

It is necessary, even when we feel obliged to reject an interpretation
of *S*aṅkara's, without at the same time altering the text, to remember
that *S*aṅkara, where he is not blinded by philosophical predilections,
commands the highest respect as an interpreter. I cannot help thinking
therefore that M. Regnaud (vol. i, p. 59) was right in translating the
passage in the *Kh*ând. Up. V, 3, 7, tasmâd u

<span id="page_lxxv">p. lxxv</span>

sarveshu lokeshu kshattrasyaiva pra*s*âsanam abhût, by 'que le kshatriya
seul l'a enseignée dans tous les mondes.' For when he proposes in the
'Errata' to translate instead, 'ç'est pourquoi l'empire dans tous les
mondes fut attribué au kshatriya seulement,' he forgets that such an
idea is foreign to the ordinary atmosphere in which the Upanishads move.
It is not on account of the philosophical knowledge possessed by a few
Kshatriyas, such as *G*anaka or Pravâha*n*a, that the privilege of
government belongs everywhere to the second class. That rests on a
totally different basis. Such exceptional knowledge, as is displayed by
a few kings, might be an excuse for their claiming the privileges
belonging to the Brahmans, but it would never, in the eyes of the
ancient Indian Âryas, be considered as an argument for their claiming
kingly power. Therefore, although I am well aware that pra*s*âs is most
frequently used in the sense of ruling, I have no doubt that *S*aṅkara
likewise was fully aware of that, and that if he nevertheless explained
pra*s*âsana here in the sense of pra*s*âst*ri*tva*m* *s*ishyâ*n*âm, he
did so because this meaning too was admissible, particularly here, where
we may actually translate it by proclaiming, while the other meaning,
that of ruling, would simply be impossible in the concatenation of
ideas, which is placed before us in the Upanishad.

It seems, no doubt, extremely strange that neither the last redactors of
the text of the Upanishads, nor the commentators, who probably knew the
principal Upanishads by heart, should have perceived how certain
passages in one Upanishad represented the same or nearly the same text
which is found in another Upanishad, only occasionally with the most
palpable corruptions.

Thus when the ceremony of offering a mantha or mash is described, we
read in the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad V, 2, 6, that it is to be accompanied
by certain words which on the whole are intelligible. But when the same
passage occurs again in the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka, those words have been
changed to such a degree, and in two different ways in the two *S*âkhâs
of the Mâdhyandinas and Kâ*n*vas, that, though the commentator explains
them, they are almost unintelligible.

<span id="page_lxxvi">p. lxxvi</span>

I shall place the three passages together in three parallel lines:

1\. *Kh*ândogya-upanishad V, 2, 6:  
II. B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka, Mâdhyandina-*s*âkhâ, XIV, 9, 3, 10:  
III. B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka-upanishad, Kâ*n*va-*s*âkhâ, VI, 3, 5:

I. Amo nâmâsy amâ hi te sarvam ida*m* sa hi *g*yesh*th*a*h*  
II. âmo 'sy âmam hi te mayi sa hi  
III. âma*m*sy âma*m*hi te mahi sa hi

I. sresh*th*o râ*g*âdhipati*h* sa mâ *g*yaish*th*ya*m* *s*rai-  
II. râ*g*e*s*âno 'dhipati*h* sa mâ râ*g*e*s*âno  
III. râ*g*e*s*âno

I. sh*th*ya*m* râ*g*yam âdhipatya*m* gamayatv aham eveda*m*  
II. 'dhipati*m* karotv iti.  
III. 'dhipati*m* karotv iti.

I. sarvam asânîti.  
II.  
III.

The text in the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad yields a certain sense, viz. 'Thou
art Ama by name, for all this together exists in thee. He is the oldest
and best, the king, the sovereign. May he make me the oldest, the best,
the king, the sovereign. May I be all this.' This, according to the
commentator, is addressed to Prâ*n*a, and Ama, though a purely
artificial word, is used in the sense of Prâ*n*a, or breath, in another
passage also, viz. B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka-up. I, 3, 22. If therefore we
accept this meaning of Ama, the rest is easy and intelligible.

But if we proceed to the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka, in the
Mâdhyandina-*s*âkhâ, we find the commentator proposing the following
interpretation: 'O Mantha, thou art a full knower, complete knowledge of
me belongs to thee.' This meaning is obtained by deriving âma*h* from â
+ man, in the sense of knower, and then taking âmam, as a neuter, in the
sense of knowledge, derivations which are simply impossible.

Lastly, if we come to the text of the Kâ*n*va-sâkhâ, the grammatical
interpretation becomes bolder still. *S*aṅkara does not explain the
passage at all, which is strange, but Ânandagiri interprets âma*m*si
tvam by 'Thou knowest

<span id="page_lxxvii">p. lxxvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (all),' and
âma*m*hi te mahi, by 'we know thy great (shape),' which are again
impossible forms.

But although there can be little doubt here that the reading of the
*Kh*ândogya-upanishad gives us the original text, or a text nearest to
the original, no sound critic would venture to correct the readings of
the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka. They are corruptions, but even as corruptions
they possess authority, at all events up to a certain point, and it is
the fixing of those certain points or chronological limits, which alone
can impart a scientific character to our criticism of ancient texts.

In the Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a-upanishad Professor Cowell has pointed out
a passage to me, where we must go beyond the text as it stood when
commented on by the *S*aṅkarânanda. In the beginning of the fourth
adhyâya all MSS. of the text read savasan, and this is the reading which
the commentator seems anxious to explain, though not very successfully.
I thought that possibly the commentator might have had before him the
reading sa vasan, or so 'vasan, but both would be very unusual.
Professor Cowell in his Various Readings, p. xii, conjectured
sa*m*vasan, which would be liable to the same objection. He now,
however, informs me that, as B. has sa*m*tvan, and C. satvan, he
believes the original text to have been Satvan-Matsyeshu. This seems to
me quite convincing, and is borne out by the reading of the Berlin MS.,
so far as it can be made out from Professor Weber's essay on the
Upanishads, Indische Studien I, p.419. I see that Boehtlingk and Roth in
their Sanskrit Dictionary, s*v*. satvat, suggest the same emendation.

The more we study the nature of Sanskrit MSS., the more, I believe, we
shall feel convinced that their proper arrangement is one by locality
rather than by time. I have frequently dwelt on this subject in the
introductions to the successive volumes of my edition of the Rig-veda
and its commentary by Sâya*n*â*k*ârya, and my convictions on this point
have become stronger ever since. A MS., however modern, from the south
of India or from the north, is more important as a check on the textus
receptus of

<span id="page_lxxviii">p. lxxviii</span>

any Sanskrit work, as prevalent in Bengal or Bombay, than ever so many
MSS., even if of greater antiquity, from the same locality. When
therefore I was informed by my friend Dr. Bühler that he had discovered
in Kashmir a MS. of the Aitareya-upanishad, I certainly expected some
real help from such a treasure. The MS. is described by its discoverer
in the last number of the journal of the Bombay Asiatic Society, p.
34 <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39), and has since been sent to me by
the Indian Government. It is written on birch bark (bhûr*g*a), and in
the alphabet commonly called *S*âradâ. The leaves are very much injured
on the margin and it is almost impossible to handle them without some
injury. In many places the bark has shrunk, probably on being moistened,
and the letters have become illegible. Apart from these drawbacks, there
remain the difficulties inherent in the *S*âradâ alphabet which, owing
to its numerous combinations, is extremely difficult to read, and very
trying to eyes which are growing weak. However, I collated the Upanishad
from the Aitareya-âra*n*yaka, which turned out to be the last portion
only, viz. the Sa*m*hitâ-upanishad (Ait. Âr. III, 1-2), or, as it is
called here, Sa*m*hitâra*n*ya, and I am sorry to say my expectations
have been disappointed. The MS. shows certain graphic peculiarities
which Dr. Bühler has pointed out. It is particularly careful in the use
of the sibilants, replacing the Visarga by sibilants, writing s + s and
*s* + *s* instead of *h* + s and *h* + *s*; distinguishing also the
*G*ihvâmûlîya and Upadhmanîya. If therefore the MS. writes antastha, we
may be sure that it really meant to write so, and not anta*h*stha, or,
as it would have written, antasstha. It shows equal care in the use of
the nasals, and generally carries on the sandhi between different
paragraphs. Here and there I met with better readings than those given
in Rajendralal Mitra's edition, but in most cases the commentary would
have been sufficient to restore the right reading. A few various
readings, which seemed to deserve being mentioned, will be found

<span id="page_lxxix">p. lxxix</span>

in the notes. The MS., though carefully written, is not free from the
ordinary blunders. At first one feels inclined to attribute some
importance to every peculiarity of a new MS., but very soon one finds
out that what seems peculiar, is in reality carelessness. Thus Ait. Âr.
III, I, 5, 2, the Kashmir MS. has pûrvam akshara*m* rûpam, instead of
what alone can be right, pûrvarûpam. Instead of pragayâ pa*s*ubhi*h* it
writes repeatedly pra*g*aya pa*s*ubhi*h*, which is impossible. In III,
2, 2, it leaves out again and again manomaya between *kh*andomaya and
vâṅmaya; but that this is a mere accident we learn later on, where in
the same sentence manomayo, is found in its right place. Such cases
reduce this MS. to its proper level, and make us look with suspicion on
any accidental variations, such as I have noticed in my translation.

The additional paragraph, noticed by Dr. Bühler, is very indistinct, and
contains, so far as I am able to find out, sânti verses only.

I have no doubt that the discovery of new MSS. of the Upanishads and
their commentaries will throw new light on the very numerous
difficulties with which a translator of the Upanishads, particularly in
attempting a complete and faithful translation, has at present to
grapple. Some of the difficulties, which existed thirty years ago, have
been removed since by the general progress of Vedic scholarship, and by
the editions of texts and commentaries and translations of Upanishads,
many of which were known at that time in manuscript only. But I fully
agree with M. Regnaud as to the difficultés considérables que les
meilleures traductions laissent subsister, and which can be solved only
by a continued study of the Upanishads, the Âra*n*yakas, the
Brâhma*n*as, and the Vedânta-sûtras.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[lxxii:1](sbe01014.htm#fr_38) Rig-veda,
translated by M. M., vol. i, Preface, p. cxliii.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[lxxviii:1](sbe01014.htm#fr_39) Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1877. Extra Number,
containing the Detailed Report of a Tour in search of Sanskrit MSS.,
made in Kásmír, Rajputana, and Central India, by G. Bühler.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meaning of the Word Upanishad](sbe01015)
