[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01003)  [Next](sbe01005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

# TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.

The system of transcribing Oriental words with Roman types, adopted by
the translators of the Sacred Books of the East, is, on the whole, the
same which I first laid down in my Proposals for a Missionary Alphabet,
1854, and which afterwards I shortly described in my Lectures on the
Science of Language, Second Series, p. 169 (ninth edition). That system
allows of great freedom in its application to different languages, and
has, therefore, recommended itself to many scholars, even if they had
long been accustomed to use their own system of transliteration.

It rests in fact on a few principles only, which may be applied to
individual languages according to the views which each student has
formed for himself of the character and the pronunciation of the vowels
and consonants of any given alphabet.

It does not differ essentially from the Standard Alphabet proposed by
Professor Lepsius. It only endeavours to realise, by means of the
ordinary types which are found in every printing office, what my learned
friend has been enabled to achieve, it may be in a more perfect manner,
by means of a number of new types with diacritical marks, cast expressly
for him by the Berlin Academy.

The general principles of what, on account of its easy application to
all languages, I have called the Missionary Alphabet, are these:

1\. No letters are to be used which do not exist in ordinary founts.

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

2\. The same Roman type is always to represent the same foreign letter,
and the same foreign letter is always to be represented by the same
Roman type.

3\. Simple letters are, as a rule, to be represented by simple, compound
by compound types.

4\. It is not attempted to indicate the pronunciation of foreign
languages, but only to represent foreign letters by Roman types, leaving
the pronunciation to be learnt, as it is now, from grammars or from
conversation with natives.

5\. The foundation of every system of transliteration must consist of a
classification of the typical sounds of human speech. Such
classification may be more or less perfect, more or less minute,
according to the objects in view. For ordinary purposes the
classification in vowels and consonants, and of consonants again in
gutturals, dentals, and labials suffices. In these three classes we
distinguish hard (not-voiced) and sonant (voiced) consonants, each being
liable to aspiration; nasals, sibilants, and semivowels, some of these
also, being either voiced or not-voiced.

6\. After having settled the typical sounds, we assign to them, as much
as possible, the ordinary Roman types of the first class.

7\. We then arrange in every language which possesses a richer alphabet,
all remaining letters, according to their affinities, as modifications
of the nearest typical letters, or as letters of the second and third
class. Thus linguals in Sanskrit are treated as nearest to dentals,
palatals to gutturals.

8\. The manner of expressing such modifications is uniform throughout.
While all typical letters of

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

the first class are expressed by Roman types, modified letters of the
second class are expressed by italics, modified letters of the third
class by small capitals. Only in extreme cases, where another class of
modified types is wanted, are we compelled to have recourse either to
diacritical marks, or to a different fount of types.

9\. Which letters in each language are to be considered as primary,
secondary, or tertiary may, to a certain extent, be left to the
discretion of individual scholars.

10\. As it has been found quite impossible to devise any practical
alphabet that should accurately represent the pronunciation of words,
the Missionary Alphabet, by not attempting to indicate minute shades of
pronunciation, has at all events the advantage of not misleading readers
in their pronunciation of foreign words. An italic *t*, for instance, or
a small capital T, serves simply as a warning that this is not the
ordinary t, though it has some affinity with it. How it is to be
pronounced must be learnt for each language, as it now is, from a
grammar or otherwise. Thus *t* in Sanskrit is the lingual *t*. How that
is to be pronounced, we must learn from the Prâtisâkhvas, or from the
mouth of a highly educated *S*rotriya. We shall then learn that its
pronunciation is really that of what we call the ordinary dental t, as
in town, while the ordinary dental t in Sanskrit has a pronunciation of
its own, extremely difficult to acquire for Europeans.

11\. Words or sentences which used to be printed in italics are spaced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Transliteration Chart, Page 1](sbe01005.md)
