[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01103)  [Next](sbe01105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### TENTH KHA*ND*A.

'Those who know this <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_250.md) (even though
they still be g*ri*hasthas, householders) and those who in the forest
follow faith and austerities (the vânaprasthas, and of the
parivrâ*g*akas those who do not yet know the Highest Brahman) go <span
id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_251) to light (ar*k*is.md), from light to day,
from day to the light half of the moon, from the light half of the moon
to the six months when the sun goes to the north, from the six months
when the sun goes to the north to the year, from the year to the sun,
from the sun to the moon, from the moon to the lightning. There is a
person not human <span id="fr_253"></span>[3](#fn_252.md),--

2\. 'He leads them to Brahman (the conditioned Brahman). This is the
path of the Devas.

3\. 'But they who living in a village practise (a life of) sacrifices,
works of public utility, and alms, they go to the smoke, from smoke to
night, from night to the dark half of the moon, from the dark half of
the moon to the six months when the sun goes to the south. But they do
not reach the year.

4\. 'From the months they go to the world of the fathers, from the world
of the fathers to the ether, from the ether to the moon. That is Soma,
the king. Here they are loved (eaten) by the Devas, yes, the Devas love
(eat) them <span id="fr_254"></span>[4](#fn_253.md).

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

5\. 'Having dwelt there, till their (good) works are consumed, they
return again that way as they came <span
id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_254.md), to the ether, from the ether to the
air. Then the sacrificer, having become air, becomes smoke, having
become smoke, he becomes mist,

6\. 'Having become mist, he becomes a cloud, having become a cloud, he
rains down. Then he is born as rice and corn, herbs and trees, sesamum.
and beans. From thence the escape is beset with most difficulties. For
whoever the persons may be that eat the food, and beget offspring, he
henceforth becomes like unto them.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

7\. 'Those whose conduct has been good, will quickly attain some good
birth, the birth of a Brâhma*n*a, or a Kshatriya, or a Vai*s*ya. But
those whose conduct has been evil, will quickly attain an evil birth,
the birth of a dog, or a hog, or a *K*a*nd*âla.

8\. 'On neither of these two ways those small creatures (flies, worms,
&c.) are continually returning of whom it may be said, Live and die.
Theirs is a third place.

'Therefore that world never becomes full <span
id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_255) (cf. V, 3, 2.md).

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

'Hence let a man take care to himself <span
id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_256.md)! And thus it is said in the following
*S*loka <span id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_257.md):--

9\. 'A man who steals gold, who drinks spirits,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

who dishonours his Guru's bed, who kills a Brahman, these four fall, and
as a fifth he who associates with them.

10\. 'But he who thus knows the five fires is not defiled by sin even
though he associates with them. He who knows this, is pure, clean, and
obtains the world of the blessed, yea, he obtains the world of the
blessed.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_250"></span>[80:1](sbe01104.htm#fr_251.md) The doctrine of the
five fires, and our being born in them, i. e. in heaven, rain, earth,
man, and woman.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[80:2](sbe01104.htm#fr_252.md) Cf. *Kh*. Up. IV,
15, 5.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[80:3](sbe01104.htm#fr_253.md) Instead of mânava,
human, or amânava, not human, the B*ri*h. Âr. reads mânasa, mental, or
created by manas, mind.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[80:4](sbe01104.htm#fr_254.md) This passage has
been translated, 'They are the food of the gods. The gods do eat it.'
And this is indeed the literal meaning of the words. But bha*g* (to
enjoy) and bhaksh (to eat) are often <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>
used by theosophical writers in India, in the more general sense of
cherishing or loving, and anna in the sense of an object of desire,
love, and protection. The commentators, however, as the use of bhaksh in
this sense is exceptional, or as it has no support in the use of the
ancients, warn us here against a possible misunderstanding. If those,
they say, who have performed sacrifices enter at last into the essence
of Soma, the moon, and are eaten by the Devas, by Indra, &c., what is
the use of their good works? No, they reply, they are not really eaten.
Food (anna) means only what is helpful and delightful; it is not meant
that they are eaten by morsels, but that they form the delight of the
Devas. Thus we hear it said that men, women, and cattle are food for
kings. And if it is said that women are loved by men, they are, in being
loved, themselves loving. Thus these men also, being loved by the Devas,
are happy and rejoice with the Devas. Their body, in order to be able to
rejoice in the moon, becomes of a watery substance, as it was said
before, that the water, called the Sraddha libation, when offered in
heaven, as in the fire of the altar, becomes Soma, the king (*Kh*. Up.
V, 4, 1). That water becomes, after various changes, the body of those
who have performed good works, and when a man is dead and his body burnt
(*Kh*. Up. V, 9, 2), the water rises from the body upwards with the
smoke, and carries him to the moon, where, in that body, he enjoys the
fruits of his good works, as long as they last. When they are consumed,
like the oil in a lamp, he has to return to a new round of existences.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[81:1](sbe01104.htm#fr_255.md) But only to a
certain point.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[82:1](sbe01104.htm#fr_256.md) In this manner all
the five questions have been answered. First, why in the fifth oblation
water is called man; secondly, to what place men go after death, some by
the path of the Devas, others by the path of the fathers, others again
by neither of these paths; thirdly, how they return, some returning to
Brahman, others returning to the earth; fourthly, where the paths of the
Devas and the fathers diverge, viz. when from the half-year the path of
the Devas goes on to the year, while that of the fathers branches off to
the world of the fathers; fifthly, why that world, the other world, does
never become full, viz. because men either go on to Brahman or return
again to this world.

Many questions are raised among Indian philosophers on the exact meaning
of certain passages occurring in the preceding paragraphs. First, as to
who is admitted to the path of the Devas? Householders, who know the
secret doctrine of the five fires or the five libations of the
Agnihotra, as described above, while other householders, who only
perform the ordinary sacrifices, without a knowledge of their secret
meaning, go by the path of the fathers. Secondly, those who have retired
to the forest, and whose worship there consists in faith and
austerities, i. e. Vânaprasthas and Parivrâ*g*akas, before they arrive
at a knowledge of the true Brahman. The question then arises, whether
religious students also enter the path of the Devas? This is affirmed,
because Purâ*n*as and Sm*ri*tis assert it, or because our text, if
properly understood, does not exclude it. Those, on the contrary, who
know not only a conditioned, but the highest unconditioned Brahman, do
not proceed on the path of the Devas, but obtain Brahman immediately.

Again, there is much difference of opinion whether, after a man <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> has been in the moon, consuming his works, he
can be born again. Birth is the result of former works, and if former
works are altogether consumed, there can be no new birth. This, however,
is shown to be an erroneous view, because, besides the good sacrificial
works, the fruits of which are consumed in the moon, there are other
works which have to be enjoyed or expiated, as the case may be, in a new
existence.

The great difficulty or danger in the round of transmigration arises
when the rain has fructified the earth, and passes into herbs and trees,
rice, corn, and beans. For, first of all, some of the rain does not
fructify at once, but falls into rivers and into the sea, to be
swallowed up by fishes and sea monsters. Then, only after these have
been dissolved in the sea, and after the sea water has been attracted by
the clouds, the rain falls down again, it may be on desert or stony
land. Here it may be swallowed by snakes or deer, and these may be
swallowed by other animals, so that the round of existence seems
endless. Nor is this all. Some rain may dry up, or be absorbed by bodies
that cannot be eaten. Then, if the rain is absorbed by rice, corn, &c.,
and this be eaten, it may be eaten by children or by men who have
renounced marriage, and thus again lose the chance of a new birth..
Lastly, there is the danger arising from the nature of the being; in
whom the food, such as rice and corn, becomes a new seed, and likewise
from the nature of the mother. All these chances have to be met before a
new birth as a Brâhma*n*a, Kshatriya, or Vai*s*ya can be secured.

Another curious distinction is here made by *S*aṅkara in his commentary.
There are some, he says, who assume the form of rice, corn, &c., not in
their descent from a higher world, as described in the Upanishad, but as
a definite punishment for certain evil deeds they have committed. These
remain in that state till the results of their evil deeds are over, and
assume then a new body, according to their work, like caterpillars. With
them there is also a consciousness of these states, and the acts which
caused them to <span id="page_84">p. 84</span> assume this or that body,
leave impressions behind, like dreams. This is not the case with those
who in their descent from the moon, pass, as we saw, through an
existence as rice, corn, &c. They have no consciousness of such
existences, at least not in their descent. In their ascent to the moon,
they have consciousness, as a man who climbs up a tree knows what he is
about. But in their descent, that consciousness is gone, as it is when a
man falls down from a tree. Otherwise a man, who by his good works had
deserved rewards in the moon, would, while corn is being ground, suffer
tortures, as if he were in hell, and the very object of good works, as
taught by the Veda, would be defeated. As we see that a man struck by a
hammer can be carried away unconscious, so it is in the descent of
souls, till they are born again as men, and gain a new start for the
attainment of the Highest Brahman.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[83:1](sbe01104.htm#fr_257.md) Let him despise it.
Comm.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[83:2](sbe01104.htm#fr_258.md) Evidently an old
Trish*t*ubh verse, but irregular in the third line. See Manu XI, 54.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 11](sbe01105.md)
