[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

### VÂ*G*ASANEYI-SA*M*HITÂ-UPANISHAD,

###### SOMETIMES CALLED

### Î*S*ÂVÂSYA OR Î*S*Â-UPANISHAD

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

# VÂ*G*ASANEYI-SA*M*HITÂ-UPANISHAD.

1\. ALL this, whatsoever moves on earth, is to be hidden in the Lord
(the Self). When thou hast surrendered all this, then thou mayest enjoy.
Do not covet the wealth of any man!

2\. Though a man may wish to live a hundred years, performing works, it
will be thus with him; but not in any other way: work will thus not
cling to a man.

3\. There are the worlds of the Asuras <span
id="fr_765"></span>[1](#fn_763) covered with blind darkness. Those who
have destroyed their self (who perform works, without having arrived at
a knowledge of the true Self ), go after death to those worlds.

4\. That one (the Self), though never stirring, is swifter than thought.
The Devas (senses) never reached it, it walked <span
id="fr_766"></span>[2](#fn_764) before them. Though standing still, it
overtakes the others who are running. Mâtarisvan (the wind, the moving
spirit) bestows powers <span id="fr_767"></span>[3](#fn_765) on it.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

5\. It stirs and it stirs not; it is far, and likewise near <span
id="fr_768"></span>[1](#fn_766). It is inside of all this, and it is
outside of all this.

6\. And he who beholds all beings in the Self, and the Self in all
beings, he never turns away from it <span
id="fr_769"></span>[2](#fn_767).

7\. When to a man who understands, the Self has become all things, what
sorrow, what trouble can there be to him who once beheld that unity?

8\. He <span id="fr_770"></span>[3](#fn_768) (the Self) encircled all,
bright, incorporeal, scatheless, without muscles, pure, untouched by
evil; a seer, wise, omnipresent, self-existent, he disposed all things
rightly for eternal years.

9\. All who worship what is not real knowledge (good works), enter into
blind darkness: those who delight in real knowledge, enter, as it were,
into greater darkness.

10\. One thing, they say, is obtained from real knowledge; another, they
say, from what is not knowledge. Thus we have heard from the wise who
taught us this <span id="fr_771"></span>[4](#fn_769).

11\. He who knows at the same time both knowledge and not-knowledge,
overcomes death through not-knowledge, and obtains immortality through
knowledge.

12\. All who worship what is not the true cause,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

enter into blind darkness: those who delight in the true cause, enter,
as it were, into greater darkness.

13\. One thing, they say, is obtained from (knowledge of) the cause;
another, they say, from (knowledge of) what is not the cause. Thus we
have heard from the wise who taught us this.

14\. He who knows at the same time both the cause and the destruction
(the perishable body), overcomes death by destruction (the perishable
body), and obtains immortality through (knowledge of ) the true cause.

15\. The door of the True is covered with a golden disk <span
id="fr_772"></span>[1](#fn_770). Open that, O Pûshan, that we may see
the nature of the True <span id="fr_773"></span>[2](#fn_771).

16\. O Pûshan, only seer, Yama (judge), Sûrya (sun), son of Pra*g*âpati,
spread thy rays and gather them! The light which is thy fairest form, I
see it. I am what He is (viz. the person in the sun) <span
id="fr_774"></span>[3](#fn_772).

17\. Breath <span id="fr_775"></span>[4](#fn_773) to air, and to the
immortal! Then this my body ends in ashes. Om! Mind, remember! Remember
thy deeds! Mind, remember! Remember thy deeds <span
id="fr_776"></span>[5](#fn_774)!

18\. Agni, lead us on to wealth (beatitude) by a good path, thou, O God,
who knowest all things!

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Keep far from us
crooked evil, and we shall offer thee the fullest praise! (Rv. I, 189,
1.)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

This Upanishad, though apparently simple and intelligible, is in reality
one of the most difficult to understand properly. Coming at the end of
the Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ, in which the sacrifices and the hymns to be
used by the officiating priests have been described, it begins by
declaring that all has to be surrendered to the Lord. The name is, lord,
is peculiar, as having a far more personal colouring than Âtman, Self,
or Brahman, the usual names given by the Upanishads to what is the
object of the highest knowledge.

Next follows a permission to continue the performance of sacrifices,
provided that all desires have been surrendered. And here occurs our
first difficulty, which has perplexed ancient as well as modern
commentators.

I shall try, first of all, to justify my own translation. I hold that
the Upanishad wishes to teach the uselessness by themselves of all good
works, whether we call them sacrificial, legal, or moral, and yet, at
the same time, to recognise, if not the necessity, at least the
harmlessness of good works, provided they are performed without any
selfish motives, without any desire of reward, but simply as a
preparation for higher knowledge, as a means, in fact, of subduing all
passions, and producing that serenity of mind without which man is
incapable of receiving the highest knowledge. From that point of view
the Upanishad may well say, Let a man wish to live here his appointed
time, let him even perform all works. If only he knows that all must be
surrendered to the Lord, then the work done by him will not cling to
him. It will not work on and produce effect after effect, nor will it
involve him in a succession of new births in which to enjoy the reward
of his works, but it will leave him free to enjoy the blessings of the
highest knowledge. It will have served as a preparation for that higher
knowledge which the Upanishad imparts, and which secures freedom from
further births.

The expression 'na karma lipyate nare' seems to me to admit of this one
explanation only, viz. that work done does not cling to man, provided he
has acquired the highest knowledge. Similar expressions occur again and
again. Lip was, no doubt, used originally of evil deeds which became, as
it were, engrained in man; but afterwards of all work, even of good
work, if done with a desire of reward. The doctrine of the Upanishads is
throughout that orthodoxy and sacrifice can procure a limited beatitude
only,

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

and that they are a hindrance to real salvation, which can be obtained
by knowledge alone. In our passage therefore we can recognise one
meaning only, viz. that work does not cling to man or stain him, if only
he knows, i. e. if he has been enlightened by the Upanishad.

*S*aṅkara, in his commentary on the Vedânta-sûtras III, 4, 7; 13; 14,
takes the same view of this passage. The opponent of Bâdarâya*n*a, in
this case, *G*aimini himself, maintains that karma, work, is
indispensable to knowledge, and among other arguments, he says, III, 4,
7, that it is so 'Niyamât,' 'Because it is so laid down by the law.' The
passage here referred to is, according to *S*aṅkara, our very verse,
which, he thinks, should be translated as follows: 'Let a man wish to
live a hundred years here (in this body) performing works; thus will an
evil deed not cling to thee, while thou art a man; there is no other way
but this by which to escape the influence of works.' In answer to this,
Bâdarâya*n*a says, first of all, III, 4, 13, that this rule may refer to
all men in general, and not to one who knows; or, III, 4, 14, if it
refers to a man who knows, that then the permission to perform works is
only intended to exalt the value of knowledge, the meaning being that
even to a man who performs sacrifices all his life, work does not cling,
if only he knows;--such being the power of knowledge.

The same *S*aṅkara, however, who here sees quite clearly that this verse
refers to a man who knows, explains it in the Upanishad as referring to
a man who does not know (itarasyânâtma*g*ñatayâtmagraha*n*â*s*aktasya).
It would then mean: 'Let such a one, while performing works here on
earth, wish to live a hundred years. In this manner there is no other
way for him but this (the performance of sacrifices), so that an evil
deed should not be engrained, or so that he should not be stained by
such a deed.' The first and second verses of the Upanishad would thus
represent the two paths of life, that of knowledge and that of works.
and the following verses would explain the rewards assigned to each.

Mahîdhara, in his commentary on the Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ, steers at
first a middle course. He would translate: 'Let one who performs the
Agnihotra and other sacrifices, without any desire of reward, wish to
live here a hundred years. If thou do so, there will be salvation for
thee, not otherwise. There are many roads that, lead to heaven, but one
only leading to salvation, namely, performance of good works, without
any desire of reward, which produces a pure heart. Work thus done,
merely as a preparation for salvation, does not cling to man, i.e. it
produces a pure heart, but does not

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

entail any further consequences.' So far he agrees with Uva*t*a's
explanation <span id="fr_777"></span>[1](#fn_775). He allows, however,
another explanation also, so that the second line would convey the
meaning: 'If a man lives thus (performing good works), then there is no
other way by which an evil deed should not be engrained; i.e. in order
to escape the power of sin, he must all his life perform sacred acts.'

Next follows a description of the lot of those who, immersed in works,
have not arrived at the highest knowledge, and have not recovered their
true self in the Highest Self, or Brahman. That Brahman, though the name
is not used here, is then described, and salvation is promised to the
man who beholds all things in the Self and the Self in all things.

The verses 9-14 are again full of difficulty, not so much in themselves
as in their relation to the general system of thought which prevails in
the Upanishads, and forms the foundation of the Vedânta philosophy. The
commentators vary considerably in their interpretations. *S*aṅkara
explains avidyâ, not-knowledge, by good works, particularly sacrifice,
performed with a hope of reward; vidyâ, or knowledge, by a knowledge of
the gods, but not, as yet, of the highest Brahman. The former is
generally supposed to lead the sacrificer to the pit*ri*loka, the world
of the fathers, from whence he returns to a series of new births; the
latter to the devaloka, the world of the gods, from whence he may either
proceed to Brahman, or enter upon a new round of existences. The
question then arises, how in our passage the former could be said to
lead to blind darkness, the latter to still greater darkness. But for
that statement, I have no doubt that all the commentators would, as
usual, have taken vidyâ for the knowledge of the Highest Brahman, and
avidyâ for orthodox belief in the gods and good works, the former
securing immortality in the sense of freedom from new births, while the
reward of the latter is blessedness in heaven for a limited period, but
without freedom from new births.

This antithesis between vidyâ and avidyâ seems to me so firmly
established that I cannot bring myself to surrender it here. Though this
Upanishad has its own very peculiar character, yet its object is, after
all, to impart a knowledge of the Highest Self, and not to inculcate
merely a difference between faith in the ordinary gods and good works.
It was distinctly said before (ver. 3), that those who have destroyed
their self, i. e. who perform works only,

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

and have not arrived at a knowledge of the true Self, go to the worlds
of the Asuras, which are covered with blind darkness. If then the same
blind darkness is said in verse 9 to be the lot of those who worship
not-knowledge, this can only mean those who have not discovered the true
Self, but are satisfied with the performance of good works. And if those
who perform good works are opposed to others who delight in true
knowledge, that knowledge can be the knowledge of the true Self only.

The difficulty therefore which has perplexed *S*aṅkara is this, how,
while the orthodox believer is said to enter into blind darkness, the
true disciple, who has acquired a knowledge of the true Self, could be
said to enter into still greater darkness. While *S*aṅkara in this case
seems hardly to have caught the drift of the Upanishad, Uva*t*a and
Mahîdhara propose an explanation which is far more satisfactory. They
perceive that the chief stress must be laid on the words ubhaya*m* saha,
'both together,' in verses 11 and 14. The doctrine of certain Vedânta
philosophers was that works, though they cannot by themselves lead to
salvation, are useful as a preparation for the highest knowledge, and
that those who imagine that they can attain the highest knowledge
without such previous preparation, are utterly mistaken. From this point
of view therefore the author of the Upanishad might well say that those
who give themselves to what is not knowledge, i. e. to sacrificial and
other good works, enter into darkness, but that those who delight
altogether in knowledge, despising the previous discipline of works,
deceive themselves and enter into still greater darkness.

Then follows the next verse, simply stating that, according to the
teaching of wise people, the reward of knowledge is one thing, the
reward of ignorance, i. e. trust in sacrifice, another. Here Mahîdhara
is right again by assigning the pit*ri*loka, the world of the fathers,
as the reward of the ignorant; the devaloka, the world of the gods, as
the reward of the enlightened, provided that from the world of the gods
they pass on to the knowledge of the Highest Self or Brahman.

The third verse contains the strongest confirmation of Mahîdhara's view.
Here it is laid down distinctly that he only who knows both together,
both what is called ignorance and what is called knowledge, can be
saved, because by good works he overcomes death, here explained by
natural works, and by knowledge he obtains the Immortal, here explained
by oneness with the gods, the last step that leads on to oneness with
Brahman.

Uva*t*a, who takes the same view of these verses, explains at once,

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

and even more boldly than Mahîdhara <span
id="fr_778"></span>[1](#fn_776), vidyâ, or knowledge, by
brahmavi*g*ñâna, knowledge of Brahman, which by itself, and if not
preceded by works, leads to even greater darkness than what is called
ignorance, i. e. sacrifice and orthodoxy without knowledge.

The three corresponding verses, treating of sambhûti and asambhûti
instead of vidyâ and avidyâ, stand first in the Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ.
They must necessarily be explained in accordance with our explanation of
the former verses, i. e. sambhûti must correspond to vidyâ, it must be
meant for the true cause, i. e. for Brahman, while asambhûti must
correspond with avidyâ, as a name of what is not real, but phenomenal
only and perishable.

Mahîdhara thinks that these verses refer to the Bauddhas, which can
hardly be admitted, unless we take Buddhist in a very general sense.
Uva*t*a puts the Lokâyatas in their place <span
id="fr_779"></span>[2](#fn_777). It is curious also to observe that
Mahîdhara, following Uva*t*a, explains asambhûti at first by the denial
of the resurrection of the body, while he takes sambhûti rightly for
Brahman. I have chiefly followed Uva*t*a's commentary, except in his
first explanation of asambhûti, resurrection <span
id="fr_780"></span>[3](#fn_778). In what follows Uva*t*a explains
sambhûti rightly by the only cause of the origin of the whole world, i.
e. Brahman <span id="fr_781"></span>[4](#fn_779), while he takes
vinâ*s*a, destruction, as a name of the perishable body <span
id="fr_782"></span>[5](#fn_780).

*S*aṅkara sees much more in these three verses than Uva*t*a. He takes
asambhûti as a name of Prakriti, the undeveloped cause, sambhûti as a
name of the phenomenal Brahman or Hira*n*yagarbha. From a worship of the
latter a man obtains supernatural powers, from devotion to the former,
absorption in Prak*ri*ti.

Mahîdhara also takes a similar view, and he allows, like *S*aṅkara,
another reading, viz. sambhûtim avinâ*s*a*m* ka, and avinâ*s*ena
m*ri*tyum tîrtvâ. In this case the sense would be: 'He who knows the
worship both of the developed and the undeveloped, overcomes

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

death, i. e. such evil as sin, passion, &c., through worship of the
undeveloped, while he obtains through worship of the developed, i. e. of
Hira*n*yagarbha, immortality, absorption in Prak*ri*ti.'

All these forced explanations to which the commentators have recourse,
arise from the shifting views held by various authorities with regard to
the value of works. Our Upanishad seems to me to propound the doctrine
that works, though in themselves useless, or even mischievous, if
performed with a view to any present or future rewards, are necessary as
a preparatory discipline. This is or was for a long time the orthodox
view. Each man was required to pass through the â*s*ramas, or stages of
student and householder, before he was admitted to the freedom of a
Sannyâsin. As on a ladder, no step was to be skipped. Those who
attempted to do so, were considered to have broken the old law, and in
some respects they may indeed be looked upon as the true precursors of
the Buddhists.

Nevertheless the opposite doctrine, that a man whose mind had become
enlightened, might at once drop the fetters of the law, without
performing all the tedious duties of student and householder, had strong
supporters too among orthodox philosophers. Cases of such rapid
conversion occur in the ancient traditions, and Bâdarâya*n*a himself was
obliged to admit the possibility of freedom and salvation without works,
though maintaining the superiority of the usual course, which led on
gradually from works to enlightenment and salvation <span
id="fr_783"></span>[1](#fn_781). It was from an unwillingness to assent
to the decided teaching of the Î*s*â-upanishad that *S*aṅkara attempted
to explain vidyâ, knowledge, in a limited sense, as knowledge of the
gods, and not yet knowledge of Brahman. He would not admit that
knowledge without works could lead to darkness, and even to greater
darkness than works without knowledge. Our Upanishad seems to have
dreaded libertinism, knowledge without works, more even than ritualism,
works without knowledge, and its true object was to show that orthodoxy
and sacrifice, though useless in themselves, must always form the
preparation for higher enlightenment.

How misleading *S*aṅkara's explanation may prove, we can see from the
translation of this Upanishad by Rammohun Roy. He followed *S*aṅkara
implicitly, and this is the sense which he drew from the text:--

49\. Those observers of religious rites that perform only the worship of
the sacred fire, and oblations to sages, to ancestors,

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

to men, and to other creatures, without regarding the worship of
celestial gods, shall enter into the dark region: and those practisers
of religious ceremonies who habitually worship the celestial gods only,
disregarding the worship of the sacred fire, and oblations to sages, to
ancestors, to men, and to other creatures, shall enter into a region
still darker than the former.

'10. It is said that adoration of the celestial gods produces one
consequence; and that the performance of the worship of sacred fire, and
oblations to sages, to ancestors, to men, and to other creatures,
produce another: thus have we heard from learned men, who have
distinctly explained the subject to us.

'11. Of those observers of ceremonies whosoever, knowing that adoration
of celestial gods, as well as the worship of the sacred fire, and
oblation to sages, to ancestors, to men, and to other creatures, should
be observed alike by the same individual, performs them both, will, by
means of the latter, surmount the obstacles presented by natural
temptations, and will attain the state of the celestial gods through the
practice of the former.

'12. Those observers of religious rites who worship Prak*ri*ti alone
(Prak*ri*ti or nature, who, though insensible, influenced by the Supreme
Spirit, operates throughout the universe) shall enter into the dark
region: and those practisers of religious ceremonies that are devoted to
worship solely the prior operating sensitive particle, allegorically
called Brahmá, shall enter into a region much more dark than the former.

'13. It is said that one consequence may be attained by the worship of
Brahmâ, and another by the adoration of Prak*ri*ti. Thus have we heard
from learned men, who have distinctly explained the subject to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_763"></span>[311:1](sbe01243.htm#fr_765) Asury\`â, Vâ*g*.
Sa*m*hitâ; asûryâ, Upan. Asuryà in the Upanishads in the sense of
belonging to the Asuras, i. e. gods, is exceptional. I should prefer
asûryá, sunless, as we find asûryé támasi in the Rig-veda, V, 32, 6.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[311:2](sbe01243.htm#fr_766) Pûrvam ar*s*at,
Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h.; pûrvam arshat, Upan. Mahîdhara suggests also arsat as a
contraction of a-ri*s*at, not perishing.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[311:3](sbe01243.htm#fr_767) Apas is explained
by karmâ*n*i, acts, in which case it would be meant for ápas, opus. But
the Vâ*g*. Sa*m*hitâ accentuates apás, i.e. <span id="page_312">p.
312</span> aquas, and Ânandagiri explains that water stands for acts,
because most sacrificial acts are performed with water.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[312:1](sbe01243.htm#fr_768) Tad v antike,
Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h.; tadvad antike, Upan.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[312:2](sbe01243.htm#fr_769) Vi*k*ikitsati,
Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h.; vi*g*ugupsate, Upan.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[312:3](sbe01243.htm#fr_770) *S*aṅkara takes
the subject to be the Self, and explains the neuter adjectives as
masculines. Mahîdhara takes the subject to be the man who has acquired a
knowledge of the Self, and who reaches the bright, incorporeal Brahman,
&c. Mahîdhara, however, likewise allows the former explanation.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[312:4](sbe01243.htm#fr_771) Cf. Talavak. Up.
I, 4; vidyâya*h*, avidyâyâ*h*, Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h.; vidyayâ, avidyayâ, Upan.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[313:1](sbe01243.htm#fr_772) Mahîdhara on verse
17: 'The face of the true (purusha in the sun) is covered by a golden
disk.'

<span id="fn_771"></span>[313:2](sbe01243.htm#fr_773) Cf. Maitr. Up. VI,
35.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[313:3](sbe01243.htm#fr_774) Asau purusha*h*
should probably be omitted.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[313:4](sbe01243.htm#fr_775) These lines are
supposed to be uttered by a man in the hour of death.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[313:5](sbe01243.htm#fr_776) The
Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ reads: Om, krato smara, k*li*be smara, k*ri*ta*m*
smara. Uva*t*a holds that Agni, fire, who has been worshipped in youth
and manhood, is here invoked in the form of mind, or that kratu is meant
for sacrifice. 'Agni, remember me! Think of the world! Remember my
deeds!'

<span id="fn_775"></span>[316:1](sbe01243.htm#fr_777) Uva*t*a explains
*g*i*g*îshivishe*h* for *g*i*g*îvishet as a purushavyataya*h*.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[318:1](sbe01243.htm#fr_778) Mahîdhara decides
in the end that vidyâ and am*ri*tam must here be taken in a limited or
relative sense, tasmâd vidyopâsanâm*ri*ta*m* *k*âpekshikam iti dik, and
so agrees on the whole with *S*aṅkara, pp. 25-27.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[318:2](sbe01243.htm#fr_779) Sha*d*
anush*t*ubha*h*, lokâyatikâ*h* prastûyante yeshâm etad dar*s*anam.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[318:3](sbe01243.htm#fr_780) M*ri*tasya sata*h*
puna*h* sambhavo nâsti, ata*h* *s*arîragraha*n*âd asmâkam muktir eva.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[318:4](sbe01243.htm#fr_781) Samastasya
*g*agata*h* sambhavaikahetu brahma.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[318:5](sbe01243.htm#fr_782) Vinâsa*m* vinâ*s*i
ka vapu*h* *s*arîram.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[319:1](sbe01243.htm#fr_783) Vedânta-sûtras
III, 4, 36-39.

'14. Of those observers of ceremonies, whatever person, knowing that the
adoration of Prak*ri*ti and that of Brahmá should be together observed
by the same individual, performs them both, will by means of the latter
overcome indigence, and will attain the state of Prak*ri*ti, through the
practice of the former.'
