[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01017)  [Next](sbe01019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## II.

## THE TALAVAKÂRA-UPANISHAD.

THIS Upanishad is best known by the name of Kena-upanishad, from its
first word. The name of brâhmî-upanishad (IV, 7) can hardly be
considered as a title. It means 'the teaching of Brahman,' and is used
with reference to other Upanishads also <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md). *S*aṅkara, in his commentary, tells us
that this Upanishad forms the ninth adhyâya of a Brâhma*n*a, or, if we
take his words quite literally, he says, 'the beginning of the ninth
adhyâya is "the Upanishad beginning with the words Keneshitam, and
treating of the Highest Brahman has to be taught."' In the eight
preceeding adhyâyas, he tells us, all the sacred rites or sacrifices had
been fully explained, and likewise the meditations (upâsana) on the
prâ*n*a (vital breath) which belongs to all these sacrifices, and those
meditations also which have reference to the fivefold and sevenfold
Sâmans. After that followed Gâyatra-sâman and the Va*ms*a, the
genealogical list. All this would naturally form the subject of a
Sâma-veda-brâhma*n*a, and we find portions corresponding to the
description given by *S*aṅkara in the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad, e*g*. the
fivefold Sâman, II, 2; the sevenfold Sâman, II, 8; the Gâyatra-sâman,
III, 12, I.

Ânanda*g*ñâna tells us that our Upanishad belonged to the Sâkhâ of the
Talavakâras.

All this had formerly to be taken on trust, because no Brâhma*n*a was
known containing the Upanishad. Dr. Burnell, however, has lately
discovered a Brâhma*n*a of the Sâma-veda which comes very near the
description given by *S*aṅkara. In a letter dated Tanjore, 8th Dec.
1878, he

<span id="page_xc">p. xc</span>

writes: 'It appears to me that you would be glad to know the following
about the Kena-upanishad, as it occurs in my MS. of the
Talavakâra-brâhma*n*a.

'The last book but one of this Brâhma*n*a is termed
Upanishad-brâhma*n*a. It consists of 145 khandas treating of the
Gâyatra-sâman, and the 134th is a Vamsa. The Kena-upanishad comprises
the 135-145 khandas, or the tenth anuvâka of a chapter. The 139th
section begins: âsâ vâ idam agra âsit, &c.

'My MS. of the Talavakâra-brâhma*n*a agrees, as regards the contents,
exactly with what *S*aṅkara says, but not in the divisions. He says that
the Kena-upanishad begins the ninth adhyâya, but that is not so in my
MS. Neither the beginning nor the end of this Upanishad is noticed
particularly.

'The last book of this Brâhma*n*a is the Ârsheya-brâhma*n*a, which I
printed last February.

'Among the teachers quoted in the Brâhma*n*a I have noticed both Tândya
and *S*â*t*yâyani. I should not be surprised to find in it the difficult
quotations which are incorrectly given in the MSS. of Sâya*n*a's
commentary on the Rig-veda. The story of Apâlâ, quoted by Sâya*n*a in
his commentary on the Rig-veda, VIII, 80, as from the *S*â*t*yâyanaka,
is found word for word, except some trivial var. lectiones, in sections
220-221 of the Agnish*t*oma book of the Talavakâra-brâhma*n*a. The
*S*â*t*yâyanins seem to be closely connected with the
Talavakâra-*s*âkhâ.'

From a communication made by Dr. Burnell to the Academy (1 Feb. 79), I
gather that this Talavakâra-brâhma*n*a is called by those who study it
'*G*aiminîya-brâhma*n*a,' after the *S*âkhâ of the Sâma-veda which they
follow. The account given in the Academy differs on some particulars
slightly from that given in Dr. Burnell's letter to me. He writes: 'The
largest part of the Brâhma*n*a treats of the sacrifices and the Sâmans
used at them. The first chapter is on the Agnihotra, and the
Agnish*t*oma and other rites follow at great length. Then comes a book
termed Upanishad-brâhma*n*a. This contains 145 sections in four
chapters. It begins with speculations on the Gâyatra-sâman,

<span id="page_xci">p. xci</span>

followed by a Va*m*sa; next, some similar matter and another Va*m*sa.
Then (§§ 135-138) comes the Kena-upanishad (Talavakâra). The last book
is the Ârsheya. The Upanishad forms the tenth anuvâka of the fourth
chapter, not the beginning of a ninth chapter, as *S*aṅkara remarks.'

The Kena-upanishad has been frequently published and translated. It
forms part of Dârâ Shukoh's Persian, and Anquetil Duperron's Latin
translations. It was several times published in English by Rammohun Roy
(Translations of Several Principal Books, Passages, and Texts of the
Veda, London, 1832, p. 41), in German by Windischmann, Poley, and
others. It has been more or less fully discussed by Colebrooke,
Windischmann, Poley, Weber, Röer, Gough, and Regnaud in the books
mentioned before,

Besides the text of this Upanishad contained in the Brâhma*n*a of the
Sâma-veda, there is another text, slightly differing, belonging to the
Atharva-veda, and there are commentaries on both texts (Colebrooke,
Misc. Essays, 1873, II, p. 80).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[lxxxix:1](sbe01018.htm#fr_53.md) See before, p.
lxxxiii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Aitareya-Âra*n*yaka](sbe01019.md)
