[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01020)  [Next](sbe01022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## V.

## THE VÂGASANEYI-SAMHITÂ-UPANISHAD.

THE Vâgasaneyi-sa*m*hitâ-upanishad, commonly called from its beginning,
Îsâ or Îsâvâsya, forms the fortieth and concluding chapter of the
Sa*m*hitâ of the White Ya*g*ur-veda. If the Sa*m*hitâs are presupposed
by the Brâhma*n*as, at least in that form in which we possess them, then
this Upanishad, being the only one that forms part of a Sa*m*hitâ, might
claim a very early age. The Sa*m*hitâ of the White Ya*g*ur-veda,
however, is acknowledged to be of modern origin, as compared with the
Sa*m*hitâ of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda, and it would not be safe therefore
to ascribe to this Upanishad a much higher antiquity than to those which
have found a place in the older Brâhma*n*as and Âra*n*yakas.

There are differences between the text, as contained in the
Ya*g*ur-veda-sa*m*hitâ, and the text of the Upanishad by itself. Those
which are of some interest have been mentioned in the notes.

In some notes appended to the translation of this Upanishad I have
called attention to what seems to me

<span id="page_ci">p. ci</span>

its peculiar character, namely, the recognition of the necessity of
works as a preparation for the reception of the highest knowledge. This
agrees well with the position occupied by this Upanishad at the end of
the Sa*m*hitâ, in which the sacrificial works and the hymns that are to
accompany them are contained. The doctrine that the moment a man is
enlightened, he becomes free, as taught in other Upanishads, led to a
rejection of all discipline and a condemnation of all sacrifices, which
could hardly have been tolerated in the last chapter of the
Ya*g*ur-veda-sa*m*hitâ, the liturgical Veda par excellence.

Other peculiarities of this Upanishad are the name Î*s*, lord, a far
more personal name for the highest Being than Brahman; the asurya
(demoniacal) or asûrya (sunless) worlds to which all go who have lost
their self; Mâtari*s*van, used in the sense of prâ*n*a or spirit;
asnâviram, without muscles, in the sense of incorporeal; and the
distinction between sambhûti and asambhûti in verses 12-14.

The editions of the text, commentaries, and glosses, and the earlier
translations may be seen in the works quoted before, p. lxxxiv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1](sbe01022.md)
