[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01220)  [Next](sbe01222) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EIGHTH KHA*ND*A.

1\. Here (with regard to obtaining Hira*n*yagarbha) there are these
*S*lokas:

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

2\. The fivefold body into which the indestructible (prâ*n*a, breath)
enters, that body which the harnessed horses (the senses) draw about,
that body where the true of the true (the highest Brahman) follows
after, in that body (of the worshipper) all gods <span
id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_578) become one.

3\. That body into which goes the indestructible (the breath) which we
have joined (in meditation), proceeding from the indestructible (the
highest Brahman), that body which the harnessed horses (the senses) draw
about, that body where the true of the true follows after, in that body
all gods become one.

4\. After separating themselves from the Yes and No of language, and of
all that is hard and cruel, poets have discovered (what they sought
for); dependent on names they rejoiced in what had been revealed <span
id="fr_581"></span>[2](#fn_579).

5\. That in which the poets rejoiced (the revealed nature of prâ*n*a,
breath), in it the gods exist all joined together. Having driven away
evil by means of that Brahman (which is hidden in prâ*n*a), the
enlightened man goes to the Svarga world (becomes one with
Hira*n*yagarbha <span id="fr_582"></span>[3](#fn_580), the universal
spirit).

6\. No one wishing to describe him (prâ*n*a, breath) by speech,
describes him by calling him 'woman,' 'neither woman nor man,' or 'man'
(all such names applying only to the material body, and not to prâ*n*a
or breath).

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

7\. Brahman (as hidden beneath prâ*n*a) is called the A; and the I (ego)
is gone there (the worshipper should know that he is uktha and prâ*n*a).

8\. This becomes perfect as a thousand of B*ri*hatî verses, and of that
hymn, perfect with a thousand Brihad verses, there are 36,000 syllables.
So many are also the thousands of days of human life <span
id="fr_583"></span>[1](#fn_581). By means of the syllable of life (the
a) alone (which is contained in that thousand of hymns) does a man
obtain the day of life (the mahâvrata day, which completes the number of
the days in the Gavâmayana, sacrifice), and by means of the day of life
(he obtains) the syllable of life.

9\. Now there is a chariot of the god (prâ*n*a) destroying all desires
(for the worlds of Indra, the moon, the earth, all of which lie below
the place of Hira*n*yagarbha). Its front part (the point of the two
shafts of the carriage where the yoke is fastened) is speech, its wheels
the cars, the horses the eyes, the driver the mind. Prâ*n*a (breath)
mounts that chariot (and on it, i. e. by means of meditating on Prâ*n*a,
he reaches Hira*n*yagarbha).

10\. This has been said by a *Ri*shi (Rv. X, 39, 12):--

11\. 'Come hither on that which is quicker than mind,' and (Rv. VIII,
73, 2) 'Come hither on that which is quicker than the twinkling of an
eye,' yea, the twinkling of an eye <span
id="fr_584"></span>[2](#fn_582).

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_575"></span>[232:1](sbe01220.htm#fr_577) The last line on
page 246 should, I think, be the penultimate line of page 247.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[232:2](sbe01220.htm#fr_578) The body consists
of six elements, and is hence called shâ*t*kau*s*ika. Of these, three
having a white appearance (fat, bone, and marrow), come from the sun and
from man; three having a. red appearance, come from fire and from the
woman.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[232:3](sbe01220.htm#fr_579) It is well
therefore to shake off this body, and by meditating on the uktha to
obtain identity with Hira*n*yagarbha. Comm.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[233:1](sbe01221.htm#fr_580) The worshipper
identifies himself by meditation with prâ*n*a, breath, which comprehends
all gods. These gods (Agni and the rest) appear in the forms of speech,
&c. Comm.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[233:2](sbe01221.htm#fr_581) The prâ*n*a,
breath, and their identity with it through meditation or worship. Comm.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[233:3](sbe01221.htm#fr_582) Sarvâhammânî
hira*n*yagarbha iti *s*rute*h*. Comm.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[234:1](sbe01221.htm#fr_583) Cf. 11, 2, 4, 4.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[234:2](sbe01221.htm#fr_584) The commentator
remarks that the worship and meditation on the uktha as prâ*n*a, as here
taught, is different from the prâ*n*avidyâ, the knowledge of prâ*n*a,
taught in the *Kh*ândogya, the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, &c., where prâ*n*a or
life is represented as the object of meditation, without any reference
to the uktha or other portions of the Mahâvrata ceremony. He enjoins
that the meditation on <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> the uktha as
prâ*n*a should be continued till the desired result, the identification
of the worshipper with prâ*n*a, is realised, and that it should
afterwards be repeated until death, because otherwise the impression
might vanish, and the reward of becoming a god, and going to the gods,
be lost. Nor is the worship to be confined to the time of the sacrifice,
the Mahâvrata, only, but it has to be repeated mentally during life.
There are neither certain postures required for it, nor certain times
and places. At the time of death, however, he who has become perfect in
this meditation on uktha, as the emblem of prâ*n*a, will have his
reward. Up to a certain point his fate will be the same as that of other
people. The activity of the senses will be absorbed in the mind, the
activity of the mind in breath, breath in the activity of life, life
with breath in the five elements, fire, &c., and these five elements
will be absorbed up to their seed in the Paramâtman or Highest Self.
This ends the old birth. But then the subtile body, having been absorbed
in the Highest Self, rises again in the lotus of the heart, and passing
out by the channel of the head, reaches a ray of the sun, whether by day
or by night, and goes at the northern or southern course of the sun to
the road of Ar*k*is or light. That Ar*k*is, light, and other powers
carry him on, and led by these he reaches the Brahma-loka, where he
creates to himself every kind of enjoyment, according to his wish. He
may create for himself a material body and enjoy all sorts of pleasures,
as if in a state of waking, or he may, without such a body, enjoy all
pleasures in mind only, as if in a dream. And as he creates these
various bodies according to his wish, he creates also living souls in
each, endowed with the internal organs of mind, and moves about in them,
as he pleases. In fact this world is the same for the devotee (yogin)
and for the Highest Self, except that creative power belongs truly to
the latter only. At last the devotee gains the highest knowledge, that
of the Highest Self in himself, and then, at the dissolution of the
Brahma-loka, he obtains complete freedom with Brahman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 1](sbe01222)
