[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01238)  [Next](sbe01240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

# KAUSHÎTAKI-BRÂHMA*N*A-UPANISHAD.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

# KAUSHÎTAKI-UPANISHAD.

## FIRST ADHYÂYA.

1\. *K*ITRA Gâṅgyâyani <span id="fr_696"></span>[1](#fn_694), forsooth,
wishing to perform a sacrifice, chose Âru*n*i (Uddâlaka <span
id="fr_697"></span>[2](#fn_695), to be his chief priest). But Âru*n*i
sent his son, *S*vetaketu, and said: 'Perform the sacrifice for him.'
When *S*vetaketu <span id="fr_698"></span>[3](#fn_696) had arrived,
*K*itra asked him: 'Son of Gautama <span
id="fr_699"></span>[4](#fn_697), is there a hidden place in the world
where you are able to place me, or is it the other way, and are you
going to place me in the world to which it (that other way) leads <span
id="fr_700"></span>[5](#fn_698)?'

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

He answered and said: 'I do not know this. But, let me ask the master.'
Having approached his father, he asked: 'Thus has *K*itra asked me; how
shall I answer?'

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

Âru*n*i said: 'I also do not know this. Only after having learnt the
proper portion of the Veda in *K*itra's own dwelling, shall we obtain
what others give us (knowledge). Come, we will both go.'

Having said this he took fuel in his hand (like a pupil), and approached
*K*itra Gâṅgyâyani, saying: 'May I come near to you?' He replied: 'You
are worthy of Brahman <span id="fr_701"></span>[1](#fn_699), O Gautama,
because you were not led away by pride. Come hither, I shall make you
know clearly.'

2\. And *K*itra said: All who depart from this world (or this body) go
to the moon <span id="fr_702"></span>[2](#fn_700). In the former, (the
bright) half, the moon delights in their spirits; in the other, (the
dark) half, the moon sends them on

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

to be born again <span id="fr_703"></span>[1](#fn_701). Verily, the moon
is the door of the Svarga world (the heavenly world). Now, if a man
objects to the moon (if one is not satisfied with life there) the moon
sets him free <span id="fr_704"></span>[2](#fn_702). But if a man does
not object, then the moon sends him down as rain upon this earth. And
according to his deeds and according to his knowledge he is born again
here as a worm, or as an insect, or as a fish, or as a bird, or as a
lion, or as a boar, or as a serpent <span
id="fr_705"></span>[3](#fn_703), or as a tiger, or as a man, or as
something else in different places <span
id="fr_706"></span>[4](#fn_704). When he has thus returned to the earth,
some one (a sage) asks: 'Who art thou?' And he should answer: 'From the
wise moon, who orders the seasons <span id="fr_707"></span>[5](#fn_705),
when it is born consisting of fifteen parts, from the moon who is the
home of our ancestors, the seed was brought. This seed, even me, they
(the gods mentioned in the Pañ*k*âgnividyâ <span
id="fr_708"></span>[6](#fn_706)) gathered up in an active man, and
through an active

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

man they brought me to a mother. Then I, growing up to be born, a being
living by months, whether twelve or thirteen, was together with my
father, who also lived by (years of) twelve or thirteen months, that I
might either know it (the true Brahman) or not know it. Therefore, O ye
seasons <span id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_707), grant that I may attain
immortality (knowledge of Brahman). By this my true saying, by this my
toil (beginning with the dwelling in the moon and ending with my birth
on earth) I am (like) a season, and the child of the seasons.' 'Who art
thou?' the sage asks again. 'I am thou,' he replies. Then he sets him
free <span id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_708) (to proceed onward).

He (at the time of death), having reached the path of the gods, comes to
the world of Agni (fire), to the world of Vâyu (air), to the world of
Varu*n*a, to the world of Indra, to the world of Pra*g*âpati (Virâ*g*),
to the world of Brahman (Hira*n*yagarbha). In that world there is the
lake Âra <span id="fr_711"></span>[3](#fn_709), the moments called
Yesh*t*iha <span id="fr_712"></span>[4](#fn_710), the river Vi*g*arâ
(age-less), the tree Ilya <span id="fr_713"></span>[5](#fn_711), the
city Sâla*g*ya, the palace Aparâ*g*ita (unconquerable), the door-keepers
Indra

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

and Pra*g*âpati, the hall of Brahman, called Vibhu <span
id="fr_714"></span>[1](#fn_712) (built by vibhu, egoism), the throne
Vi*k*aksha*n*â (buddhi, perception), the couch Amitau*g*as (endless
splendour), and the beloved Mânasî (mind) and her image *K*âkshushî
(eye), who, as if taking flowers, are weaving the worlds, and the
Apsaras, the Ambâs (sruti, sacred scriptures), and Ambâyavîs (buddhi,
understanding), and the rivers Ambayâs (leading to the knowledge of
Brahman). To this world he who knows this (who knows the Paryaṅka-vidyâ)
approaches. Brahman says to him: 'Run towards him (servants) with such
worship as is due to myself. He has reached the river Vi*g*arâ
(age-less), he will never age.

4\. Then five hundred Apsaras go towards him, one hundred with garlands
in their hands, one hundred with ointments in their hands, one hundred
with perfumes in their hands, one hundred with garments in their hands,
one hundred with fruit <span id="fr_715"></span>[2](#fn_713) in their
hands. They adorn him with an adornment worthy of Brahman, and when thus
adorned with the adornment of Brahman, the knower of Brahman moves
towards Brahman (neut.) <span id="fr_716"></span>[3](#fn_714) He comes
to the lake Âra, and he crosses it by the mind, while those who come to
it without knowing the truth <span id="fr_717"></span>[4](#fn_715), are
drowned. He comes to the moments called Yesh*t*iha, they flee from him.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

He comes to the river Vi*g*arâ, and crosses it by the mind alone, and
there shakes off his good and evil deeds. His beloved relatives obtain
the good, his unbeloved relatives the evil he has done. And as a man,
driving in a chariot, might look at the two wheels (without being
touched by them), thus he will look at day and night, thus at good and
evil deeds, and at all pairs (at all correlative things, such as light
and darkness, heat and cold, &c.) Being freed from good and freed from
evil he, the knower of Brahman (neut.), moves towards Brahman.

5\. He approaches the tree Ilya, and the odour of Brahman reaches him.
He approaches the city Sâla*g*ya, and the flavour of Brahman reaches
him. He approaches the palace Aparâ*g*ita, and the splendour of Brahman
reaches him. He approaches the door-keepers Indra and Pra*g*âpati, and
they run away from him. He approaches the hall Vibhu, and the glory of
Brahman reaches him (he thinks, I am Brahman). He approaches the throne
Vi*k*aksha*n*â. The Sâman verses, B*ri*had and Rathantara, are the
eastern feet of that throne <span id="fr_718"></span>[1](#fn_716); the
Sâman verses, *S*yaita and Naudhasa, its western feet; the Sâman verses,
Vairûpa and Vairâ*g*a, its sides lengthways (south and north); the Sâman
verses, *S*âkvara and Raivata, its sides crossways (east and west). That
throne is Pra*g*ñâ, knowledge, for by knowledge (self-knowledge) he sees
clearly. He approaches the couch Amitau*g*as. That is Prâ*n*a (speech).
The past and the future are its eastern feet; prosperity and earth its
western feet; the Sâman verses, Brihad and Rathantara, are the two sides
lengthways of the couch (south and north);

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

the Sâman verses, Bhadra and Ya*g*ñâya*g*ñîya, are its cross-sides at
the head and feet (east and west); the *Rik* and Sâman are the long
sheets <span id="fr_719"></span>[1](#fn_717) (east and west); the
Ya*g*us the cross-sheets (south and north); the moon-beam the cushion;
the Udgîtha the (white) coverlet; prosperity the pillow <span
id="fr_720"></span>[2](#fn_718). On this couch sits Brahman, and he who
knows this (who knows himself one with Brahman sitting on the couch)
mounts it first with one foot only. Then Brahman says to him: 'Who art
thou?' and he shall answer:

6\. 'I am (like) a season, and the child of the seasons, sprung from the
womb of endless space, from the light (from the luminous Brahman). The
light, the origin of the year, which is the past, which is the present,
which is all living things, and all elements, is the Self <span
id="fr_721"></span>[3](#fn_719). Thou art the Self. What thou art, that
am U

Brahman says to him: 'Who am I?' He shall answer: 'That which is, the
true' (Sat-tyam).

Brahman asks: 'What is the true?' He says to him: 'What is different
from the gods and from the senses (prâ*n*a) that is Sat, but the gods
and the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

senses are Tyam. Therefore by that name Sattya (true) is called all this
whatever there is. All this thou art.'

7\. This is also declared by a verse: 'This great *Ri*shi, whose belly
is the Ya*g*us, the head the Sâman, the form the *Rik*, is to be known
as being imperishable, as being Brahman.'

Brahman says to him: 'How dost thou obtain my male names?' He should
answer: 'By breath (prâ*n*a*h*).'

Brahman asks: 'How my female names?' He should answer: 'By speech
(vâ*k*).'

Brahman asks: 'How my neuter names?' He should answer: 'By mind
(manas).'

'How smells?' 'By the nose.' 'How forms?' 'By the eye.' 'How sounds?'
'By the ear.' 'How flavours of food?' 'By the tongue.' 'How actions?'
'By the hands.' 'How pleasures and pain?' 'By the body.' 'How joy,
delight, and offspring?' 'By the organ.' 'How journeyings?' 'By the
feet.' 'How thoughts, and what is to be known and desired?' 'By
knowledge (pra*g*ñâ) alone.'

Brahman says to him: 'Water indeed is this my world <span
id="fr_722"></span>[1](#fn_720), the whole Brahman world, and it is
thine.'

Whatever victory, whatever might belongs to Brahman, that victory and
that might he obtains who knows this, yea, who knows this <span
id="fr_723"></span>[2](#fn_721).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_694"></span>[271:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_696) It is difficult to
determine whether *K*itra's name was Gâṅgyâyani or Gârgyâya*n*i.
Professor Weber adopted first Gârgyâya*n*i (Indische Studien 1, P. 395),
afterwards Gâṅgyâyani (ibid. II, 395). Professor Cowell adopts
Gâṅgyâyani, but he tells us that the Telugu MS. reads Gârgyâya*n*i
throughout, and the other MSS. B, C do so occasionally. The commentator
explains Gâṅgyâyani as the descendant (yuvâpatyam) of Gâṅgya. I confess
a preference for Gârgyâya*n*i, because both Gaṅgâ and Gâṅgya are names
of rare occurrence in ancient Vedic literature, but I admit that for
that very reason the transition of Gâṅgyâyani into Gârgyâya*n*i is
perhaps more intelligible than that of Gârgyâya*n*i into Gâṅgyâyani.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[271:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_697) Cf. *Kh*. Up. V,
11, 2; B*ri*h. Âr. VI, 2, 1.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[271:3](sbe01239.htm#fr_698) Cf. *Kh*. Up. V,
3; VI, 1.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[271:4](sbe01239.htm#fr_699) B*ri*h. Âr. VI, 2,
4.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[271:5](sbe01239.htm#fr_700) The question put
by *K*itra to *S*vetaketu is very obscure, and was probably from the
first intended to be obscure in its very wording. What *K*itra wished to
ask we can gather from other passages in the Upanishads, where we see
another royal sage, Pravâha*n*a Gaivali (*Kh*. Up. V, 3; B*ri*h. Âr. VI,
2), enlightening *S*vetaketu on the future life. That future life is
reached by two roads; <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> one, the
Devapatha, leading to the world of Brahman (the conditioned), beyond
which there lies one other stage only, represented by knowledge of and
identity with the unconditioned Brahman; the other leading to the world
of the fathers, and from thence, after the reward of good works has been
consumed, back to a new round of mundane existence. There is a third
road for creatures which live and die, worms, insects, and creeping
things, but they are of little consequence. Now it is quite clear that
the knowledge which king *K*itra possesses, and which *S*vetaketu does
not possess, is that of the two roads after death, sometimes called the
right and the left, or the southern and northern roads. These roads are
fully described in the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad and in the
B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka, with certain variations, yet on the whole with the
same purpose. The northern or left road, called also the path of the
Devas, passes on from light and day to the bright half of the moon; the
southern or right road, called also the path of the fathers, passes on
from smoke and night to the dark half of the moon. Both roads therefore
meet in the moon, but diverge afterwards. While the northern road passes
by the six months when the sun moves towards the north, through the sun,
(moon,) and the lightning to the world of Brahman, the southern passes
by the six months when the sun moves towards the south, to the world of
the fathers, the ether, and the moon. The great difference, however,
between the two roads is, that while those who travel on the former do
not return again to a new life on earth, but reach in the end a true
knowledge of the unconditioned Brahman, those who pass on to the world
of the fathers and the moon return to earth to be born again and again.

The question therefore which *K*itra addresses to *S*vetaketu can refer
to these two roads only, and though the text is very corrupt, and was so
evidently even at the time when the commentary was written, we must try
to restore it in accordance with the teaching imparted by *K*itra in
what follows. I propose to read: Gautamasya putra, asti sa*m*v*ri*ta*m*
loke yasmin mâ dhâsyasy anyatamo vâdhvâ tasya (or yasya) mâ loke
dhâsyasi, 'Is there a hidden place in the world where you (by your
sacrificing and teaching) are able to <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>
place me, or is it the other way, and will you place me in the world to
which it leads?' Even thus the text is by no means satisfactory, but it
is better than anyam aho vâdhvâ, adopted by the commentator and
explained by him: Is there a hidden place in that world in which you
will place me as another, i. e. as different from the whole world or
identical with the whole world, and, if as different, then having bound
me (vâdhvâ = baddhvâ) and made me a different person? We may read
anyataro for anyatamo vâdhvâ. The commentator sums up the question as
referring to a hidden or not hidden place, where *K*itra should be
placed as another person or not another person, as bound or not bound;
or, as Professor Cowell renders it, 'O son of Gautama, is there any
secret place in the world where thou canst set me unconnected, having
fixed me there (as wood united with glue); or is there some other place
where thou canst set me?' The speculations on the fate of the soul after
death seem to have been peculiar to the royal families of India, while
the Brahmans dwelt more on what may be called the shorter cut, a
knowledge of Brahman as the true Self. To know, with them, was to be,
and, after the dissolution of the body, they looked forward to immediate
emancipation, without any further wanderings.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[273:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_701) Worthy to know
Brahman, or, as the commentator, who reads brahmârgha, thinks, to be
honoured like Brahman.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[273:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_702) Both roads lead to
the moon, and diverge afterwards.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[274:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_703) I should like to
read aparapakshe pra*g*anayati, instead of aparapakshe*n*a, or
aparapakshe na. The negative is out of the question, for pra*g*anayati,
he sends into a new life, is exactly what the moon does to those who do
not proceed on the Devapatha to the Brahmaloka. Therefore if the reading
aparapakshena must be retained, it should be rendered by 'the moon with
the dark half sends them into a new life.'

<span id="fn_702"></span>[274:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_704) This is supposed
to be the hidden place, or rather the way to it, when the departed leave
the moon, and pass on to lightning and to the world of Brahman. This is
in fact the Devayâna, as opposed to the Pit*ri*yâna, described in the
*Kh*ândogya-upanishad.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[274:3](sbe01239.htm#fr_705) Para*s*vâ,
danda*s*ûkavi*s*esha*h*. There is no authority for translating it by
dog; cf. Indische Studien I, 396.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[274:4](sbe01239.htm#fr_706) This might even
include naraka or hell.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[274:5](sbe01239.htm#fr_707) If *ri*tava*h* is
here the genitive of *ri*tu, its meaning would be the ordainer of the
seasons; cf. Hibbert Lectures, p. 247. Vi*k*aksha*n*a is applied to the
moon again, II, 9, and the throne of Brahman also is called
vi*k*aksha*n*a, I, 3.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[274:6](sbe01239.htm#fr_708) *Kh*. Up. V, 4-8.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[275:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_709) The commentator
takes ritavah as an accusative. I take it as a vocative, and as used in
a sense analogous to the Zend ratu, an epithet of Ahura. Darmesteter,
Ormazd, p. 12, n. 3.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[275:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_710) If a person fears
heaven (svarga) as much as hell, because neither gives final liberation,
then he is fit to proceed to a knowledge of Brahman. It would seem that
after this, this person is in the same position as the other who,
objecting to remain in the moon, was set free at once.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[275:3](sbe01239.htm#fr_711) Consisting of
ari's, enemies, such as love, anger, &c. In the *Kh*. Up. VIII, 5, 3, it
is called Ara.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[275:4](sbe01239.htm#fr_712) Explained to mean,
killing the sacrifice, which consists in a desire for Brahman.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[275:5](sbe01239.htm#fr_713) The same as the
a*s*vattha*h* somasavana*h* in *Kh*. Up. VIII, 5, 3

<span id="fn_712"></span>[276:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_714) Vibhunâmakam
pramita*m* sabhâsthalam.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[276:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_715) Some MSS. read
pha*n*ahastâ*h*, and the commentator explains pha*n*a by âbhara*n*a.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[276:3](sbe01239.htm#fr_716) Though brahman is
used here as a neuter, it refers to the conditioned Brahman.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[276:4](sbe01239.htm#fr_717) Samprativid is
here explained as brahmavidyâ*s*ûnya, ignorant, while in other places
(Ait. Âr. II, 3, 1) it stands for samyagabhi*g*ña. If the latter is the
true meaning, we might read here tam itvâsamprativido.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[277:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_718) Cf. Atharva-veda
XV; Aufrecht, in Indische Studien I, p. 122.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[278:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_719) Sheets or
coverings seem more applicable here than mere threads forming the woof
and warp; cf. Aufrecht, Indische Studien I, p. 131.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[278:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_720) I read udgîtha
upa*s*rî*h*, *s*rir upabarha*n*am. The Atharva text has udgîtho
'pa*s*raya*h*.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[278:3](sbe01239.htm#fr_721) This passage is
corrupt, and the various readings and various interpretations of the
commentators do not help us much. One view, which I have followed, as
far as possible, is that it had to be explained how the same being could
be the child of the seasons, or living from year to year, and, at the
same time, born of the light. The answer is, Because light is the seed
or cause of the year, and the year the cause of everything else. I take
no responsibility for this view, and I see no way of discovering the
original reading and the original meaning of these sentences.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[279:1](sbe01239.htm#fr_722) it sprang from
water and the other elements. Comm. Professor Weber proposes to
translate âpa*h* by Erlangungen, acquisitions, with reference to
apnoshi, 'how dost thou acquire my names?' in what precedes.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[279:2](sbe01239.htm#fr_723) Who knows the
conditioned and mythological form of Brahman as here described, sitting
on the couch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adhyâya II](sbe01240)
