[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01012)  [Next](sbe01014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## DIFFERENT CLASSES OF UPANISHADS.

The ancient Upanishads, i. e. those which occupy a place in the
Sa*m*hitâs, Brâhma*n*as, and Âra*n*yakas, must be, if we follow the
chronology which at present is commonly, though, it may be,
provisionally only, received by Sanskrit scholars, older than 600 B.C.,
i.e. anterior to the rise of Buddhism. As to other Upanishads, and their
number is very large, which either stand by themselves, or which are
ascribed to the Atharva-veda, it is extremely difficult to fix their
age. Some of them arc, no doubt, quite modern, for mention is made even
of an Allah-upanishad; but others may claim a far higher antiquity than
is generally assigned to them on internal evidence. I shall only mention
that the name of Atharva*s*iras, an Upanishad generally assigned to a
very modern date, is quoted in the Sûtras of Gautama and
Baudhâyana <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31.md);

<span id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span>

that the *S*vetâ*s*vatara-upanishad, or the *S*vetâ*s*vatara*n*âm
Mantropanishad, though bearing many notes of later periods of thought,
is quoted by *S*aṅkara in his commentary on the Vedânta-sûtras <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md); while the
N*ri*si*m*hottaratâpanîya-upanishad forms part of the twelve Upanishads
explained by Vidyâra*n*ya in his Sarvopanishad-arthânubhûti-prakâ*s*a.
The Upanishads comprehended in that work are:

1\. Aitareya-upanishad.  
2. Taittirîya-upanishad.  
3. *Kh*ândogya-upanishad.  
4. Mu*nd*aka-upanishad.  
5. Pra*s*na-upanishad.  
6. Kaushîtaki-upanishad.  
7. Maitrâya*n*îya-upanishad.  
8. Ka*th*avallî-upanishad.  
9. *S*vetâ*s*vatara-upanishad.  
10. B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka-upanishad.  
11. Talavakâra (Kena)-upanishad.  
12. N*ri*si*m*hottaratâpanîya-upanishad <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md).

The number of Upanishads translated by Dârâ Shukoh amounts to 50; their
number, as given in the Mahâvâkyamuktâvalî and in the Muktikâ-upanishad,
is 108 <span id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34.md). Professor Weber thinks that
their number, so far as we know at present, may be reckoned at 235 <span
id="fr_35"></span>[4](#fn_35.md). In order, however, to arrive at so high a
number, every title of an Upanishad would have to be counted separately,
while in several cases it is clearly the same Upanishad which is quoted
under different names. In an alphabetical list which I published in 1855
(Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft XIX, 137-158),
the number of real Upanishads reached 149. To that number Dr.
Burnell <span id="fr_36"></span>[5](#fn_36.md) in his Catalogue

<span id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (p. 59) added 5,
Professor Haug (Brahma und die Brahmanen) 16, making a sum total of 170.
New names, however, are constantly being added in the catalogues of MSS.
published by Bühler, Kielhorn, Burnell, Rajendralal Mitra, and others,
and I shall reserve therefore a more complete list of Upanishads for a
later volume.

Though it is easy to see that these Upanishads belong to very different
periods of Indian thought, any attempt to fix their relative age seems
to me for the present almost hopeless. No one can doubt that the
Upanishads which have had a place assigned to them in the Sa*m*hitâs,
Brâhma*n*as, and Âra*n*yakas are the oldest. Next to these we can draw a
line to include the Upanishads clearly referred to in the
Vedânta-sûtras, or explained and quoted by *S*aṅkara, by Sâya*n*a, and
other more modern commentators. We can distinguish Upanishads in prose
from Upanishads in mixed prose and verse, and again Upanishads in
archaic verse from Upanishads in regular and continuous Anush*t*ubh
Slokas. We can also class them according to their subjects, and, at
last, according to the sects to which they belong. But beyond this it is
hardly safe to venture at present. Attempts have been made by Professor
Weber and M. Regnaud to fix in each class the relative age of certain
Upanishads, and I do not deny to their arguments, even where they
conflict with each other, considerable weight in forming a preliminary
judgment. But I know of hardy any argument which is really convincing,
or which could not be met by counter arguments equally strong.
Simplicity may be a sign of antiquity, but it is not so always, for what
seems simple, may be the result of abbreviation. One Upanishad may give
the correct, another an evidently corrupt reading, yet it does not
follow that the correct reading may not be the result of an emendation.
It is quite clear that a large mass of traditional Upanishads must have
existed before they assumed their present form. Where two or three or
four Upanishads contain the same story, told almost in the same words,
they are not always copied from one another, but they have been settled
independently, in different localities, by different teachers, it may
be, for different purposes.

<span id="page_lxx">p. lxx</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lastly, the
influence of *S*âkhâs or schools may have told more or less on certain
Upanishads. Thus the Maitrâya*n*îya-upanishad, as we now possess it,
shows a number of irregular forms which even the commentator can account
for only as peculiarities of the Maitrâya*n*îya-sâkhâ <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md). That Upanishad, as it has come down to
us, is full of what we should call clear indications of a modern and
corrupt age. It contains in VI, 37, a *s*loka from the
Mânava-dharma-*s*âstra, which startled even the commentator, but is
explained away by him as possibly found in another *S*âkhâ, and borrowed
from there by Manu. It contains corruptions of easy words which one
would have thought must have been familiar to every student. Thus
instead of the passage as found in the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad VIII, 7, 1,
ya âtmâpahatapâpmâ vi*g*aro vim*ri*tyur vi*s*oko 'vi*g*ighatso
'pipâsa*h*, &c., the text of the Maitrâyanîya-upanishad (VII, 7) reads,
âtmâpahatapâpmâ vi*g*aro vim*ri*tyur vi*s*oko 'vi*k*ikitso 'vipâsa*h*.
But here again the commentator explains that another *S*âkhâ reads
'vi*g*ighatsa, and that avipâ*s*a is to be explained by means of a
change of letters as apipâsa. Corruptions, therefore, or modern elements
which are found in one Upanishad, as handed down in one Sâkhâ, do not
prove that the same existed in other *S*âkhâs, or that they were found
in the original text.

All these questions have to be taken into account before we can venture
to give a final judgment on the relative age of Upanishads which belong
to one and the same class. I know of no problem which offers so many
similarities with the one before us as that of the relative age of the
four Gospels. All the difficulties which occur in the Upanishads occur
here, and no critical student who knows the difficulties that have to be
encountered in determining the relative age of the four Gospels, will
feel inclined, in the present state of Vedic scholarship, to speak with
confidence on the relative age of the ancient Upanishads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[lxvii:2](sbe01013.htm#fr_31.md) Gautama,
translated by Bühler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. 272, and
Introduction, p. lvi.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[lxviii:1](sbe01013.htm#fr_32.md) Vedânta-sûtras I,
I, II.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[lxviii:2](sbe01013.htm#fr_33.md) One misses the
Î*s*â or Î*s*âvâsya-upanishad in this list. The Upanishads chiefly
studied in Bengal are the B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka, Aitareya, *Kh*ândogya,
Taittirîya, Î*s*â, Kena, Ka*th*a, Pra*s*na, Mu*nd*aka, and Mâ*nd*ûkya,
to which should be added the *S*vetâ*s*vatara. M*M*., History of Ancient
Sanskrit Literature, p. 325.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[lxviii:3](sbe01013.htm#fr_34.md) Dr. Burnell
thinks that this is an artificial computation, 108 being a sacred number
in Southern India. See Kielhorn in Gough's Papers on Ancient Sanskrit
Literature, p. 193.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[lxviii:4](sbe01013.htm#fr_35.md) Weber, History of
Sanskrit Literature, p. 155 note.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[lxviii:5](sbe01013.htm#fr_36.md) Indian Antiquary,
II, 267.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[lxx:1](sbe01013.htm#fr_37.md) They are generally
explained as *kh*ândasa, but in one place (Maitr. Up. II, 4) the
commentator treats such irregularities as eta*kkh*âkhâsaṅketapâ*th*a*h*,
a reading peculiar to the Maitrâyanîya school. Some learned remarks on
this point may be seen in an article by Dr. L. Schroeder, Über die
Maitrâya*n*î Sa*m*hitâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Critical Treatment of the Text of the Upanishads](sbe01014.md)
