[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100092)  [Next](1100094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXXV"></span> <span id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXV-Page_506"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXVII.
62-64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062)<span
id="iii.LXXXV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p3"></span>*“Now the next day, that followed the day
of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto
Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while He was
yet alive,* <span id="fr_3132"></span>[3133](#fn_3132) *After three days
I will* <span id="fr_3133"></span>[3134](#fn_3133) *rise again. Command
therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest His
disciples come and steal Him away, and say to the people, He is risen
from the dead: so the last error should be* <span
id="fr_3134"></span>[3135](#fn_3134) *worse than the first.”*

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p7.1"></span>Everywhere</span> deceit recoils upon itself,
and against its will supports the truth. And observe. It was necessary
for it to be believed that He died, and that He rose again, and that He
was buried, and all these things are brought to pass by His enemies.
See, at any rate, these words bearing witness to every one of these
facts. “We remember,” these are the words, “that that deceiver said,
when He was yet alive,” (He was therefore now dead), “After three days I
rise again. Command therefore that the sepulchre be sealed,” (He was
therefore buried), “lest His disciples come and steal Him away.” So that
if the sepulchre be sealed, there will be no unfair dealing. For there
could not be. So then the proof of His resurrection has become
incontrovertible by what ye have put forward. For because it was sealed,
there was no unfair dealing. But if there was no unfair dealing, and the
sepulchre was found empty, it is manifest that He is risen, plainly and
incontrovertibly. Seest thou, how even against their will they contend
for the proof of the truth?

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p8"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, the
disciples’ love of truth, how they conceal from us none of the things
that are said by His enemies, though they use opprobrious language.
Behold, at any rate, they even call Him a deceiver, and these men are
not silent about that.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p9"></span>But these things show also their
savageness (that not even at His death did they let go their anger), and
these men’s simple and truthful disposition.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p10"></span>But it were worth while to inquire
concerning that point also, where He said, “After three days I rise
again?” For one would not find this thus distinctly stated, <span
id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135) but rather the example of Jonah. So
that they understood His saying, and of their own will dealt unfairly.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p12"></span>What then saith Pilate? “Ye have a
watch; make it as sure as ye can. And they made it sure, sealing the
sepulchre, and setting the watch.” <span
id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136) He suffers not the soldiers alone
to seal, for as having learnt the things concerning Christ, he was no
longer willing to co-operate with them. But in order to be rid of them,
he endures this also, and saith, “Do ye seal it as ye will, that ye may
not have it in your power to blame others.” For if the soldiers only had
sealed, they might have said (although the saying would have been
improbable and false, yet nevertheless as in the rest they cast aside
shame, so in this too they might have been able to say), that the
soldiers, having given up the body to be stolen, gave His disciples
opportunity to feign the history concerning His resurrection, but now
having themselves made it sure, they are not able to say so much as
this.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p14"></span>Seest thou how they labor for the truth
against their will? For they themselves came to Pilate, themselves
asked, themselves sealed, setting the watch, so as to be accusers, and
refuters one of another. And indeed when should they have stolen Him? on
the Sabbath? And how? for it was not lawful so much as to go out. <span
id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137) And even if they transgressed the
law, how should they have dared, who were so timid, to come forth? And
how could they also have been able to persuade the multitude? By saying
what? By doing what? And from what sort of zeal could they have stood in
behalf of the dead? expecting <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXV-Page_507"></span> what recompense? what requital? Seeing
Him yet alive and merely seized, they had fled; and after His death were
they likely to speak boldly in His behalf, unless He had risen again?
And how should these things be reasonable? For that they were neither
willing nor able to feign a resurrection, that did not take place, is
plain from hence. He discoursed to them much of a resurrection, and
continually said, as indeed these very men have stated, “After three
days I rise again.” If therefore He rose not again, it is quite clear
that these men (having been deceived and made enemies to an entire
nation for His sake, and come to be without home and without city) would
have abhorred Him, and would not have been willing to invest Him with
such glory; as having been deceived, and having fallen into the utmost
dangers on His account. For that they would not even have been able,
unless the resurrection had been true, to feign it, this does not so
much as need reasoning.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p16"></span>For in what were they confident? In the
shrewdness of their reasonings? Nay of all men they were the most
unlearned. But in the abundance of their possessions? Nay, they had
neither staff nor shoes. But in the distinction of their race? Nay, they
were mean, and of mean ancestors. But in the greatness of their country?
Nay, they were of obscure places. But in their own numbers? Nay, they
were not more than eleven, and they were scattered abroad. But in their
Master’s promises? What kind of promises? For if He were not risen
again, neither would those be likely to be trusted by them. And how
should they endure a frantic people. For if the chief of them endured
not the speech of a woman, keeping the door, and if all the rest too, on
seeing Him bound, were scattered abroad, how should they have thought to
run to the ends of the earth, and plant a feigned tale of a
resurrection? For if he stood not a woman’s threat, and they not so much
as the sight of bonds, how were they able to stand against kings, and
rulers, and nations, where were swords, and gridirons, and furnaces, and
ten thousand deaths day by day, unless they had the benefit of the power
and grace <span id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138) of Him who rose
again? Such miracles and so many were done, and none of these things did
the Jews regard, but crucified Him, who had done them, and were they
likely to believe these men at their mere word about a resurrection?
These things are not, they are not so, but the might of Him, who rose
again, brought them to pass.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p18"></span>2. But mark, I pray thee, their craft,
how ridiculous it is. “We remember,” these are their words, “that that
deceiver said, while He was yet alive, After three days I rise again.”
Yet if He were a deceiver, and boastfully uttered falsehood, why are ye
afraid and run to and fro, and use so much diligence? We are afraid, it
is replied, lest perchance the disciples steal Him away, and deceive the
multitude. And yet this has been proved to have no probability at all.
Malice, however, is a thing contentious and shameless, and attempts what
is unreasonable.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p19"></span>And they command it to be made sure for
three days, as contending for doctrines, and being minded to prove that
before that time also He was a deceiver, and they extend their malice
even to His tomb. For this reason then He rose sooner, that they might
not say that He spake falsely, and was stolen. For this, His rising
sooner, was open to no charge, but to be later would have been full of
suspicion. For indeed if He had not risen then, when they were sitting
there, and watching, but when they had withdrawn after the three days,
they would have had something to say, and to speak against it, although
foolishly. For this reason then He anticipated the time. For it was meet
the resurrection should take place, while they were sitting by and
watching. Therefore also it was fit it should take place within the
three days, since if it had been when they were passed, and the men had
withdrawn, the matter would have been regarded with suspicion. Wherefore
also He allowed them to seal it, as they were minded, and soldiers sat
around it.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p20"></span>And they cared not about doing these
things, and working on a Sabbath day, but they looked to one object
only, their own wicked purpose, as though by that they were to succeed;
which was a mark of extreme folly, and of fear now greatly dismaying
them. For they who seized Him, when living, are afraid of Him when dead.
And yet if He had been a mere man, they had reason to have taken
courage. But that they might learn, that when living also He endured of
His own will, what He did endure; behold, both a seal, a stone, and a
watch, and they were not able to hold Him. But there was one result
only, that the burial was published, and the resurrection thereby
proved. For indeed soldiers sat by it, and Jews are on the watch.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p21"></span>“But in the end of the Sabbath, <span
id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139) as it began to dawn towards the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the
sepulchre. And behold there was a <span id="page_508">p. 508</span>
<span id="iii.LXXXV-Page_508"></span> great earthquake. For an angel of
the Lord descended from Heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door of the tomb, <span id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140) and sat
upon it. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as
snow.” <span id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141)

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p25"></span>After the resurrection came the angel.
Wherefore then came he, and took away the stone? Because of the women,
for they themselves had seen Him then in the sepulchre. <span
id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) Therefore that they might believe
that He was risen again, they see the sepulchre void of the body. For
this cause he removed the stone, for this cause also an earthquake took
place, that they might be thoroughly aroused and awakened. For they were
come to pour oil on Him, and these things were done at night, and it is
likely that some also had become drowsy. And for what intent and cause
doth he say, “Fear not ye?” <span id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143)
First he delivers them from the dread, and then tells them of the
resurrection. And the ye is of one showing them great honor, and
indicating, that extreme punishment awaits them that had dared to do,
what the others had dared, except they repented. For to be afraid is not
for you, he means, but for them that crucified Him.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p28"></span>Having delivered them then from the fear
both by his words, and by his appearance (for his form he showed bright,
as bearing such good tidings), he went on to say, “I know that ye seek
Jesus the Crucified.” <span id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) And he
is not ashamed to call Him “crucified;” for this is the chief of the
blessings.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p30"></span>“He is risen.” <span
id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145) Whence is it evident? “As He said.”
So that if ye refuse to believe me, he would say, remember His words,
and neither will ye disbelieve me. Then also another proof, “Come and
see the place where He lay.” <span id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146)
For this he had lifted up the stone, in order that from this too they
might receive the proof. “And tell His disciples, that ye shall see Him
in Galilee.” <span id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147) And he prepares
them to bear good tidings to others, which thing most of all made them
believe. And He said well “in Galilee,” freeing them from troubles and
dangers, so that fear should not hinder their faith.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p34"></span>“And they departed from the sepulchre
with fear and joy.” <span id="fr_3148"></span>[3149](#fn_3148) Why could
this be? They had seen a thing amazing, and beyond expectation, a tomb
empty, where they had before seen Him laid. Wherefore also He had led
them to the sight, that they might become witnesses of both things, both
of His tomb, and of His resurrection. For they considered that no man
could have taken Him, when so many soldiers were sitting by Him, unless
He raised up Himself. For this cause also they rejoice and wonder, and
receive the reward of so much continuance with Him, that they should
first see and gladly declare, not what had been said only, but also what
they beheld.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p36"></span>3. Therefore after then they had
departed with fear and joy, “Behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail.”
But “they held Him by the feet,” <span
id="fr_3149"></span>[3150](#fn_3149) and with exceeding joy and gladness
ran unto Him, and received by the touch also, an infallible proof, and
full assurance of the resurrection. “And they worshipped Him.” What then
saith He? “Be not afraid.” Again, He Himself casts out their fear,
making way for faith, “But go, tell my brethren, that they go into
Galilee, and there shall they see me.” <span
id="fr_3150"></span>[3151](#fn_3150) Mark how He Himself sends good
tidings to His disciples by these women, bringing to honor, as I have
often said, that sex, which was most dishonored, and to good hopes; and
healing that which was diseased.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p39"></span>Perchance some one of you would wish to
be like them, to hold the feet of Jesus; ye can even now, and not His
feet and His hands only, but even lay hold on that sacred head,
receiving the awful mysteries with a pure conscience. But not here only,
but also in that day ye shall see Him, coming with that unspeakable
glory, and the multitude of the angels, if ye are disposed to be humane;
and ye shall hear not these words only, “All hail!” but also those
others, “Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you before the foundation of the world.” <span
id="fr_3151"></span>[3152](#fn_3151)

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p41"></span>Be ye therefore humane, that ye may hear
these things; and ye women, that wear gold, who have looked on the
running of these women, at last, though late, lay aside the disease of
the desire for golden ornaments. So that if ye are emulous of these
women, change the ornaments which ye wear, and clothe yourselves instead
with almsgiving. What is the use, I pray you, of these precious stones,
and of the garments spangled with gold? “My soul,” you say, “is glad,
and is pleased with these things.” I asked thee the profit, but thou
tellest me the hurt. For nothing is <span id="page_509">p. 509</span>
<span id="iii.LXXXV-Page_509"></span> worse than being taken up with
these things, and delighting in them, and being riveted to them. For
more bitter is this grievous slavery, when any one finds delight even in
being a slave. For in what spiritual matter will she ever be diligent as
she ought; when will she laugh to scorn, as she should, the things of
this world, who thinks it a worthy matter for joy, that she hath been
chained in gold? For he that continues in prison, and is pleased, will
never desire to be set free; as indeed neither will this woman; but as
having become a kind of captive to this wicked desire, she will not
endure so much as to hear spiritual language with becoming desire and
diligence, much less to engage in such work.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p42"></span>What then is the profit of these
ornaments and this luxury? I pray thee. “I am pleased with them,” thou
sayest. Again thou hast told of the hurt and the ruin. “But I enjoy
also,” thou sayest, “much honor from the beholders.” And what is this?
This is the occasion of another destruction, when thou art lifted up to
haughtiness, to arrogance. Come now, since thou hast not told me of the
profit, bear with me while I tell thee of the mischiefs. What then are
the mischiefs resulting therefrom? Anxiety, which is greater than the
pleasure. Wherefore many of the beholders, these I mean of the grosser
sort, derive more pleasure from it than she who wears the gold. For thou
indeed deckest thyself with anxiety, but they, without this, feast their
eyes.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p43"></span>Moreover, there are other things again,
the debasing of the soul, the being looked upon with envy on all sides.
For the neighboring women stung by it, arm themselves against their own
husbands, and stir up against thee grievous wars. Together with these
things, the fact that all one’s leisure and anxiety are spent on this
object, that one doth not apply one’s self earnestly to spiritual
achievements; that one is filled with haughtiness, arrogance, and
vainglory; that one is riveted to the earth, and loses one’s wings, and
instead of an eagle, becometh a dog or a swine. For having given up
looking up into Heaven, and flying thither, thou bendest down to the
earth like the swine, being curious about mines and caverns, and having
an unmanly and base soul. But dost thou, when thou appearest, turn
towards thee the eyes of them at the market-place? Well then; for this
very reason, thou shouldest not wear gold, that thou mayest not become a
common gazing stock, and open the mouths of many accusers. For none of
those whose eyes are toward thee admireth thee, but they jeer at thee,
as fond of dress, as boastful, as a carnal woman. And shouldest thou
enter into a church, thou goest forth, without getting anything but
countless leers, and revilings, and curses, not from the beholders only,
but also from the prophet. For straightway Isaiah, <span
id="fr_3152"></span>[3153](#fn_3152) that hath the fullest voice of all,
as soon as he hath seen thee, will cry out, “These things saith the Lord
against the princely daughters of Sion; because they walked with a lofty
neck, and with winkings of the eyes, and in their walking, trailing
their garments, and mincing at the same time with their feet; the Lord
shall take off their bravery, and instead of a sweet smell there shall
be dust, and instead of a stomacher, thou shalt gird thyself with a
cord.” <span id="fr_3153"></span>[3154](#fn_3153)

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p46"></span>These things for thy gorgeous array. For
not to them only are these words addressed, but to every woman that
doeth like them. And Paul again with him stands as an accuser, telling
Timothy to charge the women, “not to adorn themselves with braided hair,
or gold, or pearls, or costly array.” <span
id="fr_3154"></span>[3155](#fn_3154) So that everywhere the wearing of
gold is hurtful, but especially when thou art entering into a church,
when thou passest through the poor. For if thou wert exceedingly anxious
to bring an accusation against thyself, thou couldest not put on any
other array than this visage of cruelty and inhumanity.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p48"></span>4. Consider at any rate how many hungry
bellies thou passest by with this array, how many naked bodies with this
satanical display. How much better to feed hungry souls, than to bore
through the lobes of thy ears, and to hang from them the food of
countless poor for no purpose or profit. What? is to be rich a
commendation? What? is to wear gold a praise? Though it be from honest
earnings that these things are put on you, even so what thou hast done
is a very heavy charge against thee; but when it is moreover from
dishonesty, consider the exceeding greatness of it.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p49"></span>But dost thou love praises and honor?
Strip thyself therefore of this ridiculous clothing, and then all will
admire thee; then shalt thou enjoy both honor and pure pleasure; since
now at any rate thou art overwhelmed with jeers, working for thyself
many causes of vexation arising out of these things. For should any of
these things be missing, consider how many are the evils that have their
birth therefrom, how many maidservants are beaten, how many men put to
trouble, how many led to execution, how many cast into prison. And
trials arise hence, and actions, and countless curses and accusations
against the wife from the husband, against the hus <span
id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span id="iii.LXXXV-Page_510"></span> band
from her friends, against the soul from itself. “But it will not be
lost.” In the first place, this is not easy to secure, but even if it be
kept safe constantly, yet by being kept, it occasions much anxiety and
care and discomfort, and no advantage.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p50"></span>For what kind of profit arises from
hence to the house? What advantage to the woman herself who wears it? No
advantage indeed, but much unseemliness, and accusation from every
quarter? How wilt thou be able to kiss Christ’s feet, and cling to them,
when thus dressed? From this adorning He turneth away. For this cause He
vouchsafed to be born in the house of the carpenter, or rather not even
in that house, but in a shed, and a manger. How then wilt thou be able
to behold Him, not having beauty that is desirable in His eyes, not
wearing the array that is lovely before Him, but what is hateful. For he
that cometh unto Him must not deck himself out with such garments, but
be clothed with virtue.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p51"></span>Consider what after all these jewels
are. Nothing else than earth and ashes. Mix water with them, and they
are clay. Consider and be ashamed to make clay thy master, forsaking
all, and abiding by it, and carrying and bearing it about, even when
thou enterest into a church, when most of all thou oughtest to flee from
it. For neither for this cause was the church built, that thou shouldest
display therein these riches, but spiritual riches. But thou, as though
thou wert entering into a pompous procession, thus deckest thyself out
on every side, imitating the women on the stage, even so dost thou carry
about in profusion that ridiculous mass.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p52"></span>Therefore, I tell thee, thou comest for
mischief to many, and when the congregation is dismissed, in their
houses, at their tables, one may hear the more part describing these
things. For they have left off saying, thus and thus said the prophet
and the apostle, and they describe the costliness of your garments, the
size of your precious stones, and all the other unseemliness of them
that wear these things.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p53"></span>This makes you backward in almsgiving,
and your husbands. For one of you would not readily consent to break up
one of these ornaments to feed a poor man. For when thou wouldest choose
even thyself to be in distress rather than to behold these things broken
to pieces, how shouldest thou feed another at the cost of them?

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p54"></span>For most women feel towards these
things, as to some living beings, and not less than towards their
children. “God forbid,” thou sayest. Prove me this then, prove it by
your works, as now at least I see the contrary. For who ever of those
that are completely taken captive, by melting down these things, would
rescue a child’s soul from death? And why do I say a child’s? Who hath
redeemed his own soul thereby, when perishing? Nay, on the contrary, the
more part even set it to sale for these things every day. And should any
bodily infirmity take place, they do everything, but if they see their
soul depraved, they take no such pains, but are careless both about
their children’s soul, and their own soul, in order that these things
may remain to rust with time.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p55"></span>And whilst thou art wearing jewels worth
ten thousand talents, the member of Christ hath not the enjoyment so
much as of necessary food. And whereas the common Lord of all hath
imparted to all alike of heaven, and of the things in Heaven, and of the
spiritual table, thou dost not impart to Him even of perishing things,
on purpose that thou mayest continue perpetually bound with these
grievous chains.

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p56"></span>Hence the countless evils, <span
id="fr_3155"></span>[3156](#fn_3155) hence the fornications of the men,
when ye prepare them to cast off self-restraint, when ye teach them to
take delight in these things with which the harlot women deck
themselves. For this cause they are so quickly taken captive. For if
thou hadst instructed him to look down upon these things, and to take
delight in chastity, godly fear and humility, he would not have been so
easily taken by the shafts <span id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156) of
fornication. For the harlot is able to adorn herself in this way even to
a greater degree than this, but with those other ornaments not so.
Accustom him then to take delight in these ornaments, which he cannot
see placed on the harlot. And how wilt thou bring him into this habit?
If thou take off these, and put on those others, so shall both thy
husband be in safety, and thou in honor, and God will be propitious to
you, and all men will admire you, and ye will attain unto the good
things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3132"></span>[506:3133](1100093.htm#fr_3132) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p4"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p4.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p4.2"></span>τι</span> is inserted at this point (but not
in the subsequent citation). There are no other variations. R.V., “Now
on the morrow which is *the day* after the Preparation, the chief
priests and the Pharisees were gathered together,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3133"></span>[506:3134](1100093.htm#fr_3133) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p5"></span>\[R.V. omits “will.”\]

<span id="fn_3134"></span>[506:3135](1100093.htm#fr_3134) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p6"></span>\[R.V., “will be.”\]

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[506:3136](1100093.htm#fr_3135) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p11"></span>Not to the Jews, for it was often
plainly declared to the disciples, as St. Chrysostom himself observes a
little further on.

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[506:3137](1100093.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p13"></span>[Matt.
27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065),
[66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p13.1"></span>.
\[The only peculiarity is indicated in the above rendering; for “made
the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone.” R.V., “guard” for “watch,” and
“the guard being with them.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[506:3138](1100093.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p15"></span>[Exod. xvi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[507:3139](1100093.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p17.1"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p17.2"></span>οπ</span>.

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[507:3140](1100093.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p22"></span>\[R.V., “Now late on the Sabbath day.”\]

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[508:3141](1100093.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p23"></span>\[The only textual variation is the
addition of <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXV-p23.1"></span>το
μνημεου</span>. The R.V. omits “from the door of the tomb,” and renders
“rolled away,” to distinguish from [Mark xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#004)<span
id="iii.LXXXV-p23.2"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[508:3142](1100093.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p24"></span>[Matt.
28.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001)<span
id="iii.LXXXV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[508:3143](1100093.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p26"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p26.1"></span>εδον</span>, “saw,” *i.e.*, when He was
buried.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[508:3144](1100093.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p27"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p27.1"></span>.
\[The emphatic <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p27.2"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p27.3"></span>με</span> occurs in the Greek of the New
Testament passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[508:3145](1100093.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p29"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p29.1"></span>τν σταυρωμνον</span> .\]

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[508:3146](1100093.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p31"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[508:3147](1100093.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p32"></span>\[This agrees with the reading of the
two oldest New Testament <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p32.1"></span>mss</span>. So R.V. margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[508:3148](1100093.htm#fr_3147) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p33"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p33.1"></span>.
\[Abridged.\]

<span id="fn_3148"></span>[508:3149](1100093.htm#fr_3148) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p35"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p35.1"></span>.
\[The word “great” is omitted.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3149"></span>[508:3150](1100093.htm#fr_3149) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p37"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p37.1"></span>.
\[R.V. “took hold of his feet.”\]

<span id="fn_3150"></span>[508:3151](1100093.htm#fr_3150) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p38"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p38.1"></span>.
\[R.V. “that they depart.”\]

<span id="fn_3151"></span>[508:3152](1100093.htm#fr_3151) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p40"></span>[Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3152"></span>[509:3153](1100093.htm#fr_3152) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p44"></span>[Isa.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p44.1"></span>
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXXV-p44.2"></span>LXX</span>.\]

<span id="fn_3153"></span>[509:3154](1100093.htm#fr_3153) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p45"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXXXV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3154"></span>[509:3155](1100093.htm#fr_3154) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p47"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p47.1"></span>εσαγωγα</span>.

<span id="fn_3155"></span>[510:3156](1100093.htm#fr_3155) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p57"></span>\[The Oxford translator inserts here
“hence the jealousies,” but there is no corresponding phrase in the
Greek text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[510:3157](1100093.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="iii.LXXXV-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXV-p58"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXV-p58.1"></span>πτερο</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXXVI](1100094)
