[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100017)  [Next](1100019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.X"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.X-p1.1"></span>Homily X.</span>

<span id="iii.X-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.X-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.X-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.X-p3"></span>“In those days cometh John the Baptist,
preaching in the wilderness of Judæa, and saying, Repent ye: for the
kingdom of Heaven is at hand.”

<span id="iii.X-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.X-p4.1"></span>How</span> “in those days”? For not then, surely,
when He was a child, and came to Nazareth, but thirty years after, John
cometh; as Luke also testifies. How then is it said, “in those days”?
The Scripture is always wont to use this manner of speech, not only when
it is mentioning what occurs in the time immediately after, but also of
things which are to come to pass many years later. Thus also, for
example, when His disciples came unto Him as He sat on the Mount of
Olives, and sought to learn about His coming, and the taking of
Jerusalem: <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407.md) and yet ye know how
great is the interval between those several periods. I mean, that having
spoken of the subversion of the mother city, <span id="page_59">p.
59</span> <span id="iii.X-Page_59"></span> and completed His discourse
on that subject, and being about to pass to that on the consummation, he
inserted, “*Then* shall these things also come to pass;” <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408.md) not bringing together the times by the
word *then*, but indicating that time only in which these things were to
happen. And this sort of thing he doth now also, saying, “In those
days.” For this is not put to signify the days that come immediately
after, but those in which these things were to take place, which he was
preparing to relate.

<span id="iii.X-p7"></span>“But why was it after thirty years,” it may
be said, “that Jesus came unto His baptism”? After this baptism He was
thenceforth to do away with the law: wherefore even until this age,
which admits of all sins, He continues fulfilling it all; that no one
might say, that because He Himself could not fulfill it, He did it away.
For neither do all passions assail us at all times; but while in the
first age of life there is much thoughtlessness and timidity, in that
which comes after it, pleasure is more vehement, and after this again
the desire of wealth. For this cause he awaits the fullness of His adult
age, and throughout it all fulfills the law, and so comes to His
baptism, adding it as something which follows upon the complete keeping
of all the other commandments.

<span id="iii.X-p8"></span>To prove that this was to Him the last good
work of those enjoined by the law, hear His own words: “For thus it
becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.” <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409.md) Now what He saith is like this: “We
have performed all the duties of the law, we have not transgressed so
much as one commandment. Since therefore this only remains, this too
must be added, and so shall we “fulfill all righteousness.” For He here
calls by the name of “righteousness” the full performance of all the
commandments.

<span id="iii.X-p10"></span>2. Now that on this account Christ came to
His baptism, is from this evident. But wherefore was this baptism
devised for Him? For that not of himself did the son of Zacharias
proceed to this, but of God who moved him,—this Luke also declares, when
he saith, “The word of the Lord came unto him,” <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410.md) that is, His commandment. And he
himself too saith, “He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said
to me, upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending like a dove, and
remaining on Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost.” <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411.md) Wherefore then was he
sent to baptize? The Baptist again makes this also plain to us, saying,
“I knew Him not, but that He should be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water.” <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412.md)

<span id="iii.X-p14"></span>And if this was the only cause, how saith
Luke, that “he came into the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism
of repentance for the remission of sins?” <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413.md) And yet it had not remission, but this
gift pertained unto the baptism that was given afterwards; for in this
“we are buried with Him,” <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414.md) and
our old man was then crucified with Him, and before the cross there doth
not appear remission anywhere; for everywhere this is imputed to His
blood. And Paul too saith, “But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,”
not by the baptism of John, but “in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by the Spirit of our God.” <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415.md)
And elsewhere too he saith, “John verily preached a baptism of
repentance,” (he saith not “of remission,”) “that they should believe on
Him that should come after him.” <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416.md)
For when the sacrifice was not yet offered, neither had the spirit yet
come down, nor sin was put away, nor the enmity removed, nor the curse
destroyed; how was remission to take place?

<span id="iii.X-p19"></span>What means then, “for the remission of
sins?”

<span id="iii.X-p20"></span>The Jews were senseless, and had never any
feeling of their own sins, but while they were justly accountable for
the worst evils, they were justifying themselves in every respect; and
this more than anything caused their destruction, and led them away from
the faith. This, for example, Paul himself was laying to their charge,
when he said, that “they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and
going about <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) to establish their
own, had not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.” <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418.md) And again: “What shall we say then?
That the Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness, have
attained <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419.md) to righteousness; but
Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not
attained <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420.md) unto the law of
righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by works.” <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421.md)

<span id="iii.X-p26"></span>Since therefore this was the cause of their
evils, John cometh, doing nothing else but bringing them to a sense of
their own sins. This, among other things, his very garb declared, being
that of repentance and confession. This was indicated also by what he
preached, for nothing else did he say, but <span id="page_60">p.
60</span> <span id="iii.X-Page_60"></span> “bring forth fruits meet for
repentance.” <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md) Forasmuch then as
their not condemning their own sins, as Paul also hath explained, made
them start off from Christ, while their coming to a sense thereof would
set them upon longing to seek after their Redeemer, and to desire
remission; this John came to bring about, and to persuade them to
repent, not in order that they might be punished, but that having become
by repentance more humble, and condemning themselves, they might hasten
to receive remission.

<span id="iii.X-p28"></span>But let us see how exactly he hath expressed
it; how, having said, that he “came preaching the baptism of repentance
in the wilderness of Judæa,” he adds, “for remission,” as though he
said, For this end he exhorted them to confess and repent of their sins;
not that they should be punished, but that they might more easily
receive the subsequent remission. For had they not condemned themselves,
they could not have sought after His grace; and not seeking, they could
not have obtained remission.

<span id="iii.X-p29"></span>Thus that baptism led the way for this;
wherefore also he said, that “they should believe on Him which should
come after him;” <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md) together with
that which hath been mentioned setting forth this other cause of His
baptism. For neither would it have been as much for him to have gone
about to their houses, and to have led Christ around, taking Him by the
hand, and to have said, “Believe in This Man;” as for that blessed voice
to be uttered, and all those other things performed in the presence and
sight of all.

<span id="iii.X-p31"></span>On account of this He cometh to the baptism.
Since in fact both the credit of him that was baptizing, and the purport
of the thing itself, <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md) was
attracting the whole city, and calling it unto Jordan; and it became a
great spectacle. <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425.md)

<span id="iii.X-p34"></span>Therefore he humbles them also when they are
come, and persuades them to have no high fancies about themselves;
showing them liable to the utmost evils, unless they would repent, and
leaving their forefathers, and all vaunting in them, would receive Him
that was coming.

<span id="iii.X-p35"></span>Because in fact the things concerning Christ
had been up to that time veiled, and many thought He was dead, owing to
the massacre which took place at Bethlehem. For though at twelve years
old He discovered Himself, yet did He also quickly veil Himself again.
And for this cause there was need of that splendid exordium and of a
loftier beginning. Wherefore also then for the first time he with clear
voice proclaims things which the Jews had never heard, neither from
prophets, nor from any besides; making mention of Heaven, and of the
kingdom there, and no longer saying anything touching the earth.

<span id="iii.X-p36"></span>But by the kingdom in this place he means
His former and His last advent.

<span id="iii.X-p37"></span>3. “But what is this to the Jews?” one may
say, “for they know not even what thou sayest.” “Why, for this cause,”
saith he, “do I so speak, in order that being roused by the obscurity of
my words, they may proceed to seek Him, whom I preach.” In point of
fact, he so excited them with good hopes when they came near, that even
many publicans and soldiers inquired what they should do, and how they
should direct their own life; which was a sign of being thenceforth set
free from all worldly things, and of looking to other greater objects,
and of foreboding <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426.md) things to
come. Yea, for all, both the sights and the words of that time, led them
unto lofty thoughts.

<span id="iii.X-p39"></span>Conceive, for example, how great a thing it
was to see a man after thirty years coming down from the wilderness,
being the son of a chief priest, who had never known the common wants of
men, and was on every account venerable, and had Isaiah with him. For he
too was present proclaiming him, and saying, “This is he who I said
should come crying, and preaching throughout the whole wilderness with a
clear voice.” For so great was the earnestness of the prophets touching
these things, that not their own Lord only, but him also who was to
minister unto Him, they proclaimed a long time beforehand, and they not
only mentioned him, but the place too in which he was to abide, and the
manner of the doctrine which he had to teach when he came, and the good
effect that was produced by him.

<span id="iii.X-p40"></span>See, at least, how both the prophet and the
Baptist go upon the same ideas, although not upon the same words.

<span id="iii.X-p41"></span>Thus the prophet saith that he shall come
saying, “Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.” <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md) And he himself when he was come said,
“Bring forth fruits meet for repentance,” <span
id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md) which corresponds with, “Prepare ye
the way of the Lord.” Seest thou that both by the words of the prophet,
and by his own preaching, this one thing is manifested alone; that he
was come, making a way and preparing beforehand, not bestowing the gift,
which was the remission, but ordering in good time the souls of such as
should receive the God of all?

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span id="iii.X-Page_61"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p44"></span>But Luke expresses somewhat further: not
repeating the exordium, and so passing on, but setting down likewise all
the prophecy. “For every valley,” saith he, “shall be filled; and every
mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be made
straight, and the rough ways smooth; and all flesh shall see the
salvation of God.” <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) Dost thou
perceive how the prophet hath anticipated all by his words; the
concourse of the people, the change of things for the better, the
easiness of that which was preached, the first cause of all that was
occurring, even if he hath expressed it rather as in figure, it being in
truth a prophecy which he was uttering? Thus, when he saith, “Every
valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought
low, and the rough ways shall be made smooth;” he is signifying the
exaltation of the lowly, the humiliation of the self-willed, the
hardness of the law changed into easiness of faith. For it is no longer
toils and labors, saith he, but grace, and forgiveness of sins,
affording great facility of salvation. Next he states the cause of these
things, saying, “All flesh shall see the salvation of God;” no longer
Jews and proselytes only, but also all earth and sea, and the whole race
of men. Because by “the crooked things” he signified our whole corrupt
life, publicans, harlots, robbers, magicians, as many as having been
perverted before afterwards walked in the right way: much as He Himself
likewise said, “publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of God before
you,” <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md) because they believed. And
in other words also again the prophet declared the self-same thing, thus
saying, “Then wolves and lambs shall feed together.” <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431.md) For like as here by the hills and
valleys, he meant that incongruities of character <span
id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432.md) are blended into one and the same
evenness of self-restraint, so also there, by the characters of the
brute animals indicating the different dispositions of men, he again
spoke of their being linked in one and the same harmony of godliness.
Here also, as before, stating the cause. That cause is, “There shall be
He that riseth to reign over the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles
trust:” <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433.md) much the same as here
too he said, “All flesh shall see the salvation of God,” everywhere
declaring that the power and knowledge of these our Gospels would be
poured out to the ends of the world, converting the human race, from a
brutish disposition and a fierce temper to something very gentle and
mild.

<span id="iii.X-p50"></span>4. “And the same John had his raiment of
camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins.” <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md)

<span id="iii.X-p52"></span>Observe, how the prophets foretold some
things, others they left to the evangelists. Wherefore also Matthew both
sets down the prophecies, and adds his own part, not accounting even
this superfluous, to speak of the dress of the righteous man.

<span id="iii.X-p53"></span>For indeed it was a marvellous and strange
thing to behold so great austerity in a human frame: which thing also
particularly attracted the Jews, seeing in him the great Elijah, and
guided by what they then beheld, to the memory of that blessed man; or
rather, even to a greater astonishment. For the one indeed was brought
up in cities and in houses, the other dwelt entirely in the wilderness
from his very swaddling clothes. For it became the forerunner of Him who
was to put away all the ancient ills, the labor, for example, the curse,
the sorrow, the sweat; himself also to have certain tokens of such a
gift, and to come at once to be above that condemnation. Thus he neither
ploughed land, nor opened furrow, he ate not his bread by the sweat of
his face, but his table was hastily supplied, and his clothing more
easily furnished than his table, and his lodging yet less troublesome
than his clothing. For he needed neither roof, nor bed, nor table, nor
any other of these things, but a kind of angel’s life in this our flesh
did he exhibit. For this cause his very garment was of hair, that by his
dress he might instruct men to separate themselves from all things
human, and to have nothing in common with the earth, but to hasten back
to their earlier nobleness, wherein Adam was before he wanted garments
or robe. Thus that garb bore tokens of *nothing less than* a kingdom,
and of repentance.

<span id="iii.X-p54"></span>And do not say to me, “Whence had he a
garment of hair and a girdle, dwelling as he did in the wilderness?” For
if thou art to make a difficulty of this, thou wilt also inquire into
more things besides; how in the winters, and how in the heats of summer,
he continued in the wilderness, and this with a delicate body, and at an
immature age? how the nature of his infant flesh endured such great
inconstancy of weather, and a diet so uncommon, and all the other
hardships arising from the wilderness?

<span id="iii.X-p55"></span>Where now are the philosophers of the
Greeks, who at random and for nought emu <span id="page_62">p. 62</span>
<span id="iii.X-Page_62"></span> lated the shamelessness of the Cynics
(for what is the profit of being shut up in a tub, and afterwards
running into such wantonness)? they who encompassed themselves with
rings and cups, and men servants and maid servants, and with much pomp
besides, falling into either extreme. But this man was not so; but he
dwelt in the wilderness as in Heaven, showing forth all strictness of
self-restraint. And from thence, like some angel from Heaven, he went
down unto the cities, being a champion of godliness, and a crowned
victor over the world, and a philosopher of that philosophy which is
worthy of the heavens. And these things were, when sin was not yet put
away, when the law had not yet ceased, when death was not yet bound,
when the brazen gates were not yet broken up, but while the ancient
polity still was in force.

<span id="iii.X-p56"></span>Such is the nature of a noble and thoroughly
vigilant soul, for it is everywhere springing forward, and passing
beyond the limits set to it; as Paul <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md) also did with respect to the new
polity.

<span id="iii.X-p58"></span>But why, it may be asked, did he use a
girdle with his raiment? This was customary with them of old time,
before men passed into this soft and loose kind of dress. Thus, for
instance, both Peter <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md) appears to
have been “girded,” and Paul; for it saith, “the man that owneth this
girdle.” <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) And Elijah <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) too was thus arrayed, and every one of
the saints, because they were at work continually, laboring, and busying
themselves either in journeyings, or about some other necessary matter;
and not for this cause only, but also with a view of trampling under
foot all ornaments, and practising all austerity. This very kind of
thing accordingly Christ declares to be the greatest praise of virtue,
thus saying, “What went ye out for to see? a man clothed in soft
raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing are in king’s
houses.” <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md)

<span id="iii.X-p63"></span>But if he, who was so pure, and more
glorious than the heaven, and above all prophets, than whom none greater
was born, and who had such great boldness of speech, thus exercised
himself in austerity, scorning so exceedingly all dissolute delicacy,
and training himself to this hard life; what excuse shall we have, who
after so great a benefit, and the unnumbered burdens of our sins, do not
show forth so much as the least part of his penance, <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) but are drinking and surfeiting, and
smelling of perfumes, and in no better trim than the harlot women on the
stage, and are by all means softening ourselves, and making ourselves an
easy prey to the devil? <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md)

<span id="iii.X-p66"></span>5. “Then went out to him all Judea, and
Jerusalem, and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of
him, confessing their sins.” <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md)

<span id="iii.X-p68"></span>Seest thou how great power was in the coming
of the prophet? how he stirred up all the people; how he led them to a
consideration of their own sins? For it was indeed worthy of wonder to
behold him in human form showing forth such things and using so great
freedom of speech, and rising up in condemnation of all as children, and
having his great grace beaming out from his countenance. And, moreover,
the appearance of a prophet after the great interval of time contributed
to their amazement, because the gift had failed them, and returned to
them after a long time. And the nature of his preaching too was strange
and unusual. For they heard of none of those things to which they were
accustomed; such as wars and battles and victories below, and famine and
pestilence, and Babylonians and Persians, and the taking of the city,
and the other things with which they were familiar, but of Heaven and of
the kingdom there, and of the punishment in hell. And it was for this
cause, let me add, that although they that committed revolt in the
wilderness, those in the company of Judas, and of Theudas, <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md) had been all of them slain no great
while before, yet they were not the more backward to go out thither. For
neither was it for the same objects that he summoned them, as for
dominion, or revolt, or revolution; but in order to lead them by the
hand to the kingdom on high. Wherefore neither did he keep them in the
wilderness to take them about with him, but baptizing them, and teaching
them the rules concerning self-denial, he dismissed them; by all means
instructing them to scorn whatever things are on earth, and to raise
themselves up to the things to come, and press on every day.

<span id="iii.X-p70"></span>6. This man then let us also emulate, and
forsaking luxury and drunkenness let us go over unto the life of
restraint. For this surely is the time of confession both for the
uninitiated and for the baptized; for the one, that upon their
repentance they may partake of the sacred mysteries; for the others,
that having washed away their stain after baptism, they may approach the
table with a clean <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="iii.X-Page_63"></span> conscience. Let us then forsake this soft and
effeminate way of living. For it is not, it is not possible at once both
to do penance <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md) and to live in
luxury. And this let John teach you by his raiment, by his food, by his
abode. What then? dost thou require us, you may say, to practise such
self-restraint as this? I do not require it, but I advise and recommend
it. But if this be not possible to you, let us at least, though in
cities, show forth repentance, for the judgment is surely at our doors.
But even if it were further off, we ought not even so to be emboldened,
for the term of each man’s life is the end of the world virtually to him
that is summoned. But that it is even at the doors, hear Paul saying,
“The night is far spent, the day is at hand;” <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md) and again, “He that cometh will come,
and will not tarry.” <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md)

<span id="iii.X-p74"></span>For the signs too are now complete, which
announce that day. For “this Gospel of the Kingdoms,” saith He, “shall
be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then
shall the end come.” <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md) Attend with
care to what is said. He said not, “when it hath been believed by all
men,” but “when it hath been preached to <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) all.” For this cause he also said,
“for a witness to the nations,” to show, that He doth not wait for all
men to believe, and then for Him to come. Since the phrase, “for a
witness,” hath this meaning, “for accusation,” “for reproof,” “for
condemnation of them that have not believed.”

<span id="iii.X-p77"></span>But we, while hearing these things and
seeing them, slumber, and see dreams, sunk in a lethargy, as in some
very deepest night. <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md) For the
things present are nothing better than dreams, whether they be
prosperous, or whether they be painful. Wherefore I entreat you now at
length to be awakened, and to look another way, unto the Sun of
Righteousness. For no man while sleeping can see the sun, nor delight
his eyes with the beauty of its beams; but whatever he may see, he
beholds all as in a dream. For this cause we need much penance, and many
tears; both as being in a state of insensibility while we err, and
because our sins are great, and beyond excuse. And that I lie not, the
more part of them that hear me are witnesses. Nevertheless, although
they be beyond excuse, let us repent, and we shall receive crowns.

<span id="iii.X-p79"></span>7. But by repentance I mean, not only to
forsake our former evil deeds, but also to show forth good deeds greater
than those. For, “bring forth,” saith he, “fruits meet for
repentance.” <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450.md) But how shall we
bring them forth? If we do the opposite things: as for instance, hast
thou seized by violence the goods of others? henceforth give away even
thine own. Hast thou been guilty of fornication for a long time? abstain
even from thy wife for certain appointed days; exercise continence. Hast
thou insulted and stricken such as were passing by? Henceforth bless
them that insult thee, and do good to them that smite thee. For it
sufficeth not for our health to have plucked out the dart only, but we
must also apply remedies to the wound. Hast thou lived in
self-indulgence, and been drunken in time past? Fast, and take care to
drink water, in order to destroy the mischief that hath so grown up
within thee. Hast thou beheld with unchaste eyes beauty that belonged to
another? Henceforth do not so much as look upon a woman at all, that
thou mayest stand in more safety. For it is said, “Depart from evil, and
do good;” <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451.md) and again, “Make thy
tongue to cease from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.” <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md) “But tell me the good too.” “Seek
peace, and pursue it:” I mean not peace with man only, but also peace
with God. And he hath well said, “pursue” her: for she is driven away,
and cast out; she hath left the earth, and is gone to sojourn in Heaven.
Yet shall we be able to bring her back again, if we will put away pride
and boasting, and whatsoever things stand in her way, and will follow
this temperate and frugal life. <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md)
For nothing is more grievous than wrath and fierce anger. This renders
men both puffed up and servile, by the former making them ridiculous, by
the other hateful; and bringing in opposite vices, pride and flattery,
at the same time. But if we will cut off the greediness of this passion,
we shall be both lowly with exactness, and exalted with safety. For in
our bodies too all distempers arise from excess; and when the elements
thereof leave their proper limits, and go on beyond moderation, then all
these countless diseases are generated, and grievous kinds of death.
Somewhat of the same kind one may see take place with respect to the
soul likewise.

<span id="iii.X-p84"></span>8. Let us therefore cut away excess, and
drinking the salutary medicine of moderation, <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> <span id="iii.X-Page_64"></span> let us abide in our proper
temperament, and give careful heed to our prayers. Though we receive
not, let us persevere that we may receive; and if we do receive, then
because we have received. For it is not at all His wish to defer giving,
but by such delay He is contriving for us to persevere. With this intent
He doth also lengthen out <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md) what
is good for us better than we do, and loves us more ardently than those
who gave us birth. And let both these considerations be a charm for us
to chant to ourselves in every terror that occurs, that so we may quell
our despondency, and in all things glorify Him, who on our behalf doeth
and ordereth all, even God.

<span id="iii.X-p86"></span>For so we shall both easily repulse all
hostile devices, and attain unto the incorruptible crowns: by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be unto the
Father glory, might, and honor, together with the Holy Ghost, now, and
always, even for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_407"></span>[58:408](1100018.htm#fr_407.md) <span
id="iii.X-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p5"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.X-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[59:409](1100018.htm#fr_408.md) <span
id="iii.X-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p6"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.X-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[59:410](1100018.htm#fr_409.md) <span
id="iii.X-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p9"></span>[Matt. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.X-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[59:411](1100018.htm#fr_410.md) <span
id="iii.X-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p11"></span>[Luke iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.X-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[59:412](1100018.htm#fr_411.md) <span
id="iii.X-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p12"></span>[John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.X-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[59:413](1100018.htm#fr_412.md) <span
id="iii.X-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p13"></span>[John i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.X-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[59:414](1100018.htm#fr_413.md) <span
id="iii.X-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p15"></span>[Luke iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.X-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[59:415](1100018.htm#fr_414.md) <span
id="iii.X-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p16"></span>[Col.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md), [Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.X-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[59:416](1100018.htm#fr_415.md) <span
id="iii.X-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p17"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.X-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[59:417](1100018.htm#fr_416.md) <span
id="iii.X-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p18"></span>[Acts xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.X-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[59:418](1100018.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="iii.X-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p21"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p21.1"></span>ζητοντε</span>, “seeking,” R.V.\]

<span id="fn_418"></span>[59:419](1100018.htm#fr_418.md) <span
id="iii.X-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p22"></span>[Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.X-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[59:420](1100018.htm#fr_419.md) <span
id="iii.X-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p23"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p23.1"></span>κατλαβε</span> \[R.V., “attained.”\]

<span id="fn_420"></span>[59:421](1100018.htm#fr_420.md) <span
id="iii.X-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p24"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p24.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p24.2"></span>φθασε</span> \[R.V., “did not arrive.”\]

<span id="fn_421"></span>[59:422](1100018.htm#fr_421.md) <span
id="iii.X-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p25"></span>[Rom. ix.
30-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.X-p25.1"></span>.
\[See R.V. The text of Chrysostom follows one of the readings accepted
by the Revisers, omitting <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p25.2"></span>νμου</span> at the close of the citation; but it
inserts <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p25.3"></span>δικαιοσνη</span> (with Rec.) a second time in
verse 31.—R.\]

<span id="fn_422"></span>[60:423](1100018.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="iii.X-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p27"></span>[Matt. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.X-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[60:424](1100018.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="iii.X-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p30"></span>[Acts xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.X-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[60:425](1100018.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="iii.X-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p32"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p32.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p32.2"></span>το πργματο πθεσι</span>.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[60:426](1100018.htm#fr_425.md) <span
id="iii.X-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p33"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p33.1"></span>θατρον</span>.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[60:427](1100018.htm#fr_426.md) <span
id="iii.X-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p38.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p38.2"></span>νειροπολεν</span> .

<span id="fn_427"></span>[60:428](1100018.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="iii.X-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p42"></span>[Is. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.X-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[60:429](1100018.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="iii.X-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p43"></span>[Matt. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.X-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[61:430](1100018.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="iii.X-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p45"></span>[Luke 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.X-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[61:431](1100018.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="iii.X-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p46"></span>[Matt. xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.X-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[61:432](1100018.htm#fr_431.md) <span
id="iii.X-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p47"></span>[Isa. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.X-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[61:433](1100018.htm#fr_432.md) <span
id="iii.X-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p48"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p48.1"></span>τ νμαλον το θου</span>.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[61:434](1100018.htm#fr_433.md) <span
id="iii.X-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p49"></span>[Isa.
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md), [Rom.
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.X-p49.1"></span>.
\[“Hope” instead of “trust;” see foot-note on Hom. vii. 2, p. 45.—R.\]

<span id="fn_434"></span>[61:435](1100018.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="iii.X-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p51"></span>[Matt. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.X-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[62:436](1100018.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="iii.X-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p57"></span>As in refusing to be supported (in several
cases) by those to whom he preached the gospel. See his account of his
views in so doing, [1 Cor. ix](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.X-p57.1"></span>., especially towards the end of the chapter.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[62:437](1100018.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="iii.X-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p59"></span>[John xxi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.X-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[62:438](1100018.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="iii.X-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p60"></span>[Acts xxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.X-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[62:439](1100018.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="iii.X-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p61"></span>[2 Kings i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.X-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[62:440](1100018.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="iii.X-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p62"></span>[Matt. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.X-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[62:441](1100018.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="iii.X-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p64"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p64.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p64.2"></span>ξομολογσεω</span> .

<span id="fn_441"></span>[62:442](1100018.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="iii.X-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p65"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p65.1"></span>τ διαβλ</span>. The Oxford edition has “the
devils,” but this is misleading, since it suggests a reference to
“demons.” Probably the plural is a misprint.—R.\]

<span id="fn_442"></span>[62:443](1100018.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="iii.X-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p67"></span>[Matt.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.X-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[62:444](1100018.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="iii.X-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p69"></span>[Acts
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037.md)<span id="iii.X-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[63:445](1100018.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="iii.X-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p71"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p71.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p71.2"></span>ξομολογεσθαι</span> .

<span id="fn_445"></span>[63:446](1100018.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="iii.X-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p72"></span>[Rom. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.X-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[63:447](1100018.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="iii.X-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p73"></span>[Heb. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037.md)<span id="iii.X-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[63:448](1100018.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="iii.X-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p75"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.X-p75.1"></span>.
\[“All the nations,” so R.V., and comp. what follows here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_448"></span>[63:449](1100018.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="iii.X-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p76"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p76.1"></span>παρ πντων νθρπων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p76.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p76.3"></span>…</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p76.4"></span>παρ πασ</span>, is the explanation of
Chrysostom, paraphrasing the New Testament passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_449"></span>[63:450](1100018.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="iii.X-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p78"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p78.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p78.2"></span>ν βαθυττ νυκτ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_450"></span>[63:451](1100018.htm#fr_450.md) <span
id="iii.X-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p80"></span>[Matt. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.X-p80.1"></span>.
\[R.V., more literally, “worthy of repentance,” with margin, “Or, your
repentance,” the Greek being <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p80.2"></span>τ μετανοα</span>; so in the text of
Chrysostom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_451"></span>[63:452](1100018.htm#fr_451.md) <span
id="iii.X-p80.3"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p81"></span>[Ps. xxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.X-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[63:453](1100018.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="iii.X-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p82"></span>[Ps. xxxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.X-p82.1"></span>
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.X-p82.2"></span>LXX</span>.\].

<span id="fn_453"></span>[63:454](1100018.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="iii.X-p82.3"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p83"></span>\[“If we desire (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p83.1"></span>θλωμεν</span>), by putting away, etc.…to pursue
this temperate and frugal life.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_454"></span>[64:455](1100018.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="iii.X-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.X-p85"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p85.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.X-p85.2"></span>περτθεται</span>, used as in the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.X-p85.3"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.X-p85.4"></span>πρθεσι</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.X-p85.5"></span>χριν εδτε πρ πντων τ
εδτι</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XI](1100019.md)
