[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100063)  [Next](1100065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LVI"></span> <span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="iii.LVI-Page_346"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LVI-p1.1"></span>Homily LIX.</span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LVI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XVIII.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span
id="iii.LVI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p3"></span>*Woe unto the world because of
offenses:* <span id="fr_2287"></span>[2288](#fn_2287) *for it must needs
be that offenses come: but woe to that man by* <span
id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288) *whom the offense cometh.”*

<span id="iii.LVI-p6"></span>“<span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LVI-p6.1"></span>And</span> if ‘it must needs be that offenses
come,’” (some one of our adversaries may perchance say), “why doth He
lament over the world, when He ought rather to afford succor, and to
stretch forth His hand in its behalf? For this were the part of a
physician, and a protector, whereas the other might be looked for even
from any ordinary person.”

<span id="iii.LVI-p7"></span>What then could we possibly say, in answer
to so shameless a tongue? nay what dost thou seek for equal to this
healing care of His? For indeed being God He became man for thee, and
took the form of a slave, and underwent all extremities, and left undone
none of those things which it concerned Him to do. But inasmuch as
unthankful men were nothing the better for this, He laments over them,
for that after so much fostering care they continued in their
unsoundness.

<span id="iii.LVI-p8"></span>It was like as if over the sick man, that
had had the advantage of much attendance, and who had not been willing
to obey the rules of the physician, any one were to lament and say, “Woe
to such a man from his infirmity, which he has increased by his own
remissness.” But in that case indeed there is no advantage from the
bewailing, but here this too is a kind of healing treatment to foretell
what would be, and to lament it. For many oftentimes, though, when
advised, they were nothing profited, yet, when mourned for, they
amended.

<span id="iii.LVI-p9"></span>For which reason most of all He used the
word “Woe,” thoroughly to rouse them, and to make them in earnest, and
to work upon them to be wakeful. And at the same time He shows forth the
good will He had towards those very men and His own mildness, that He
mourns for them even when gainsaying, not taking mere disgust at it, but
correcting them, both with the mourning, and with the prediction, so as
to win them over.

<span id="iii.LVI-p10"></span>But how is this possible? he may say. For
if “it must needs be that offenses come,” how is it possible to escape
these? Because that the offenses come indeed must needs be, but that men
should perish is not altogether of necessity. Like as though a physician
should say (for nothing hinders our using the same illustration again),
it must needs be that this disease should come on, but it is not a
necessary consequence that he who gives heed should be of course
destroyed by the disease. And this He said, as I mentioned, to awaken
together with the others His disciples. For that they may not slumber,
as sent unto peace and unto untroubled life, He shows many wars close
upon them, from without, from within. Declaring this, Paul said,
“Without were fightings, within were fears;” <span
id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289) and, “In perils among false
brethren;” <span id="fr_2290"></span>[2291](#fn_2290) and in his
discourse to the Milesians too He said, “Also of you shall some arise
speaking perverse things;” <span id="fr_2291"></span>[2292](#fn_2291)
and He Himself too said, “The man’s foes shall be they of his own
household.” <span id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292) But when He said,
“It must needs be,” it is not as taking away the power of choosing for
themselves, nor the freedom of the moral principle, nor as placing man’s
life under any absolute constraint of circumstances, that He saith these
things, but He foretells what would surely be; and this Luke hath set
forth in another form of expression, “It is impossible but that offenses
should come.” <span id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293)

<span id="iii.LVI-p16"></span>But what are the offenses? <span
id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294) The hindrances on the right way.
Thus also do those on the stage call them that are skilled in those
matters, them that distort their bodies.

<span id="iii.LVI-p18"></span>It is not then His prediction that brings
the offenses; far from it; neither because He foretold it, therefore
doth it take place; but because it surely was to be, therefore He
foretold it; since if those who bring in the offenses had not been
minded to do wickedly, neither would the offenses have come; and if they
had not been to come, neither would they have been foretold. But because
those men did evil, and were incurably diseased, the offenses came, and
He foretells that which is to be.

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span id="iii.LVI-Page_347"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p19"></span>But if these men had been kept right, it
may be said, and there had been no one to bring in an offense, would not
this saying have been convicted of falsehood? By no means, for neither
would it have been spoken. For if all were to have been kept right, He
would not have said, “it must needs be that they come,” but because He
foreknew they would be of themselves incorrigible, therefore He said,
the offenses will surely come.

<span id="iii.LVI-p20"></span>And wherefore did He not take them out of
the way? it may be said. Why, wherefore should they have been taken out
of the way? For the sake of them that are hurt? But not thence is the
ruin of them that are hurt, but from their own remissness. And the
virtuous prove it, who, so far from being injured thereby, are even in
the greatest degree profited, such as was Job, such as was Joseph, such
as were all the righteous, and the apostles. But if many perish, it is
from their own slumbering. But if it were not so, but the ruin was the
effect of the offenses, all must have perished. And if there are those
who escape, let him who doth not escape impute it to himself. For the
offenses, as I have said, awaken, and render more quick-sighted, and
sharper, not only him that is preserved; but even him that hath fallen
into them, if he rise up again quickly, for they render him more safe,
and make him more difficult to overcome; so that if we be watchful, no
small profit do we reap from hence, even to be continually awake. For if
when we have enemies, and when so many dangers are pressing upon us, we
sleep, what should we be if living in security. Nay, if thou wilt, look
at the first man. For if having lived in paradise a short time,
perchance not so much as a whole day, and having enjoyed delights, he
drove on to such a pitch of wickedness, as even to imagine an equality
with God, and to account the deceiver a benefactor, and not to keep to
one commandment; if he had lived the rest of his life also without
affliction, what would he not have done?

<span id="iii.LVI-p21"></span>2. But when we say these things, they make
other objections again, asking, And why did God make him such? God did
not make him such, far from it, since then neither would He have
punished him. For if we in those matters in which we are the cause, do
not find fault with our servant, much more will not the God of all. “But
whence did this come to pass?” one may say. Of himself and his own
remissness. “What means, of himself?” Ask thyself. For if it be not of
themselves the bad are bad, do not punish thy servant nor reprove thy
wife for what errors she may commit, neither beat thy son, nor blame thy
friend, nor hate thine enemy that doth despite to thee: for all these
deserve to be pitied, not to be punished, unless they offend of
themselves. “But I am not able to practise self-restraint,” one may say.
And yet, when thou perceivest the cause not to be with them, but of
another necessity, thou canst practise self-restraint. When at least a
servant being taken with sickness doth not the things enjoined him, so
far from blaming thou dost rather excuse him. Thus thou art a witness,
that the one thing is of one’s self, the other not of one’s self. So
that here too, if thou knewest that he was wicked from being born such,
so far from blaming, thou wouldest rather have shown him indulgence. For
surely, when thou makest him allowance for his illness, it could not be
that thou wouldest have refused to make allowance for God’s act of
creation, if indeed he had been made such from the very first.

<span id="iii.LVI-p22"></span>And in another way too it is easy to stop
the mouths of such men, for great is the abounding power of the truth.
For wherefore dost thou never find fault with thy servant, because he is
not of a beautiful countenance, that he is not of fine stature in his
body, that he is not able to fly? Because these things are natural. So
then from blame against his nature he is acquitted, and no man gainsays
it. When therefore thou blamest, thou showest that the fault is not of
nature but of his choice. For if in those things, which we do not blame,
we bear witness that the whole is of nature, it is evident that where we
reprove, we declare that the offense is of the choice.

<span id="iii.LVI-p23"></span>Do not then bring forward, I beseech thee,
perverse reasonings, neither sophistries and webs slighter than the
spider’s, but answer me this again: Did God make all men? It is surely
plain to every man. How then are not all equal in respect of virtue and
vice? whence are the good, and gentle, and meek? whence are the
worthless and evil? For if these things do not require any purpose, but
are of nature, how are the one this, the others that? For if by nature
all were bad, it were not possible for any one to be good, but if good
by nature, then no one bad. For if there were one nature of all men,
they must needs in this respect be all one, whether they were to be
this, or whether they were to be that.

<span id="iii.LVI-p24"></span>But if we should say that by nature the
one are good, the other bad, which would not be reasonable (as we have
shown), these things must be unchangeable, for the things of nature are
unchangeable. Nay, mark. All <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="iii.LVI-Page_348"></span> mortals are also liable to suffering; and
no one is free from suffering, though he strive without end. But now we
see of good many becoming worthless, and of worthless good, the one
through remissness, the other by earnestness; which thing most of all
indicates that these things do not come of nature.

<span id="iii.LVI-p25"></span>For the things of nature are neither
changed, nor do they need diligence for their acquisition. For like as
for seeing and hearing we do not need labor, so neither should we need
toils in virtue, if it had been apportioned by nature.

<span id="iii.LVI-p26"></span>“But wherefore did He at all make
worthless men, when He might have made all men good? Whence then are the
evil things?” saith he. Ask thyself; for it is my part to show they are
not of nature, nor from God.

<span id="iii.LVI-p27"></span>“Come they then of themselves?” he saith.
By no means. “But are they unoriginated?” Speak reverently, O man, and
start back from this madness, honoring with one honor God and the evil
things, and that honor the highest. For if they be unoriginate they are
mighty, and cannot so much as be plucked up, nor pass into annihilation.
For that what is unoriginate is imperishable, is surely manifest to all.

<span id="iii.LVI-p28"></span>3. And whence also are there so many good,
when evil hath such great power? how are they that have an origin
stronger than that which is unoriginate?

<span id="iii.LVI-p29"></span>“But God destroys these things,” he saith.
When? And how will He destroy what are of equal honor, and of equal
strength, and of the same age, as one might say, with Himself?

<span id="iii.LVI-p30"></span>Oh malice of the devil! how great an evil
hath he invented! With what blasphemy hath he persuaded men to surround
God! with what cloak of godliness hath he devised another profane
account? For desiring to show, that not of Him was the evil, they
brought in another evil doctrine, saying, that these things are
unoriginate.

<span id="iii.LVI-p31"></span>“Whence then are evils?” one may say. From
willing and not willing. “But the very thing of our willing and not
willing, whence is it?” From ourselves. But thou dost the same in
asking, as if when thou hadst asked, whence is seeing and not seeing?
then when I said, from closing the eyes or not closing the eyes, thou
wert to ask again; the very closing the eyes or not, whence is it? then
having heard that it was of ourselves, and our will, thou wert to seek
again another cause.

<span id="iii.LVI-p32"></span>For evil is nothing else than disobedience
to God. “Whence then,” one may say, “did man find this?” “Why, was it a
task to find this? I pray thee.” “Nay, neither do I say this, that this
thing is difficult; but whence became he desirous to disobey.” “From
remissness. For having power for either, he inclined rather to this.”

<span id="iii.LVI-p33"></span>But if thou art perplexed yet and dizzy at
hearing this, I will ask thee nothing difficult nor involved, but a
simple and plain question. Hast thou become some time bad? and hast thou
become some time also good? What I mean, is like this. Didst thou
prevail some time over passion, and wast thou taken again by passion?
Hast thou been overtaken by drunkenness, and hast thou prevailed over
drunkenness? Wast thou once moved to wrath, and again not moved to
wrath? Didst thou overlook a poor man, and not overlook him? Didst thou
commit whoredom once? and didst thou become chaste again? Whence then
are all these things? tell me, whence? Nay if thou thyself do not tell,
I will say. Because at one time thou didst restrain thyself and strive,
but after that thou becamest remiss and careless. For to those that are
desperate, and are continually in wickedness, and are in a state of
senselessness, and are mad, and who are not willing so much as to hear
what will amend them, I will not even discourse of self restraint; but
to them that have been sometimes in the one, and sometimes in the other,
I will gladly speak. Didst thou once take by violence the things that
belonged not to thee; and after this, subdued by pity, didst impart even
of thine unto him that was in need? Whence then this change? Is it not
quite plain it is from the mind, and the choice of will?

<span id="iii.LVI-p34"></span>It is quite plain, and there is no one who
would not say this. Wherefore I entreat you to be in earnest, and to
cleave to virtue, and ye will have no need of these questions. For our
evils are mere names, if we be willing. Inquire not then whence are
evils, neither perplex thyself; but having found that they are from
remissness only, flee the evil deeds.

<span id="iii.LVI-p35"></span>And if any one should say, that these
things come not from us; whenever thou seest him angry with his
servants, and provoked with his wife, and blaming a child, and
condemning them who injure him, say to him, how then saidst thou, that
evils come not from us? For if they be not from us, wherefore dost thou
find fault? Say again; is it of thyself thou revilest, and insultest?
For if it be not of thyself, let no man be angry with thee; but if it be
of thyself, of thyself and of thy remissness are thy evil deeds.

<span id="iii.LVI-p36"></span>But what? thinkest thou there are some
good men? For if indeed no man is good, <span id="page_349">p.
349</span> <span id="iii.LVI-Page_349"></span> whence hast thou this
word? whence are praises? But if there are good men, it is quite plain
that they will also reprove the bad. Yet if no one is voluntarily
wicked, nor of himself, the good will be found to be unjustly reproving
the bad, and they themselves too will be in this way bad again. For what
can be worse than to subject the guiltless to accusations? But if they
continue in our estimation good men, though reproving, and this
especially is a proof of their goodness, even to the very fools it is
hereby plain, that no one is ever by necessity bad.

<span id="iii.LVI-p37"></span>But if after all this thou wouldest still
inquire, whence are evils? I would say, from remissness, from idleness,
from keeping company with the bad, from contempt of virtue; hence are
both the evils themselves, and the fact that some inquire, whence are
the evils. Since of them surely who do right no one inquires about these
things, of them that are purposed to live equitably and temperately; but
they, who dare to commit wicked acts, and wish to devise some foolish
comfort <span id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295) to themselves by
these discussions, do weave spiders’ webs.

<span id="iii.LVI-p39"></span>But let us tear these in pieces not by our
words only, but by our deeds too. For neither are these things of
necessity. For if they were of necessity, He would not have said, “Woe
to the man, by whom the offense cometh.” <span
id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) For those only doth he bewail, who
are wicked by their choice.

<span id="iii.LVI-p41"></span>And if He saith “by whom,” <span
id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297) marvel not. For not as though
another were bringing in it by him, doth He say this, but viewing him as
himself causing the whole. For the Scripture is wont to say, “by whom,”
for “of whom;” <span id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298) as when it
saith, “I have gotten a man by God,” <span
id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) putting not the second cause, but
the first; and again, “Is not the interpretation of them by God,” <span
id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300) and, “God is faithful, by whom ye
are called unto the fellowship of His Son.” <span
id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301)

<span id="iii.LVI-p47"></span>4. And that thou mayest learn that it is
not of necessity, hear also what follows. For after bewailing them, He
saith, “If thy hand, or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
them from thee: for it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than having two hands or feet to be cast into the fire.
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out; it is better for thee to
enter into life with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into the
furnace of fire;” <span id="fr_2302"></span>[2303](#fn_2302) not saying
these things of limbs; far from it; but of friends, of relations, whom
we regard in the rank of necessary members. This He had both said
further back, and now He saith it. For nothing is so hurtful as bad
company. For what things compulsion cannot, friendship can often effect,
both for hurt, and for profit. Wherefore with much earnestness He
commands us to cut off them that hurt us, intimating these that bring
the offenses.

<span id="iii.LVI-p49"></span>Seest thou how He hath put away the
mischief that would result from the offenses? By foretelling that there
surely will be offenses, so that they might find no one in a state of
carelessness, but that looking for them men might be watchful. By
showing the evils to be great (for He would not have said without
purpose, “Woe to the world because of the offenses,” but to show that
great is the mischief therefrom), by lamenting again in stronger terms
over him that brings them in. For the saying, “But woe to that man,” was
that of one showing that great was the punishment, but not this only,
but also by the comparison which He added He increased the fear.

<span id="iii.LVI-p50"></span>Then He is not satisfied with these
things, but He showeth also the way, by which one may avoid the
offenses.

<span id="iii.LVI-p51"></span>But what is this? The wicked, saith He,
though they be exceeding dear friends to thee, cut off from thy
friendship.

<span id="iii.LVI-p52"></span>And He giveth a reason that cannot be
gainsaid. For if they continue friends, thou wilt not gain them, but
thou wilt lose thyself besides; but if thou shouldest cut them off,
thine own salvation at least thou wilt gain. So that if any one’s
friendship harms thee, cut it off from thee. For if of our own members
we often cut off many, when they are both in an incurable state, and are
ruining the rest, much more ought one to do this in the case of friends.

<span id="iii.LVI-p53"></span>But if evils were by nature, superfluous
were all this admonition and advice, superfluous the precaution by the
means that have been mentioned. But if it be not superfluous, as surely
it is not superfluous, it is quite clear that wickedness is of the
will. <span id="fr_2303"></span>[2304](#fn_2303)

<span id="iii.LVI-p55"></span>“Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones; for I say unto you, that their angels do always
behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2304"></span>[2305](#fn_2304)

<span id="iii.LVI-p57"></span>He calleth little ones not them that are
really little, but them that are so esteemed by the multitude, the poor,
the objects of contempt, the unknown (for how should he be little who is
equal in value to the whole <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="iii.LVI-Page_350"></span> world; how should he be little, who is
dear to God?); but them who in the imagination of the multitude are so
esteemed.

<span id="iii.LVI-p58"></span>And He speaks not of many only, but even
of one, even by this again warding off the hurt of the many offenses.
For even as to flee the wicked, so also to honor the good, hath very
great gain, and would be a twofold security to him who gives heed, the
one by rooting out the friendships with them that offend, the other from
regarding these saints with respect and honor.

<span id="iii.LVI-p59"></span>Then in another way also He makes them
objects of reverence, saying, “That their angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in Heaven.”

<span id="iii.LVI-p60"></span>Hence it is evident, that the saints have
angels, or even all men. For the apostle too saith of the woman, “That
she ought to have power on her head because of the angels.” <span
id="fr_2305"></span>[2306](#fn_2305) And Moses, “He set the bounds of
the nations according to the number of the angels <span
id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306) of God.” <span
id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307)

<span id="iii.LVI-p64"></span>But here He is discoursing not of angels
only, but rather of angels that are greater than others. But when He
saith, “The face of my Father,” He means nothing else than their fuller
confidence, and their great honor.

<span id="iii.LVI-p65"></span>“For the Son of Man is come to save that
which was lost.” <span id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308)

<span id="iii.LVI-p67"></span>Again, He is putting another reason
stronger than the former, and connects with it a parable, by which He
brings in the Father also as desiring these things. “For how think ye?”
saith He; “If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the
mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray? And if so be that he
find it, <span id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309) he rejoiceth over it
more than over the ninety and nine, which went not astray. Even so it is
not will before your Father, <span id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310)
that one of these little ones should perish.” <span
id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311)

<span id="iii.LVI-p71"></span>Seest thou by how many things He is urging
to the care of our mean brethren. Say not then, “Such a one is a
blacksmith, a shoemaker, he is a ploughman, he is a fool,” and so
despise him. For in order that thou shouldest not feel this, see by how
many motives He persuades thee to practise moderation, and presses thee
into a care for these. He set a little child, and saith, “Be ye as
little children.” And, “Whosoever receiveth such a little child
receiveth me;” and, “Whosoever shall offend,” shall suffer the utmost
penalties. And He was not even satisfied with the comparison of the
“millstone,” but added also His “woe,” and commanded us to cut off such,
though they be in the place of hands and eyes to us. And by the angels
again that are entrusted with these same mean brethren, He makes them
objects of veneration, and from His own will and passion (for when He
said, “The Son of Man is come to save that which was lost,” He signifies
even the cross, like as Paul saith, speaking of a brother, “For whom
Christ died”); and from the Father, for that neither to Him doth it seem
good that one should perish; and from common custom, because the
shepherd leaves them that are safe, and seeks what is lost; and when he
hath found what was gone astray, he is greatly delighted at the finding
and the saving of this.

<span id="iii.LVI-p72"></span>5. If then God thus rejoices over the
little one that is found, how dost thou despise them that are the
objects of God’s earnest care, when one ought to give up even one’s very
life for one of these little ones? But is he weak and mean? Therefore
for this very cause most of all, one ought to do everything in order to
preserve him. For even He Himself left the ninety and nine sheep, and
went after this, and the safety of so many availed not to throw into the
shade the loss of one. But Luke saith, that He even brought it on his
shoulders, and that “There was greater joy over one sinner that
repenteth, than over ninety and nine just persons.” <span
id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) And from His forsaking those that
were saved for it, and from His taking more pleasure in this one, He
showed His earnestness about it to be great.

<span id="iii.LVI-p74"></span>Let us not then be careless about such
souls as these. For all these things are said for this object. For by
threatening, that he who has not become a little child should not so
much as at all set foot in the Heavens, and speaking of “the millstone,”
He hath brought down the haughtiness of the boastful; for nothing is so
hostile to love as pride; and by saying, “It must needs be that offenses
come,” He made them to be wakeful; and by adding, “Woe unto him by whom
the offense cometh,” He hath caused each to endeavor that it be not by
him. And while by commanding to cut off them that offend He made
salvation easy; by enjoining not to despise them, and not merely
enjoining, but with <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="iii.LVI-Page_351"></span> earnestness (for “take heed,” saith He,
“that ye despise not one of these little ones”), and by saying, “Their
angels behold the face of my Father,” and, “For this end am I come,” and
“my Father willeth this,” He hath made those who should take care of
them more diligent.

<span id="iii.LVI-p75"></span>Seest thou what a wall He hath set around
them, and what earnest care He taketh of them that are contemptible and
perishing, at once threatening incurable ills to them that make them
fall, and promising great blessings to them that wait upon them, and
take care of them, and bringing an example from Himself again and from
the Father?

<span id="iii.LVI-p76"></span>Him let us also imitate, refusing none of
the tasks that seem lowly and troublesome for our brethren’s sake; but
though we have to do service, though he be small, though he be mean for
whom this is done, though the work be laborious, though we must pass
over mountains and precipices, let all things be held endurable for the
salvation of our brother. For a soul is an object of such earnest care
to God, that “He spared not His own Son.” <span
id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313)

<span id="iii.LVI-p78"></span>Wherefore I entreat, when morning hath
appeared, straightway as we come out of our house, let us have this one
object in view, this earnest care above all, to rescue him that is in
danger; I do not mean this danger only that is known by sense, for this
is not danger at all, but the danger of the soul, that which is brought
upon men by the devil.

<span id="iii.LVI-p79"></span>For the merchant too, to increase his
wealth, crosses the sea; and the artisan, to add to his substance, doeth
all things. Let us also then not be satisfied with our own salvation
only, since else we destroy even this. For in a war too, and in an
engagement, the soldier who is looking to this only how he may save
himself by flight, destroys the rest also with himself; much as on the
other hand the noble-minded one, and he who stands in arms in defense of
the others, with the others preserves himself also. Since then our state
too is a war, and of all wars the bitterest, and an engagement and a
battle, even as our King commanded us, so let us set ourselves in array
in the engagement, prepared for slaughter, and blood, and murders,
looking to salvation in behalf of all, and cheering them that stand, and
raising up them that are down. For indeed many of our brethren lie
fallen in this conflict, having wounds, wallowing in blood, and there is
none to heal, not any one of the people, not a priest, no one else, no
one to stand by, no friend, no brother, but we look every man to his own
things.

<span id="iii.LVI-p80"></span>By reason of this we maim our own
interests also. For the greatest confidence and means of approval is the
not looking to our own things.

<span id="iii.LVI-p81"></span>Therefore I say, are we weak and easy to
be overcome both by men, and by the devil, because we seek the opposite
to this, and lock not our shields one with another, neither are
fortified with godly love, but seek for ourselves other motives of
friendship, some from relationship, some from long acquaintance, some
from community of interest, some from neighborhood; and from every cause
rather are we friends, than from godliness, when one’s friendships ought
to be formed upon this only. But now the contrary is done; with Jews and
with Greeks <span id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) we sometimes
become friends, rather than with the children of the church.

<span id="iii.LVI-p83"></span>6. Yes, saith he, because the one is
worthless, but the other kind and gentle. What sayest thou? Dost thou
call thy brother worthless, who art commanded not to call him so much as
Raca? And art thou not ashamed, neither dost thou blush, at exposing thy
brother, thy fellow member, him that hath shared in the same birth with
thee, that hath partaken of the same table?

<span id="iii.LVI-p84"></span>But if thou hast any brother after the
flesh, if he should perpetrate ten thousand evil deeds, thou laborest to
conceal him, and accountest thyself also to partake of the shame, when
he is disgraced; but as to thy spiritual brother, when thou oughtest to
free him from calumny, thou dost rather encompass him with ten thousand
charges against him?

<span id="iii.LVI-p85"></span>“Why he is worthless and insufferable,”
thou mayest say. Nay then for this reason become his friend, that thou
mayest put an end to his being such a one, that thou mayest convert him,
that thou mayest lead him back to virtue.—“But he obeys not,” thou wilt
say, “neither doth he bear advice.”—Whence knowest thou it? What, hast
thou admonished him, and attempted to amend him?—“I have admonished him
often,” thou wilt say. How many times?—Oftentimes, both once, and a
second time.—Oh! Is this often? Why, if thou hadst done this throughout
all the time, oughtest thou to grow weary, and to give it up? Seest thou
not how God is always admonishing us, by the prophets, by the apostles,
by the evangelists? What then? have we performed all? and have we been
obedient in all things? By no means. Did He then cease admonishing?
<span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span id="iii.LVI-Page_352"></span>
Did He hold His peace? Doth He not say each day, “Ye cannot serve God,
and mammon” <span id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) and with many,
the superfluity and the tyranny of wealth yet increases? Doth He not cry
aloud each day, “Forgive, and ye shall have forgiveness,” <span
id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316) and we become wild beasts more and
more? Doth He not continually admonish to restrain desire, and to keep
the mastery over wicked lust, and many wallow worse than swine in this
sin? But nevertheless, He ceases not speaking.

<span id="iii.LVI-p88"></span>Wherefore then do we not consider these
things with ourselves, and say that even with us God reasons, and
abstains not from doing this, although we disobey Him in many things?

<span id="iii.LVI-p89"></span>Therefore He said that, “Few are the
saved.” <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) For if virtue in
ourselves suffices not for our salvation, but we must take with us
others too when we depart; when we have saved neither ourselves, nor
others, what shall we suffer? Whence shall we have any more a hope of
salvation?

<span id="iii.LVI-p91"></span>But why do I blame for these things, when
not even of them that dwell with us do we take any account, of wife, and
children, and servants, but we have care of one thing instead of
another, like drunken men, that our servants may be more in number, and
may serve us with much diligence, and that our children may receive from
us a large inheritance, and that our wife may have ornaments of gold,
and costly garments, and wealth; and we care not at all for themselves,
but for the things that belong to them. For neither do we care for our
own wife, nor provide for her, but for the things that belong to the
wife; neither for the child, but for the things of the child.

<span id="iii.LVI-p92"></span>And we do the same as if any one seeing a
house in a bad state, and the walls giving way, were to neglect to raise
up these, and to make up great fences round it without; or when a body
was diseased, were not to take care of this, but were to weave for it
gilded garments; or when the mistress was ill, were to give heed to the
maidservants, and the looms, and the vessels in the house, and mind
other things, leaving her to lie and moan.

<span id="iii.LVI-p93"></span>For this is done even now, and when our
soul is in evil and wretched case, and angry, and reviling, and lusting
wrongly, and full of vainglory, and at strife, and dragged down to the
earth, and torn by so many wild beasts, we neglect to drive away the
passions from her, and are careful about house and servants. And while
if a bear has escaped by stealth, we shut up our houses, and run along
by the narrow passages, so as not to fall in with the wild beast; now
while not one wild beast, but many such thoughts are tearing in pieces
the soul, we have not so much as a feeling of it. And in the city we
take so much care, as to shut up the wild beasts in solitary places and
in cages, and neither at the senate house of the city, nor at the courts
of justice, nor at the king’s palace, but far off somewhere at a
distance do we keep them chained; but in the case of the soul, where the
senate house is, where the King’s palace, where the court of justice is,
the wild beasts are let loose, crying and making a tumult about the mind
itself and the royal throne. Therefore all things are turned upside
down, and all is full of disturbance, the things within, the things
without, and we are in nothing different from a city thrown into
confusion from being overrun by barbarians; and what takes place in us
is as though a serpent were setting on a brood of sparrows, and the
sparrows, with their feeble cries, were flying about every way
affrighted, and full of trouble, without having any place whither to go
and end their consternation.

<span id="iii.LVI-p94"></span>7. Wherefore I entreat, let us kill the
serpent, let us shut up the wild beasts, let us stifle them, let us slay
them, and these wicked thoughts let us give over to the sword of the
Spirit, lest the prophet threaten us also with such things as he
threatened Judea, that “The wild asses shall dance there, and
porcupines, and serpents.” <span id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318)

<span id="iii.LVI-p96"></span>For there are, there are even men worse
than wild asses, living as it were in the wilderness, and kicking; yea
the more part of the youth amongst us is like this. For indeed having
wild lusts they thus leap, they kick, going about unbridled, and spend
their diligence on no becoming object.

<span id="iii.LVI-p97"></span>And the fathers are to blame, who while
they constrain the horsebreakers to discipline their horses with much
attention, and suffer not the youth of the colt to go on long untamed,
but put upon it both a rein, and all the rest, from the beginning; but
their own young ones they overlook, going about for a long season
unbridled, and without temperance; disgracing themselves, by
fornications, and gamings, and continuings in the wicked theatres, when
they ought before fornication to give him to a wife, to a wife chaste,
and highly endued with wisdom; for she will both bring off her husband
from his most disorderly course of life, and will be instead of a rein
to the colt.

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span id="iii.LVI-Page_353"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p98"></span>For indeed fornications and adulteries
come not from any other cause, than from young men’s being unrestrained.
For if he have a prudent wife, he will take care of house and honor and
character. “But he is young,” you say. I know it too. For if Isaac was
forty years old when he took his bride, passing all that time of his
life in virginity, much more ought young men under grace to practise
this self-restraint. But oh what grief! Ye do not endure to take care of
their chastity, but ye overlook their disgracing, defiling themselves,
becoming accursed; as though ye knew not that the profit of marriage is
to preserve the body pure, and if this be not so, there is no advantage
of marriage. But ye do the contrary; when they are filled with countless
stains, then ye bring them to marriage without purpose and without
fruit.

<span id="iii.LVI-p99"></span>“Why I must wait,” thou wilt say, “that he
may become approved, that he may distinguish himself in the affairs of
the state;” but of the soul ye have no consideration, but ye overlook it
as a cast-away. For this reason all things are full of confusion, and
disorder, and trouble, because this is made a secondary matter, because
necessary things are neglected, but the unimportant obtain much
forethought.

<span id="iii.LVI-p100"></span>Knowest thou not, that thou canst do no
such kindness to the youth, as to keep him pure from whorish
uncleannness? For nothing is equal to the soul. Because, “What is a man
profited,” saith He, “if he shall gain the whole world, but lose his own
soul.” <span id="fr_2319"></span>[2320](#fn_2319) But because the love
of money hath overturned and cast down all, and hath thrust aside the
strict fear of God, having seized upon the souls of men, like some rebel
chief upon a citadel; therefore we are careless both of our children’s
salvation, and of our own, looking to one object only, that having
become wealthier, we may leave riches to others, and these again to
others after them, and they that follow these to their posterity,
becoming rather a kind of passers on of our possessions and of our
money, but not masters.

<span id="iii.LVI-p102"></span>Hence great is our folly; hence the free
are less esteemed than the slaves. For slaves we reprove, if not for
their sake, yet for our own; but the free enjoy not the benefit even of
this care, but are more vile in our estimation than these slaves. And
why do I say, than our slaves? For our children are less esteemed than
cattle; and we take care of horses and asses rather than of children.
And should one have a mule, great is his anxiety to find the best groom,
and not one either harsh, or dishonest, or drunken, or ignorant of his
art; but if we have set a tutor <span
id="fr_2320"></span>[2321](#fn_2320) over a child’s soul, we take at
once, and at random, whoever comes in our way. And yet than this art
there is not another greater. For what is equal to training the soul,
and forming the mind of one that is young? For he that hath this art,
ought to be more exactly observant than any painter and any
sculptor. <span id="fr_2321"></span>[2322](#fn_2321)

<span id="iii.LVI-p105"></span>But we take no account of this, but look
to one thing only, that he may be trained as to his tongue. And to this
again we have directed our endeavors for money’s sake. For not that he
may be able to speak, but that he may get money, does he learn speaking;
since if it were possible to grow rich even without this, we should have
no care even for this.

<span id="iii.LVI-p106"></span>Seest thou how great is the tyranny of
riches? how it has seized upon all things, and having bound them like
some slaves or cattle, drags them where it will?

<span id="iii.LVI-p107"></span>But what are we advantaged by such
accusations against it? For we indeed shoot at it in words, but it
prevails over us in deeds. Nevertheless, not even so shall we cease to
shoot at it with words from our tongue. For if any advance is made, both
we are gainers and you; but if you continue in the same things, all our
part at least hath been performed.

<span id="iii.LVI-p108"></span>But may God both deliver you from this
disease, and cause us to glory in you, for to Him be glory, and
dominion, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2287"></span>[346:2288](1100064.htm#fr_2287) <span
id="iii.LVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p4"></span>\[R.V., “occasions of stumbling,” <span
id="iii.LVI-p4.1"></span>σκανδλων; see the comment below.\]

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[346:2289](1100064.htm#fr_2288) <span
id="iii.LVI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p5"></span>\[R.V., “through.”\]

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[346:2290](1100064.htm#fr_2289) <span
id="iii.LVI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p11"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span id="iii.LVI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2290"></span>[346:2291](1100064.htm#fr_2290) <span
id="iii.LVI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p12"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)<span id="iii.LVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2291"></span>[346:2292](1100064.htm#fr_2291) <span
id="iii.LVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p13"></span>[Acts xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span id="iii.LVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[346:2293](1100064.htm#fr_2292) <span
id="iii.LVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p14"></span>[Matt. x.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036)<span id="iii.LVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[346:2294](1100064.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="iii.LVI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p15"></span>[Luke xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#001)<span id="iii.LVI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[346:2295](1100064.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="iii.LVI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p17.1"></span>σκνδαλα</span>.

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[349:2296](1100064.htm#fr_2295) <span
id="iii.LVI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p38.1"></span>παραμυθαν</span>, Field.

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[349:2297](1100064.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="iii.LVI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p40"></span>[Matt. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span id="iii.LVI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[349:2298](1100064.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="iii.LVI-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p42.1"></span>δ ο</span>.

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[349:2299](1100064.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="iii.LVI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p43"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p43.1"></span>δι ο</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p43.2"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p43.3"></span>φ ο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p43.4"></span>,</span> *i.e.,*“through whom” for “by whom,”
the latter phrase referring to the personal agent.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[349:2300](1100064.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="iii.LVI-p43.5"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p44"></span>[Gen. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)<span id="iii.LVI-p44.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LVI-p44.2"></span>LXX</span>. \[<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LVI-p44.3"></span>δι το θεο</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[349:2301](1100064.htm#fr_2300) <span
id="iii.LVI-p44.4"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p45"></span>[Gen. xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#008)<span id="iii.LVI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[349:2302](1100064.htm#fr_2301) <span
id="iii.LVI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p46"></span>[1 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="iii.LVI-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2302"></span>[349:2303](1100064.htm#fr_2302) <span
id="iii.LVI-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p48"></span>[Matt.
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009)<span id="iii.LVI-p48.1"></span>.
\[The variations from the received text appear in the English rendering
as given above.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2303"></span>[349:2304](1100064.htm#fr_2303) <span
id="iii.LVI-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p54"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p54.1"></span>γνμη</span>.

<span id="fn_2304"></span>[349:2305](1100064.htm#fr_2304) <span
id="iii.LVI-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p56"></span>[Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="iii.LVI-p56.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “See,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2305"></span>[350:2306](1100064.htm#fr_2305) <span
id="iii.LVI-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p61"></span>[1 Cor. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#010)<span id="iii.LVI-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[350:2307](1100064.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="iii.LVI-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p62"></span>A.V., “Children of Israel,” al. “Sons of
God,” and hence “Angels.”

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[350:2308](1100064.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="iii.LVI-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p63"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)<span id="iii.LVI-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[350:2309](1100064.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="iii.LVI-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p66"></span>[Matt. xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011)<span id="iii.LVI-p66.1"></span>.
\[This verse, which is passed over without comment is omitted in Matthew
by some of the best <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LVI-p66.2"></span>mss</span>. and fathers. Probably taken from
[Luke xix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span
id="iii.LVI-p66.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[350:2310](1100064.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="iii.LVI-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p68"></span>\[“Verily I say unto you,” omitted.\]

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[350:2311](1100064.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="iii.LVI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p69"></span>\[R.V., margin, Greek: “a thing willed
before your Father.”\]

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[350:2312](1100064.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="iii.LVI-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p70"></span>[Matt. xviii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)<span id="iii.LVI-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[350:2313](1100064.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="iii.LVI-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p73"></span>[Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="iii.LVI-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[351:2314](1100064.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="iii.LVI-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p77"></span>[Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iii.LVI-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[351:2315](1100064.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="iii.LVI-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p82"></span>*i.e.*Heathens.

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[352:2316](1100064.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="iii.LVI-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p86"></span>[Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="iii.LVI-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[352:2317](1100064.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="iii.LVI-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p87"></span>[Luke vi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037)<span id="iii.LVI-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[352:2318](1100064.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="iii.LVI-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p90"></span>See [Luke xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#023)<span id="iii.LVI-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[352:2319](1100064.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="iii.LVI-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p95"></span>[Isa.
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022)<span id="iii.LVI-p95.1"></span>.
\[The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p95.2"></span>δρκοντε</span>, here rendered “serpents,” is
not found in the LXX.; nor does the prophecy refer to Judæa, but to
Babylon.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2319"></span>[353:2320](1100064.htm#fr_2319) <span
id="iii.LVI-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p101"></span>[Matt. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span id="iii.LVI-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2320"></span>[353:2321](1100064.htm#fr_2320) <span
id="iii.LVI-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p103"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p103.1"></span>παιδαγωγν</span>, a man-servant who took care
of boys.

<span id="fn_2321"></span>[353:2322](1100064.htm#fr_2321) <span
id="iii.LVI-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVI-p104"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p104.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVI-p104.2"></span>νδριαντοποιο</span>, “maker of statuary.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LVII](1100065)
