[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100028)  [Next](1100030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXI"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXI-p1.1"></span>Homily XXI.</span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. VI.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="iii.XXI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p3"></span>“No man can serve two masters, for either
he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to one and
despise the other.”

<span id="iii.XXI-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXI-p4.1"></span>Seest</span> thou how by degrees He withdraws
us from the things that now are, and at greater length introduces what
He hath to say, touching voluntary poverty, and casts down the dominion
of covetousness?

<span id="iii.XXI-p5"></span>For He was not contented with His former
sayings, many and great as they were, but He adds others also, more and
more alarming. <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905)

<span id="iii.XXI-p7"></span>For what can be more alarming than what He
now saith, if indeed we are for our riches to fall from the service of
Christ? or what more to be desired, if indeed, by despising wealth, we
shall have our affection towards Him and our charity perfect? <span
id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) For what I am continually repeating,
the same do I now say likewise, namely, that by both kinds He presses
the hearer to obey His sayings; both by the profitable, and by the
hurtful; much like an excellent physician, pointing out both the disease
which is the consequence of neglect, and the good health which results
from obedience.

<span id="iii.XXI-p9"></span>See, for instance, what kind of gain He
signifies this to be, and how He establishes the advantage of it by
their deliverance from the contrary things. Thus, “wealth,” saith He,
“hurts you not in this only, that it arms robbers against you, nor in
that it darkens your mind in the most intense degree, but also in that
it casts you out of God’s service, making you captive of lifeless
riches, and in both ways doing you harm, on the one hand, by causing you
to be slaves of what you ought to command; on the other, by casting you
out of God’s service, whom, above all things, it is indispensable for
you to serve.” For just as in the other place, He signified the mischief
to be twofold, in both laying up here, “where moth corrupteth,” and in
not laying up there, where the watch kept is impregnable; so in this
place, too, He shows the loss to be twofold, in that it both draws off
from God, and makes us subject to mammon.

<span id="iii.XXI-p10"></span>But He sets it not down directly, rather
He establishes it first upon general considerations, saying thus; “No
man can serve two masters:” meaning here two that are enjoining opposite
things; since, unless this were the case, they would not even be two.
For so, “the multitude of them that believed <span id="page_144">p.
144</span> <span id="iii.XXI-Page_144"></span> were of one heart and of
one soul,” <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) and yet were they
divided into many bodies; their unanimity however made the many one.

<span id="iii.XXI-p12"></span>Then, as adding to the force of it, He
saith, “so far from serving, he will even hate and abhor:” “For either
he will hate the one,” saith He, “and love the other, or else he will
hold to the one and despise the other.” And it seems indeed as if the
same thing were said twice over; He did not however choose this form
without purpose, but in order to show that the change for the better is
easy. I mean, lest thou shouldest say, “I am once for all made a slave;
I am brought under the tyranny of wealth,” He signifies that it is
possible to transfer one’s self, and that as from the first to the
second, so also from the second one may pass over to the first.

<span id="iii.XXI-p13"></span>2. Having thus, you see, spoken generally,
that He might persuade the hearer to be an uncorrupt judge of His words,
and to sentence according to the very nature of the things; when he hath
made sure of his assent, then, and not till then, He discovers Himself.
Thus He presently adds, “Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” Let us shudder
to think what we have brought Christ to say; with the name of God, to
put that of gold. But if this be shocking, its taking place in our
deeds, our preferring the tyranny of gold to the fear of God, is much
more shocking.

<span id="iii.XXI-p14"></span>“What then? Was not this possible among
the ancients?” By no means. “How then,” saith one, “did Abraham, how did
Job obtain a good report?” Tell me not of them that are rich, but of
them that serve riches. Since Job also was rich, but he served not
mammon, but possessed it and ruled over it, and was a master, not a
slave. Therefore he so possessed all those things, as if he had been the
steward of another man’s goods; not only not extorting from others, but
even giving up his own to them that were in need. And what is more, when
he had them they were no joy to him: so he also declared, saying, “If I
did so much as rejoice when my wealth waxed great:” <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) wherefore neither did he grieve when
it was gone. But they that are rich are not now such as he was, but are
rather in a worse condition than any slave, paying as it were tribute to
some grievous tyrant. Because their mind is as a kind of citadel
occupied by the love of money, which from thence daily sends out unto
them its commands full of all iniquity, and there is none to disobey. Be
not therefore thus over subtle. <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909)
Nay, for God hath once for all declared and pronounced it a thing
impossible for the one service and the other to agree. Say not thou,
then, “it is possible.” Why, when the one master is commanding thee to
spoil by violence, the other to strip thyself of thy possessions; the
one to be chaste, the other to commit fornication; the one to be drunken
and luxurious, the other to keep the belly in subjection; the one again
to despise the things that are, the other to be rivetted to the present;
the one to admire marbles, and walls, and roofs, the other to contemn
these, but to honor self-restraint: how is it possible that these should
agree?

<span id="iii.XXI-p17"></span>Now He calls mammon here “a master,” not
because of its own nature, but on account of the wretchedness of them
that bow themselves beneath it. So also He calls “the belly a
god,” <span id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) not from the dignity of
such a mistress, but from the wretchedness of them that are enslaved: it
being a thing worse than any punishment, and enough, before the
punishment, in the way of vengeance on him who is involved in it. For
what condemned criminals can be so wretched, as they who having God for
their Lord, do from that mild rule desert to this grievous tyranny, and
this when their act brings after it so much harm even here? For indeed
their loss is unspeakable by so doing: there are suits, and
molestations, and strifes, and toils, and a blinding of the soul; and
what is more grievous than all, one falls away from the highest
blessings; for such a blessing it is to be God’s servant.

<span id="iii.XXI-p19"></span>3. Having now, as you see, in all ways
taught the advantage of contemning riches, as well for the very
preservation of the riches, as for the pleasure of the soul, and for
acquiring self-command, and for the securing of godliness; He proceeds
to establish the practicability of this command. For this especially
pertains to the best legislation, not only to enjoin what is expedient,
but also to make it possible. Therefore He also goes on to say,

<span id="iii.XXI-p20"></span>“Take no thought <span
id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) for your life, <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912) what ye shall eat.”

<span id="iii.XXI-p23"></span>That is, lest they should say, “What then?
if we cast all away, how shall we be able to live?” At this objection,
in what follows, He makes a stand, very seasonably. For as <span
id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span id="iii.XXI-Page_145"></span> surely
as if at the beginning He had said, “Take no thought,” the word would
have seemed burdensome; so surely, now that He hath shown the mischief
arising out of covetousness, His admonition coming after is made easy to
receive. Wherefore neither did He now simply say, “Take no thought,” but
He added the reason, and so enjoined this. After having said, “Ye cannot
serve God and mammon,” He added, “therefore I say unto you, take no
thought. Therefore;” for what? Because of the unspeakable loss. For the
hurt you receive is not in riches only, rather the wound is in the most
vital parts, and in that which is the overthrow of your salvation;
casting you as it does out from God, who made you, and careth for you,
and loveth you.

<span id="iii.XXI-p24"></span>“Therefore I say unto you, take no
thought.” Thus, after He hath shown the hurt to be unspeakable, then and
not before He makes the commandment stricter; in that He not only bids
us cast away what we have, but forbids to take thought even for our
necessary food, saying, “Take no thought for your soul, what ye shall
eat.” Not because the soul needs food, for it is incorporeal; but He
spake according to the common custom. For though it needs not food, yet
can it not endure to remain in the body, except that be fed. And in
saying this, He puts it not simply so, but here also He brings up
arguments, some from those things which we have already, and some from
other examples.

<span id="iii.XXI-p25"></span>From what we have already, thus saying:

<span id="iii.XXI-p26"></span>“Is not the soul more than meat, and the
body more than the raiment?” <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913)

<span id="iii.XXI-p28"></span>He therefore that hath given the greater,
how shall He not give the less? He that hath fashioned the flesh that is
fed, how shall He not bestow the food? Wherefore neither did He simply
say, “Take no thought what ye shall eat,” or “wherewithal ye shall be
clothed;” but, “for the body,” and, “for the soul:” forasmuch as from
them He was to make His demonstrations, carrying on His discourse in the
way of comparison. Now the soul He hath given once for all, and it
abides such as it is; but the body increases every day. Therefore
pointing out both these things, the immortality of the one, and the
frailty of the other, He subjoins and says,

<span id="iii.XXI-p29"></span>“Which of you can add one cubit unto his
stature?” <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914)

<span id="iii.XXI-p31"></span>Thus, saying no more of the soul, since it
receives not increase, He discoursed of the body only; hereby making
manifest this point also, that not the food increases it, but the
providence of God. Which Paul showing also in other ways, said, “So
then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth;
but God that giveth the increase.” <span
id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915)

<span id="iii.XXI-p33"></span>From what we have already, then, He urges
us in this way: and from examples of other things, by saying, “Behold
the fowls of the air.” <span id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) Thus,
lest any should say, “we do good by taking thought,” He dissuades them
both by that which is greater, and by that which is less; by the
greater, *i.e.* the soul and the body; by the less, *i.e.* the birds.
For if of the things that are very inferior He hath so much regard, how
shall He not give unto you? saith He. And to them on this wise, for as
yet it was an ordinary <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917)
multitude: but to the devil not thus; but how? “Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God.” <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) But here He makes mention
of the birds, and this in a way greatly to abash them; which sort of
thing is of very great value for the purpose of admonition.

<span id="iii.XXI-p37"></span>4. However, some of the ungodly have come
to so great a pitch of madness, as even to attack His illustration.
Because, say they, it was not meet for one strengthening <span
id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) moral principle, to use natural
advantages as incitements to that end. For to those animals, they add,
this belongs by nature. What then shall we say to this? That even though
it is theirs by nature, yet possibly we too may attain it by choice. For
neither did He say, “behold how the birds fly,” which were a thing
impossible to man; but that they are fed without taking thought, a kind
of thing easy to be achieved by us also, if we will. And this they have
proved, who have accomplished it in their actions.

<span id="iii.XXI-p39"></span>Wherefore it were meet exceedingly to
admire the consideration of our Lawgiver, in that, when He might bring
forward His illustration from among men, and when He might have spoken
of Moses and Elias and John, and others like them, who took no thought;
that He might touch them more to the quick, He made mention of the
irrational beings. For had He spoken of those righteous men, these would
have been able to say, “We are not yet become like them.” But now by
passing them over in silence, and bringing forward the fowls of the air,
He hath cut off from them every excuse, imitating in this place also the
old law. Yea, for the old covenant <span id="page_146">p. 146</span>
<span id="iii.XXI-Page_146"></span> likewise sends to the bee, and to
the ant, <span id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) and to the turtle, and
to the swallow. <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) And neither is
this a small sign of honor, when the same sort of things, which those
animals possess by nature, those we are able to accomplish by an act of
our choice. If then He take so great care of them which exist for our
sakes, much more of us; if of the servants, much more of the master.
Therefore He said, “Behold the fowls,” and He said not, “for they do not
traffic, nor make merchandise,” <span id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922)
for these were among the things that were earnestly forbidden. But what?
“they sow not, neither do they reap.” “What then?” saith one, “must we
not sow?” He said not, “we must not sow,” but “we must not *take
thought*;” neither that one ought not to work, but not to be low-minded,
nor to rack one’s self with cares. Since He bade us also be nourished,
but not in “taking thought.”

<span id="iii.XXI-p43"></span>Of this lesson David also lays the
foundation from old time, saying enigmatically on this wise, “Thou
openest Thine hand, and fillest every living thing with bounty;” <span
id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923) and again, “To Him that giveth to the
beasts their food, and to the young ravens that call upon Him.” <span
id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924)

<span id="iii.XXI-p46"></span>“Who then,” it may be said, “have not
taken thought”? Didst thou not hear how many of the righteous I adduced?
Seest thou not with them Jacob, departing from his father’s house
destitute of all things? Dost thou not hear him praying and saying, “If
the Lord give me bread to eat and raiment to put on?” <span
id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) which was not the part of one taking
thought, but of one seeking all of God. This the apostles also attained,
who cast away all, and took no thought: also, the “five thousand,” and
the “three thousand.” <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926)

<span id="iii.XXI-p49"></span>5. But if thou canst not bear, upon
hearing so high words, to release thyself from these grievous bonds,
consider the unprofitableness of the thing, and so put an end to thy
care. For

<span id="iii.XXI-p50"></span>“Which of you by taking thought” (saith
He) “can add one cubit unto his stature.” <span
id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927)

<span id="iii.XXI-p52"></span>Seest thou how by that which is evident,
He hath manifested that also which is obscure? Thus, “As unto thy body,”
saith He, “thou wilt not by taking thought be able to add, though it be
ever so little; so neither to gather food; think as thou mayest
otherwise.” Hence it is clear that not our diligence, but the providence
of God, even where we seem to be active, effects all. So that, were He
to forsake us, no care, nor anxiety, nor toil, nor any other such thing,
will ever appear to come to anything, but all will utterly pass away.

<span id="iii.XXI-p53"></span>Let us not therefore suppose His
injunctions are impossible: for there are many who duly perform them,
even as it is. And if thou knowest not of them, it is nothing
marvellous, since Elias too supposed he was alone, but was told, “I have
left unto myself seven thousand men.” <span
id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) Whence it is manifest that even now
there are many who show forth the apostolical life; like as the “three
thousand” then, and the “five thousand.” <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) And if we believe not, it is not
because there are none who do well, but because we are far from so
doing. So that just as the drunkard would not easily believe, that there
exists any man who doth not taste even water (and yet this hath been
achieved by many solitaries in our time <span
id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) ); nor he who connects himself with
numberless women, that it is easy to live in virginity; nor he that
extorts other men’s goods, that one shall readily give up even his own:
so neither will those, who daily melt themselves down with innumerable
anxieties, easily receive this thing.

<span id="iii.XXI-p57"></span>Now as to the fact, that there are many
who have attained unto this, we might show it even from those, who have
practised this self-denial even in our generation.

<span id="iii.XXI-p58"></span>But for you, just now, it is enough to
learn not to covet, and that almsgiving is a good thing; and to know
that you must impart of what ye have. For these things if thou wilt duly
perform, beloved, thou wilt speedily proceed to those others also.

<span id="iii.XXI-p59"></span>6. For the present therefore let us lay
aside our excessive sumptuousness, and let us endure moderation, and
learn to acquire by honest labor all that we are to have: since even the
blessed John, when he was discoursing with those that were employed upon
the tribute, and with the soldiery, enjoined them “to be content with
their wages.” <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931) Anxious though he
were to lead them on to another, and a higher self-command, yet since
they were still unfit for this, he speaks of the lesser things. Because,
if he had mentioned what are higher than these, they would have failed
to apply themselves to them, and would have fallen from the others.

<span id="iii.XXI-p61"></span>For this very reason we too are practising
you <span id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) in the inferior duties. Yes,
because <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="iii.XXI-Page_147"></span> as yet, we know, the burden of voluntary
poverty is too great for you, and the heaven is not more distant from
the earth, than such self-denial from you. Let us then lay hold, if it
be only of the lowest commandments, for even this is no small
encouragement. And yet some amongst the heathens have achieved even
this, though not in a proper spirit, and have stripped themselves of all
their possessions. <span id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) However, we
are contented in your case, if alms are bestowed abundantly by you; for
we shall soon arrive at those other duties too, if we advance in this
way. But if we do not so much as this, of what favor shall we be worthy,
who are bidden to surpass those under the old law, and yet show
ourselves inferior to the philosophers among the heathens? What shall we
say, who when we ought to be angels and sons of God, do not even quite
maintain our being as men? For to spoil and to covet comes not of the
gentleness of men, but of the fierceness of wild beasts; nay, worse than
wild beasts are the assailers of their neighbor’s goods. For to them
this comes by nature, but we who are honored with reason, and yet are
falling away unto that unnatural vileness, what indulgence shall we
receive?

<span id="iii.XXI-p64"></span>Let us then, considering the measures of
that discipline which is set before us, press on at least to the middle
station, that we may both be delivered from the punishment which is to
come, and proceeding regularly, may arrive at the very summit of all
good things; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_905"></span>[143:906](1100029.htm#fr_905) <span
id="iii.XXI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p6"></span>\[“More in number and more terrible.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_906"></span>[143:907](1100029.htm#fr_906) <span
id="iii.XXI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p8"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p8.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p8.2"></span>κριβ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_907"></span>[144:908](1100029.htm#fr_907) <span
id="iii.XXI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p11"></span>[Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[144:909](1100029.htm#fr_908) <span
id="iii.XXI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p15"></span>[Job xxxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[144:910](1100029.htm#fr_909) <span
id="iii.XXI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p16"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p16.1"></span>Μ τοινυν περιττ φιλοσφει</span>.\]

<span id="fn_910"></span>[144:911](1100029.htm#fr_910) <span
id="iii.XXI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p18"></span>[Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[144:912](1100029.htm#fr_911) <span
id="iii.XXI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p21"></span>\[R.V., more correctly, “Be not anxious,”
and so throughout the chapter.—R.\]

<span id="fn_912"></span>[144:913](1100029.htm#fr_912) <span
id="iii.XXI-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p22"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p22.1"></span>τ ψυχ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p22.2"></span>,</span> “your soul.” \[So Chrysostom
interprets (see below); but the New Testament passage must refer to
physical life. In the latter part of the verse the higher “life” is
suggested. But to understand the argument of Chrysostom, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXI-p22.3"></span>ψυχ</span> must be
rendered “soul” throughout this passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_913"></span>[145:914](1100029.htm#fr_913) <span
id="iii.XXI-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p27"></span>[Matt. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXI-p27.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Is not the life more than the food,” *i.e.*, the food that
sustains it.—R.\]

<span id="fn_914"></span>[145:915](1100029.htm#fr_914) <span
id="iii.XXI-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p30"></span>[Matt. vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[145:916](1100029.htm#fr_915) <span
id="iii.XXI-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p32"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXI-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[145:917](1100029.htm#fr_916) <span
id="iii.XXI-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p34"></span>[Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="iii.XXI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[145:918](1100029.htm#fr_917) <span
id="iii.XXI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p35"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p35.1"></span>δημδη</span>.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[145:919](1100029.htm#fr_918) <span
id="iii.XXI-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p36"></span>[Matt. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXI-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[145:920](1100029.htm#fr_919) <span
id="iii.XXI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p38.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p38.2"></span>λεφοντα</span>.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[146:921](1100029.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iii.XXI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p40"></span>[Prov. vi.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXI-p40.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXI-p40.2"></span>LXX</span>. See
before, Hom. XVII., 6, note.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[146:922](1100029.htm#fr_921) <span
id="iii.XXI-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p41"></span>[Jer. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[146:923](1100029.htm#fr_922) <span
id="iii.XXI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p42.1"></span>καπηλεουσιν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p42.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p42.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p42.4"></span>μπορεονται</span></span>: two words which in
the New Testament are always used in a bad sense.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[146:924](1100029.htm#fr_923) <span
id="iii.XXI-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p44"></span>[Ps. cxlv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXI-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[146:925](1100029.htm#fr_924) <span
id="iii.XXI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p45"></span>[Ps. cxlvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[146:926](1100029.htm#fr_925) <span
id="iii.XXI-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p47"></span>[Gen. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[146:927](1100029.htm#fr_926) <span
id="iii.XXI-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p48"></span>[Acts
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004), [Acts
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="iii.XXI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[146:928](1100029.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iii.XXI-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p51"></span>[Matt. vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[146:929](1100029.htm#fr_928) <span
id="iii.XXI-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p54"></span>[1 Kings
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018), [Rom.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[146:930](1100029.htm#fr_929) <span
id="iii.XXI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p55"></span>[Acts
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041), [Acts
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[146:931](1100029.htm#fr_930) <span
id="iii.XXI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p56"></span>See Sulpicius Severus, Dial. i. c. 14. “It
is told of a certain holy man that he constantly and entirely abstained
from all drink: and that by way of food, he lived upon seven figs only.”

<span id="fn_931"></span>[146:932](1100029.htm#fr_931) <span
id="iii.XXI-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p60"></span>[Luke iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXI-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[146:933](1100029.htm#fr_932) <span
id="iii.XXI-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p62"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p62.1"></span>ύ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXI-p62.2"></span>μ γυμνζομεν</span>, “we are exercising
you.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_933"></span>[147:934](1100029.htm#fr_933) <span
id="iii.XXI-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXI-p63"></span>So Aristippus: *vid*. Hor. *Serm*. 2, 3,
100.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXII](1100030)
