[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100000)  [Next](1100002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_iii">p. iii</span> <span
id="ii-Page_iii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Preface to the American Edition.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>This</span> volume, according to the previous
announcement of the publishers, contains a reprint of the Oxford edition
of the Homilies of St. Chrysostom on the gospel of St. Matthew.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The Homilies on this Gospel formed three volumes
of the Oxford edition, published respectively in 1843, 1844, and 1851.
The dedication appears in the third volume, as a memorial of Archbishop
Howley, who died in 1848. The preface is from the pen of Charles
Marriott of Oriel College.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>As regards the present volume, it may be
remarked that the archaic style of the English translation has been
preserved without material alteration. Even when obscure and involved,
the form seemed to be a fitting dress for the original. Occasionally an
amendation, or rather suggestion, has been made in a foot-note by the
American editor. The spelling has been altered throughout by the
printer, to accord with the usage more common among us. Some obvious
typographical errors have been corrected, and these have usually been
indicated. Instead of the brackets, used in the Oxford edition, to mark
words or phrases supplied by the translator, *Italics* have been
substituted. The same remark applies to passages where the Greek text is
in doubt. The editor has felt at liberty to indicate more fully than the
translator the portions supplied by the latter. In a few cases an
emphatic word is printed in Italics, but these instances can be readily
distinguished from the passages above referred to.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The English translator of these Homilies was
fortunate in having the Greek text of Mr. Frederick Field as the basis
of his renderings. This text is also accessible in the edition of Migne,
and has been compared throughout in the preparation of this volume. At
the time when the Oxford edition appeared textual criticism had received
but slight attention in England; hence the translator seems to have
occasionally failed to estimate aright the value of the authorities for
various readings. But in few patristic works do we have better security
for the accuracy of the text than in the case of these Homilies on
Matthew. The labor of the American editor has been, of course,
supplementary. Attention has been called quite frequently to the Greek
phrase used in the Homily, with a view to marking the usage in
Ecclesiastical Greek. Many foot-notes have been added, to indicate the
readings of the New Testament text appearing in the Homilies. The
constant use of the Authorized <span id="page_iv">p. iv</span> <span
id="ii-Page_iv"></span> Version by the translator made this necessary.
The Greek phrase has frequently been given; still more frequently the
rendering (and reading) of the Revised version. Where these agree with
the text of the Homily, they are cited, without comment, in brackets.
Differences between readings are carefully indicated.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>Occasionally the editor has noted his dissent
from the renderings or annotations of the translator, but he has not
felt warranted in expressing every difference of judgment. All additions
made in this volume are enclosed in brackets, and except in cases where
the Revised Version is cited without comment, the letter R. has been
appended.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>Much time and care have been bestowed upon the
Indexes.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>M. B. R.

<span id="ii-p10"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p10.1"></span>Allegheny, Pa.</span> Sept. 24, 1888.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Homilies of St. John Chrysostom.](1100002.md)
