[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100039)  [Next](1100041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXXII"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. IX.
27-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p3"></span>*“And when Jesus departed thence, two
blind men followed Him, crying, and saying, Thou Son of David, have
mercy on us.* <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) *And when He
was come into the house, the blind men came to Him: and Jesus saith unto
them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say unto Him, Yea,
Lord. Then touched He their eyes, saying, According to your faith be
it* <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) *unto you. And their eyes
were opened.”*

<span id="iii.XXXII-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p6.1"></span>Wherefore</span> can it be that He puts them
off, <span id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) and they crying out?
Here again teaching us utterly to repel the glory that cometh from the
multitude. For because the house was near, He leads them thither to heal
them in private. And this is evident from the fact, that He charged them
moreover to tell no man.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p8"></span>But this is no light charge against the
Jews; when these men, though their eyes were struck out, receive the
faith by hearing alone, but they beholding the miracles, and having
their sight to witness what was happening, do all just contrary. And see
their earnestness also, both by their cry, and by their prayer itself.
For they did not merely approach Him, but with loud cries, and alleging
nought else but “mercy.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p9"></span>And they called Him “Son of David,”
because the name was thought to be honorable. In many passages, for
instance, did the prophets <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336)
likewise so call the kings, whom <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="iii.XXXII-Page_206"></span> they wished to honor, and to declare
great.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p11"></span>And having brought them into the house,
He puts to them a further question. For in many cases He made a point of
healing on entreaty, lest any should suppose Him to be rushing <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) upon these miracles through
vainglory: and not on this account alone, but to indicate also that they
deserve healing, and that no one should say, “If it was of mere mercy
that He saved, all men ought to be saved.” For even His love to man hath
a kind of proportion; depending on the faith of them that are healed.
But not for these causes only doth He require faith of them, but
forasmuch as they called Him “Son of David,” He to lead them up to what
is higher, and to teach them to entertain the imaginations they ought of
Himself, saith, “Believe ye that I am able to do this?” He did not say,
“Believe ye that I am able to entreat my Father, that I am able to pray”
but, “that I am able to do this?”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p13"></span>What then is their word? “Yea, Lord.”
They call Him no more Son of David, but soar higher, and acknowledge His
dominion.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p14"></span>And then at last He for His part lays
His hand upon them, saying, “According to your faith be it unto you.”
And this He doth to confirm their faith, and to show that they are
participators in the good work, and to witness that their words were not
words of flattery. For neither did He say, “Let your eyes be opened,”
but, “According to your faith be it unto you;” which He saith to many of
them that came unto Him; before the healing of their bodies, hastening
to proclaim the faith in their soul; so as both to make them more
approved, and to render others more serious.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p15"></span>Thus with respect to the sick of the
palsy also; for there too before giving nerve to the body, He raises up
the fallen soul, saying, “Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee.” <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338) And the young damsel
too, when He had raised her up, He detained, and by the food taught her
her Benefactor; and in the case of the centurion also He did in like
manner, leaving the whole to his faith; and as to His disciples again,
when delivering them from the storm on the sea, He delivered them first
from their want of faith. Just so likewise in this case: He knew indeed,
even before their cry, the secrets of their mind; but that He might lead
on others also to the same earnestness, He makes them known to the rest
as well, by the result of their cure proclaiming their hidden faith.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p17"></span>Then after their cure He commands them
to tell no man; neither doth He merely command them, but with much
strictness.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p18"></span>“For Jesus,” it is said, “straitly
charged them, saying, See that no man know it. But they, when they were
departed, spread abroad His fame in all that country.” <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p20"></span>They however did not endure this, but
became preachers, and evangelists; and when bidden to hide what had been
done, they endured it not.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p21"></span>And if in another place we find Him
saying, “Go thy way, and declare the glory of God,” <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340) that is not contrary to this, but
even highly in agreement herewith. For He instructs us to say nothing
ourselves, concerning ourselves, but even to forbid them that would
eulogise us: but if the glory be referred to God, then not only not to
forbid, but to command men to do this.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p23"></span>2. “And as they went out,” it is said,
“behold, they brought unto Him a dumb man possessed with a devil.” <span
id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p25"></span>For the affliction was not natural, but
the device of the evil spirit; wherefore also he needs others to bring
him. For he could neither make entreaty himself, being speechless, nor
supplicate others, when the evil spirit had bound his tongue, and
together with his tongue had fettered his soul.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p26"></span>For this cause neither doth He require
faith of him, but straightway heals the disease.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p27"></span>“For when the devil was cast out,” it
saith, “the dumb spake: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was
never so seen in Israel.” <span id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p29"></span>Now this especially vexed the Pharisees,
that they preferred Him to all, not only that then were, but that had
ever been. And they preferred Him, not for His healing, but for His
doing it easily and quickly, and to diseases innumerable and incurable.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p30"></span>And thus the multitude; but the
Pharisees quite contrariwise; not only disparaging the works, but saying
things contradictory to themselves, and not ashamed. Such a thing is
wickedness. For what say they?

<span id="iii.XXXII-p31"></span>“He casteth out devils through the
prince of the devils.” <span id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p33"></span>What can be more foolish than this? For
in the first place, as He also saith further on, it is impossible that a
devil should cast out a devil, for that being is wont to repair what
belongs to himself, not to pull it down. But <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_207"></span> He did not cast out
devils only, but also cleansed lepers, and raised the dead, and curbed
the sea, and remitted sins, and preached the kingdom, and brought men
unto the Father; things which a demon would never either choose, or at
any time be able to effect. For the devils bring men to idols, and
withdraw them from God, and persuade them to disbelieve the life to
come. The devil doth not bestow kindness when he is insulted; forasmuch
as even when not insulted, he harms those that court and honor him.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p34"></span>But He doeth the contrary. For after
these their insults and revilings,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p35"></span>3. “He went about,” it is said, “all the
cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the
gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every
disease.” <span id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p37"></span>And so far from punishing them for their
insensibility, He did not even simply rebuke them; at once both evincing
His meekness, and so refuting the calumny; and at the same time minded
also by the signs which followed to exhibit His proof more completely:
and then to adduce also the refutation by words. He went about therefore
both in cities, and in countries, and in their synagogues; instructing
us to requite our calumniators, not with fresh calumnies, but with
greater benefits. Since, if not for man’s sake, but God’s, thou doest
good to thy fellow-servants; whatsoever they may do, leave not thou off
doing them good, that thy reward may be greater; since he surely, who
upon their calumny leaves off his doing good, signifies that for their
praise’ sake, not for God’s sake, he applies himself to that kind of
virtue.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p38"></span>For this cause Christ, to teach us that
of mere goodness He had entered on this, so far from waiting for the
sick to come to Him, of Himself hastened unto them, bearing them two of
the greatest blessings; one, the gospel of the kingdom; another, the
perfect cure of all their diseases. And not a city did He overlook, not
a village did He hasten by, but visited every place.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p39"></span>4. And not even at this doth He stop,
but He exhibits also another instance of His forethought. That is,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p40"></span>“When He saw,” it is said, “the
multitudes, He was moved with compassion on them, because they were
troubled, <span id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) and scattered
abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. Then saith He unto His disciples,
The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few, pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He will send forth laborers into
His harvest.” <span id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p43"></span>See again His freedom from vainglory.
That He may not draw all men unto Himself, He sends out His disciples.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p44"></span>And not with this view only, but that He
might also teach them, after practising in Palestine, as in a sort of
training-school, to strip themselves for their conflicts with the world.
For this purpose then He makes the exercises even more serious than the
actual conflicts, so far as pertained to their own virtue; that they
might more easily engage in the struggles that were to ensue; as it were
a sort of tender nestlings whom He was at length leading out to fly. And
for the present He makes them physicians of bodies, dispensing to them
afterwards the cure of the soul, which is the principal thing.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p45"></span>And mark how He points out the facility
and necessity of the thing. For what saith He? “The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the laborers are few.” That is, “not to the sowing,”
saith He, “but to the reaping do I send you.” Which in John He expressed
by, “Other men labored, and ye are entered into their labors.” <span
id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p47"></span>And these things he said, at once
repressing their pride, and preparing them to be of good courage, and
signifying that the greater part of the labor came first.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p48"></span>And contemplate Him here too beginning
from love to man, not with any requital. “For He had compassion, because
they were troubled and scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd.”
This is His charge against the rulers of the Jews, that being shepherds
they acted the part of wolves. For so far from amending the multitude,
they even marred their progress. For instance, when they were marvelling
and saying, “It was never so seen in Israel:” these were affirming the
contrary, “He casteth out devils through the prince of the
devils.” <span id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p50"></span>But of what laborers doth He speak here?
Of the twelve disciples. What then? whereas He had said, “But the
laborers are few,” did He add to their number? By no means, but He sent
them out alone. Wherefore then did He say, “Pray ye the Lord of the
harvest, that He would <span id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349) send
forth laborers into His harvest;” and made no addition to their number?
Because though they were but twelve, He made them many from that time
<span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_208"></span>
forward, not by adding to their number, but by giving them power.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p52"></span>Then to signify how great the gift is,
He saith, “Pray ye the Lord of the harvest;” and indirectly declares it
to be His own prerogative. For after having said, “Pray ye the Lord of
the harvest;” when they had not made any entreaty nor prayer, He Himself
at once ordains them, reminding them also of the sayings of John, <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350) of the threshing floor, and of the
Person winnowing, and of the chaff, and of the wheat. Whence it is
evident that Himself is the husbandman, Himself the Lord of the harvest,
Himself the master and owner of the prophets. For if He sent them to
reap, clearly it was not to reap what belongs to another, but what
Himself had sown by the prophets.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p54"></span>But not in this way only was He
indirectly encouraging them, in calling their ministry a harvest; but
also by making them able for the ministry.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p55"></span>“And when He had called unto Him,” it
saith, “His twelve disciples, He gave them power against <span
id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351) unclean spirits, to cast them out,
and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease.” <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p58"></span>Still the Spirit was not yet given. For
“there was not yet,” it saith, “a Spirit, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified.” <span id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) How then did they
cast out the spirits? By His command, by His authority.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p60"></span>And mark, I pray thee, also, how well
timed was the mission. For not at the beginning did He send them; but
when they had enjoyed sufficiently the advantage of following Him, and
had seen a dead person raised, and the sea rebuked, and devils expelled,
and a paralytic new-strung, and sins remitted, and a leper cleansed, and
had received a sufficient proof of His power, both by deeds and words,
then He sends them forth: and not to dangerous acts, for as yet there
was no danger in Palestine, but they had only to stand against evil
speakings. However, even of this He forewarns them, I mean of their
perils; preparing them even before the time, and making them feel as in
conflict by His continual predictions of that sort.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p61"></span>5. Then, since He had mentioned to us
two pairs of apostles, that of Peter, and that of John, and after those
had pointed out the calling of Matthew, but had said nothing to us
either of the calling or of the name of the other apostles; here of
necessity He sets down the list of them, and their number, and makes
known their names, saying thus:

<span id="iii.XXXII-p62"></span>“Now the names of the twelve apostles
are these; first, Simon, who is called Peter.” <span
id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p64"></span>Because there was also another Simon,
the Canaanite; and there was Judas Iscariot, and Judas the brother of
James; and James the son of Alphæus, and James the son of Zebedee.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p65"></span>Now Mark doth also put them according to
their dignity; for after the two leaders, He then numbers Andrew; but
our evangelist not so, but without distinction; or rather He sets before
himself even Thomas who came far short of him.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p66"></span>But let us look at the list of them from
the beginning.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p67"></span>“First, Simon, who is called Peter, and
Andrew his brother.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p68"></span>Even this is no small praise. For the
one he named from his virtue, the other from his high kindred, which was
in conformity to his disposition.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p69"></span>Then, “James the son of Zebedee, and
John his brother.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p70"></span>Seest thou how He arranges them not
according to their dignity. For to me John seems to be greater, not only
than the others, but even than his brother.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p71"></span>After this, when he had said, “Philip,
and Bartholomew,” he added, “Thomas, and Matthew the Publican.” <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p73"></span>But Luke not so, but in the opposite
order, and he puts him before Thomas.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p74"></span>Next, “James the son of Alphæus.” For
there was, as I have already said, the son of Zebedee also. Then after
having mentioned “Lebbæus, whose surname was Thaddæus,” <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) and “Simon” Zelotes, whom he calls
also “the Canaanite,” he comes to the traitor. And not as a sort of
enemy or foe, but as one writing a history, so hath he described him. He
saith not, “the unholy, the all unholy one,” but hath named him from his
city, “Judas Iscariot.” Because there was also another Judas, “Lebbæus,
whose surname was Thaddæus,” who, Luke saith, was the brother of James,
saying, “Judas the brother of James.” <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) Therefore to distinguish him from
this man, it saith, “Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed Him.” <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) And he is not ashamed to say, “who
also betrayed Him.” So far were they from ever disguising aught even of
<span id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_209"></span>
those things that seem to be matters of reproach.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p78"></span>And first of all, and leader of the
choir, <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) is the “unlearned, the
ignorant man.” <span id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p81"></span>But let us see whither, and to whom, He
sends them.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p82"></span>“These twelve,” it is said, “Jesus sent
forth.” <span id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p84"></span>What manner of men were these? The
fishermen, the publicans: for indeed four were fishermen and two
publicans, Matthew and James, and one was even a traitor. And what saith
He to them? He presently charges them, saying,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p85"></span>“Go not into the way <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) of the Gentiles, and into any city
of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.” <span id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p88"></span>“For think not at all,” saith He,
“because they insult me, and call me demoniac, that I hate them and turn
away from them. Nay, as I sought earnestly to amend them in the first
place, so keeping you away from all the rest, to them do I send you as
teachers and physicians. And I not only forbid you to preach to others
before these, but I do not suffer you so much as to touch upon the road
that leads thither, nor to enter into such a city.” Because the
Samaritans too are in a state of enmity with the Jews. And yet it was an
easier thing to deal with them, for they were much more favorably
disposed to the faith; but the case of these was more difficult. But for
all this, He sends them on the harder task, indicating his guardian care
of them, and stopping the mouths of the Jews, and preparing the way for
the teaching of the apostles, that people might not hereafter blame them
for “entering in to men uncircumcised,” <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) and think they had a just cause for
shunning and abhorring them. And he calls them “lost,” not “stray,”
“sheep,” in every way contriving how to excuse them, and winning their
mind to himself.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p90"></span>6. “And as ye go,” saith He, “preach,
saying, The kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p92"></span>Seest thou the greatness of their
ministry? Seest thou the dignity of apostles? Of nothing that is the
object of sense are they commanded to speak, nor such as Moses spake of,
and the prophets before them, but of some new and strange things. For
while the former preached no such things, but earth, and the good things
in the earth, these preached the kingdom of Heaven, and whatever is
there.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p93"></span>And not from this circumstance only were
these the greater, but also from their obedience: in that they shrink
not, nor are they backward, like those of old; <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366) but, warned as they are of perils,
and wars, and of those insupportable evils, they receive with great
obedience His injunctions, as being heralds of a kingdom.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p95"></span>“And what marvel,” saith one, “if having
nothing to preach that is dismal or grievous, they readily obeyed?” What
sayest thou? nothing grievous enjoined them? Dost thou not hear of the
prisons, the executions, the civil wars, the hatred of all men? all
which, He said a little while after, they must undergo. True, as to
other men, He sent them to be procurers and heralds of innumerable
blessings: but for themselves, He said and proclaimed beforehand, that
they were to suffer terrible and incurable ills.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p96"></span>After this, to make them
trustworthy, <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367) He saith,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p98"></span>“Heal the sick, cleanse the
lepers, <span id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368) cast out devils:
freely ye have received, freely give.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p100"></span>See how He provides for their conduct,
and that no less than for their miracles, implying that the miracles
without this are nothing. Thus He both quells their pride by saying,
“Freely ye have received, freely give;” and takes order for their being
clear of covetousness. Moreover, lest it should be thought their own
work, <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) and they be lifted up
by the signs that were wrought, He saith, “freely ye have received.” “Ye
bestow no favor on them that receive you, for not for a price did ye
receive these things, nor after toil: for the grace is mine. In like
manner therefore give ye to them also, for there is no finding a price
worthy of them.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p102"></span>7. After this plucking up immediately
the root of the evils, <span id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) He
saith,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p104"></span>“Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor
brass in your purses, nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats,
neither shoes, nor yet a staff.” <span
id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p106"></span>He said not, “take them not with you,”
but, “even if you can obtain them from another, flee the evil disease.”
And you see that hereby He was answering many good pur <span
id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_210"></span> poses;
first setting His disciples above suspicion; secondly, freeing them from
all care, so that they might give all their leisure to the word;
thirdly, teaching them His own power. Of this accordingly He quite
speaks out to them afterwards, “Lacked ye anything, when I sent you
naked and unshod?” <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p108"></span>He did not at once say, “Provide not,”
but when He had said, “Cleanse the lepers, cast out devils,” then He
said, “Provide nothing; freely ye have received, freely give;” by His
way of ordering things consulting at once for their interest, their
credit, and their ability.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p109"></span>But perhaps some one may say, that the
rest may not be unaccountable, but “not to have a scrip for the journey,
neither two coats, nor a staff, nor shoes,” why did He enjoin this?
Being minded to train them up unto all perfection; since even further
back, He had suffered them not to take thought so much as for the next
day. For even to the whole world He was to send them out as teachers.
Therefore of men He makes them even angels (so to speak); releasing them
from all worldly care, so that they should be possessed with one care
alone, that of their teaching; or rather even from that He releases
them, saying, “Take no thought how or what ye shall speak.” <span
id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p111"></span>And thus, what seems to be very
grievous and galling, this He shows to be especially light and easy for
them. For nothing makes men so cheerful as being freed from anxiety and
care; and especially when it is granted them, being so freed, to lack
nothing, God being present, and becoming to them instead of all things.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p112"></span>Next, lest they should say, “whence
then are we to obtain our necessary food?” He saith not unto them, “Ye
have heard that I have told you before, ‘Behold the fowls of the
air;’” <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374) (for they were not yet
able to realise <span id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375) this
commandment in their actions); but He added what came far short of this,
saying, “For the workman is worthy of his meat;” <span
id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376) declaring that they must be
nourished by their disciples, that neither they might be high minded
towards those whom they were teaching, as though giving all and
receiving nothing at their hands; nor these again break away, as being
despised by their teachers.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p116"></span>After this, that they may not say,
“Dost thou then command us to live by begging?” and be ashamed of this,
He signifies the thing to be a debt, both by calling them “workmen,” and
by terming what was given, “hire.” <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) For “think not,” saith He, “because
the labor is in words, that the benefit conferred by you is small; nay,
for the thing hath much toil; and whatsoever they that are taught may
give, it is not a free gift which they bestow, but a recompence which
they render: “for the workman is worthy of his meat.” But this He said,
not as declaring so much to be the worth of the apostles’ labors, far
from it; God forbid: but as both making it a law for them to seek
nothing more, and as convincing the givers, that what they do is not an
act of liberality, but a debt.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p118"></span>8. “And into whatsoever city or town ye
shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy: and there abide till ye go
thence.” <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p120"></span>That is, “it follows not,” saith He,
“from my saying, ‘The workman is worthy of his meat,’ that I have opened
to you all men’s doors: but herein also do I require you to use much
circumspection. For this will profit you both in respect of your credit,
and for your very maintenance. For if he is worthy, he will surely give
you food; more especially when ye ask nothing beyond mere necessaries.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p121"></span>And He not only requires them to seek
out worthy persons, but also not to change house for house, whereby they
would neither vex him that is receiving them, nor themselves get the
character of gluttony and self-indulgence. <span
id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379) For this He declared by saying,
“There abide till ye go thence.” And this one may perceive from the
other evangelists also. <span id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p124"></span>Seest thou how He made them honorable
by this also, and those that received them careful; by signifying that
they rather are the gainers, both in honor, and in respect of advantage?

<span id="iii.XXXII-p125"></span>Then pursuing again the same subject,
He saith,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p126"></span>“And when ye come into an house, salute
it. And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it
be not worthy, let your peace return to you.” <span
id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p128"></span>Seest thou how far He declines not to
carry His injunctions? And very fitly. For as champions of godliness,
and preachers to the whole world, was He training them. And in that
regard disposing them to practise moderation, and making them objects of
love, He saith,

<span id="iii.XXXII-p129"></span>“And whosoever shall not receive you,
nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that <span id="page_211">p.
211</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_211"></span> house or city, shake
off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,
than for that city.” <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p131"></span>That is, “do not,” saith He, “because
ye are teachers, therefore wait to be saluted by others, but be first in
showing that respect.” Then, implying that this is not a mere
salutation, but a blessing, He saith, “If the house be worthy, it shall
come upon it,” but if it deal insolently, its first punishment will be,
not to have the benefit of your peace; and the second, that it shall
suffer the doom of Sodom.” “And what,” it will be said, “is their
punishment to us?” Ye will have the houses of such as are worthy.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p132"></span>But what means, “Shake off the dust of
your feet?” It is either to signify their having received nothing of
them, or to be a witness to them of the long journey, which they had
travelled for their sake.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p133"></span>But mark, I pray thee, how He doth not
even yet give the whole to them. For neither doth He as yet bestow upon
them foreknowledge, so as to learn who is worthy, and who is not so; but
He bids them inquire, and await the trial. How then did He Himself abide
with a publican? Because he was become worthy by his conversion.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p134"></span>And mark, I pray thee, how when He had
stripped them of all, He gave them all, by suffering them to abide in
the houses of those who became disciples, and to enter therein, having
nothing. For thus both themselves were freed from anxiety, and they
would convince the others, that for their salvation only are they come;
first by bringing in nothing with them, then by requiring no more of
them than necessaries, lastly, by not entering all their houses without
distinction.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p135"></span>Since not by the signs only did He
desire them to appear illustrious, but even before the signs, by their
own virtue. For nothing so much characterizes strictness of life, <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383) as to be free from superfluities,
and so far as may be, from wants. This even the false apostles knew.
Wherefore Paul also said, “That wherein they glory, they may be found
even as we.” <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p138"></span>But if when we are in a strange
country, and are going unto persons unknown to us, we must seek nothing
more than our food for the day, much more when abiding at home.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p139"></span>9. These things let us not hear only,
but also imitate. For not of the apostles alone are they said, but also
of the saints afterwards. Let us therefore become worthy to entertain
them. For according to the disposition of the entertainers this peace
both comes and flies away again. For not only on the courageous speaking
of them that teach, but also on the worthiness of them that receive,
doth this effect follow.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p140"></span>Neither let us account it a small loss,
not to enjoy such peace. For this peace the prophet also from of old
proclaims, saying, “How beautiful are the feet of them that bring good
tidings of peace.” <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385) Then to
explain the value thereof he added, “That bring good tidings of good
things.”

<span id="iii.XXXII-p142"></span>This peace Christ also declared to be
great, when He said, “Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you.” <span id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386) And we should do all
things, so as to enjoy it, both at home and in church. For in the very
church too the presiding minister gives peace. <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) And this which we speak of is a
type of that. And you should receive it with all alacrity, in
heart <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) before the actual
communion. <span id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) For if not to
impart it after the communion <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390)
be disgusting, how much more disgusting to repel from you him that
pronounces it!

<span id="iii.XXXII-p148"></span>For thee the presbyter sits, for thee
the teacher stands, laboring and toiling. What plea then wilt thou have,
for not affording him so much welcome as to listen to Him? For indeed
the church is the common home of all, and when ye have first occupied
it, we enter in, strictly observing the type which they exhibited. For
this cause we also pronounce “peace” in common to all, directly as we
enter, according to that law.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p149"></span>Let no one therefore be careless, no
one inattentive, <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) when the
priests have entered in and are teaching; for there is really no small
punishment appointed for this. Yea, and I for one would rather enter
into any of your houses ten thousand times, and find myself <span
id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_212"></span>
baffled, than not be heard when I speak here. This latter is to me
harder to bear than the other, by how much this house is of greater
dignity; our great possessions being verily laid up here, here all the
hopes we have. For what is here, that is not great and awful? Thus both
this table is far more precious and delightful than the other, <span
id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) and this candlestick than the
candlestick there. And this they know, as many as have put away diseases
by anointing themselves with oil <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) in faith and in due season. And
this coffer too is far better and more indispensable than that other
chest; for it hath not clothes but alms shut up in it; even though they
be few that own them. Here too is a couch better than that other; for
the repose of the divine Scriptures is more delightful than any couch.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p153"></span>And had we attained to excellence in
respect of concord, then had we no other home beside this. And that
there is nothing over-burdensome in this saying, the “three
thousand,” <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) bear witness, and
the “five thousand,” <span id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) who had
but one home, one table, one soul; for “the multitude of them that
believed,” we read, “were of one heart and of one soul.” <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) But since we fall far short of
their virtue, and dwell scattered in our several homes, let us at least,
when we meet here, be earnest in so doing. Because though in all other
things we be destitute and poor, yet in these we are rich. Wherefore
here at least receive us with love when we come in unto you. And when I
say, “Peace be unto you,” <span id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) and
ye say, “And with thy spirit,” say it not with the voice only, but also
with the mind; not in mouth, but in understanding also. But if, while
here thou sayest, “Peace also to thy spirit,” out of doors thou art mine
enemy, spitting at and calumniating me, and secretly aspersing me with
innumerable reproaches; what manner of peace is this?

<span id="iii.XXXII-p158"></span>For I indeed, though thou speak evil of
me ten thousand times, give thee that peace with a pure heart, with
sincerity of purpose, and I can say nothing evil at any time of thee;
for I have a father’s bowels. And if I rebuke thee at any time, I do it
out of concern for thee. But as for thee, by thy secret carping at me,
and not receiving me in the Lord’s house, I fear lest thou shouldest in
return add to my despondency; not for thine insulting me, not for thy
casting me out, but for thy rejecting our peace, and drawing down upon
thyself that grievous punishment.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p159"></span>For though I shake not off the dust,
though I turn not away, what is threatened remains unchanged. For I
indeed oftentimes pronounce peace to you, and will not cease from
continually speaking it; and if, besides your insults, ye receive me
not, even then I shake not off the dust; not that I am disobedient to
our Lord, but that I vehemently burn for you. And besides, I have
suffered nothing at all for you; I have neither come a long journey, nor
with that garb and that voluntary poverty am I come (therefore we first
blame ourselves), nor without shoes and a second coat; and perhaps this
is why ye also fail of your part. However, this is not a sufficient plea
for you; but while our condemnation is greater, to you it imparts no
excuse.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p160"></span>10. Then the houses were churches, but
now the church is become a house. Then one might say nothing worldly in
a house, now one may say nothing spiritual in a church, but even here ye
bring in the business from the market place, and while God is
discoursing, ye leave off listening in silence to His sayings, and bring
in the contrary things, and make discord. And I would it were your own
affairs, but now the things which are nothing to you, those ye both
speak and hear.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p161"></span>For this I lament, and will not cease
lamenting. For I have no power to quit this house, but here we must
needs remain until we depart from this present life. “Receive us” <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) therefore, as Paul commanded. For
his language in that place related not to a meal, but to the temper and
mind. This we also seek of you, even love, that fervent and genuine
affection. But if ye endure not even this, at least love yourselves, and
lay aside your present remissness. This is sufficient for our
consolation, if we see you approving yourselves, and becoming better
men. So will I also myself show forth increased love, even “though the
more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.” <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p164"></span>For indeed there are many things to
bind us together. One table is set before all, one <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span id="iii.XXXII-Page_213"></span> Father
begat us, we are all the issue of the same throes, the same drink hath
been given to all; or rather not only the same drink, but also to drink
out of one cup. For our Father desiring to lead us to a kindly
affection, hath devised this also, that we should drink out of one cup;
a thing which belongs to intense love.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p165"></span>But “there is no comparison between the
apostles and us.” I confess it too, and would never deny it. For I say
not, to themselves, but not even to their shadows are we comparable.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p166"></span>But nevertheless, let your part be
done. This will have no tendency to disgrace you but rather to profit
you the more. For when even to unworthy persons ye show so much love and
obedience, then shall ye receive the greater reward.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p167"></span>For neither are they our own words
which we speak, since ye have no teacher at all on earth; but what we
have received, that we also give, and in giving we seek for nothing else
from you, but to be loved only. And if we be unworthy even of this, yet
by our loving you we shall quickly be worthy. Although we are commanded
to love not them only that love us, but even our enemies. Who then is so
hardhearted, who so savage, that after having received such a law, he
should abhor and hate even them that love him, full as he may be of
innumerable evils?

<span id="iii.XXXII-p168"></span>We have partaken of a spiritual table,
let us be partakers also of spiritual love. For if robbers, on partaking
of salt, forget their character; what excuse shall we have, who are
continually partaking of the Lord’s body, and do not imitate even their
gentleness? And yet to many, not one table only, but even to be of one
city, hath sufficed for friendship; but we, when we have the same city,
and the same house, and table, and way, and door, and root, and life,
and head, and the same shepherd, and king, and teacher, and judge, and
maker, and father, and to whom all things are common; what indulgence
can we deserve, if we be divided one from another?

<span id="iii.XXXII-p169"></span>11. But the miracles, perhaps, are what
ye seek after, such as they wrought when they entered in; the lepers
cleansed, the devils driven out, and the dead raised? Nay, but this is
the great indication of your high birth, and of your love, that ye
should believe God without pledges. And in fact this, and one other
thing, were the reasons why God made miracles to cease. I mean, that if
when miracles are not performed, they that plume themselves on other
advantages,—for instance, either on the word of wisdom, or on show of
piety,—grow vainglorious, are puffed up, are separated one from another;
did miracles also take place, how could there but be violent rendings?
And that what I say is not mere conjecture, the Corinthians bear
witness, who from this cause were divided into many parties.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p170"></span>Do not thou therefore seek signs, but
the soul’s health. Seek not to see one dead man raised; nay, for thou
hast learnt that the whole world is arising. Seek not to see a blind man
healed, but behold all now restored unto that better and more profitable
sight; and do thou too learn to look chastely, and amend thine eye.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p171"></span>For in truth, if we all lived as we
ought, workers of miracles would not be admired so much as we by the
children of the heathen. For as to the signs, they often carry with them
either a notion of mere fancy, or another evil suspicion, although ours
be not such. But a pure life cannot admit of any such reproach; yea, all
men’s mouths are stopped by the acquisition of virtue.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p172"></span>Let virtue then be our study: for
abundant are her riches, and great the wonder wrought in her. She
bestows the true freedom, and causes the same to be discerned even in
slavery, not releasing from slavery, but while men continue slaves,
exhibiting them more honorable than freemen; which is much more than
giving them freedom: not making the poor man rich, but while he
continues poor, exhibiting him wealthier than the rich.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p173"></span>But if thou wouldest work miracles
also, be rid of transgressions, and thou hast quite accomplished it.
Yea, for sin is a great demon, beloved; and if thou exterminate this,
thou hast wrought a greater thing than they who drive out ten thousand
demons. Do thou listen to Paul, how he speaks, and prefers virtue to
miracles. “But covet earnestly,” saith he, “the best gifts: and yet show
I unto you a more excellent way.” <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400) And when he was to declare this
“way,” he spoke not of raising the dead, not of cleansing of lepers, not
of any other such thing; but in place of all these he set charity.
Hearken also unto Christ, saying, “Rejoice not that the demons obey you,
but that your names are written in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) And again before this, “Many will
say to me in that day, Have we not prophesied in Thy name, and cast out
devils, and done many mighty works, and then I will profess unto them, I
know you not.” <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) And when He
was about to be crucified, He called His disciples, and said unto them,
“By this shall all men know that ye <span id="page_214">p. 214</span>
<span id="iii.XXXII-Page_214"></span> are my disciples,” not “if ye cast
out devils,” but “if ye have love one to another.” <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) And again, “Hereby shall all men
know that Thou hast sent me;” not “if these men raise the dead,” but,
“if they be one.” <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404)

<span id="iii.XXXII-p179"></span>For, as to miracles, they oftentimes,
while they profited another, have injured him who had the power, by
lifting him up to pride and vainglory, or haply in some other way: but
in our works there is no place for any such suspicion, but they profit
both such as follow them, and many others.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p180"></span>These then let us perform with much
diligence. For if thou change from inhumanity to almsgiving, thou hast
stretched forth the hand that was withered. If thou withdraw from
theatres and go to the church, thou hast cured the lame foot. If thou
draw back thine eyes from an harlot, and from beauty not thine own, thou
hast opened them when they were blind. If instead of satanical songs,
thou hast learnt spiritual psalms, being dumb, thou hast spoken.

<span id="iii.XXXII-p181"></span>These are the greatest miracles, these
the wonderful signs. If we go on working these signs, we shall both
ourselves be a great and admirable sort of persons through these, and
shall win over all the wicked unto virtue, and shall enjoy the life to
come; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[205:1334](1100040.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p4"></span>\[R.V. (and Chrysostom), “Have mercy on
us, thou Son of David.”\]

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[205:1335](1100040.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p5"></span>\[R.V., “be it done.”\]

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[205:1336](1100040.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p7.1"></span>παρλκει</span>.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[205:1337](1100040.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p10"></span>Perhaps [Isa. xxxvii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#035)<span id="iii.XXXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[206:1338](1100040.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p12.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p12.2"></span>πιπδν</span>.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[206:1339](1100040.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p16"></span>[Matt. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXII-p16.1"></span>.
\[“Thy sins are forgiven.” Comp. Homily XXIX. 1.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[206:1340](1100040.htm#fr_1339) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p19"></span>[Matt.
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#031)<span id="iii.XXXII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[206:1341](1100040.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p22"></span>[Mark
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#019), [Luke
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#039)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[206:1342](1100040.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p24"></span>[Matt. ix.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXXII-p24.1"></span>.
\[“Demon” is more correct, here and throughout the passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[206:1343](1100040.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p28"></span>[Matt. ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#033)<span id="iii.XXXII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[206:1344](1100040.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p32"></span>[Matt. ix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#034)<span id="iii.XXXII-p32.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “By (or, in) the prince of the devils (Greek, demons) he casteth
out devils.”\]

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[207:1345](1100040.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p36"></span>[Matt. ix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035)<span id="iii.XXXII-p36.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “all manner of disease and all manner of sickness.” In the
Homily, as in the best New Testament <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p36.2"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p36.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p36.4"></span>ἐ</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p36.5"></span>υ τ λα</span> is not found.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[207:1346](1100040.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p41"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p41.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p41.2"></span>σκυλμνοι</span>, *vexati*, the reading of
the Vulgate, and of most <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p41.3"></span>mss</span>. and Fathers: adopted by
Griesbach into the text. \[The R.V. renders this “distressed.”\]

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[207:1347](1100040.htm#fr_1346) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p42"></span>[Matt. ix.
36-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p42.1"></span>. \[“will” is unnecessary.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[207:1348](1100040.htm#fr_1347) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p46"></span>[John iv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)<span id="iii.XXXII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[207:1349](1100040.htm#fr_1348) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p49"></span>[Matt.
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024)<span id="iii.XXXII-p49.1"></span>.
\[See on verse 34, in sec. 2.\]

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[207:1350](1100040.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p51"></span>\[Omit “would.”\]

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[208:1351](1100040.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p53"></span>[Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[208:1352](1100040.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p56"></span>\[R.V., “authority over.”\]

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[208:1353](1100040.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p57"></span>[Matt. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXXII-p57.1"></span>.
\[“Sickness” and “disease” should be transposed. Comp. on chap. ix. 35,
and R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[208:1354](1100040.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p59"></span>[John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span id="iii.XXXII-p59.1"></span>.
\[Chrysostom accepts the reading sustained by our best authorities; but
the literal rendering given above does not represent his view. In Homily
LI., in John, he distinctly says: “For the Holy Ghost was not yet, that
is, ‘was not yet given.’”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[208:1355](1100040.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p63"></span>[Matt. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[208:1356](1100040.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p72"></span>[Matt. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[208:1357](1100040.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p75"></span>\[R.V., “Thaddæus.” The longer reading
arose quite early. Tischendorf accepts “Lebbæus,” though it is not
strongly supported, mainly because Mark has “Thaddæus.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[208:1358](1100040.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p76"></span>[Luke vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXXII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[208:1359](1100040.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p77"></span>[Matt. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXXII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[209:1360](1100040.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p79"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p79.1"></span>κορυφαο</span>.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[209:1361](1100040.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p80"></span>[Acts iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)<span id="iii.XXXII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[209:1362](1100040.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p83"></span>[Matt. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXXII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[209:1363](1100040.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p86"></span>\[R.V., “*any* way.”\]

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[209:1364](1100040.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p87"></span>[Matt.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[209:1365](1100040.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p89"></span>[Acts xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[209:1366](1100040.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p91"></span>[Matt. x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXXII-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[209:1367](1100040.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p94"></span>See [Exod.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010), [Jer.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXII-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[209:1368](1100040.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p97"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p97.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p97.2"></span>ξιοπστου</span>, worthy of the confidence of
those to whom they preached.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[209:1369](1100040.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p99"></span>[Matt. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXXII-p99.1"></span>.
“Raise the dead,” is added in our copies. \[There is some authority for
omitting this clause in the New Testament, but recent critical editors
retain it.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[209:1370](1100040.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p101"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p101.1"></span>κατρθωμα</span>; nearly answering, perhaps,
both here and in other places, to *meritum*.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[209:1371](1100040.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p103"></span>[1 Tim vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXXII-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[209:1372](1100040.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p104.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p105"></span>[Matt.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p105.1"></span>. \[R.V., “Get you no gold nor silver, nor
brass in your purses (Greek, girdles); no wallet for your journey,
neither two coats, nor shoes, nor staff.”\]

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[210:1373](1100040.htm#fr_1372) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p107"></span>[Luke xxii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span id="iii.XXXII-p107.1"></span>.
\[The passage is paraphrased by Chrysostom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[210:1374](1100040.htm#fr_1373) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p110"></span>[Matt. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXXII-p110.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Be not anxious,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[210:1375](1100040.htm#fr_1374) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p113"></span>[Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="iii.XXXII-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[210:1376](1100040.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p114"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p114.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p114.2"></span>πιδεξασθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[210:1377](1100040.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p114.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p115"></span>[Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXXII-p115.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “For the laborer is worthy of his food.”\]

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[210:1378](1100040.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p117"></span>See [Luke x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXXII-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[210:1379](1100040.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p119"></span>[Matt. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXII-p119.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Search out who,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[210:1380](1100040.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p122"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p122.1"></span>εκολα</span>.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[210:1381](1100040.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p122.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p123"></span>[Luke x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXXII-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[210:1382](1100040.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p127"></span>[Matt.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[211:1383](1100040.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p130"></span>[Matt.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[211:1384](1100040.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p135.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p136"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p136.1"></span>φιλοσοφαν</span> .

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[211:1385](1100040.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p136.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p137"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXII-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[211:1386](1100040.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p140.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p141"></span>[Isa.
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007), [Rom.
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[211:1387](1100040.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p143"></span>[John xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXXII-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[211:1388](1100040.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p143.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p144"></span>See Bingham 13, 10, 8, quoting St.
Chrys. Hom. *in eos qui primum Pascha jejunant*, P. vi. 383. Sav. “There
is nothing like peace and harmony. Therefore our Father (the Bishop)
mounts not up to this throne, until he have invoked peace upon you all:
nor when he stands up, doth he begin his instruction to you, until he
have given peace to all; and the priests, when about to consecrate,
first make this prayer for you, and so begin the blessing: and the
deacon also, when he bids you pray, joins this with the rest as matter
of your prayer, that you should ask for the angel of peace, and that all
the things set before you should be for your peace: also in dismissing
you from this assembly, this is what he implores for you, saying,
‘Depart in peace.’ And in a word, we may not say or do any thing without
this peace.” See also Bingham, 14, 4, 6; 4, 14; 15, 3, 1, 2; and the
authors quoted by him, especially St. Chrysostom in various places: from
which it is evident that “the table” here means the holy table, and that
his argument is, “We should receive our brethren’s salutations as home
and elsewhere with a brotherly mind, that we may be fit to impart to him
the kiss of peace in the holy mysteries: the one is a type of, and a
preparation for, the other: as was the salutation here enjoined to the
apostles. Especially ought we to be ready and attentive at the many
salutations which the ministers offer to us in the earlier part of the
service, that we may lose none of the benefit of that mysterious
salutation which we know will come in the end and most awful part of
it.”

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[211:1389](1100040.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p144.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p145"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p145.1"></span>τ γνμ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[211:1390](1100040.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p145.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p146"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p146.1"></span>τ Τραπζη</span>.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[211:1391](1100040.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p147"></span>*i.e*., to refuse the kiss of peace,
which was always a part of the altar service.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[211:1392](1100040.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p149.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p150"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXII-p150.1"></span>μετωρο</span>.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[212:1393](1100040.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p150.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p151"></span>*i.e.*, than the common tables in your
own houses.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[212:1394](1100040.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p152"></span>See [Jas.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p152.1"></span>. Tertull. *ad Scapul.* c. 4. “Severus
sought out one Proculus, a Christian, who had cured him at a certain
time with oil, and kept him in his court until he died.” St. Jerome,
*vit. St. Hilarion*, c. 32. “Very many, wounded by serpents, having had
recourse to Hilarion, indeed all the husbandmen and shepherds, upon
touching their wounds with consecrated oil, recovered lasting health.”
Other cases occur in church history, and illustrate the importance which
the early writers attribute to the sacred oil in the church ritual, and
the account of the miracle of St. Narcissus in Euseb. E. H. vi. 9. This
statement of St. Chrysostom should be borne in mind, as qualifying what
he so often seems to affirm or imply, that miraculous gifts had been
withdrawn.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[212:1395](1100040.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p153.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p154"></span>[Acts ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="iii.XXXII-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[212:1396](1100040.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p154.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p155"></span>[Acts iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXXII-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[212:1397](1100040.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p155.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p156"></span>[Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXXII-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[212:1398](1100040.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p156.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p157"></span>See St. Chrys. on Coloss. Hom. III. (as
quoted by Mr. Field). “When the bishop enters the church, immediately he
says, ‘Peace be to all;’ when he exhorts, ‘Peace to all;’ when he
consecrates, ‘Peace to all,’ when he enjoins the salutation, ‘Peace to
all;’ when the sacrifice is ended, ‘Peace to all;’ and at intervals
again, ‘Grace to you and Peace.’”

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[212:1399](1100040.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p161.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p162"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXII-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[212:1400](1100040.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p162.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p163"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXXII-p163.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Am I loved the less?” The reading accepted by Chrysostom agrees
better with this interpretation.\]

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[213:1401](1100040.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p173.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p174"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="iii.XXXII-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[213:1402](1100040.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p174.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p175"></span>[Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXXII-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[213:1403](1100040.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p175.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p176"></span>[Matt.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[214:1404](1100040.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p176.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p177"></span>[John xiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="iii.XXXII-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[214:1405](1100040.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="iii.XXXII-p177.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXII-p178"></span>[John
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022)<span
id="iii.XXXII-p178.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXIII](1100041)
