[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100068)  [Next](1100070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXI"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXI-p1.1"></span>Homily LXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XIX.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027)<span
id="iii.LXI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p3"></span>“Then answered Peter and said unto Him,
Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed Thee; what shall we have
therefore?”

<span id="iii.LXI-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXI-p4.1"></span>All</span> which? O blessed Peter; the rod? the
net? the boat? the craft? These things dost thou tell me of, as all?
Yea, saith he, but not for display do I say these things, but in order
that by this question I may bring in the multitude of the poor. For
since the Lord had said, “If thou wilt be perfect, sell that thou hast,
and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in Heaven;” <span
id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425) lest any one of the poor should
say, What then? if I have no possessions, can I not be perfect? Peter
asks, that thou, the poor man, mayest learn, that thou art made in no
respect inferior by this: Peter asks, that thou mayest not learn from
Peter and doubt (for indeed he was imperfect as yet, and void of the
Spirit), but that, having received the declaration from Peter’s Master,
thou mayest be confident.

<span id="iii.LXI-p6"></span>For like as we do (we make things our own
often when speaking of the concerns of others), so did the apostle, when
he put to Him this question in behalf of all the world. Since that at
least he knew with certainty his own portion, is manifest from what had
been said before; for he that had already received the keys of the
Heavens, much more might feel confidence about the things hereafter.

<span id="iii.LXI-p7"></span>But mark also how exactly his reply is
according to Christ’s demand. For He had required of the rich man these
two things, to give that he had to the poor, and to follow Him.
Wherefore he also expresses these two things, to forsake, and to follow.
“For behold we have forsaken all,” saith he, “and have followed Thee.”
For the forsaking was done for the sake of following, and the following
was rendered easier by the forsaking, and made them feel confidence and
joy touching the forsaking.

<span id="iii.LXI-p8"></span>What then saith He? “Verily, I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of
Man shall sit on the throne of His glory, ye also shall sit <span
id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span id="iii.LXI-Page_374"></span> upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” <span
id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426) What then, one may say, shall Judas
sit there? By no means. How, then, doth He say, “Ye shall sit on twelve
thrones?” how shall the terms of the promise be fulfilled?

<span id="iii.LXI-p10"></span>Hear how, and on what principle. There is
a law ordained of God, recited by Jeremiah, the prophet to the Jews, and
in these words: “At what instant I shall speak a sentence concerning a
nation and kingdom, to pluck up and destroy; if that nation turn from
their evil deeds, I also will repent of the evils, which I thought to do
unto them. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and
kingdom to build and to plant it; and if they do evil in my sight, that
they obey not my voice, I also will repent of the good, which I said I
would do unto them.” <span id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427)

<span id="iii.LXI-p12"></span>For the same custom do I observe with
respect to the good things as well, saith He. For though I spake of
building up, should they show themselves unworthy of the promise, I will
no longer do it. Which sort of thing was done with respect to man upon
his creation, “For the dread of you,” it is said, “and the fear of you
shall be on the wild beasts,” <span id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428)
and it came not to pass, for he proved himself unworthy of the
sovereignty, even as did Judas also.

<span id="iii.LXI-p14"></span>For in order that neither at the
denunciations of punishment any men should despair and become more
hardened, nor by the promises of good things be rendered causelessly
more remiss, He remedies both these evils, by that which I have before
mentioned, saying in this way: Though I should threaten, do not despair;
for thou art able to repent, and to reverse the denunciation, like the
Ninevites. Though I should promise any good thing, grow not remiss
because of the promise. For shouldest thou appear unworthy, the fact of
my having promised will not advantage thee, but will rather bring
punishment. For I promise thee being worthy.

<span id="iii.LXI-p15"></span>Therefore even then in His discourse with
His disciples He did not promise to them simply, for neither did He say,
“you,” only, but added, “which have followed me,” that He might both
cast out Judas, and draw towards Him those that should come afterwards.
For neither to them only was it said, nor to Judas any more, when he had
become unworthy.

<span id="iii.LXI-p16"></span>Now to the disciples He promised things to
come, saying, “Ye shall sit on twelve thrones,” for they were now of a
higher stamp, and sought after none of the things of the present world,
but to the rest He promises also what are here.

<span id="iii.LXI-p17"></span>For “every one,” He saith, “that hath
forsaken brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands, or house, for my name’s sake, shall receive an
hundredfold in this world, and shall inherit eternal life.” <span
id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429)

<span id="iii.LXI-p19"></span>For lest any after having heard the word
“ye,” should suppose this a thing peculiar to the disciples (I mean now
the enjoying the greatest and first honors in the things to come), He
extended the word, and spread the promise over the whole earth, and from
the things present establishes the things to come also. And to the
disciples also at the beginning, when they were in a more imperfect
state, He reasoned from the things present. For when He drew them from
the sea, and took them from their trade, and commanded them to forsake
the ships, He made mention not of Heaven, not of thrones, but of the
things here, saying, “I will make you fishers of men;” but when He had
wrought them to be of higher views, then after that He discourses of the
things to come also.

<span id="iii.LXI-p20"></span>2. But what is, “Judging the twelve tribes
of Israel?” This is, “condemning them.” For they are not surely to sit
as judges, but like as He said the Queen of the South should condemn
that generation, and the Ninevites shall condemn them; so now these
also. Therefore He said not, the nations, and the world, but the tribes
of Israel. For since both the Jews alike and the apostles had been
brought up under the same laws, and customs, and polity; when the Jews
said, that for this cause they could not believe in Christ, because the
law forbade to receive His commandments, by bringing forward these men,
who had received the same law, and yet had believed, He condemns all
those; like as even already He had said, “therefore they shall be your
judges.” <span id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430)

<span id="iii.LXI-p22"></span>And what great thing doth He promise them,
it may be said, if what the Ninevites have and the Queen of the South,
this these are to have also? In the first place He had promised them
many other things before this, and after this doth promise them, and
this alone is not their reward.

<span id="iii.LXI-p23"></span>And besides even in this He intimated by
the way something more than these things. For of those He simply said,
The men of Nineveh shall rise up and condemn this gen <span
id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span id="iii.LXI-Page_375"></span>
eration,” <span id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431) and, “The Queen of
the South shall condemn it;” but concerning these, not merely thus, but
how? “When the Son of Man shall sit upon the throne of His glory, then
shall ye also sit upon twelve thrones,” saith He, declaring, that they
also shall reign with Him, and partake of that glory. “For if we
suffer,” it is said, “we shall also reign with Him.” <span
id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432) For neither do the thrones signify
a sitting (in judgment), for He alone is the one that shall sit and
judge, but honor and glory unspeakable did He intimate by the thrones.

<span id="iii.LXI-p26"></span>To these then He spake of these things,
but to all the rest of eternal life and an hundredfold here. But if to
the rest, much more to these too, both these things, and the things in
this life.

<span id="iii.LXI-p27"></span>And this surely came to pass; for when
they had left a fishing rod and a net, they possessed with authority the
substances of all, the prices of the houses and the lands, and the very
bodies of the believers. For often did they choose even to be slain for
their sake, as Paul also bears witness to many, when he saith, “If it
had been possible ye would have plucked out your eyes, and given them to
me.” <span id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433) But when He saith,
“Every one who hath forsaken wife,” He saith not this, for marriages to
be broken asunder for nought, but as He saith concerning one’s life, “He
that loseth his life for my sake shall find it,” <span
id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434) not that we should destroy
ourselves, neither that while yet here we should part it from the body,
but that we should prefer godliness to all things; this too He saith
also with respect to wife and brethren.

<span id="iii.LXI-p30"></span>But He seems to me here to intimate also
the persecutions. For since there were many instances both of fathers
urging their sons to ungodliness, and wives their husbands; when they
command these things, saith He, let them be neither wives nor parents,
even as Paul likewise said, “But if the unbelieving depart, let him
depart.” <span id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435)

<span id="iii.LXI-p32"></span>When He had then raised the spirit of all,
and had persuaded them to feel confidence both with respect to
themselves and to all the world, He added, that “Many that were first
shall be last, and last first.” <span
id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436) But this although it be spoken also
without distinction concerning many others likewise, it is spoken also
concerning these men and concerning the Pharisees, who did not believe,
even as before also He had said, “Many shall come from east and west and
shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; but the children of
the kingdom shall be cast out.” <span
id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437)

<span id="iii.LXI-p35"></span>Then He adds also a parable, as training
those who had fallen short to a great forwardness.

<span id="iii.LXI-p36"></span>“For the kingdom of Heaven,” He said, “is
like to a man that is an householder, which went out early in the
morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. And when he had agreed with
them for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.”

<span id="iii.LXI-p37"></span>“And at the third hour he saw others
standing idle, and to them too he said, Go ye also into the vineyard,
and whatsoever is right I will give you. And about the sixth and ninth
hours he did likewise. And about the eleventh hour, he saw others
standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?
But they say unto him, No man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye
also into my vineyard, and whatsoever is right, ye shall receive.”

<span id="iii.LXI-p38"></span>“So when even was come, the lord of the
vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the laborers, and give them their
hire, beginning from the last unto the first. And when they came that
were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny. And
the first supposed that they should receive more, and they received
likewise every man a penny. And when they had received it, they murmured
against the good man of the house, saying, These last have wrought but
one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us that have borne the
burden and heat of the day. But he answered one of them, and said,
Friend, I do thee no wrong; didst thou not agree with me for a penny?
Take that thine is, and go thy way; I will give unto this last also,
even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? Thus the last shall be first,
and the first last: for many are called, but few chosen.” <span
id="fr_2438"></span>[2439](#fn_2438)

<span id="iii.LXI-p40"></span>3. What is to us the intent of this
parable? For the beginning doth not harmonize with what is said at the
end, but intimates altogether the contrary. For in the first part He
shows all enjoying the same, and not some cast out, and some brought in;
yet He Himself both before the parable and after the parable said the
opposite thing. “That the first shall be last, and the last first,” that
is, before the very first, those not continuing first, but having become
last. For in proof that this is His meaning, He added, “Many are called,
but few chosen,” so as doubly <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="iii.LXI-Page_376"></span> both to sting the one, and to soothe and
urge on the other.

<span id="iii.LXI-p41"></span>But the parable saith not this, but that
they shall be equal to them that are approved, and have labored much.
“For thou hast made them equal unto us,” it is said, “that have borne
the burden and heat of the day.”

<span id="iii.LXI-p42"></span>What then is the meaning of the parable?
For it is necessary to make this first clear, and then we shall clear up
that other point. By a vineyard He meaneth the injunctions of God and
His commandments: by the time of laboring, the present life: by
laborers, them that in different ways are called to the fulfillment of
the injunctions: by early in the morning, and about the third and ninth
and eleventh hours, them who at different ages have drawn near to God,
and approved themselves.

<span id="iii.LXI-p43"></span>But the question is this, whether the
first having gloriously approved themselves, and having pleased God, and
having throughout the whole day shone by their labors, are possessed by
the basest feeling of vice, jealousy and envy. For when they had seen
them enjoying the same rewards, they say, “These last have wrought but
one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, that have borne the
burden and heat of the day.” And in these words, when they are to
receive no hurt, neither to suffer diminution as to their own hire, they
were indignant, and much displeased at the good of others, which was
proof of envy and jealousy. And what is yet more, the good man of the
house in justifying himself with respect to them, and in making his
defense to him that had said these things, convicts him of wickedness
and the basest jealousy, saying, “Didst thou not agree with me for a
penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way; I will give unto the last
even as unto thee. Is thine eye evil, because I am good?”

<span id="iii.LXI-p44"></span>What then is it which is to be established
by these things? For in other parables also this self-same thing may be
seen. For the son who was approved is brought in, as having felt this
self-same thing, when he saw his prodigal brother enjoying much honor,
even more than himself. For like as these enjoyed more by receiving
first, so he in a greater degree was honored by the abundance of the
things given him; and to these things he that was approved bears
witness.

<span id="iii.LXI-p45"></span>What then may we say? There is no one who
is thus justifying himself, or blaming others in the kingdom of Heaven;
away with the thought! for that place is pure from envy and jealousy.
For if when they are here the saints give their very lives for sinners,
much more when they see them there in the enjoyment of these things, do
they rejoice and account these to be blessings of their own. Wherefore
then did He so frame His discourse? The saying is a parable, wherefore
neither is it right to inquire curiously into all things in parables
word by word, <span id="fr_2439"></span>[2440](#fn_2439) but when we
have learnt the object for which it was composed, to reap this, and not
to busy one’s self about anything further.

<span id="iii.LXI-p47"></span>Wherefore then was this parable thus
composed? what is its object to effect? To render more earnest them that
are converted and become better men in extreme old age, and not to allow
them to suppose they have a less portion. So it is for this cause He
introduces also others displeased at their blessings, not to represent
those men as pining or vexed, away with the thought! but to teach us
that these have enjoyed such honor, as could even have begotten envy in
others. Which we also often do, saying, “Such a one blamed me, because I
counted thee worthy of much honor,” neither having been blamed, nor
wishing to slander that other, but hereby to show the greatness of the
gift which this one enjoyed.

<span id="iii.LXI-p48"></span>But wherefore can it have been that He did
not hire all at once? As far as concerned Him, He did hire all; but if
all did not hearken at once, the difference was made by the disposition
of them that were called. For this cause, some are called early in the
morning, some at the third hour, some at the sixth, some at the ninth,
some at the eleventh, when they would obey.

<span id="iii.LXI-p49"></span>This Paul also declared when he said,
“When it pleased Him, who separated me from my mother’s womb.” <span
id="fr_2440"></span>[2441](#fn_2440) When did it please Him? When he was
ready to obey. For He willed it even from the beginning, but because he
would not have yielded, then it pleased Him, when Paul also was ready to
obey. Thus also did He call the thief, although He was able to have
called him even before, but he would not have obeyed. For if Paul at the
beginning would not have obeyed, much more the thief.

<span id="iii.LXI-p51"></span>And if they say, “No man hath hired us,”
in the first place as I said we must not be curious about all the points
in the parables; but here neither is the good man of the house
represented to say this, but they; but he doth not convict them, that he
might drive them to perplexity, but might win them over. For that He
called all, as far as lay in Him, from the first even the parable shows,
saying, that “He went out early in the morning to hire.”

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="iii.LXI-Page_377"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p52"></span>4. From everything then it is manifest to
us, that the parable is spoken with reference to them who from earliest
youth, and those who in old age and more tardily, lay hold on virtue; to
the former, that they may not be proud, neither reproach those called at
the eleventh hour; to the latter, that they may learn that it is
possible even in a short time to recover all.

<span id="iii.LXI-p53"></span>For since He had been speaking about
earnestness, and the casting away of riches, and contempt of all one’s
possessions, but this needed much vigor of mind and youthful ardor; in
order to kindle in them a fire of love, and to give vigor to their will,
He shows that it is possible even for men coming later to receive the
hire of the whole day.

<span id="iii.LXI-p54"></span>But He doth not say it thus, lest again He
should make them proud, but he shows that the whole is of His love to
man, and because of this they shall not fail, but shall themselves enjoy
the unspeakable blessings.

<span id="iii.LXI-p55"></span>And this chiefly is what it is His will to
establish by this parable. And if He adds, that, “So the last shall be
first and the first last; for many are called, but few chosen,” marvel
not. For not as inferring it from the parable doth He say this, but His
meaning is this, that like as this came to pass, so shall that come to
pass. For here indeed the first did not become last, but all received
the same contrary to hope and expectation. But as this result took place
contrary to hope and contrary to expectation, and they that came before
were equalled by them that followed, so shall that also come to pass
which is more than this, and more strange, I mean, that the last should
come to be even before the first, and that the first should be after
these. So that that is one thing, and this another.

<span id="iii.LXI-p56"></span>But He seems to me to say these things,
darkly hinting at the Jews, and amongst the believers at those who at
first shone forth, but afterwards neglected virtue, and fell back; and
those others again that have risen from vice, and have shot beyond many.
For we see such changes taking place both with respect to faith and
practice.

<span id="iii.LXI-p57"></span>Wherefore I entreat you let us use much
diligence both to stand in the right faith, and to show forth an
excellent life. For unless we add also a life suitable to our faith, we
shall suffer the extremest punishment.

<span id="iii.LXI-p58"></span>And this the blessed Paul showed even from
times of old, when he said, that “They did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink:” and added, that they
were not saved; “for they were overthrown in the wilderness.” <span
id="fr_2441"></span>[2442](#fn_2441) And Christ declared it even in the
evangelists, when He brought in some that had cast out devils and
prophesied, and are led away to punishment. And all His parables also,
as that of the virgins, that of the net, that of the thorns, that of the
tree not bringing forth fruit, demand virtue in our works. For
concerning doctrines He discourses seldom, for neither doth the subject
need labor, but of life often or rather everywhere, for the war about
this is continual, wherefore also so is the labor.

<span id="iii.LXI-p60"></span>And why do I speak of the whole code. For
even a part of it overlooked brings upon one great evils; as, for
instance, almsgiving overlooked casts into hell them that have come
short in it; and yet this is not the whole of virtue, but a part
thereof. But nevertheless both the virgins were punished for not having
this, and the rich man was for this cause tormented, and they that have
not fed the hungry, are for this condemned with the devil. Again, not to
revile is a very small part of it, nevertheless this too casts out them
that have not attained to it. “For he that saith to his brother, Thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.” <span
id="fr_2442"></span>[2443](#fn_2442) Again, even continence itself is a
part, but nevertheless, without this no one shall see the Lord. For,
“Follow peace,” it is said, “and holiness, <span
id="fr_2443"></span>[2444](#fn_2443) without which no man shall see the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2444"></span>[2445](#fn_2444) And humility too in
like manner is a part of virtue; but nevertheless though any one should
fulfill other good works, but have not attained to this, he is unclean
with God. And this is manifest from the Pharisee, who though abounding
with numberless good works, by this lost all.

<span id="iii.LXI-p64"></span>But I have also something more than these
things to say again. I mean, that not only one of them overlooked shuts
Heaven against us, but though it be done, yet not in due perfection and
abundance, it produces the selfsame effect again. “For except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2445"></span>[2446](#fn_2445) So that though thou give alms, but
not more than they, thou shalt not enter in.

<span id="iii.LXI-p66"></span>And how much did they bestow in alms? one
may ask. For this very thing, I am minded to say now, that they who do
not give may be roused to give, and they that give may not pride
themselves, but may make increase of their gifts. What then did they
give? A tenth of all their possessions, and again another tenth, and
after this a third, so that they almost gave away the <span
id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span id="iii.LXI-Page_378"></span> third
part, for three-tenths put together make up this. And together with
these, first fruits, and first born, and other things besides, as, for
instance, the offerings for sins, those for purification, those at
feasts, those in the jubilee, <span id="fr_2446"></span>[2447](#fn_2446)
those by the cancelling of debts, and the dismissals of servants, and
the lendings that were clear of usury. But if he who gave the third part
of his goods, or rather the half (for those being put together with
these are the half), if then he who is giving the half, achieves no
great thing, he who doth not bestow so much as the tenth, of what shall
he be worthy? With reason He said, “There are few that be saved.”

<span id="iii.LXI-p68"></span>5. Let us not, then, despise the care of
our life. For if one portion of it despised brings so great a
destruction, when on every hand we are subject to the sentence of
condemnation, how shall we escape the punishment? and what manner of
penalty shall we not suffer? and what manner of hope of salvation have
we, one may ask, if each of the things we have numbered threatens us
with hell? I too say this; nevertheless, if we give heed we may be
saved, preparing the medicines of almsgiving, and attending to our
wounds.

<span id="iii.LXI-p69"></span>For oil does not so strengthen a body, as
benevolence at once strengthens a soul, and makes it invincible to all
and impregnable to the devil. For wheresoever he may seize us, his hold
then slips, this oil not suffering his grasp to fix on our back.

<span id="iii.LXI-p70"></span>With this oil therefore let us anoint
ourselves continually. For it is the cause of health, and a supply of
light, and a source of cheerfulness. “But such a one,” thou wilt say,
“hath talents of gold so many and so many, and gives away nothing.” And
what is that to thee? For thus shalt thou appear more worthy of
admiration, when in poverty thou art more munificent than he. It was on
this ground Paul marvelled at the Macedonians, not because they gave,
but because even though they were in poverty they gave. <span
id="fr_2447"></span>[2448](#fn_2447)

<span id="iii.LXI-p72"></span>Look not then at these, but at the common
Teacher of all, who “had not where to lay His head.” <span
id="fr_2448"></span>[2449](#fn_2448) And why, you say, doth not this and
that person do so? Do not judge another, but deliver thyself from the
charge against thee. Since the punishment is greater when thou at the
same time blamest others, and thyself doest not, when judging other men,
thou art again thyself also subject to the same judgment. For if even
them who do right He permits not to judge others, much more will He not
permit offenders. Let us not therefore judge others, neither let us look
to others who are taking their ease, but unto Jesus, and from thence let
us draw our examples.

<span id="iii.LXI-p74"></span>Why! have I been thy benefactor? Why! did
I redeem thee, that thou lookest to me? It is another who hath bestowed
these things on thee. Why dost thou let go thy Master, and look unto thy
fellow-servant? Heardest thou not Him saying, “Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart?” <span id="fr_2449"></span>[2450](#fn_2449) And
again, “He that would be first amongst you, let him be servant of all:”
and again, “Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister.” <span id="fr_2450"></span>[2451](#fn_2450) And after these
things again, lest taking offense at them who are remiss amongst thy
fellow-servants, thou continue in contemptuousness; to draw thee off
from that, He saith, “I have made myself an example to you, that as I
have done, ye should do also.” <span
id="fr_2451"></span>[2452](#fn_2451) But hast thou no teacher of virtue
amongst those persons that are with thee, neither such a one as to lead
thee on to these things? More abundant then will be the praise, the
commendation greater, when not even being supplied with teachers thou
hast become one to be marvelled at.

<span id="iii.LXI-p78"></span>For this is possible, nay very easy, if we
be willing: and this they show, who first duly performed these things,
as for instance, Noah, Abraham, Melchizedeck, Job, and all the men like
them. To them it is needful to look every day, and not unto these, whom
ye never cease emulating, and passing about their names in your
assemblies. For nothing else do I hear you saying everywhere, but such
words as these; “Such a one has bought so many acres of land; such a one
is rich, he is building.” Why dost thou stare, O man, at what is
without? Why dost thou look to others? If thou art minded to look to
others, look to them that do their duty, to them that approve
themselves, to them that carefully fulfill the law, not to those that
have become offenders, and are in dishonor. For if thou look to these,
thou wilt gather hence many evil things, falling into remissness, into
pride, into condemnation of others; but if thou reckon over them that do
right, thou wilt lead thyself on unto humility, unto diligence, unto
compunction, unto the blessings that are beyond number.

<span id="iii.LXI-p79"></span>Hear what the Pharisee suffered, because
he let pass them that do right, and looked to him that had offended;
hear and fear.

<span id="iii.LXI-p80"></span>See how David became one to be marvelled
at, because he looked to his ancestors that were noted for virtue. “For
I am a <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="iii.LXI-Page_379"></span> stranger,” saith he, “and a sojourner, as
all my fathers were.” <span id="fr_2452"></span>[2453](#fn_2452) For
this man, and all that are like him, let pass them that had sinned, and
thought of those who had approved themselves.

<span id="iii.LXI-p82"></span>This do thou also. For thou art not set to
judge of the negligences of which others have been guilty, nor to
inquire into the sins which others are committing; thou art required to
do judgment on thyself, not on others. “For if we judged ourselves,” it
is said, “we should not be judged, but when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord.” <span id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453) But
thou hast reversed the order, of thyself requiring no account of
offenses great or small, but being strict and curious about the offenses
of others.

<span id="iii.LXI-p84"></span>Let us no more do this, but leaving off
this disorderly way, let us set up a tribunal in ourselves for the sins
committed by ourselves, becoming ourselves accusers, and judges, and
executioners for our offenses.

<span id="iii.LXI-p85"></span>But if it be thy will to be busy about the
things of other men also, busy thyself about their good works, not their
sins, that both by the memory of our negligences and by our emulation
for the good works they have done, *and by setting before ourselves the
judgment-seat from which no prayers can deliver, wounded each day by our
conscience as by a kind of goad*, <span
id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454) we may lead ourselves on to
humility, and a greater diligence, and attain unto the good things to
come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ; with
whom be to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory, might,
honor, now and always, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[373:2426](1100069.htm#fr_2425) <span
id="iii.LXI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p5"></span>[Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[374:2427](1100069.htm#fr_2426) <span
id="iii.LXI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p9"></span>[Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[374:2428](1100069.htm#fr_2427) <span
id="iii.LXI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p11"></span>[Jer. xviii.
7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[374:2429](1100069.htm#fr_2428) <span
id="iii.LXI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p13"></span>[Gen. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[374:2430](1100069.htm#fr_2429) <span
id="iii.LXI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p18"></span>[Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXI-p18.1"></span>.
\[The citation differs from that in the last Homily. The order here is
that of Tischendorf (not of R.V. or rec. text): “or wife” occurs here;
“house” is substituted for “houses.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[374:2431](1100069.htm#fr_2430) <span
id="iii.LXI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p21"></span>[Matt. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027)<span id="iii.LXI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[375:2432](1100069.htm#fr_2431) <span
id="iii.LXI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p24"></span>[Matt. xii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)<span id="iii.LXI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[375:2433](1100069.htm#fr_2432) <span
id="iii.LXI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p25"></span>[2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[375:2434](1100069.htm#fr_2433) <span
id="iii.LXI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p28"></span>[Gal. iv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#051)<span id="iii.LXI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[375:2435](1100069.htm#fr_2434) <span
id="iii.LXI-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p29"></span>[Matt. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span id="iii.LXI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[375:2436](1100069.htm#fr_2435) <span
id="iii.LXI-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p31"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXI-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[375:2437](1100069.htm#fr_2436) <span
id="iii.LXI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p33"></span>[Matt. xix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXI-p33.1"></span>.
\[“were” is an emendation of the translator. The Greek is that of the
rec. text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[375:2438](1100069.htm#fr_2437) <span
id="iii.LXI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p34"></span>[Matt.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2438"></span>[375:2439](1100069.htm#fr_2438) <span
id="iii.LXI-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p39"></span>[Matt. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)<span id="iii.LXI-p39.1"></span>.
\[This long passage agrees closely with the rec. text. In [Matt.
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXI-p39.2"></span>,
the New Testament narrative is abridged, but there are scarcely any
other peculiarities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2439"></span>[376:2440](1100069.htm#fr_2439) <span
id="iii.LXI-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p46"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXI-p46.1"></span>κατ λξιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2440"></span>[376:2441](1100069.htm#fr_2440) <span
id="iii.LXI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p50"></span>[Gal. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXI-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2441"></span>[377:2442](1100069.htm#fr_2441) <span
id="iii.LXI-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p59"></span>[1 Cor.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXI-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2442"></span>[377:2443](1100069.htm#fr_2442) <span
id="iii.LXI-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p61"></span>[Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXI-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2443"></span>[377:2444](1100069.htm#fr_2443) <span
id="iii.LXI-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p62"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXI-p62.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXI-p62.2"></span>γιασμν</span>, comp. [1 Thess. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXI-p62.3"></span>.
\[R.V., “sanctification.”\]

<span id="fn_2444"></span>[377:2445](1100069.htm#fr_2444) <span
id="iii.LXI-p62.4"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p63"></span>[Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="iii.LXI-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2445"></span>[377:2446](1100069.htm#fr_2445) <span
id="iii.LXI-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p65"></span>[Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="iii.LXI-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2446"></span>[378:2447](1100069.htm#fr_2446) <span
id="iii.LXI-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p67"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXI-p67.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXI-p67.2"></span>Ιωβηλα</span>.

<span id="fn_2447"></span>[378:2448](1100069.htm#fr_2447) <span
id="iii.LXI-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p71"></span>[2 Cor.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXI-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2448"></span>[378:2449](1100069.htm#fr_2448) <span
id="iii.LXI-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p73"></span>[Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="iii.LXI-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2449"></span>[378:2450](1100069.htm#fr_2449) <span
id="iii.LXI-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p75"></span>[Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXI-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2450"></span>[378:2451](1100069.htm#fr_2450) <span
id="iii.LXI-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p76"></span>[Matt.
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXI-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2451"></span>[378:2452](1100069.htm#fr_2451) <span
id="iii.LXI-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p77"></span>[John xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXI-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2452"></span>[379:2453](1100069.htm#fr_2452) <span
id="iii.LXI-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p81"></span>[Ps. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXI-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[379:2454](1100069.htm#fr_2453) <span
id="iii.LXI-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p83"></span>[1 Cor.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span id="iii.LXI-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[379:2455](1100069.htm#fr_2454) <span
id="iii.LXI-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXI-p86"></span>The part in italics is omitted in two
manuscripts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXII](1100070)
