[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100022)  [Next](1100024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XV"></span> <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="iii.XV-Page_88"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XV-p1.1"></span>Homily XV.</span>

<span id="iii.XV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002)<span
id="iii.XV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XV-p3"></span>“And Jesus seeing the multitudes went up
into the mountain, and when He was set, His disciples came unto Him. And
He opened His mouth, and taught them saying, Blessed,” etc.

<span id="iii.XV-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XV-p4.1"></span>See</span> how unambitious He was, and void of
boasting: in that He did not lead people about with Him, but whereas,
when healing was required, He had Himself gone about everywhere,
visiting both towns and country places; now when the multitude is become
very great, He sits in one spot: and that not in the midst of any city
or forum, but on a mountain and in a wilderness; instructing us to do
nothing for display, and to separate ourselves from the tumults of
ordinary life, <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) and this most
especially, when we are to study wisdom, and to discourse of things
needful to be done.

<span id="iii.XV-p6"></span>But when He had gone up into the mount, and
“was set down, His disciples came unto Him.” Seest thou their growth in
virtue? and how in a moment <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) they
became better men? Since the multitude were but gazers on the miracles,
but these from that hour desired also to hear some great and high thing.
And indeed this it was set Him on His teaching, and made Him begin this
discourse.

<span id="iii.XV-p8"></span>For it was not men’s bodies only that He was
healing, but He was also amending their souls; and again from the care
of these He would pass to attendance on the other. Thus He at once
varied the succor that He gave, and likewise mingled with the
instruction afforded by His words, the manifestation of His glory from
His works; and besides, He stopped the shameless mouths of the heretics,
signifying by this His care of both parts of our being, that He Himself
is the Maker of the whole creation. Therefore also on each nature He
bestowed abundant providence, now amending the one, now the other.

<span id="iii.XV-p9"></span>And in this way He was then employed. For it
is said, that “He opened His mouth, and taught them.” And wherefore is
the clause added, “He opened His mouth”? To inform thee that in His very
silence He gave instruction, and not when He spoke only: but at one time
by “opening His mouth,” at another uttering His voice by the works which
He did.

<span id="iii.XV-p10"></span>But when thou hearest that He taught them,
do not think of Him as discoursing with His disciples only, but rather
with all through them.

<span id="iii.XV-p11"></span>For since the multitude was such as a
multitude ever is, <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) and consisted
moreover of such as creep on the ground, <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) He withdraws the choir of His
disciples, and makes His discourse unto them: in His conversation with
them providing that the rest also, who were yet very far from the level
of His sayings, might find His lesson of self-denial no longer grievous
unto them. Of which indeed both Luke gave intimation, when he said, that
He directed His words unto them: <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584)
and Matthew too, clearly declaring the same, wrote, “His disciples came
unto Him, and He taught them.” For thus the others also were sure to be
more eagerly attentive to Him, than they would have been, had He
addressed Himself unto all.

<span id="iii.XV-p15"></span>2. Whence then doth He begin? and what kind
of foundations of His new polity doth He lay for us?

<span id="iii.XV-p16"></span>Let us hearken with strict attention unto
what is said. For though it was spoken unto them, it was written for the
sake also of all men afterwards. And accordingly on this account, though
He had His disciples in His mind in His public preaching, yet unto them
He limits not His sayings, but applies all His words of blessing without
restriction. Thus He said not, “Blessed are ye, if ye become poor,” but
“Blessed are the poor.” And I may add that even if He had spoken of
them, the advice would still be common to all. For so, when He saith,
“Lo! I am with you always, even unto the end of the world,” <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) He is discoursing not with them only,
but also, through them, with all the world. And in pronouncing them
blessed, who are persecuted, and chased, and suffer <span
id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_89"></span> all
intolerable things; not for them only, but also for all who arrive at
the same excellency, He weaves His crown.

<span id="iii.XV-p18"></span>However, that this may be yet plainer, and
to inform thee that thou hast great interest in His sayings, and so
indeed hath all mankind, if any choose to give heed; hear how He begins
these wondrous words.

<span id="iii.XV-p19"></span>“Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs
is the kingdom of Heaven.” <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586)

<span id="iii.XV-p21"></span>What is meant by “the poor in spirit?” The
humble and contrite in mind. For by “spirit” He hath here designated the
soul, and the faculty of choice. That is, since many are humble not
willingly, but compelled by stress of circumstances; letting these pass
(for this were no matter of praise), He blesses them first, who by
choice humble and contract themselves.

<span id="iii.XV-p22"></span>But why said he not, “the humble,” but
rather “the poor?” Because this is more than that. For He means here
them who are awestruck, and tremble at the commandments of God. Whom
also by His prophet Isaiah God earnestly accepting said, “To whom will I
look, but to him who is meek <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) and
quiet, and trembleth at My words?” <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) For indeed there are many kinds of
humility: one is humble in his own measure, another with all excess of
lowliness. It is this last lowliness of mind which that blessed prophet
commends, picturing to us the temper that is not merely subdued, but
utterly broken, when he saith, “The sacrifice for God is a contrite
spirit, a contrite and an humble heart God will not despise.” <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) And the Three Children also offer this
unto God as a great sacrifice, saying, “Nevertheless, in a contrite
soul, and in a spirit of lowliness, may we be accepted.” <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) This Christ also now blesses.

<span id="iii.XV-p27"></span>3. For whereas the greatest of evils, and
those which make havoc of the whole world, had their entering in from
pride:—for both the devil, not being such before, did thus become a
devil; as indeed Paul plainly declared, saying, “Lest being lifted up
with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the devil:” <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) —and the first man, too, puffed up by
the devil with these hopes, was made an example of, <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) and became mortal (for expecting to
become a god, he lost even what he had; and God also upbraiding him with
this, and mocking his folly, said, “Behold, Adam is become as one of
us” <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) ; and each one of those that
came after did hereby wreck himself in impiety, fancying some equality
with God:—since, I say, this was the stronghold of our evils, and the
root and fountain of all wickedness, He, preparing a remedy suitable to
the disease, laid this law first as a strong and safe foundation. For
this being fixed as a base, the builder in security lays on it all the
rest. But if this be taken away, though a man reach to the Heavens in
his course of life, <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) it is all
easily undermined, and issues in a grievous end. Though fasting, prayer,
almsgiving, temperance, any other good thing whatever, be gathered
together in thee; without humility all fall away and perish.

<span id="iii.XV-p32"></span>It was this very thing that took place in
the instance of the Pharisee. For even after he had arrived at the very
summit, he “went down” <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) with the
loss of all, because he had not the mother of virtues: for as pride is
the fountain of all wickedness, so is humility the principle of all
self-command. Wherefore also He begins with this, pulling up boasting by
the very root out of the soul of His hearers.

<span id="iii.XV-p34"></span>“And what,” one may ask, “is this to His
disciples, who were on every account humble? For in truth they had
nothing to be proud of, being fishermen, poor, ignoble, and illiterate.”
Even though these things concerned not His disciples, yet surely they
concerned such as were then present, and such as were hereafter to
receive the disciples, lest they should on this account despise them.
But it were truer to say that they did also concern His disciples. For
even if not then, yet by and by they were sure to require this help,
after their signs and wonders, and their honor from the world, and their
confidence towards God. For neither wealth, nor power, nor royalty
itself, had so much power to exalt men, as the things which they
possessed in all fullness. And besides, it was natural that even before
the signs they might be lifted up, at that very time when they saw the
multitude, and all that audience surrounding their Master; they might
feel some human weakness. Wherefore He at once represses their pride.

<span id="iii.XV-p35"></span>And He doth not introduce what He saith by
way of advice or of commandments, but by way of blessing, so making His
word less burthensome, and opening to all the course of His discipline.
For He said not, “This or that person,” but “they who do so, are all of
them *blessed*.” So that though thou be a slave, a beggar, in poverty, a
stranger, unlearned, <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) there is
nothing to hinder thee from being blessed, if thou emulate this virtue.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_90"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p37"></span>4. Now having begun, as you see, where most
need was, He proceeds to another commandment, one which seems to be
opposed to the judgment of the whole world. For whereas all think that
they who rejoice are enviable, those in dejection, poverty, and
mourning, wretched, He calls these blessed rather than those; saying
thus,

<span id="iii.XV-p38"></span>“Blessed are they that mourn.” <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597)

<span id="iii.XV-p40"></span>Yet surely all men call them miserable. For
therefore He wrought the miracles beforehand, that in such enactments as
these He might be entitled to credit.

<span id="iii.XV-p41"></span>And here too again he designated not simply
all that mourn, but all that do so for sins: since surely that other
kind of mourning is forbidden, and that earnestly, which relates to
anything of this life. This Paul also clearly declared, when he said,
“The sorrow of the world worketh death, but godly sorrow worketh
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of.” <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598)

<span id="iii.XV-p43"></span>These then He too Himself calls blessed,
whose sorrow is of that kind; yet not simply them that sorrow did He
designate, but them that sorrow intensely. Therefore He did not say,
“they that sorrow,” but “they that mourn.” For this commandment again is
fitted to teach us entire self-control. For if those who grieve for
children, or wife, or any other relation gone from them, have no
fondness for gain or pleasure during that period of their sorrow; if
they aim not at glory, are not provoked by insults, nor led captive by
envy, nor beset by any other passion, their grief alone wholly
possessing them; much more will they who mourn for their own sins, as
they ought to mourn, show forth a self-denial greater than this.

<span id="iii.XV-p44"></span>Next, what is the reward for these? “For
they shall be comforted,” saith He.

<span id="iii.XV-p45"></span>Where shall they be comforted! tell me.
Both here and there. For since the thing enjoined was exceeding
burthensome and galling, He promised to give that, which most of all
made it light. Wherefore, if thou wilt be comforted, mourn: and think
not this a dark saying. For when God doth comfort, though sorrows come
upon thee by thousands like snow-flakes, thou wilt be above them all.
Since in truth, as the returns which God gives are always far greater
than our labors; so He hath wrought in this case, declaring them that
mourn to be blessed, not after the value of what they do, but after His
own love towards man. For they that mourn, mourn for misdoings, and to
such it is enough to enjoy forgiveness, and obtain wherewith to answer
for themselves. But forasmuch as He is full of love towards man, He doth
not limit His recompense either to the removal of our punishments, or to
the deliverance from our sins, but He makes them even blessed, and
imparts to them abundant consolation.

<span id="iii.XV-p46"></span>But He bids us mourn, not only for our own,
but also for other men’s misdoings. And of this temper were the souls of
the saints: such was that of Moses, of Paul, of David; yea, all these
many times mourned for evils not their own.

<span id="iii.XV-p47"></span>5. “Blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth.” <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) Tell me,
what kind of earth? Some <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) say a
figurative earth, but it is not this, for nowhere in Scripture do we
find any mention of an earth that is merely figurative. <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) But what can the saying mean? He holds
out a sensible prize; even as Paul also doth, in that when he had said,
“Honor thy father and thy mother,” <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) he added, “For so shalt thou live long
upon the earth.” And He Himself unto the thief again, “Today shalt thou
be with me in Paradise.” <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603)

<span id="iii.XV-p53"></span>Thus He doth not incite us by means of the
future blessings only, but of the present also, for the sake of the
grosser sort of His hearers, and such as before the future seek those
others.

<span id="iii.XV-p54"></span>Thus, for example, further on also He said,
“Agree with thine adversary.” <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604)
Then He appoints the reward of such self-command, and saith, “Lest at
any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge to the
officer.” <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) Seest thou whereby He
alarmed us? By the things of sense, by what happens before our eyes. And
again, “Whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of
the council.” <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606)

<span id="iii.XV-p58"></span>And Paul too sets forth sensible rewards at
great length, and uses things present in his exhortations; as when he is
discoursing about virginity. For having said nothing about the heavens
there, for the time he urges it by things present, saying, “Because of
the present distress,” and, “But I spare you,” and, “I would have you
without carefulness.” <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607)

<span id="iii.XV-p60"></span>Thus accordingly Christ also with the
things spiritual hath mingled the sensible. For whereas the meek man is
thought to lose all his own, He promises the contrary, saying, <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_91"></span> “Nay, but
this is he who possesses his goods in safety, namely, he who is not
rash, nor boastful: while that sort of man shall often lose his
patrimony, and his very life.”

<span id="iii.XV-p61"></span>And besides, since in the Old Testament the
prophet used to say continually, “The meek shall inherit the
earth;” <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) He thus weaves into His
discourse the words to which they were accustomed, so as not everywhere
to speak a strange language.

<span id="iii.XV-p63"></span>And this He saith, not as limiting the
rewards to things present, but as joining with these the other sort of
gifts also. For neither in speaking of any spiritual thing doth He
exclude such as are in the present life; nor again in promising such as
are in our life, doth He limit his promise to that kind. For He saith,
“Seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto
you.” <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) And again: “Whosoever hath
left houses or brethren, shall receive an hundred fold in this world,
and in the future shall inherit everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610)

<span id="iii.XV-p66"></span>6. “Blessed are they which do hunger and
thirst after righteousness.” <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611)

<span id="iii.XV-p68"></span>What sort of righteousness? He means either
the whole of virtue, or that particular virtue which is opposed to
covetousness. <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) For since He is
about to give commandment concerning mercy, to show how we must show
mercy, as, for instance, not of rapine or covetousness, He blesses them
that lay hold of righteousness.

<span id="iii.XV-p70"></span>And see with what exceeding force He puts
it. For He said not, “Blessed are they which keep fast by
righteousness,” but, “Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness:” that not merely anyhow, but with all desire we may
pursue it. For since this is the most peculiar property of covetousness,
and we are not so enamored of meat and drink, as of gaining, and
compassing ourselves with more and more, He bade us to transfer this
desire to a new object, freedom from covetousness.

<span id="iii.XV-p71"></span>Then He appoints the prize, again from
things sensible; saying, “for they shall be filled.” Thus, because it is
thought that the rich are commonly made such by covetousness, “Nay,”
saith He, “it is just contrary: for it is righteousness that doeth this.
Wherefore, so long as thou doest righteously, fear not poverty, nor
tremble at hunger. For the extortioners, they are the very persons who
lose all, even as he certainly who is in love with righteousness,
possesses himself the goods of all men in safety.”

<span id="iii.XV-p72"></span>But if they who covet not other men’s goods
enjoy so great abundance, <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) much
more they who give up their own.

<span id="iii.XV-p74"></span>“Blessed are the merciful.” <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614)

<span id="iii.XV-p76"></span>Here He seems to me to speak not of those
only who show mercy in giving of money, but those likewise who are
merciful in their actions. For the way of showing mercy is manifold, and
this commandment is broad. What then is the reward thereof? “For they
shall obtain mercy.”

<span id="iii.XV-p77"></span>And it seems indeed to be a sort of equal
recompence, but it is a far greater thing than the act of goodness. For
whereas they themselves show mercy as men, they obtain mercy from the
God of all; and it is not the same thing, man’s mercy, and God’s; but as
wide as is the interval between wickedness and goodness, so far is the
one of these removed from the other.

<span id="iii.XV-p78"></span>“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.” <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615)

<span id="iii.XV-p80"></span>Behold again the reward is spiritual. Now
He here calls “pure,” either those who have attained unto all virtue,
and are not conscious to themselves of any evil; or those who live in
temperance. For there is nothing which we need so much in order to see
God, as this last virtue. Wherefore Paul also said, “Follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.” <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) He is here speaking of such sight as
it is possible for man to have.

<span id="iii.XV-p82"></span>For because there are many who show mercy,
and who commit no rapine, nor are covetous, who yet are guilty of
fornication and uncleanness; to signify that the former alone suffices
not, He hath added this, much in the same sense as Paul, writing to the
Corinthians, bore witness of the Macedonians, that they were rich not
only in almsgiving, but also in all other virtue. For having spoken of
the noble spirit <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) they had shown
in regard of their goods, he saith, “They gave also their own selves to
the Lord, and to us.” <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618)

<span id="iii.XV-p85"></span>7. “Blessed are the peace-makers.” <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619)

<span id="iii.XV-p87"></span>Here He not only takes away altogether our
own strife and hatred amongst ourselves, but He requires besides this
something more, namely, that we should set at one again others, who are
at strife.

<span id="iii.XV-p88"></span>And again, the reward which He annexes is
spiritual. Of what kind then is it.

<span id="iii.XV-p89"></span>“For they shall be called the children of
God.”

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_92"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p90"></span>Yea, for this became the work of the Only
Begotten, to unite the divided, and to reconcile the alienated.

<span id="iii.XV-p91"></span>Then, lest thou shouldest imagine peace in
all cases a blessing, He hath added,

<span id="iii.XV-p92"></span>“Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness’ sake.” <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620)

<span id="iii.XV-p94"></span>That is, for virtue’s sake, for
succor <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) given to others, and for
godliness: it being ever His wont to call by the name of “righteousness”
the whole practical wisdom of the soul.

<span id="iii.XV-p96"></span>“Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for
my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad.” <span
id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622)

<span id="iii.XV-p98"></span>As if He said, “Though they should call you
sorcerers, deceivers, pestilent persons, or whatever else, blessed are
ye:” so He speaks. What could be newer than these injunctions? wherein
the very things which all others avoid, these He declares to be
desirable; I mean, being poor, mourning, persecution, evil report. But
yet He both affirmed this, and convinced not two, nor ten, nor twenty,
nor an hundred, nor a thousand men, but the whole world. And hearing
things so grievous and galling, so contrary to the accustomed ways of
men, the multitudes “were astonished.” So great was the power of Him who
spake.

<span id="iii.XV-p99"></span>However, lest thou shouldest think that the
mere fact of being evil spoken of makes men blessed, He hath set two
limitations; when it is for His sake, and when the things that are said
are false: for without these, he who is evil spoken of, so far from
being blessed, is miserable.

<span id="iii.XV-p100"></span>Then see the prize again: “Because your
reward is great in heaven.” But thou, though thou hear not of a kingdom
given in each one of the blessings, be not discouraged. For although He
give different names to the rewards, yet He brings all into His kingdom.
Thus, both when He saith, “they that mourn shall be comforted;” and,
“they that show mercy shall obtain mercy;” and, “the pure in heart shall
see God;” and, the peacemakers “shall be called the children of God;”
nothing else but the Kingdom doth He shadow out by all these sayings.
For such as enjoy these, shall surely attain unto that. Think not
therefore that this reward is for the poor in spirit only, but for those
also who hunger after righteousness, for the meek, and for all the rest
without exception.

<span id="iii.XV-p101"></span>Since on this account He hath set His
blessing on them all, that thou mightest not look for anything sensible:
for that man cannot be blessed, who is crowned with such things as come
to an end with this present life, and hurry by quicker than a shadow.

<span id="iii.XV-p102"></span>8. But when He had said, “your reward is
great,” he added also another consolation, saying, “For so persecuted
they the prophets which were before you.”

<span id="iii.XV-p103"></span>Thus, since that first, the promise of the
Kingdom, was yet to come, and all in expectation, He affords them
comfort from this world; from their fellowship with those who before
them had been ill-treated.

<span id="iii.XV-p104"></span>For “think not,” saith He, “that for
something inconsistent in your sayings and enactments ye suffer these
things: or, as being teachers of evil doctrines, ye are to be persecuted
by them; the plots and dangers proceed not of any wickedness in your
sayings, but of the malice of those who hear you. Wherefore neither are
they any blame to you who suffer wrong, but to them who do the wrong.
And to the truth of these things all preceding time bears witness. For
against the prophets they did not even bring any charge of transgressing
the law, and of sentiments of impiety, that they stoned some, chased
away others, encompassed others with innumerable afflictions. Wherefore
let not this trouble you, for of the very same mind they do all that is
done now.” Seest thou how He raised up their spirits, by placing them
near to the company of Moses and Elias?

<span id="iii.XV-p105"></span>Thus also Paul writing to the
Thessalonians, saith, “For ye became followers of the Churches of God,
which are in Judea; for ye also have suffered the same things of your
own fellow-countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: who both killed
the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have driven us out; and they
please not God, and are contrary to all men.” <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) Which same point here also Christ hath
established.

<span id="iii.XV-p107"></span>And whereas in the other beatitudes, He
said, “Blessed are the poor,” and “the merciful;” here He hath not put
it generally, but addresses His speech unto themselves, saying, “Blessed
are ye, when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and say every
evil word:” signifying that this is an especial privilege of theirs; and
that beyond all others, teachers have this for their own.

<span id="iii.XV-p108"></span>At the same time He here also covertly
signifies His own dignity, and His equality in honor with Him who begat
Him. For “as they on the Father’s account,” saith He, “so shall ye also
for me suffer these things.” But when He saith, “the prophets which
<span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_93"></span> were
before you,” He implies that they were also by this time become
prophets.

<span id="iii.XV-p109"></span>Next, declaring that this above all
profits them, and makes them glorious, He did not say, “they will
calumniate and persecute you, but I will prevent it.” For not in their
escaping evil report, but in their noble endurance thereof, and in
refuting them by their actions, He will have their safety stand: this
being a much greater thing than the other; even as to be struck and not
hurt, is much greater than escaping the blow.

<span id="iii.XV-p110"></span>9. Now in this place He saith, “Your
reward is great in heaven.” But Luke <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) reports Him to have spoken this, both
earnestly, and with more entire consolation; for He not only, as you
know, pronounces them blessed, who are evil spoken of for God’s sake,
but declares them likewise wretched, who are well spoken of by all men.
For, “Woe unto you,” saith He, “when all men shall speak well of you.”
And yet the apostles were well spoken of, but not by all men. Wherefore
He said not, “Woe unto you, when men shall speak well of you,” but,
“when all men” shall do so: for it is not even possible that those who
live in the practice of virtue should be well spoken of by all men.

<span id="iii.XV-p112"></span>And again He saith, “When they shall cast
out your name as evil, rejoice ye, and leap for joy.” <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) For not only of the dangers they
underwent, but of the calumny also, He appoints the recompence to be
great. Wherefore He said not, “When they shall persecute, and kill you,”
but, “When they shall revile you, and say all manner of evil.” For most
assuredly, men’s evil reports have a sharper bite than their very deeds.
For whereas, in our dangers, there are many things that lighten the
toil, as to be cheered <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) by all,
to have many to applaud, to crown, to proclaim our praise; here in our
reproach even this consolation is destroyed. Because we seem not to have
achieved anything great; and this galls the combatant more than all his
dangers: at least many have gone on even to hang themselves, not bearing
evil report. And why marvellest thou at the others? since that traitor,
that shameless and accursed one, he who had ceased to blush for anything
whatever, was wrought upon by this chiefly to hurry to the halter. And
Job again, all adamant as he was, and firmer than a rock; when he had
been robbed of all his possessions, and was suffering those incurable
ills, and had become on a sudden childless, and when he saw his body
pouring out worms like a fountain, and his wife attacking him, he
repelled it all with ease; but when he saw his friends reproaching and
trampling upon him, and entertaining an evil opinion of him, and saying
that he suffered those things for some sins, and was paying the penalty
of wickedness: then was there trouble, then commotion, even in that
great and noble-hearted man. <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627)

<span id="iii.XV-p116"></span>And David also, letting pass all that he
had suffered, sought of God a retribution for the calumny alone. For,
“Let him curse,” saith he, “for the Lord hath bidden him: that the Lord
may see my humiliation, and requite me for this cursing of his on this
day.” <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628)

<span id="iii.XV-p118"></span>And Paul too proclaims the triumph not of
those only who incur danger, or are deprived of their goods, but of
these also, thus saying, “Call to remembrance the former days, in which
after ye were illuminated ye endured a great fight of afflictions;
partly whilst ye were made a gazing stock by reproaches, and
afflictions.” <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) On this account
then Christ hath appointed the reward also to be great.

<span id="iii.XV-p120"></span>After this, lest any one should say, “Here
thou givest no redress, nor stoppest men’s mouths; and dost thou assign
a reward there?” He hath put before us the prophets, to show that
neither in their case did God give redress. And if, where the rewards
were at hand, He cheered them with things to come; much more now, when
this hope is become clearer, and self-denial is increased.

<span id="iii.XV-p121"></span>And observe too, after how many
commandments He hath put this, for surely He did it not without reason,
but to show that it is not possible for one unprovided, and unarmed with
all those other virtues, to go forth unto these conflicts. Therefore,
you see, in each instance, by the former precept making way for the
following one, He hath woven a sort of golden chain for us. Thus, first,
he that is “humble,” will surely also “mourn” for his own sins: he that
so “mourns,” will be both “meek,” and “righteous,” and “merciful;” he
that is “merciful,” and “righteous,” and “contrite” will of course be
also “pure in heart:” and such a one will be “a peacemaker” too: and he
that hath attained unto all these, will be moreover arrayed against
dangers, and will not be troubled when evil is spoken of him, and he is
enduring grievous trials innumerable.

<span id="iii.XV-p122"></span>10. Now then, after giving them due
exhortation, He refreshes them again with <span id="page_94">p.
94</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_94"></span> praises. As thus: the
injunctions being high, and far surpassing those in the Old Testament;
lest they should be disturbed and confounded, and say, “How shall we be
able to achieve these things?” hear what He saith: “Ye are the salt of
the earth.” <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) Implying, that of
absolute necessity He enjoins all this. For “not for your own life
apart,” saith He, “but for the whole world, shall your account be. For
not to two cities, nor to ten or twenty, nor to a single nation am I
sending you, as I sent the prophets; but to earth, and sea, and the
whole world; and that in evil case.” For by saying, “Ye are the salt of
the earth,” He signified all human nature to have “lost its
savor,” <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) and to be decayed by our
sins. For which cause, you see, He requires of them such virtues, as are
most necessary and useful for the superintendence of the common sort.
For first, the meek, and yielding, and merciful, and righteous, shuts
not up his good deeds unto himself only, but also provides that these
good fountains should run over for the benefit of others. And he again
who is pure in heart, and a peacemaker, and is persecuted for the
truth’s sake; he again orders his way of life for the common good.
“Think not then,” He saith, “that ye are drawn on to ordinary conflicts,
or that for some small matters you are to give account.” “Ye are the
salt of the earth.”

<span id="iii.XV-p125"></span>What then? did they restore the decayed?
By no means; for neither is it possible to do any good to that which is
already spoilt, by sprinkling it with salt. This therefore they did not.
But rather, what things had been before restored, and committed to their
charge, and freed from that ill savor, these they then salted,
maintaining and preserving them in that freshness, <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) which they had received of the Lord.
For that men should be set free from the rottenness of their sins was
the good work of Christ; but their not returning to it again any more
was the object of these men’s diligence and travail.

<span id="iii.XV-p127"></span>Seest thou how by degrees He indicates
their superiority to the very prophets? in that He saith they are
teachers, not of Palestine, but of the whole world; and not simply
teachers, but awful ones too. For this is the marvellous thing, that not
by flattering, nor soothing, but by sharply bracing <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) them, as salt, even so they became
dear to all men.

<span id="iii.XV-p129"></span>“Now marvel not,” saith He, “if leaving
all others, I discourse to you, and draw you on to so great dangers. For
consider over how many cities, tribes, and nations, I am to send you to
preside. Wherefore I would have you not only be prudent yourselves, but
that you should also make others the same. And such persons have great
need to be intelligent, in whom the salvation of the rest is at stake:
they ought so much to abound in virtue, as to impart of the profit to
others also. For if ye do not become such as this, ye will not suffice
even for your own selves.

<span id="iii.XV-p130"></span>“Be not then impatient, as though my
sayings were too burdensome. For while it is possible for others who
have lost their savor to return by your means, you, if you should come
to this, will with yourselves destroy others also. So that in proportion
as the matters are great, which ye have put into your hands, you need so
much the greater diligence.” Therefore He saith,

<span id="iii.XV-p131"></span>“But if the salt have lost its savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.” <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634)

<span id="iii.XV-p133"></span>For other men, though they fall never so
often, may possibly obtain indulgence: but the teacher, should this
happen to him, is deprived of all excuse, and will suffer the most
extreme vengeance. Thus, lest at the words, “When they shall revile you,
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you,” they should
be too timid to go forth: He tells them, “unless ye are prepared to
combat with all this, ye have been chosen in vain.” For it is not evil
report that ye should fear, but lest ye should prove partners in
dissimulation. <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) For then, “Ye
will lose your savor, and be trodden under foot:” but if ye continue
sharply to brace them up, and then are evil spoken of, rejoice; for this
is the very use of salt, to sting the corrupt, <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) and make them smart. And so their
censure follows of course, in no way harming you, but rather testifying
your firmness. But if through fear of it you give up the earnestness
that becomes you, ye will have to suffer much more grievously, being
both evil spoken of, and despised by all. For this is the meaning of
“trodden under foot.”

<span id="iii.XV-p136"></span>11. After this He leads on to another, a
higher image.

<span id="iii.XV-p137"></span>“Ye are the light of the world.” <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637)

<span id="iii.XV-p139"></span>“Of the world” again; not of one nation,
nor of twenty states, <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) but of the
whole inhabited earth. And “a light” to the mind, far better than this
sunbeam: like as they were also a spiritual *salt*. And before they are
*salt*, and now *light;* to teach thee how great <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_95"></span> is the gain of these
strict <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) precepts, and the profit
of that grave discipline: how it binds, and permits not to become
dissolute; and causes clear sight, leading men on to virtue.

<span id="iii.XV-p142"></span>“A city that is set on a hill cannot be
hid, neither do men light a candle, and put it under the bushel.” <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640)

<span id="iii.XV-p144"></span>Again, by these words He trains them to
strictness of life, teaching them to be earnest in their endeavors, as
set before the eyes of all men, and contending in the midst of the
amphitheatre of the world. For, “look not to this,” He saith, “that we
are now sitting here, that we are in a small portion of one corner. For
ye shall be as conspicuous to all as a city set on the ridge of a hill,
as a candle in a house on the candlestick, giving light.” <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641)

<span id="iii.XV-p146"></span>Where now are they who persevere in
disbelieving the power of Christ? Let them hear these things, and let
them adore His might, amazed at the power of the prophecy. For consider
how great things he promised to them, who were not known even in their
own country: that earth and sea should know them, and that they should
by their fame reach to the limits of the inhabited world; or rather, not
by their fame, but by the working of the good they wrought. For it was
not fame that bearing them everywhere made them conspicuous, but also
the actual demonstration by their works. Since, as though they had
wings, more vehemently than the sunbeam did they overrun the whole
earth, sowing the light of godliness. <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642)

<span id="iii.XV-p148"></span>But here He seems to me to be also
training them to boldness of speech. For to say, “A city set on a hill
cannot be hid,” is to speak as declaring His own powers. <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) For as that city can by no means be
hidden, so it was impossible that what they preached should sink into
silence and obscurity. Thus, since He had spoken of persecutions and
calumnies, of plots and wars, for fear they might think that these would
have power to stop their mouths; to encourage them, He saith, that so
far from being hid, it should over-shine the whole world; and that on
this very account they should be illustrious and renowned.

<span id="iii.XV-p150"></span>By this then He declares His own power. In
what follows, He requires that boldness of speech which was due on their
part; thus saying,

<span id="iii.XV-p151"></span>“Neither do men light a candle and put it
under the bushel, but on the candlestick, and it giveth light unto all
that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644)

<span id="iii.XV-p153"></span>“For I,” saith He, “it is true, have
kindled the light, but its continuing to burn, let that come of your
diligence: not for your own sakes alone, but also for their sake, who
are to profit by these rays, and to be guided unto the truth. Since the
calumnies surely shall not be able to obscure your brightness, if you be
still living a strict life, and as becomes those who are to convert the
whole world. Show forth therefore a life worthy of His grace; that even
as it is everywhere preached, so this light may everywhere accompany the
same.

<span id="iii.XV-p154"></span>Next He sets before them another sort of
gain, besides the salvation of mankind, enough to make them strive
earnestly, and to lead them unto all diligence. As thus, “Ye shall not
only,” saith He, “amend the world, if ye live aright, but ye will also
give occasion that God shall be glorified; even as if ye do the
contrary, ye will both destroy men, and make God’s name to be
blasphemed.”

<span id="iii.XV-p155"></span>And how, it may be asked, shall God be
glorified through us, if at least men are to speak evil of us? Nay, not
all men, and even they themselves who in envy do this, will in their
conscience admire and approve you; even as the outward flatterers of
such as live in wickedness do in mind accuse them.

<span id="iii.XV-p156"></span>What then? Dost thou command us to live
for display and vain glory? Far from it; I say not this; for I did not
say, “Give ye diligence to bring forward your own good deeds,” neither
did I say, “Show them;” but “Let your light shine.” That is, “Let your
virtue be great, and the fire abundant, and the light unspeakable.” For
when virtue is so great, it cannot lie hid, though its pursuer shade it
over ten thousand fold. Present unto them an irreprehensible life, and
let them have no true occasion of evil speaking; and then, though there
be thousands of evil-speakers, no man shall be able to cast any shade
upon you. And well did He say, “your light,” for nothing makes a man so
illustrious, how manifold soever his will to be concealed, as the
manifestation of virtue. For as if he were clad with the very sunbeam,
so he shines, yet brighter than it; not spending his rays on earth, but
surmounting also Heaven itself.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_96"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p157"></span>Hence also He comforts them more
abundantly. For, “What though the slander pain you,” saith He; “yet
shall ye have many to honor God on your account. And in both ways your
recompence is gathering, as well because God is glorified through you,
as because ye are defamed for God’s sake. Thus, lest we should on
purpose seek to be reproached, on hearing that there is a reward for it:
first, He hath not expressed that sentiment simply, but with two
limitations, namely, when what is said is false, and when it is for
God’s sake:—and next He signifies how not that only, but also good
report, hath its great profit, the glory of it passing on to God. And He
holds out to them those gracious hopes. “For,” saith He, “the calumny of
the wicked avails not so much as to put all others in the dark, in
respect of seeing your light. For then only when you have “lost your
savor” shall they tread you under foot; but not when you are falsely
accused, doing right. Yea, rather then shall there be many admiring, not
you only, but for your sake your Father also.” And He said not “God,”
but “your Father;” already sowing beforehand the seeds of that noble
birth, which was about to be bestowed upon them. Moreover, indicating
His parity in honor, as He said above, “Grieve not when ye are evil
spoken of, for it is enough for you that for my sake you are thus spoken
of;” so here He mentions the Father: every where manifesting His
equality.

<span id="iii.XV-p158"></span>12. Since then we know the gain that
arises from this earnestness, and the danger of indolence (for if our
Lord be blasphemed because of us, that were far worse than our
perdition), let us “give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.” <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) And while the life which we present
before them is brighter than the sun, yet if any one will speak evil of
us, let us not grieve at being defamed, but only if we be defamed with
justice.

<span id="iii.XV-p160"></span>For, on the one hand, if we live in
wickedness, though there be none to speak ill of us, we shall be the
most wretched of all men: on the other hand, if we apply ourselves to
virtue, though the whole world speak evil of us, at that very time we
shall be more enviable than any. And we shall draw on to follow us all
who choose to be saved, for not the calumny of the wicked, but our good
life, will draw their attention. For indeed no trumpet is so clear as
the proof that is given by our actions: neither is the light itself so
transparent as a pure life, though our calumniators be beyond number.

<span id="iii.XV-p161"></span>I say, if all the above-mentioned
qualities be ours; if we be meek and lowly and merciful; if we be pure,
and peacemakers; if hearing reproach, we revile not again, but rather
rejoice; then shall we attract all that observe us no less than the
miracles do. And all will be kindly disposed towards us, though one be a
wild beast, a demon, or what you will.

<span id="iii.XV-p162"></span>Or if there should even be some who speak
evil of thee, be not thou at all troubled thereat, nor because they
revile thee in public, regard it; but search into their conscience, and
thou shalt see them applauding and admiring thee, and numbering up ten
thousand praises.

<span id="iii.XV-p163"></span>See, for instance, how Nebuchadnezzar
praises the children in the furnace; yet surely he was an adversary and
an enemy. But upon seeing them stand nobly, he proclaims their triumph,
and crowns them: and that for nought else, but because they disobeyed
him, and hearkened unto the law of God. For the devil, when he sees
himself effecting nothing, from that time departs, fearing lest he
should be the cause of our winning more crowns. And when he is gone,
even one who is abominable and depraved will recognize virtue, that mist
being withdrawn. Or if men still argue perversely, thou shalt have from
God the greater praise and admiration.

<span id="iii.XV-p164"></span>Grieve not now, I pray thee, neither
despond; since the very apostles were to some a “savor of death;” <span
id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) to others, a “savor of life.” And if
there be nothing to lay hold of in thyself, thou art rid of all their
charges; or rather, thou art become the more blessed. Shine out
therefore in thy life, and take no account of them who speak evil of
thee. For it cannot, it cannot be, that one careful of virtue, should
not have many enemies. However, this is nothing to the virtuous man. For
by such means his brightness will increase the more abundantly.

<span id="iii.XV-p166"></span>Let us then, bearing these things in mind,
look to one object only; how to order our own life with strictness. For
thus we shall also guide to the life that is there, such as are now
sitting in darkness. For such is the virtue of that light, as not only
to shine here, but also to conduct its followers thither. For when men
see us despising all things present, and preparing ourselves for that
which is to come, our actions will persuade them sooner than any
discourse. For who is there so senseless, that at sight of one, who
within a day or two was living in luxury and wealth, now stripping
himself of all, and putting on wings, and arrayed to meet both hunger
and poverty, and all hardship, and dangers, and <span id="page_97">p.
97</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_97"></span> blood, and slaughter, and
everything that is counted dreadful; will not from this sight derive a
clear demonstration of the things which are to come?

<span id="iii.XV-p167"></span>But if we entangle ourselves in things
present, and plunge ourselves in them more and more, how will it be
possible for them to be persuaded that we are hastening to another
sojourn? <span id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647)

<span id="iii.XV-p169"></span>And what excuse after this shall we have,
if the fear of God avail not so much with us, as human glory availed
with the Greek philosophers? For some of them did really both lay aside
wealth, and despised death, that they might make a show before men;
wherefore also their hopes became vain. What plea then shall deliver us,
when with so great things set before us, and with so high a rule of
self-denial laid open to us, we are not able even to do as they did, but
ruin both ourselves and others besides? For neither is the harm so great
when a heathen commits transgression, as when a Christian doeth the
same. Of course not; for their character is already lost, but ours, by
reason of the grace of God, is even among the ungodly venerable and
glorious. Therefore when they would most revile us, and aggravate their
evil speech, they add some such taunt as, “Thou Christian:” a taunt
which they would not utter, did they not secretly entertain a great
opinion of our doctrine.

<span id="iii.XV-p170"></span>Hast thou not heard how many, and how
great precepts Christ enjoined? Now when wilt thou be able to fulfill
one of those commandments, while thou leavest all, and goest about
gathering interest, tacking together usuries, setting on foot
transactions of business, buying herds of slaves, procuring silver
vessels, purchasing houses, fields, goods without end? And I would this
were all. But when to these unseasonable pursuits, thou addest even
injustice, removing landmarks, <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648)
taking away houses by violence, aggravating poverty, increasing hunger,
when wilt thou be able to set thy foot on these thresholds?

<span id="iii.XV-p172"></span>13. But sometimes thou showest mercy to
the poor. I know it as well as thou. But even in this again great is the
mischief. For thou doest this either in pride or in vainglory, so as not
to profit even by thy good deeds. What can be more wretched than this,
to be making thy shipwreck in the very harbor? To prevent this, when
thou hast done any good action, seek not thanks from me, that thou
mayest have God thy debtor. For, “Lend,” saith He, “unto them from whom
ye do not expect to receive.” <span id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649)

<span id="iii.XV-p174"></span>Thou hast thy Debtor; why leave Him, and
require it of me, a poor and wretched mortal? What? is that Debtor
displeased, when the debt is required of Him? What? is He poor? Is He
unwilling to pay? Seest thou not His unspeakable treasures? Seest thou
not His indescribable munificence? Lay hold then on Him, and make thy
demand; for He is pleased when one thus demands the debt of Him.
Because, if He see another required to pay for what He Himself owes, He
will feel as though He were insulted, and repay thee no more; nay, He
justly finds fault, saying, “Why, of what ingratitude hast thou
convicted me? what poverty dost thou know to be in me, that thou
hastenest by me, and resortest unto others? Hast thou lent to One, and
dost thou demand the debt of another?”

<span id="iii.XV-p175"></span>For although man received it, it was God
that commanded thee to bestow; and His will is to be Himself, and in the
original sense, <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) debtor, and
surety, affording thee ten thousand occasion to demand the debt of Him
from every quarter. Do not thou then let go so great facility and
abundance, and seek to receive of me who have nothing. Why, to what end
dost thou display to me thy mercy shown to the poor. What! was it I that
said to thee, Give? was it from me that thou didst hear this; that thou
shouldest demand it back of me? He Himself hath said, “He that hath pity
upon the poor lendeth to God.” <span id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651)
Thou hast lent to God: <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652) put it to
His account.

<span id="iii.XV-p179"></span>“But He doth not repay the whole now.”
Well, this too He doth for thy good. For such a debtor is He: not as
many, who are anxious simply to repay that which is lent; whereas He
manages and doeth all things, with a view of investing likewise in
security that which hath been given unto Him. Therefore some, you see,
He repays here: some He assigns <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653)
in the other place.

<span id="iii.XV-p181"></span>14. Knowing therefore as we do these
things, let us make our mercifulness abundant, let us give proof of much
love to man, both by the use of our money, and by our actions. And if we
see any one ill-treated and beaten in the market-place, whether we can
pay down money, let us do it: or whether by words we may separate them,
let us not be backward. For even a word has its re <span id="page_98">p.
98</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_98"></span> ward, and still more have
sighs. And this the blessed Job said; “But I wept for every helpless
one, and I sighed when I saw a man in distress.” <span
id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) But if there be a reward for tears and
sighs; when words also, and an anxious endeavor, and many things besides
are added, consider how great the recompence becomes. Yea, for we too
were enemies to God, and the Only-begotten reconciled us, casting
himself between, and for us receiving stripes, and for us enduring
death.

<span id="iii.XV-p183"></span>Let us then likewise do our diligence to
deliver from countless evils such as are incurring them; and not as we
now do, when we see any beating and tearing one another: we are apt to
stand by, finding pleasure in the disgrace of others, and forming a
devilish amphitheatre around: than which what can be more cruel? Thou
seest men reviled, tearing each other to pieces, rending their clothes,
smiting each other’s faces, and dost thou endure to stand by quietly?

<span id="iii.XV-p184"></span>What! is it a bear that is fighting? a
wild beast? a serpent? It is a man, one who hath in every respect
fellowship with thee: a brother, a member. <span
id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) Look not on, but separate them. Take
no pleasure, but amend the evil. Stir not up others to the shameful
sight, but rather drive off and separate those who are assembled. It is
for shameless persons, and born slaves, <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) to take pleasure in such calamities;
for those that are mere refuse, for asses without reason.

<span id="iii.XV-p187"></span>Thou seest a man behaving himself
unseemly, and dost thou not account the unseemliness thine own? Dost
thou not interpose, and scatter the devil’s troop, and put an end to
men’s miseries?

<span id="iii.XV-p188"></span>“That I may receive blows myself,” saith
one; “is this also thy bidding?” Thou wilt not have to suffer even this;
but if thou shouldest, the thing would be to thee a sort of martyrdom;
for thou didst suffer on God’s behalf. And if thou art slow to receive
blows, consider that thy Lord was not slow to endure the cross for thee.

<span id="iii.XV-p189"></span>Since they for their part are drunken in
darkness; wrath being their tyrant and commander; and they need some one
who is sound to help them, both the wrong-doer, and he who is injured;
the one that he may be delivered from suffering evil, the other that he
may cease to do it. Draw nigh, therefore, and stretch forth the hand,
thou that art sober to him that is drunken. For there is a drunkenness
of wrath too, and that more grievous than the drunkenness of wine.

<span id="iii.XV-p190"></span>Seest thou not the seamen, how, when they
see any meeting with shipwreck, they spread their sails, and set out
with all haste, to rescue those of the same craft out of the waves? Now,
if partakers in an art show so much care one for another, how much more
ought they who are partakers of the same nature to do all these things!
Because in truth here too is a shipwreck, a more grievous one than that;
for either a man under provocation blasphemes, and so throws all away:
or he forswears himself under the sway of his wrath, and that way falls
into hell: or he strikes a blow and commits murder, and thus again
suffers the very same shipwreck. Go thou then, and put a stop to the
evil; pull out them that are drowning, though thou descend into the very
depth of the surge; and having broken up the theatre of the devil, take
each one of them apart, and admonish him to quell the flame, and to lull
the waves.

<span id="iii.XV-p191"></span>But if the burning pile wax greater, and
the furnace more grievous, be not thou terrified; for thou hast many to
help thee, and stretch forth the hand, if thou furnish but a beginning;
and above all thou surely hast with thee the God of peace. And if thou
wilt first turn aside the flames, many others also will follow, and of
what they do well, thou wilt thyself receive the reward.

<span id="iii.XV-p192"></span>Hear what precept Christ gave to the Jews,
creeping as they did upon the earth: “If thou see,” saith He, “thine
enemy’s beast of burden falling down, do not hasten by, but raise
it.” <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) And thou must see that to
separate and reconcile men that are fighting is a much lighter thing
than to lift up the fallen beast. And if we ought to help in raising our
enemies’ ass, much more our friends’ souls: and most when the fall is
more grievous; for not into mire do these fall, but into the fire of
hell, not bearing the burden of their wrath. And thou, when thou seest
thy brother lying under the load, and the devil standing by, and
kindling the pile, thou runnest by, cruelly and unmercifully; a kind of
thing not safe to do, even where brutes are concerned.

<span id="iii.XV-p194"></span>And whereas the Samaritan, seeing a
wounded man, unknown, and not at all appertaining to him, both staid,
and set him on a beast, and brought him home to the inn, and hired a
physician, and gave some money, and promised more: thou, seeing one
fallen not among thieves, but amongst a band of demons, and beset by
anger; and this not in a wilderness, but in the midst of the forum;
<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span id="iii.XV-Page_99"></span> not
having to lay out money, nor to hire a beast, nor to bring him on a long
way, but only to say some words:—art thou slow to do it? and holdest
back, and hurriest by cruelly and unmercifully? And how thinkest thou,
calling upon God, ever to find Him propitious?

<span id="iii.XV-p195"></span>15. But let me speak also to you, who
publicly disgrace yourselves: to him who is acting despitefully, and
doing wrong. Art thou inflicting blows? tell me; and kicking, and
biting? art thou become a wild boar, and a wild ass? and art thou not
ashamed? dost thou not blush at thus being changed into a wild beast,
and betraying thine own nobleness? For though thou be poor, thou art
free; though thou be a working man, thou art a Christian.

<span id="iii.XV-p196"></span>Nay, for this very reason, that thou art
poor, thou shouldest be quiet. For fightings belong to the rich, not to
the poor; to the rich, who have many causes to force them to war. But
thou, not having the pleasure of wealth, goest about gathering to
thyself the evils of wealth, enmities, and strifes, and fightings; and
takest thy brother by the throat, and goest about to strangle him, and
throwest him down publicly in the sight of all men: and dost thou not
think that thou art thyself rather disgraced, imitating the violent
passions of the brutes; nay rather, becoming even worse than they? For
they have all things in common; they herd one with another, and go about
together: but we have nothing in common, but all in confusion:
fightings, strifes, revilings, and enmities, and insults. And we neither
reverence the heaven, unto which we are called all of us in common; nor
the earth, which He hath left free to us all in common; nor our very
nature; but wrath and the love of money sweeps all away.

<span id="iii.XV-p197"></span>Hast thou not seen him who owed the ten
thousand talents, and then, after he was forgiven that debt, took his
fellow-servant by the throat for an hundred pence, what great evils he
underwent, and how he was delivered over to an endless punishment? Hast
thou not trembled at the example? Hast thou no fear, lest thou too incur
the same? For we likewise owe to our Lord many and great debts:
nevertheless, He forbears, and suffers long, and neither urges us, as we
do our fellow-servants, nor chokes and takes us by the throat; yet
surely had he been minded to exact of us but the least part thereof, we
had long ago perished.

<span id="iii.XV-p198"></span>16. Let us then, beloved, bearing these
things in mind, be humbled, and feel thankful to those who are in debt
to us. For they become to us, if we command ourselves, an occasion of
obtaining most abundant pardon; and giving a little, we shall receive
much. Why then exact with violence, it being meet, though the other were
minded to pay, for thee of thine accord to excuse him, that thou mayest
receive the whole of God? But now thou doest all things, and art
violent, and contentious, <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) to
have none of thy debts forgiven thee; and whilst thou art thinking to do
despite unto thy neighbor, thou art thrusting the sword into thyself, so
increasing thy punishment in hell: whereas if thou wilt show a little
self-command here, thou makest thine own accounts easy. For indeed God
therefore wills us to take the lead in that kind of bounty, that He may
take occasion to repay us with increase.

<span id="iii.XV-p200"></span>As many therefore as stand indebted to
thee, either for money, or for trespasses, let them all go free, and
require of God the recompense of such *thy* magnanimity. For so long as
they continue indebted to thee, thou canst not have God thy debtor. But
if thou let them go free, thou wilt be able to detain thy God, and to
require of Him the recompense of so great self-restraint in bountiful
measure. For suppose a man had come up and seeing thee arresting thy
debtor, had called upon thee to let him go free, and transfer to himself
thy account with the other: he would not choose to be unfair <span
id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) after such remission, seeing he had
passed the whole demand to himself: how then shall God fail to repay us
manifold, yea, ten thousand fold, when for His commandment’s sake, if
any be indebted to us, we urge no complaint against them, great or
small, but let them go exempt from all liability? Let us not then think
of the temporary pleasure that springs up in us by exacting of our
debtors, but of the loss, rather, how great! which we shall thereby
sustain hereafter, grievously injuring ourselves in the things which are
eternal. Rising accordingly above all, let us forgive those who must
give account to us, both their debts and their offenses; that we may
make our own accounts prove indulgent, and that what we could not reach
by all virtue besides, this we may obtain by not bearing malice against
our neighbors; and thus enjoy the eternal blessings, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
now and always, even forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_580"></span>[88:581](1100023.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iii.XV-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p5.1"></span>τν ν μσ θορβων</span>.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[88:582](1100023.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iii.XV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p7"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p7.2"></span>θρον</span>, “all at once.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_582"></span>[88:583](1100023.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iii.XV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p12.1"></span>δημδε</span>.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[88:584](1100023.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iii.XV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p13.1"></span>χμαι συρομνων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p13.2"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p13.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p13.4"></span>ἐ</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p13.5"></span>ρχομνων</span>.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[88:585](1100023.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iii.XV-p13.6"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p14"></span>[Luke vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)<span id="iii.XV-p14.1"></span>.
“And He lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said.” And [Luke
6.27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027)<span id="iii.XV-p14.2"></span>,
“I say unto you which hear.”

<span id="fn_585"></span>[88:586](1100023.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iii.XV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p17"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iii.XV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[89:587](1100023.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iii.XV-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p20"></span>[Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="iii.XV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[89:588](1100023.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iii.XV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p23"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p23.1"></span>ταπεινν</span>, <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XV-p23.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[89:589](1100023.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iii.XV-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p24"></span>[Isa. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span id="iii.XV-p24.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XV-p24.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[89:590](1100023.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iii.XV-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p25"></span>[Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="iii.XV-p25.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XV-p25.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[89:591](1100023.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iii.XV-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p26"></span>[Dan. iii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#039)<span id="iii.XV-p26.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XV-p26.2"></span>LXX</span>.; or <span
id="iii.XV-p26.3"></span>Song of the Three Holy Children, ver. 16.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[89:592](1100023.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iii.XV-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p28"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)<span id="iii.XV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[89:593](1100023.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iii.XV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p29"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p29.2"></span>ξετραχηλσθη</span>.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[89:594](1100023.htm#fr_593) <span
id="iii.XV-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p30"></span>[Gen. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022)<span id="iii.XV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[89:595](1100023.htm#fr_594) <span
id="iii.XV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p31"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p31.1"></span>πολιτευμενο</span>.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[89:596](1100023.htm#fr_595) <span
id="iii.XV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p33"></span>[Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="iii.XV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[89:597](1100023.htm#fr_596) <span
id="iii.XV-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p36"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p36.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p36.2"></span>διτη</span>.\]

<span id="fn_597"></span>[90:598](1100023.htm#fr_597) <span
id="iii.XV-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p39"></span>[Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="iii.XV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[90:599](1100023.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iii.XV-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p42"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="iii.XV-p42.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “*a repentance* which bringeth no regret,” in the margin, “unto
a salvation which bringeth no regret.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_599"></span>[90:600](1100023.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iii.XV-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p48"></span>Or, “the land.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[90:601](1100023.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iii.XV-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p49"></span>So St. Aug. *de Serm. Dom. in Monte*, lib.
i. c. 4; St. Jerome *in loc*.; Op. Imperf. *in loc*.; St. Hilar. *in
loc*.; Orig. *in Levit*., Hom. XV. 2, *et alibi*.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[90:602](1100023.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iii.XV-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p50.1"></span>νοητν</span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[90:603](1100023.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iii.XV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p51"></span>[Eph. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002)<span id="iii.XV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[90:604](1100023.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iii.XV-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p52"></span>[Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="iii.XV-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[90:605](1100023.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iii.XV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p55"></span>[Matt. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)<span id="iii.XV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[90:606](1100023.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iii.XV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p56"></span>[Matt. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)<span id="iii.XV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[90:607](1100023.htm#fr_606) <span
id="iii.XV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p57"></span>[Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="iii.XV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[90:608](1100023.htm#fr_607) <span
id="iii.XV-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p59"></span>[1 Cor.
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)<span id="iii.XV-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[91:609](1100023.htm#fr_608) <span
id="iii.XV-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p62"></span>[Ps. xxxvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011)<span id="iii.XV-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[91:610](1100023.htm#fr_609) <span
id="iii.XV-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p64"></span>[Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="iii.XV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[91:611](1100023.htm#fr_610) <span
id="iii.XV-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p65"></span>[Matt.
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029), [Mark
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030), [Luke
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#030)<span id="iii.XV-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[91:612](1100023.htm#fr_611) <span
id="iii.XV-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p67"></span>[Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="iii.XV-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[91:613](1100023.htm#fr_612) <span
id="iii.XV-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p69"></span>See Aristot. *Eth. Nic*. v. 2.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[91:614](1100023.htm#fr_613) <span
id="iii.XV-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p73"></span>Not that St. Chrysostom limited this or any
of the Gospel promises to a temporal sense. See below, sec. 7.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[91:615](1100023.htm#fr_614) <span
id="iii.XV-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p75"></span>[Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="iii.XV-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[91:616](1100023.htm#fr_615) <span
id="iii.XV-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p79"></span>[Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="iii.XV-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[91:617](1100023.htm#fr_616) <span
id="iii.XV-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p81"></span>[Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="iii.XV-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[91:618](1100023.htm#fr_617) <span
id="iii.XV-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p83"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p83.1"></span>φιλοτιμα</span>. The term in later Greek means
“munificence,” and is so rendered below, in sec. 13.—R.\]

<span id="fn_618"></span>[91:619](1100023.htm#fr_618) <span
id="iii.XV-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p84"></span>[2 Cor. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005)<span id="iii.XV-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[91:620](1100023.htm#fr_619) <span
id="iii.XV-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p86"></span>[Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="iii.XV-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[92:621](1100023.htm#fr_620) <span
id="iii.XV-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p93"></span>[Matt. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span id="iii.XV-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[92:622](1100023.htm#fr_621) <span
id="iii.XV-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p95"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p95.1"></span>προστασα</span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[92:623](1100023.htm#fr_622) <span
id="iii.XV-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p97"></span>[Matt.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)<span id="iii.XV-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[92:624](1100023.htm#fr_623) <span
id="iii.XV-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p106"></span>[1 Thess.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015)<span id="iii.XV-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[93:625](1100023.htm#fr_624) <span
id="iii.XV-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p111"></span>See [Luke
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#026)<span id="iii.XV-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[93:626](1100023.htm#fr_625) <span
id="iii.XV-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p113"></span>[Luke
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023)<span id="iii.XV-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[93:627](1100023.htm#fr_626) <span
id="iii.XV-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p114"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p114.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p114.2"></span>λεφεσθκι</span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[93:628](1100023.htm#fr_627) <span
id="iii.XV-p114.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p115"></span>\[Literally, “then was disturbed, then was
troubled, that noble and great man.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_628"></span>[93:629](1100023.htm#fr_628) <span
id="iii.XV-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p117"></span>[2 Sam.
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#012)<span id="iii.XV-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[93:630](1100023.htm#fr_629) <span
id="iii.XV-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p119"></span>[Heb.
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#033)<span id="iii.XV-p119.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “in which, after ye were enlightened, ye endured a great
conflict of sufferings; partly, being made a gazing-stock both by
reproaches and afflictions.” The text of the Homily omits “both.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_630"></span>[94:631](1100023.htm#fr_630) <span
id="iii.XV-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p123"></span>[Matt. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="iii.XV-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[94:632](1100023.htm#fr_631) <span
id="iii.XV-p123.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p124"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p124.1"></span>μωραι</span>?e<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p124.2"></span>ῖ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p124.3"></span>σαν</span>.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[94:633](1100023.htm#fr_632) <span
id="iii.XV-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p126"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p126.1"></span>νεαρτητι</span>.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[94:634](1100023.htm#fr_633) <span
id="iii.XV-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p128"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p128.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p128.2"></span>πιστφοντε</span>, used of astringents.—R.\]

<span id="fn_634"></span>[94:635](1100023.htm#fr_634) <span
id="iii.XV-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p132"></span>[Matt. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="iii.XV-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[94:636](1100023.htm#fr_635) <span
id="iii.XV-p133.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p134"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p134.1"></span>συνυποκρινομνου</span>, cf. [Gal. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)<span id="iii.XV-p134.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[94:637](1100023.htm#fr_636) <span
id="iii.XV-p134.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p135"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p135.1"></span>χανου</span>.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[94:638](1100023.htm#fr_637) <span
id="iii.XV-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p138"></span>[Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iii.XV-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[94:639](1100023.htm#fr_638) <span
id="iii.XV-p139.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p140"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p140.1"></span>πλεων</span>.\]

<span id="fn_639"></span>[95:640](1100023.htm#fr_639) <span
id="iii.XV-p140.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p141"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p141.1"></span>κατεστυμμνων</span> .

<span id="fn_640"></span>[95:641](1100023.htm#fr_640) <span
id="iii.XV-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p143"></span>[Matt.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="iii.XV-p143.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “lamp.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_641"></span>[95:642](1100023.htm#fr_641) <span
id="iii.XV-p144.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p145"></span>\[“as a lamp in a house, giving light
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XV-p145.1"></span>φαυων</span>) on
the lampstand.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_642"></span>[95:643](1100023.htm#fr_642) <span
id="iii.XV-p146.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p147"></span>*Lumine conserit arva, Lucr*.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[95:644](1100023.htm#fr_643) <span
id="iii.XV-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p149"></span>\[Or, “is spoken of manifesting His
power.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_644"></span>[95:645](1100023.htm#fr_644) <span
id="iii.XV-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p152"></span>[Matt.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iii.XV-p152.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Neither do men light a lamp, and put it under the bushel, but
on the stand; and it shineth unto all that are in the house. Even so let
your light shine,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_645"></span>[96:646](1100023.htm#fr_645) <span
id="iii.XV-p158.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p159"></span>[1 Cor. x.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032)<span id="iii.XV-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[96:647](1100023.htm#fr_646) <span
id="iii.XV-p164.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p165"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)<span id="iii.XV-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[97:648](1100023.htm#fr_647) <span
id="iii.XV-p167.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p168"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p168.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p168.2"></span>ποδημαν</span>.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[97:649](1100023.htm#fr_648) <span
id="iii.XV-p170.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p171"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p171.1"></span>γν ποτεμνμενο</span>. There is no reference to
the Old Testament phrase in the original, which simply means “cutting
off land for one’s self,” *i.e*., to appropriate it wrongfully.—R.\]

<span id="fn_649"></span>[97:650](1100023.htm#fr_649) <span
id="iii.XV-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p173"></span>\[Comp. [Luke vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#034)<span id="iii.XV-p173.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_650"></span>[97:651](1100023.htm#fr_650) <span
id="iii.XV-p175.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p176"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p176.1"></span>πρωττυπο</span>, *archetypal*: the word seems
to imply the symbolical use to be made of all visible things and their
relations: as here, the relation of debtor and creditor is a sort of
token of God’s mercy, in binding Himself to do us good.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[97:652](1100023.htm#fr_651) <span
id="iii.XV-p176.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p177"></span>[Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span id="iii.XV-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[97:653](1100023.htm#fr_652) <span
id="iii.XV-p177.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p178"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p178.1"></span>ατ περθε</span>.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[97:654](1100023.htm#fr_653) <span
id="iii.XV-p179.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p180"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p180.1"></span>ταμιεεται</span> .

<span id="fn_654"></span>[98:655](1100023.htm#fr_654) <span
id="iii.XV-p181.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p182"></span>[Job xxx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)<span id="iii.XV-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[98:656](1100023.htm#fr_655) <span
id="iii.XV-p184.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p185"></span>[Eph. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)<span id="iii.XV-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[98:657](1100023.htm#fr_656) <span
id="iii.XV-p185.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p186"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p186.1"></span>οκοτρβων</span>.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[98:658](1100023.htm#fr_657) <span
id="iii.XV-p192.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p193"></span>[Exod.
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#005), [Deut.
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#004)<span id="iii.XV-p193.1"></span>.
\[The citation is made very freely from the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XV-p193.2"></span>LXX</span>. The former passage was probably in
the mind of the preacher.—R.\]

<span id="fn_658"></span>[99:659](1100023.htm#fr_658) <span
id="iii.XV-p198.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p199"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p199.1"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p199.2"></span>στε</span>.\]

<span id="fn_659"></span>[99:660](1100023.htm#fr_659) <span
id="iii.XV-p200.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XV-p201"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p201.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XV-p201.2"></span>γνωμονεν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVI](1100024)
