[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100087)  [Next](1100089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXX"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXX-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXVI.
51-54](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#051)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p3"></span>“And, behold, one of them which were with
Jesus stretched forth his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant
of the high priest’s, and smote off his ear.”

<span id="iii.LXXX-p4"></span>*Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again
thy sword unto his place, for all they that take the sword, shall perish
by the sword. Thinkest* <span id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996) *thou
that I cannot pray to the Father, and He shall presently* <span
id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) *give me more than twelve legions
of angels? How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must
be?”* <span id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p8"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXX-p8.1"></span>Who</span> was this “one,” who cut off the
ear? John saith that it was Peter. <span
id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999) For the act was of his fervor.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p10"></span>But this other point is worth inquiry,
wherefore they were bearing swords? For that they bore them is evident
not hence only, but from their saying when asked, “here are two.” But
wherefore did Christ even permit them to have swords? For Luke affirms
this too, that He said unto them, “When I sent you without purse, and
scrip, and shoes, lacked ye anything?” And when they said, “Nothing,” He
said unto them, “But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and a
scrip, and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy
one.” And when they said, “Here are two swords,” He said unto them, “It
is enough.” <span id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p12"></span>Wherefore then did He suffer them to have
them? To assure them that He was to be betrayed. Therefore He saith unto
them, “Let him buy a sword,” not that they should <span id="page_483">p.
483</span> <span id="iii.LXXX-Page_483"></span> arm themselves, far from
it; but by this, indicating His being betrayed.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p13"></span>And wherefore doth He mention a scrip
also? He was teaching them henceforth to be sober, and wakeful, and to
use much diligence on their own part. For at the beginning He cherished
them (as being inexperienced) with much putting forth of His power but
afterwards bringing them forth as young birds out of the nest, He
commands them to use their own wings. Then, that they might not suppose
that it was for weakness He is letting them alone, in commanding them
also to work their part, He reminds them of the former things, saying,
“When I sent you without purse, lacked ye anything?” that by both they
might learn His power, both wherein He protected them, and wherein He
now leaveth them to themselves by degrees.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p14"></span>But whence were the swords there? They
were come forth from the supper, and from the table. It was likely also
there should be swords because of the lamb, and that the disciples,
hearing that certain were coming forth against Him, took them for
defense, as meaning to fight in behalf of their Master, which was of
their thought only. Wherefore also Peter is rebuked for using it, and
with a severe threat. For he was resisting the servant who came, warmly
indeed, yet not defending himself, but doing this in behalf of his
Master.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p15"></span>Christ however suffered not any harm to
ensue. For He healed him, and showed forth a great miracle, enough to
indicate at once both His forbearance and His power, and the affection
and meekness of His disciple. For then he acted from affection, now with
dutifulness. For when he heard, “Put up thy sword into its
sheath,” <span id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001) he obeyed
straightway, and afterwards nowhere doeth this.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p17"></span>But another saith, that they moreover
asked, “Shall we smite?” <span id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002) but
that He forbad it, and healed the man, and rebuked His disciple, and
threatened, that He might move him to obedience. “For all they that take
the sword,” He said, “shall die with the sword.”

<span id="iii.LXXX-p19"></span>And he adds a reason, saying, “Think ye
that I cannot pray to my Father, and He shall presently give me more
than twelve legions of angels? But that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled.” <span id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) By these words He
quenched their anger, indicating that to the Scriptures also, this
seemed good. Wherefore there too He prayed, that they might take meekly
what befell Him, when they had learnt that this again is done according
to God’s will.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p21"></span>And by these two things, He comforted
them, both by the punishment of them that are plotting against Him, “For
all they,” He saith, “that take the sword shall perish with the sword;”
and by His not undergoing these things against His will, “For I can
pray,” He saith, “to my Father.”

<span id="iii.LXXX-p22"></span>And wherefore did He not say, “Think ye
that I cannot destroy them all?” Because He was more likely to be
believed in saying what He did say; for not yet had they the right
belief concerning Him. And a little while before He had said, “My soul
is exceeding sorrowful even unto death,” and, “Father, let the cup pass
from me;” <span id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) and He had appeared
in an agony and sweating, and strengthened by an angel.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p24"></span>Since then He had shown forth many tokens
of human nature, He did not seem likely to speak so as to be believed,
if He had said, “Think ye that I cannot destroy them.” Therefore He
saith, “What, think ye that I cannot pray to my Father?” And again He
speaks it humbly, in saying, “He will presently give me twelve legions
of angels.” For if one angel slew one hundred and eighty-five armed
thousands, <span id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) what need of
twelve legions against a thousand men? But He frames His language with a
view to their terror and weakness, for indeed they were dead with fear.
Wherefore also He brings against them the Scriptures, saying, “How then
shall the Scriptures be fulfilled?” alarming them by this also. For if
this be approved by the Scriptures, do ye oppose and fight against them?

<span id="iii.LXXX-p26"></span>2. And to His disciples He saith these
things; but to the others, “Are ye come out as against a thief with
swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily teaching in the temple,
and ye laid no hold on me.” <span id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p28"></span>See how many things He doeth that might
awaken them. He cast them to the ground, He healed the servant’s ear, He
threatened them with being slain; “For they shall perish with the
sword,” He saith, “who take the sword.” By the healing of the ear, He
gave assurance of these things also; from every quarter, both from the
things present, and from the things to come, manifesting His power, and
showing that it was not a work of their strength to seize Him. Wherefore
He also adds, “I was daily with you, and sat teaching, and ye laid no
hold on me;” by this also making it manifest, that the seizure <span
id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span id="iii.LXXX-Page_484"></span> was of
His permission. He passed over the miracles, and mentions the teaching,
that He might not seem to boast.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p29"></span>When I taught, ye laid no hold on me;
when I held my peace, did ye come against me? I was in the temple, and
no one seized me, and now do ye come upon me late and at midnight with
swords and staves? What need was there of these weapons against Him, who
was with you always? by these things teaching them, that unless He had
voluntarily yielded, not even then would they have succeeded. For
neither could they (who were not able to hold Him when in their hands,
and who, when they had got Him in the midst of them, had not prevailed)
even then have succeeded, unless He had been willing.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p30"></span>After this, He solves also the difficulty
why He willed it then. For, “this was done,” He saith, “that the
Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.” <span
id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) See how even up to the last hour,
and in the very act of being betrayed, He did all things for their
amendment, healing, prophesying, threatening. “For,” He saith, “they
shall perish by the sword.” To show that He is suffering voluntarily, He
saith, “I was daily with you teaching;” to manifest His accordance with
the Father, He adds, “That the Scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled.”

<span id="iii.LXXX-p32"></span>But wherefore did they not lay hold on
Him in the temple? Because they would not have dared in the temple, on
account of the people. Wherefore also He went forth without, both by the
place and by the time giving them security, and even to the last hour
taking away their excuse. For He who, in order that He might obey the
prophets, gave up even Himself, how did He teach things contrary to
them?

<span id="iii.LXXX-p33"></span>“Then all His disciples,” it is said,
“forsook Him, and fled.” For when He was seized, they remained; but when
He had said these things to the multitudes, they fled. For thenceforth
they saw that escape was no longer possible, when He was giving Himself
up to them voluntarily, and saying, that this was done according to the
Scriptures.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p34"></span>And when these were fled, “they lead Him
away to Caiaphas; but Peter followed, and entered in to see what the end
should be.” <span id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p36"></span>Great was the fervor of the disciple;
neither did he fly when he saw them flying, but stood his ground, and
went in with Him. And if John did so too, yet he was “known to the high
priest.” <span id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p38"></span>And why did they lead Him away there
where they were all assembled? That they might do all things with
consent of the chief priests. For he was then high priest, and all were
waiting for Christ there, to such a degree did they spend the whole
night, and give up their sleep for this object. For neither did they
then eat the passover, but watched for this other purpose. For John,
when he had said that “it was early,” added, “they entered into the
judgment hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the
passover.” <span id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p40"></span>What must we say then? That they ate it
on another day, and broke the law, on account of their eager desire
about this murder. For Christ would not have transgressed as to the time
of the passover, but they who were daring all things, and trampling
under foot a thousand laws. For since they were exceedingly boiling with
rage, and having often attempted to seize Him, had not been able; having
then taken Him unexpectedly, they chose even to pass by the passover,
for the sake of satiating their murderous lust.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p41"></span>Wherefore also they were all assembled
together, and it was a council of pestilent men, <span
id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) and they ask some questions,
wishing to invest this plot with the appearance of a court of justice.
For “neither did their testimonies agree together;” <span
id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012) so feigned was the court of
justice, and all things full of confusion and disorder.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p44"></span>“But false witnesses came, and said, This
fellow said, I will destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise
it.” <span id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) And indeed He had said,
“In three days,” but He said not, “I will destroy,” but, “Destroy,” and
not about that temple but about His own body. <span
id="fr_3014"></span>[3015](#fn_3014)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p47"></span>What then doth the high priest? Willing
to press Him to a defense, that by that he might take Him, he saith,
“Hearest Thou not what these witness against Thee? But He held His
peace.” <span id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p49"></span>For the attempts at defense were
unprofitable, no man hearing. For this was a show only of a court of
justice, but in truth an onset of robbers, assailing Him without cause,
as in a cave, or on a road.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p50"></span>Wherefore “He held His peace,” but the
other continued, saying, “I adjure Thee by the living God, that Thou
tell us whether Thou be the Christ, the Son of the living God. <span
id="page_485">p. 485</span> <span id="iii.LXXX-Page_485"></span> But He
said, Thou hast said. Nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye
see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken
blasphemy.” <span id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) And this he did
to add force to the accusation, and to aggravate what He said, by the
act. For since what had been said moved the hearers to fear, what they
did about Stephen, <span id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017) stopping
their ears, this high priest doth here also.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p53"></span>3. And yet what kind of blasphemy was
this? For indeed before He had said, when they were gathered together,
“The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand,” <span
id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) and interpreted the saying, and
they dared say nothing, but held their peace, and from that time forth
gainsaid Him no more. Why then did they now call the saying a blasphemy?
And wherefore also did Christ thus answer them? To take away all their
excuse, because unto the last day He taught that He was Christ, and that
He sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and that He will come again
to judge the world, which was the language of one manifesting His full
accordance with the Father.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p55"></span>Having rent therefore his clothes, he
saith, “What think ye?” <span id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) He
gives not the sentence from himself, but invites it from them, as in a
case of confessed sins, and manifest blasphemy. For, inasmuch as they
knew that if the thing came to be inquired into, and carefully decided,
it would free Him from all blame, they condemn Him amongst themselves,
and anticipate the hearers by saying, “Ye have heard the blasphemy;” all
but necessitating and forcing them to deliver the sentence. What then
say they? “He is guilty of death;” that having taken Him as condemned,
they should thus work upon Pilate thereupon to pass sentence. In which
matter those others also being accomplices say, “He is guilty of death;”
themselves accusing, themselves judging, themselves passing sentence,
themselves being everything then.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p57"></span>But wherefore did they not bring forward
the Sabbaths? Because He had often stopped their mouths; and moreover
they wanted to take Him, and condemn Him by the things then said. And
*the high priest* anticipated them, and gave the sentence as from them,
and drew them all on by rending his vestments, and having led Him away
as now condemned unto Pilate, thus did all.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p58"></span>Before Pilate at any rate they said
nothing of this kind, but what? “If <span
id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) this Man were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered Him up unto thee;” attempting to put Him to
death by political accusations. And wherefore did they not slay Him
secretly? They were desirous also to bring up an evil report against His
fame. For since many had now heard Him, and were admiring Him, and
amazed at Him, therefore they endeavored that He should be put to death
publicly, and in the presence of all.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p60"></span>But Christ hindered it not, but made full
use of their wickedness for the establishment of the truth, so that His
death should be manifest. And the result was the contrary to what they
wished. For they wished to make a show of it, as in this way disgracing
Him, but He even by these very things shone forth the more. And much as
they said, “Let us put Him to death, lest the Romans come and take away
our place and nation;” <span id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) and
after they had put Him to death, this came to pass; so also here; their
object was to crucify Him publicly, that they might injure His fame, and
the contrary result took place.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p62"></span>For in proof that indeed they had power
to have put Him to death, even amongst themselves, hear what Pilate
saith: “Take ye Him, and judge Him according to your law.” <span
id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022) But they would not, that He might
seem to have been put to death as a transgressor, as an usurper, as a
mover of sedition. Therefore also they crucified thieves with Him;
therefore also they said, “Write not that this man is King of the Jews;
but that He said it.” <span id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023)

<span id="iii.LXXX-p65"></span>But all these things are done for the
truth, so that they might not have so much as any shadow of a defense
that is surely shameless. And at the sepulchre too, in the like manner,
the seals and the watches made the truth to be the more conspicuous; and
the mockings, and the jeerings, and the revilings, wrought again this
self-same effect.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p66"></span>For such is the nature of error: it is
destroyed by those things whereby it plots; thus at least it fell out
even here, for they that seemed to have conquered, these most of all
were put to shame, and defeated, and ruined; but He that seemed to be
defeated, this man above all hath both shone forth, and conquered
mightily.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p67"></span>Let us not then everywhere seek victory,
nor everywhere shun defeat. There is an occasion when victory brings
hurt, but defeat <span id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span
id="iii.LXXX-Page_486"></span> profit. For, for instance, in the case of
them that are angry; he that hath been very outrageous seems to have
prevailed; but this man above all is the one subdued and hurt by the
most grievous passion; but he that hath endured nobly, this man hath got
the better and conquered. And while the one hath not had strength to
overcome so much as his own disease; the other hath removed another
man’s; this hath been subdued by his own, that hath got the better even
of another’s passion; and so far from being burnt up, he quenched the
flame of another when raised to a height. But if he had minded to gain
what seems to be victory, both he himself would have been overcome; and
having inflamed the other, he would have occasioned him to have suffered
this more grievously; and, like women, both the one and the other would
have been disgracefully and miserably overthrown by their anger. But now
he that hath exercised self-control is both freed from this disgrace,
and hath erected a glorious trophy over anger both in himself and in his
neighbor, through his honorable defeat.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p68"></span>4. Let us not then everywhere seek
victory. For he that hath overreached hath conquered the person wronged,
but with an evil victory, and one that brings destruction to him that
has won it; but he that is wronged, and seems to have been conquered, if
he have borne it with self-command, this above all is the one that hath
the crown. For often to be defeated is better, and this is the best mode
of victory. For whether one overreaches, or smites, or envies, he that
is defeated, and enters not into the conflict, this is he who hath the
victory.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p69"></span>And why do I speak of overreaching and
envy? For he also that is dragged to martyrdom, thus conquers by being
bound, and beaten, and maimed, and slain. And what is in wars defeat,
namely, for the combatant to fall; this with us is victory. For nowhere
do we overcome by doing wrongfully, but everywhere by suffering
wrongfully. Thus also doth the victory become more glorious, when we
sufferers get the better of the doers. Hereby it is shown that the
victory is of God. For indeed it hath an opposite nature to outward
conquest, which fact is again above all an infallible sign of strength.
Thus also the rocks in the sea, by being struck, break the waves; thus
also all the saints were proclaimed, and crowned, and set up their
glorious trophies, winning this tranquil victory. “For stir not
thyself,” He saith, “neither weary thyself. God hath given thee this
might, to conquer not by conflict, but by endurance alone. Do not oppose
thyself also as he does, and thou hast conquered; conflict not, and thou
hast gained the crown. <span id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) Why
dost thou disgrace thyself? Allow him not to say that by conflicting
thou hast got the better, but suffer him to be amazed and to marvel at
thy invincible power; and to say to all, that even without entering into
conflict thou hast conquered.”

<span id="iii.LXXX-p71"></span>Thus also the blessed Joseph obtained a
good report, everywhere by suffering wrong getting the better of them
who were doing it. For his brethren and the Egyptian woman were amongst
those that were plotting against him, but over all did this man prevail.
For tell me not of the prison, wherein this man dwelt, nor of the kings’
courts where she abode, but show me who it is that is conquered, who it
is that is defeated, who that is in despondency, who that is in
pleasure. For she, so far from being able to prevail over the righteous
man, could not master so much as her own passion; but this man prevailed
both over her and over that grievous disease. But if thou wilt, hear her
very words, and thou shalt see the trophy. “Thou broughtest in unto us
here an Hebrew servant to mock us.” <span
id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025) It was not this man that mocked
thee, O wretched and unhappy woman, but the devil that told thee that
thou couldest break down the adamant. This *thy husband* brought not in
unto thee an Hebrew servant to plot against thee, but the wicked spirit
brought in that unclean lasciviousness; he it was that mocked thee.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p73"></span>What then did Joseph? He held his peace,
and thus is condemned, even as Christ is also.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p74"></span>For all those things are types of these.
And he indeed was in bonds, and she in royal courts. Yet what is this?
For he was more glorious than any crowned victor, even while continuing
in his bonds, but she was in a more wretched condition than any
prisoner, while abiding in royal chambers.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p75"></span>But not hence alone may one see the
victory, and the defeat, but by the end itself. For which accomplished
his desired object? The prisoner, not the high born lady? For he strove
to keep his chastity, but she to destroy it. Which then accomplished
what he desired? he who suffered wrong, or she who did the wrong. It is
quite plain, that it is he who suffered. Surely then this is the one who
hath conquered.

<span id="iii.LXXX-p76"></span>Knowing then these things, let us follow
after this victory, which is obtained by suffering wrong, let us flee
from that which is got <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="iii.LXXX-Page_487"></span> by doing wrong. For so shall we both live
this present life in all tranquility, and great quietness, and shall
attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might world without end.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[482:2997](1100088.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p5"></span>\[R.V., “Or thinkest.”\]

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[482:2998](1100088.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p6"></span>\[R.V., “even now.”\]

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[482:2999](1100088.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p7"></span>\[The citation is very accurate; the only
variation is the omission of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXX-p7.1"></span>μου</span> after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXX-p7.2"></span>πατρα</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[482:3000](1100088.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p9"></span>[John xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010)<span id="iii.LXXX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[482:3001](1100088.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p11"></span>[Luke xxii.
35-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p11.1"></span>. \[On the renderings of [Luke
22.36](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#036)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p11.2"></span>, see R.V. The text of the Homily admits of
either interpretation, but the comment favors the rendering given in the
text of the R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[483:3002](1100088.htm#fr_3001) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p16"></span>[John xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)<span id="iii.LXXX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[483:3003](1100088.htm#fr_3002) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p18"></span>[Luke xxii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#049)<span id="iii.LXXX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[483:3004](1100088.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p20"></span>[Matt.
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053),
[54](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#054)<span id="iii.LXXX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[483:3005](1100088.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p23"></span>[Matt.
26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iii.LXXX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[483:3006](1100088.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p25"></span>[2 Kings xix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="iii.LXXX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[483:3007](1100088.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p27"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
55](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#055)<span id="iii.LXXX-p27.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “robber”…“ to seize me”…“ye took me not.”\]

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[484:3008](1100088.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p31"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056)<span id="iii.LXXX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[484:3009](1100088.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p35"></span>[Matt.
26:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#057),
[58](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#058)<span id="iii.LXXX-p35.1"></span>.
\[Abridged and altered.\]

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[484:3010](1100088.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p37"></span>[John xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXXX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[484:3011](1100088.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p39"></span>[John xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXXX-p39.1"></span>.
\[Compare Homily LXXVI. 1, and the note there.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[484:3012](1100088.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXX-p42.1"></span>συνδριον λοιμν</span>; cf. [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="iii.LXXX-p42.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[484:3013](1100088.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p43"></span>[Mark
14:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#056),
[59](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#059)<span id="iii.LXXX-p43.1"></span>.
\[The passages are combined.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[484:3014](1100088.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p45"></span>[Matt.
26:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060),
[61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#061)<span id="iii.LXXX-p45.1"></span>.
\[The citation is very free, not agreeing with any one of the
evangelists, according to our authorities; but it seems to combine terms
from several passages.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3014"></span>[484:3015](1100088.htm#fr_3014) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p46"></span>See [John ii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[484:3016](1100088.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p48"></span>[Matt.
26:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#062),
[63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063)<span id="iii.LXXX-p48.1"></span>.
\[Freely cited; the beginning is from the language of Pilate; [Matt.
27.13.](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#013)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p48.2"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[485:3017](1100088.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p51"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
63-65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p51.1"></span>. \[In [Matt.
26.63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p51.2"></span>, “the living God” occurs twice, peculiar to
this Homily: in [Matt. 26.64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p51.3"></span>“of heaven” is omitted. In other details the
citation agrees with the received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[485:3018](1100088.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p51.4"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p52"></span>[Acts vii.
59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)<span id="iii.LXXX-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[485:3019](1100088.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p54"></span>[Matt. xxii.
43-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)<span
id="iii.LXXX-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[485:3020](1100088.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p56"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066)<span id="iii.LXXX-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[485:3021](1100088.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p59"></span>[John xviii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXXX-p59.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “an evil-doer.”\]

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[485:3022](1100088.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p61"></span>[John xi.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)<span id="iii.LXXX-p61.1"></span>.
\[Freely paraphrased.\]

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[485:3023](1100088.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p63"></span>[John xviii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#031)<span id="iii.LXXX-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[485:3024](1100088.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p64"></span>[John xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXXX-p64.1"></span>.
\[The citation is accurate; “it” is supplied by the translator to
complete the sense.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[486:3025](1100088.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p70"></span>\[The following clause is omitted in the
translation: “Much better and stronger art thou than thine
antagonist.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[486:3026](1100088.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="iii.LXXX-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXX-p72"></span>[Gen. xxxix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#017)<span id="iii.LXXX-p72.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXXI](1100089)
