[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100053)  [Next](1100055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLVI"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p1.1"></span>Homily XLVI.</span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XIII.
24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)<span
id="iii.XLVI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p3"></span>*“Another parable put He forth unto them,
saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good
seed in his field. But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares
among the wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and
brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares. So the servants of the
householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in
thy field? whence then hath it tares? He said unto them, An enemy hath
done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and
gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye
root up also the wheat with them. Let both therefore grow together until
the harvest.”* <span id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p5.1"></span>What</span> is the difference between this,
and the parable before it? There He speaks of them that have not at all
holden with Him, but have started aside, and have thrown away the seed;
but here He means the societies of the heretics. For in order that not
even this might disturb His disciples, He foretells it <span
id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span id="iii.XLVI-Page_281"></span> also,
after having taught them why He speaks in parables. The former parable
then means their not receiving Him; this, their receiving corrupters.
For indeed this also is a part of the devil’s craft, by the side of the
truth always to bring in error, painting thereon many resemblances, so
as easily to cheat the deceivable. Therefore He calls it not any other
seed, but tares; which in appearance are somewhat like wheat.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p6"></span>Then He mentions also the manner of his
device. For “while men slept,” saith He. It is no small danger, which He
hereby suspends over our rulers, to whom especially is entrusted the
keeping of the field; and not the rulers only, but the subjects too.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p7"></span>And He signifies also that the error comes
after the truth, which the actual event testifies. For so after the
prophets, were the false prophets; and after the apostles, the false
apostles; and after Christ, Antichrist. For unless the devil see what to
imitate, or against whom to plot, he neither attempts, nor knows how.
Now then also, having seen that “one brought forth a hundred, another
sixty, another thirty,” he proceeds after that another way. That is, not
having been able to carry away what had taken root, nor to choke, nor to
scorch it up, he conspires against it by another craft, privily casting
in his own inventions.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p8"></span>And what difference is there, one may say,
between them that sleep, and them that resemble the wayside? That in the
latter case he immediately caught it away; yea, he suffered it not even
to take root; but here more of his craft was needed.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p9"></span>And these things Christ saith, instructing
us to be always wakeful. For, saith He, though thou quite escape those
harms, there is yet another harm. For as in those instances “the
wayside,” and “the rock,” and “the thorns,” so here again sleep
occasions our ruin; so that there is need of continual watchfulness.
Wherefore He also said, “He that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved.” <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p11"></span>Something like this took place even at
the beginning. Many of the prelates, I mean, bringing into the churches
wicked men, disguised heresiarchs, gave great facility to the laying
that kind of snare. For the devil needs not even to take any trouble,
when he hath once planted them among us.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p12"></span>And how is it possible not to sleep? one
may say. Indeed, as to natural sleep, it is not possible; but as to that
of our moral faculty, it is possible. Wherefore Paul also said, “Watch
ye, stand fast in the faith.” <span id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p14"></span>After this He points out the thing to be
superfluous too, not hurtful only; in that, after the land hath been
tilled, and there is no need of anything, then this enemy sows again; as
the heretics also do, who for no other cause than vainglory inject their
proper venom.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p15"></span>And not by this only, but by what follows
likewise, He depicts exactly all their acting. For, “When the blade was
sprung up,” saith He, “and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares
also;” which kind of thing these men also do. For at the beginning they
disguise themselves; but when they have gained much confidence, and some
one imparts to them the teaching of the word, then they pour out their
poison.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p16"></span>But wherefore doth He bring in the
servants, telling what hath been done? That He may pronounce it wrong to
slay them.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p17"></span>And He calls him “an enemy,” because of
his harm done to men. For although the despite is against us, in its
origin it sprang from his enmity, not to us, but to God. Whence it is
manifest, that God loves us more than we love ourselves.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p18"></span>And see from another thing also, the
malicious craft of the devil. For he did not sow before this, because he
had nothing to destroy, but when all had been fulfilled, that he might
defeat the diligence of the Husbandman; in such enmity against Him did
he constantly act.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p19"></span>And mark also the affection of the
servants. I mean, what haste they are in at once to root up the tares,
even though they do it indiscreetly; which shows their anxiety for the
crop, and that they are looking to one thing only, not to the punishment
of that enemy, but to the preservation of the seed sown. For of course
this other is not the urgent consideration.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p20"></span>Wherefore how they may for the present
extirpate the mischief, this is their object. And not even this do they
seek absolutely, for they trust not themselves with it, but await the
Master’s decision, saying, “Wilt Thou?”

<span id="iii.XLVI-p21"></span>What then doth the Master? He forbids
them, saying, “Lest haply ye root up the wheat with them.” And this He
said, to hinder wars from arising, and blood and slaughter. For it is
not right to put a heretic to death, since an implacable war would be
brought into the world. By these two reasons then He restrains them;
one, that the wheat be not hurt; another, that punishment will surely
overtake them, if incurably diseased. Wherefore, if thou wouldest have
them punished, yet without harm to the wheat, I bid thee wait for the
proper season.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span id="iii.XLVI-Page_282"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p22"></span>But what means, “Lest ye root up the
wheat with them?” Either He means this, If ye are to take up arms, and
to kill the heretics, many of the saints also must needs be overthrown
with them; or that of the very tares it is likely that many may change
and become wheat. If therefore ye root them up beforehand, ye injure
that which is to become wheat, slaying some, in whom there is yet room
for change and improvement. He doth not therefore forbid our checking
heretics, and stopping their mouths, and taking away their freedom of
speech, and breaking up their assemblies and confederacies, but our
killing and slaying them.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p23"></span>But mark thou His gentleness, how He not
only gives sentence and forbids, but sets down reasons.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p24"></span>What then, if the tares should remain
until the end? “Then I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first
the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them.” <span
id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810) He again reminds them of John’s
words, <span id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811) introducing Him as
judge; and He saith, So long as they stand by the wheat, we must spare
them, for it is possible for them even to become wheat but when they
have departed, having profited nothing, then of necessity the inexorable
punishment will overtake them. “For I will say to the reapers,” saith
He, “Gather ye together first the tares.” Why, “first?” That these may
not be alarmed, as though the wheat were carried off with them. “And
bind them in bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into my
barn.” <span id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p28"></span>2. “Another parable put He forth unto
them, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a grain of mustard
seed.” <span id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p30"></span>That is, since He had said, that of the
crop three parts are lost, and but one saved, and in the very part again
which is saved so great damage ensues; lest they should say, “And who,
and how many will be the faithful?” this fear again He removes, by the
parable of the mustard seed leading them on to belief, and signifying
that in any case the gospel <span id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814)
shall be spread abroad.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p32"></span>Therefore He brought forward the
similitude of this herb, which has a very strong resemblance to the
subject in hand; “Which indeed is the least,” He saith, “of all seeds,
but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a
tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches
thereof.” <span id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p34"></span>Thus He meant to set forth the most
decisive sign of its greatness. “Even so then shall it be with respect
to the gospel too,” saith He. Yea, for His disciples were weakest of
all, and least of all; but nevertheless, because of the great power that
was in them, It hath been unfolded <span
id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816) in every part of the world.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p36"></span>After this He adds the leaven to this
similitude, saying,

<span id="iii.XLVI-p37"></span>“The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto
leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, until the
whole was leavened.” <span id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p39"></span>For as this converts the large quantity
of meal into its own quality, <span id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818)
even so shall ye convert the whole world.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p41"></span>And see His wisdom, in that He brings in
things natural, implying that as the one cannot fail to take place, so
neither the other. For say not this to me: “What shall we be able to do,
twelve men, throwing ourselves upon so vast a multitude?” Nay, for this
very thing most of all makes your might conspicuous, that ye mix with
the multitude and are not put to flight. As therefore the leaven then
leavens the lump when it comes close to the meal, and not simply close,
but so as to be actually mixed with it (for He said not, “put,” simply,
but “hid”); so also ye, when ye cleave to your enemies, and are made one
with them, then shall ye get the better of them. And as the leaven,
though it be buried, yet is not destroyed, but by little and little
transmutes all into its own condition; of like sort will the event be
here also, with respect to the gospel. Fear ye not then, because I said
there would be much injurious dealing: for even so shall ye shine forth,
and get the better of all.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p42"></span>But by “three measures,” here, He meant
many, for He is wont to take this number for a multitude.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p43"></span>And marvel not, if discoursing about the
kingdom, He made mention of a little seed and of leaven; for He was
discoursing with men inexperienced and ignorant, and such as needed to
be led on by those means. For so simple were they, that even after all
this, they required a good deal of explanation.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p44"></span>Where now are the children of the Greeks?
Let them learn Christ’s power, seeing the verity of His deeds, and on
either ground let them adore Him, that He both foretold so great a
thing, and fulfilled it. Yea, for it is He that put the power into the
leaven. With <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="iii.XLVI-Page_283"></span> this intent He mingled also with the
multitude those who believe on Him, that we might impart unto the rest
of our wisdom. Let no one therefore reprove us for being few. For great
is the power of the gospel, and that which hath been once leavened,
becomes leaven again for what remains. And as a spark, when it hath
caught in timber, makes what hath been burnt up already increase the
flame, and so proceeds to the rest; even so the gospel likewise. But He
said not fire, but “leaven.” Why might this be? Because in that case the
whole effect is not of the fire, but partly of the timber too that is
kindled, but in this the leaven doth the whole work by itself.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p45"></span>3. Now if twelve men leavened the whole
world, imagine how great our baseness, in that when we being so many are
not able to amend them that remain; we, who ought to be enough for ten
thousand worlds, and to become leaven to them. “But they,” one may say,
“were apostles.” And what then? Were they not partakers with thee? Were
they not brought up in cities? Did they not enjoy the same benefits? Did
they not practise trades? What, were they angels? What, came they down
from Heaven?

<span id="iii.XLVI-p46"></span>“But they had signs,” it will be said. It
was not the signs that made them admirable. How long shall we use those
miracles as cloaks for our own remissness? *Behold the choir of the
Saints, that they shone not by those miracles*. <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) Why, many who had actually cast out
devils, because they wrought iniquity, instead of being admired, did
even incur punishment.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p48"></span>And what can it be then, he will say,
that showed them great? Their contempt of wealth, their despising glory,
their freedom from worldly things. Since surely, had they wanted these
qualities, and been slaves of their passions, though they had raised ten
thousand dead, so far from doing any good, they would even have been
accounted deceivers. Thus it is their life, so bright on all sides,
which also draws down the grace of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p49"></span>What manner of miracle did John work,
that he fixed on himself the attention <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) of so many cities? For as to the
fact that he did no wondrous works, hear the evangelist, saying, “John
did no miracle.” <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821) And whence
did Elias become admirable? Was it not from his boldness towards the
king? from his zeal towards God? from his voluntary poverty? from his
garment of sheep’s skin, and his cave, and his mountains? For his
miracles he did after all these. And as to Job, what manner of miracle
did he work in sight of the devil, that he was amazed at him? No miracle
indeed, but a life that shone and displayed an endurance firmer than any
adamant. What manner of miracle did David, yet being young, that God
should say, “I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own
heart?” <span id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) And Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, what dead body did they raise? what leper did they
cleanse? Knowest thou not that the miracles, except we be sober, do even
harm in many cases? Thus many of the Corinthians were severed one from
another; thus many of the Romans were carried away with pride; thus was
Simon cast out. Thus he, who at a certain time had a desire to follow
Christ, was rejected, when he had been told, “The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air nests.” <span id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823)
For each of these, one aiming at the wealth, another at the glory, which
the miracles bring, fell away and perished. But care of practice, and
love of virtue, so far from generating such a desire, doth even take it
away when it exists.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p54"></span>And Himself too, when He was making laws
for His own disciples, what said He? “Do miracles, that men may see
you”? By no means. But what? “Let your light shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven.” <span id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824) And to Peter again
He said not, “If thou lovest me,” “do miracles,” but “feed my
sheep.” <span id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825) And whereas He
everywhere distinguishes him with James and John above all the rest, for
what, I pray thee, did He distinguish them? For their miracles? Nay, all
alike cleansed the lepers, and raised the dead; and to all alike He gave
that authority.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p57"></span>Whence then had these the advantage? From
the virtue in their soul. Seest thou how everywhere practice is
required, and the proof by works? “For by their fruits,” saith He, “ye
shall know them.” <span id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826) And what
commends our own life? Is it indeed a display of miracles, or the
perfection of an excellent conversation? Very evidently it is the
second; but as to the miracles, they both have their origin from hence,
and terminate herein. For both he that shows forth an excellent life,
draws to himself this gift, and he that receives the gift, receives it
for this end, that he may amend other men’s lives. <span
id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span id="iii.XLVI-Page_284"></span> Since
even Christ for this end wrought those miracles, that having made
Himself thereby credible, and drawn men unto Him, He might bring virtue
into our life. Wherefore also He lays more stress of the two on this.
For He is not at all satisfied with the signs only, but He also
threatens hell, and promises a kingdom, and lays down those startling
laws, and all things He orders to this end, that He may make us equal to
the angels.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p59"></span>And why say I, that Christ doth all for
this object? Why, even thou, should one give thee thy choice, to raise
dead men by His name, or to die for His name; which I pray thee, of the
two wouldest thou rather accept? Is it not quite plain, the latter? and
yet the one is a miracle, the other but a work. And what, if one offered
thee to make grass gold, or to be able to despise all wealth as grass,
wouldest thou not rather accept this latter? and very reasonably. For
mankind would be attracted by this more than any way. For if they saw
the grass changed into gold, they would covet themselves also to acquire
that power, as Simon did, and the love of money would be increased in
them; but if they saw us all contemning and neglecting gold, as though
it were grass, they would long ago have been delivered from this
disease.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p60"></span>4. Seest thou that our practice has more
power to do good? By practice I mean, not thy fasting, nor yet thy
strewing sackcloth and ashes under thee, but if thou despise wealth, as
it ought to be despised; if thou be kindly affectioned, if thou give thy
bread to the hungry, if thou control anger, if thou cast out vainglory,
if thou put away envy. So He Himself used to teach: for, “Learn of me,”
saith He, “for I am meek and lowly in heart.” <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) He did not say, “for I fasted,”
although surely He might have spoken of the forty days, yet He saith not
this; but, “I am meek and lowly in heart.” And again, when sending them
out, He said not, “Fast,” but, “Eat of all that is set before
you.” <span id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828) With regard to wealth,
however, He required of them great strictness, saying, “Provide not
gold, or silver, or brass, in your purses.” <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829)

<span id="iii.XLVI-p64"></span>And all this I say, not to depreciate
fasting, God forbid, but rather highly to commend it. But I grieve when
other duties being neglected, ye think it enough for salvation, having
but the last place in the choir of virtue. For the greatest thing is
charity, and moderation, and almsgiving; which hits a higher mark even
than virginity.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p65"></span>Wherefore, if thou desire to become equal
to the apostles, there is nothing to hinder thee. For to have arrived at
this virtue only suffices for thy not at all falling short of them. Let
no one therefore wait for miracles. <span
id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830) For though the evil spirit is
grieved, when he is driven out of a body, yet much more so, when he sees
a soul delivered from sin. For indeed this is his great power. <span
id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831) This power caused Christ to die,
that He might put an end to it. Yea, for this brought in death; by
reason of this all things have been turned upside down. If then thou
remove this, thou hast cut out the nerves of the devil, thou hast
“bruised his head,” thou hast put an end to all his might, thou hast
scattered his host, thou hast exhibited a sign greater than all signs.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p68"></span>The saying is not mine, but the blessed
Paul’s. For when he had said, “Covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet
show I unto you a more excellent way;” <span
id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832) hhe did not speak next of a sign,
but of charity, the root of all our good things. If then we practise
this, and all the self-denial that flows from it, we shall have no need
of signs; even as on the other hand, if we do not practise it, we shall
gain nothing by the signs.

<span id="iii.XLVI-p70"></span>Bearing in mind then all this, let us
imitate those things whereby the apostles became great. And whereby did
they become great? Hear Peter, saying, “Behold we have forsaken all, and
followed Thee; what shall we have therefore?” <span
id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833) Hear also Christ saying to them,
“Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones,” and, “every one that hath forsaken
houses, or brethren, or father, or mother, shall receive an hundredfold
in this world, and shall inherit everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834) From all worldly things, therefore,
let us withdraw ourselves, and dedicate ourselves to Christ, that we may
both be made equal to the apostles according to His declaration, and may
enjoy eternal life; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ to whom be glory and might forever
and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[280:1808](1100054.htm#fr_1807) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p4"></span>\[The citation agrees exactly with the
Received text; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p4.1"></span>ον</span> is however inserted in verse 30,
against nearly all our New Testament authorities. In several minor
variations the text differs from that of Tischendorf and other recent
editors.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[281:1809](1100054.htm#fr_1808) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p10"></span>[Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="iii.XLVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[281:1810](1100054.htm#fr_1809) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p13"></span>[1 Cor. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)<span id="iii.XLVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[282:1811](1100054.htm#fr_1810) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p25"></span>[Matt. xiii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)<span id="iii.XLVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[282:1812](1100054.htm#fr_1811) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p26"></span>[Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="iii.XLVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[282:1813](1100054.htm#fr_1812) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p27"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p27.1"></span>μου</span> is omitted from the text of the
Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[282:1814](1100054.htm#fr_1813) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p29"></span>\[[Matt. xiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)<span id="iii.XLVI-p29.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “set he before them,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[282:1815](1100054.htm#fr_1814) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p31"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p31.1"></span>κρυγμα</span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[282:1816](1100054.htm#fr_1815) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p33"></span>[Matt.
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032)<span id="iii.XLVI-p33.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “is less than all,” “is greater than.”\]

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[282:1817](1100054.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p35"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p35.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p35.2"></span>ξηπλθη</span>.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[282:1818](1100054.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p38"></span>[Matt. xiii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033)<span id="iii.XLVI-p38.1"></span>.
\[<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLVI-p38.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLVI-p38.3"></span>ἔ</span></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLVI-p38.4"></span>κρυψεν</span> (see [Luke
xiii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#021)<span
id="iii.XLVI-p38.5"></span>) is the reading here, and in the comment.
Our best New Testament <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p38.6"></span>mss</span>. read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p38.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p38.8"></span>νκρυψεν</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[282:1819](1100054.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p40.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p40.2"></span>σχν</span>.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[283:1820](1100054.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p47"></span>This sentence is printed in italics, as
not appearing in many of the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p47.1"></span>mss</span>. It is evidently a marginal note
by some copyist. \[It is not found in any of the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p47.2"></span>mss</span>. collated by Field, and was
bracketed as doubtful by earlier editors.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[283:1821](1100054.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p50.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p50.2"></span>νηρτσατο</span>.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[283:1822](1100054.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p51"></span>[John x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#041)<span id="iii.XLVI-p51.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “sign,” and so elsewhere in this edition of the Homilies. The
same term (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p51.2"></span>σημεον</span>) occurs frequently in the
present context, and is uniformly rendered “miracle.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[283:1823](1100054.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p52"></span>[Acts xiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022)<span id="iii.XLVI-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[283:1824](1100054.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p53"></span>[Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="iii.XLVI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[283:1825](1100054.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p55"></span>[Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iii.XLVI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[283:1826](1100054.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p56"></span>[John xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016)<span id="iii.XLVI-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[283:1827](1100054.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p58"></span>[Matt. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span id="iii.XLVI-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[284:1828](1100054.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p61"></span>[Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="iii.XLVI-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[284:1829](1100054.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p62"></span>[Luke
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#008), [1 Cor.
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027)<span
id="iii.XLVI-p62.1"></span>. \[The two passages are combined.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[284:1830](1100054.htm#fr_1829) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p63"></span>[Matt. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLVI-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[284:1831](1100054.htm#fr_1830) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p66"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p66.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLVI-p66.2"></span>ναβαλλσθω ε σημεα</span>.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[284:1832](1100054.htm#fr_1831) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p66.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p67"></span>[Acts viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#010)<span id="iii.XLVI-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[284:1833](1100054.htm#fr_1832) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p69"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="iii.XLVI-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[284:1834](1100054.htm#fr_1833) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p71"></span>[Matt. xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027)<span id="iii.XLVI-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[284:1835](1100054.htm#fr_1834) <span
id="iii.XLVI-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLVI-p72"></span>[Matt.
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029), [Mark
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030), [Luke
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#030)<span id="iii.XLVI-p72.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLVII](1100055)
