[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100026)  [Next](1100028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XIX"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XIX-p1.1"></span>Homily XIX.</span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XIX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. VI.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.XIX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p3"></span>*“Take heed that ye do not your alms* <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) *before men, to be seen of them.”*

<span id="iii.XIX-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XIX-p5.1"></span>He</span> roots out in what remains the most
tyrannical passion of all, the rage and madness with respect to
vainglory, which springs up in them that do right. For at first He had
not at all discoursed about it; it being indeed superfluous, before He
had persuaded them to do any of the things which they ought, to teach in
which way they should practise and pursue them.

<span id="iii.XIX-p6"></span>But after He had led them on to
self-command, then He proceeds to purge away also the alloy which
secretly subsists with it. For this disease is by no means of random
birth; but when we have duly performed many of the commandments.

<span id="iii.XIX-p7"></span>It behooved therefore first to implant
virtue, and then to remove the passion which mars its fruit.

<span id="iii.XIX-p8"></span>And see with what He begins, with fasting,
and prayer, and almsgiving: for in these good deeds most especially it
is wont to make its haunt. The Pharisee, for instance, was hereby puffed
up, who saith, “I fast twice a week, I give tithes of my
substance.” <span id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) And he was
vainglorious too in his very prayer, making it for display. For since
there was no one else present, he pointed himself out to the
publican, <span id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) saying, “I am not as
the rest of men, nor even as this publican.” <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817)

<span id="iii.XIX-p12"></span>And mark how Christ began, as though He
were speaking of some wild beast, hard to catch, and crafty to deceive
him who was not very watchful. Thus, “take heed,” saith He, “as to your
alms.” So Paul also speaks to the Philippians; “Beware of dogs.” <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) And with reason, for <span
id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) the evil beast comes in upon us
secretly, and without noise puffs all away, and unobservedly carries out
all that is within.

<span id="iii.XIX-p15"></span>Forasmuch then as He had made much
discourse about almsgiving, and brought forward God, “Who maketh His sun
to rise on the evil and the good,” <span
id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) and *by motives* from all quarters had
urged them on to this, and had persuaded them to exult in the abundance
of their giving; He finishes by taking away also all things that
encumber this fair olive tree. For which same cause He saith, “Take heed
that ye do not your alms before men,” for that which was before
mentioned, is “God’s” almsgiving.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_128"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p17"></span>2. And when He had said, “not to do it
before men,” He added, “to be seen of them.” And though it seems as if
the same thing were said a second time, yet if any one give particular
attention, it is not the same thing, but one is different from the
other; and it hath great security, and unspeakable care and tenderness.
For it may be, both that one doing alms before men may not do it to be
seen of them, and again that one not doing it before men may do it to be
seen of them. Wherefore it is not simply the thing, but the intent,
which He both punishes and rewards. And unless such exactness were
employed, this would make many more backward about the giving of alms,
because it is not on every occasion altogether possible to do it
secretly. For this cause, setting thee free from this restraint, He
defines both the penalty and the reward not by the result of the action,
but by the intention of the doer.

<span id="iii.XIX-p18"></span>That is, that thou mayest not say, “What?
am I then the worse, should another see?”—“it is not this,” saith He,
“that I am seeking, but the mind that is in thee, and the tone of what
thou doest.” For His will is to bring our soul altogether into frame,
and to deliver it from every disease. Now having, as you see, forbidden
men’s acting for display, and having taught them the penalty thence
ensuing, namely, to do it vainly, and for nought, He again rouses their
spirits by putting them in mind of the Father, and of Heaven, that not
by the loss alone He might sting them, but also shame them by the
recollection of Him who gave them being.

<span id="iii.XIX-p19"></span>“For ye have no reward,” saith He, “with
your Father which is in Heaven.” <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821)

<span id="iii.XIX-p21"></span>Nor even at this did He stop, but proceeds
yet further, by other motives also increasing their disgust. For as
above He set forth publicans and heathens, by the quality of the person
shaming their imitators, so also in this place the hypocrites.

<span id="iii.XIX-p22"></span>“Therefore when thou doest thine alms,”
saith He, “do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites
do.” <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822)

<span id="iii.XIX-p24"></span>Not that they had trumpets, but He means
to display the greatness of their frenzy, by the use of this figure of
speech, deriding and making a show <span
id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) of them hereby.

<span id="iii.XIX-p26"></span>And well hath He called them “hypocrites”
for the mask was of mercy, but the spirit of cruelty and inhumanity. For
they do it, not because they pity their neighbors, but that they
themselves may enjoy credit; and this came of the utmost cruelty; while
another was perishing with hunger, to be seeking vainglory, and not
putting an end to his suffering.

<span id="iii.XIX-p27"></span>It is not then the giving alms which is
required, but the giving as one ought, the giving for such and such an
end. <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824)

<span id="iii.XIX-p29"></span>Having then amply derided those men, and
having handled them so, that the hearer should be even ashamed of them,
He again corrects thoroughly the mind which is so distempered: and
having said how we ought not to act, He signifies on the other hand how
we ought to act. How then ought we to do our alms? <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825)

<span id="iii.XIX-p31"></span>“Let not thy left hand know,” saith He,
“what thy right hand doeth.” <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826)

<span id="iii.XIX-p33"></span>Here again His enigmatical meaning is not
of the hands, but He hath put the thing hyperbolically. As thus: “If it
can be,” saith He, “for thyself not to know it, let this be the object
of thine endeavor; that, if it were possible, it may be concealed from
the very hands that minister.” It is not, as some say, that we should
hide it from wrong-headed <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) men,
for He hath here commanded that it should be concealed from all.

<span id="iii.XIX-p35"></span>And then the reward too; consider how
great it is. For after He had spoken of the punishment from the one, He
points out also the honor derived from the other; from either side
urging them, and leading them on to high lessons. Yea, for He is
persuading them to know that God is everywhere present, and that not by
our present life are our interests limited, but a yet more awful
tribunal will receive us when we go hence, and the account of all our
doings, and honors, and punishments: and that no one will be hid in
doing anything either great or small, though he seem to be hid from men.
For all this did He darkly signify, when He said,

<span id="iii.XIX-p36"></span>“Thy Father which seeth in secret shall
reward thee openly.” <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828)

<span id="iii.XIX-p38"></span>Setting for him a great and august
assemblage of spectators, and what He desires, that very thing bestowing
on him in great abundance. “For what,” saith He, “dost thou wish? is it
not to have some to be spectators of what is going on? Behold then, thou
hast some; not angels, nor archangels, but the God of all.” And if thou
desire to have men also as spectators, neither of this desire doth He
deprive thee at the fitting season, but rather in greater abundance
affords it <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iii.XIX-Page_129"></span> unto thee. For, if thou shouldest now make
a display, thou wilt be able to make it to ten only, or twenty, or (we
will say) a hundred persons: but if thou take pains to lie hid now, God
Himself will then proclaim thee in the presence of the whole universe.
Wherefore above all, if thou wilt have men see thy good deeds, hide them
now, that then all may look on them with the more honor, God making them
manifest, and extolling them, and proclaiming them before all. Again,
whereas now they that behold will rather condemn thee as vainglorious;
when they see thee crowned, so far from condemning, they will even
admire thee, all of them. When therefore by waiting a little, thou
mayest both receive a reward, and reap greater admiration; consider what
folly it is to cast thyself out of both these; and while thou art
seeking thy reward from God, and while God is beholding, to summon men
for the display of what is going on. Why, if display must be made of our
love, to our Father above all should we make it; and this most
especially, when our Father hath the power both to crown and to punish.

<span id="iii.XIX-p39"></span>And let me add, even were there no
penalty, it were not meet for him who desires glory, to let go this our
theatre, and take in exchange that of men. For who is there so wretched,
as that when the king was hastening to come and see his achievements, he
would let him go, and make up his assembly of spectators of poor men and
beggars? For this cause then, He not only commands to make no display,
but even to take pains to be concealed: it not being at all the same,
not to strive for publicity, and to strive for concealment.

<span id="iii.XIX-p40"></span>3. “And when ye pray,” saith He, “ye shall
not be as the hypocrites, for they love to pray standing in the
synagogues, and in the corners of the streets. Verily I say unto you,
they have their reward.” <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)

<span id="iii.XIX-p42"></span>“But thou, when thou prayest, enter into
thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which
is in secret.” <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830)

<span id="iii.XIX-p44"></span>These too again He calls “hypocrites,” and
very fitly; for while they are feigning to pray to God, they are looking
round after men; wearing the garb not of suppliants, but of ridiculous
persons. For he, who is to do a suppliant’s office, letting go all
other, looks to him alone, who hath power to grant his request. But if
thou leave this one, and go about wandering and casting around thine
eyes everywhere, thou wilt depart with empty hands. For this was thine
own will. Wherefore He said not, “such shall not receive a reward,” but,
“they have it out:” that is, they shall indeed receive one, but from
those of whom they themselves desire to have it. For God wills not this:
He rather for His part was willing to bestow on men the recompence that
comes from Himself; but they seeking that which is from men, can be no
longer justly entitled to receive from Him, for whom they have done
nothing.

<span id="iii.XIX-p45"></span>But mark, I pray thee, the lovingkindness
of God, in that He promises to bestow on us a reward, even for those
good things which we ask of Him.

<span id="iii.XIX-p46"></span>Having then discredited them, who order
not this duty as they ought, both from the place and from their
disposition of mind, and having shown that they are very ridiculous: He
introduces the best manner of prayer, and again gives the reward,
saying, “Enter into thy closet.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p47"></span>“What then,” it may be said, “ought we not
to pray in church?” Indeed we ought by all means, but in such a spirit
as this. Because everywhere God seeks the intention of all that is done.
Since even if thou shouldest enter into thy closet, and having shut the
door, shouldest do it for display, the doors will do thee no good.

<span id="iii.XIX-p48"></span>It is worth observing in this case also,
how exact the definition, which He made when He said, “That they may
appear unto men.” So that even if thou shut the doors, this He desires
thee duly to perform, rather than the shutting of the doors, even to
shut the doors of the mind. For as in everything it is good to be freed
from vainglory, so most especially in prayer. For if even without this,
we wander and are distracted, when shall we attend unto the things which
we are saying, should we enter in having this disease also? And if we
who pray and beseech attend not, how do we expect God to attend?

<span id="iii.XIX-p49"></span>4. But yet some there are, who after such
and so earnest charges, behave themselves so unseemly in prayer, that
even when their person is concealed, they make themselves manifest to
all by their voice, crying out disorderly, <span
id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) and rendering themselves objects of
ridicule both by gesture and voice. Seest thou not that even in a market
place, should any one come up doing like this, and begging clamorously,
he wilt drive away him whom he is petitioning; but if quietly, and with
the proper gesture, then he rather wins over him that can grant the
favor?

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_130"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p51"></span>Let us not then make our prayer by the
gesture of our body, nor by the loudness of our voice, but by the
earnestness of our mind: neither with noise and clamor and for display,
so as even to disturb those that are near us, but with all
modesty, <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) and with contrition in
the mind, and with inward tears.

<span id="iii.XIX-p53"></span>But art thou pained in mind, and canst not
help crying aloud? yet surely it is the part of one exceedingly pained
to pray and entreat even as I have said. Since Moses too was pained, and
prayed in this way and was heard; for this cause also God said unto him,
“Wherefore criest thou unto me.” <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)
And Hannah too again, her voice not being heard, accomplished all she
wished, forasmuch as her heart cried out. <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) But Abel prayed not only when silent,
but even when dying, and his blood sent forth a cry more clear than a
trumpet. <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835)

<span id="iii.XIX-p57"></span>Do thou also then groan, even as that holy
one, I forbid it not. “Rend,” as the prophet commanded, <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) “thine heart, and not thy garments.”
Out of deeps call upon God, for it is said, “Out of the depths have I
cried to Thee, O Lord.” <span id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) From
beneath, out of the heart, draw forth a voice, make thy prayer a
mystery. Seest thou not that even in the houses of kings all tumult is
put away, and great on all sides is the silence? Do thou also therefore,
entering as into a palace,—not that on the earth, but what is far more
awful than it, that which is in heaven,—show forth great seemliness.
Yea, for thou art joined to the choirs of angels, and art in communion
with archangels, and art singing with the seraphim. And all these tribes
show forth much goodly order, singing with great awe that mystical
strain, and their sacred hymns to God, the King of all. With these then
mingle thyself, when thou art praying, and emulate their mystical order.

<span id="iii.XIX-p60"></span>For not unto men art thou praying, but to
God, who is everywhere present, who hears even before the voice, who
knows the secrets of the mind. If thou so pray, great is the reward thou
shalt receive.

<span id="iii.XIX-p61"></span>“For thy Father,” saith He, “who seeth in
secret, shall reward thee openly.” <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838)

<span id="iii.XIX-p63"></span>He said not, “shall freely give thee,”
but, “shall reward thee;” yea, for He hath made Himself a debtor to
thee, and even from this hath honored thee with great honor. For because
He Himself is invisible, He would have thy prayer be so likewise.

<span id="iii.XIX-p64"></span>5. Then He speaks even the very words of
the prayer.

<span id="iii.XIX-p65"></span>“When ye pray,” saith He, “use no vain
repetitions, even as the heathen do.” <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839)

<span id="iii.XIX-p67"></span>You see that when He was discoursing of
almsgiving, He removed only that mischief which comes of vainglory, and
added nothing more; neither did He say whence one should give alms; as
from honest labor, and not from rapine nor covetousness: this being
abundantly acknowledged among all. And also before that, He had
thoroughly cleared up this point, when He blessed them “that hunger
after righteousness.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p68"></span>But touching prayer, He adds somewhat over
and above; “not to use vain repetitions.” And as there He derides the
hypocrites, so here the heathen; shaming the hearer everywhere most of
all by the vileness of the persons. For since this, in most cases, is
especially biting and stinging, I mean our appearing to be likened to
outcast persons; by this topic He dissuades them; calling frivolousness,
here, by the name of “vain repetition:” as when we ask of God things
unsuitable, kingdoms, and glory, and to get the better of enemies, and
abundance of wealth, and in general what does not at all concern us.

<span id="iii.XIX-p69"></span>“For He knoweth,” saith He, “what things
ye have need of.” <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840)

<span id="iii.XIX-p71"></span>And herewith He seems to me to command in
this place, that neither should we make our prayers long; long, I mean,
not in time, but in the number and length of the things mentioned. For
perseverance indeed in the same requests is our duty: His word being,
“continuing instant in prayer.” <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)

<span id="iii.XIX-p73"></span>And He Himself too, by that example of the
widow, who prevailed with the pitiless and cruel ruler, by the
continuance of her intercession; <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842)
and by that of the friend, who came late at night time, and roused the
sleeper from his bed, <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) not for
his friendship’s, but for his importunity’s sake; what did He, but lay
down a law, that all should continually make supplication unto Him? He
doth not however bid us compose a prayer of ten thousand clauses, and so
come to Him and merely repeat it. For this He obscurely signified when
He said, “They think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p76"></span>“For He knoweth,” saith He, “what things
ye have need of.” And if He know, one may say, what we have need of,
wherefore must we pray? Not to instruct Him, but to prevail with Him; to
be made intimate with Him, by continuance in supplication; to be
humbled; to be reminded of thy sins.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_131"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p77"></span>6. “After this manner, therefore, pray
ye,” saith He: “Our Father, which art in heaven.” <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)

<span id="iii.XIX-p79"></span>See how He straightway stirred up the
hearer, and reminded him of all God’s bounty in the beginning. For he
who calls God Father, by him both remission of sins, and taking away of
punishment, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and
adoption, and inheritance, and brotherhood with the Only-Begotten, and
the supply of the Spirit, are acknowledged in this single title. For one
cannot call God Father, without having attained to all those blessings.
Doubly, therefore, doth He awaken their spirit, both by the dignity of
Him who is called on, and by the greatness of the benefits which they
have enjoyed. But when He saith, “in Heaven,” He speaks not this as
shutting up God there, but as withdrawing him who is praying from earth,
and fixing him in the high places, and in the dwellings above.

<span id="iii.XIX-p80"></span>He teaches, moreover, to make our prayer
common, in behalf of our brethren also. For He saith not, “my Father,
which art in Heaven,” but, “our Father,” offering up his supplications
for the body in common, and nowhere looking to his own, but everywhere
to his neighbor’s good. And by this He at once takes away hatred, and
quells pride, and casts out envy, and brings in the mother of all good
things, even charity, and exterminates the inequality of human things,
and shows how far the equality reaches between the king and the poor
man, if at least in those things which are greatest and most
indispensable, we are all of us fellows. For what harm comes of our
kindred below, when in that which is on high we are all of us knit
together, and no one hath aught more than another; neither the rich more
than the poor, nor the master than the servant, neither the ruler than
the subject, nor the king than the common soldier, nor the philosopher
than the barbarian, nor the skillful than the unlearned? For to all hath
He given one nobility, having vouchsafed to be called the Father of all
alike.

<span id="iii.XIX-p81"></span>7. When therefore He hath reminded us of
this nobility, and of the gift from above, and of our equality with our
brethren, and of charity; and when He hath removed us from earth, and
fixed us in Heaven; let us see what He commands us to ask after this.
Not but, in the first place, even that saying alone is sufficient to
implant instruction in all virtue. For he who hath called God Father,
and a common Father, would be justly bound to show forth such a
conversation, as not to appear unworthy of this nobility, and to exhibit
a diligence proportionate to the gift. Yet is He not satisfied with
this, but adds, also another clause, thus saying,

<span id="iii.XIX-p82"></span>“Hallowed be Thy name.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p83"></span>Worthy of him who calls God Father, is the
prayer to ask nothing before the glory of His Father, but to account all
things secondary to the work of praising Him. For “hallowed” is
*glorified*. For His own glory He hath complete, and ever continuing the
same, but He commands him who prays to seek that He may be glorified
also by our life. Which very thing He had said before likewise, “Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) Yea, and the seraphim too, giving
glory, said on this wise, “Holy, holy, holy.” <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) So that “hallowed” means this, *viz*.
“glorified.” That is, “vouchsafe,” saith he, “that we may live so
purely, that through us all may glorify Thee.” Which thing again
appertains unto perfect self-control, to present to all a life so
irreprehensible, that every one of the beholders may offer to the Lord
the praise due to Him for this.

<span id="iii.XIX-p86"></span>“Thy kingdom come.” <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847)

<span id="iii.XIX-p88"></span>And this again is the language of a
right-minded child, not to be rivetted to things that are seen, neither
to account things present some great matter; but to hasten unto our
Father, and to long for the things to come. And this springs out of a
good conscience, and a soul set free from things that are on earth.
This, for instance, Paul himself was longing after every day: wherefore
he also said, that “even we ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the
Spirit, groan, waiting for an adoption, the redemption of our
body.” <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) For he who hath this
fondness, <span id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) can neither be puffed
up by the good things of this life, nor abashed by its sorrows; but as
though dwelling in the very heavens, is freed from each sort of
irregularity. <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850)

<span id="iii.XIX-p92"></span>“Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
Heaven.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p93"></span>Behold a most excellent train of thought!
in that He bade us indeed long for the things <span id="page_132">p.
132</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_132"></span> to come, and hasten
towards that sojourn; and, till that may be, even while we abide here,
so long to be earnest in showing forth the same conversation as those
above. For ye must long, saith He, for heaven, and the things in heaven;
however, even before heaven, He hath bidden us make the earth a heaven
and do and say all things, even while we are continuing in it, as having
our conversation there; insomuch that these too should be objects of our
prayer to the Lord. For there is nothing to hinder our reaching the
perfection of the powers above, because we inhabit the earth; but it is
possible even while abiding here, to do all, as though already placed on
high. What He saith therefore is this: “As there all things are done
without hindrance, and the angels are not partly obedient and partly
disobedient, but in all things yield and obey (for He saith, ‘Mighty in
strength, performing His word’); <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851)
so vouchsafe that we men may not do Thy will by halves, but perform all
things as Thou willest.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p95"></span>Seest thou how He hath taught us also to
be modest, by making it clear that virtue is not of our endeavors only,
but also of the grace from above? And again, He hath enjoined each one
of us, who pray, to take upon himself the care of the whole world. For
He did not at all say, “Thy will be done” *in me,* or *in us*, but
everywhere on the earth; so that error may be destroyed, and truth
implanted, and all wickedness cast out, and virtue return, and no
difference in this respect be henceforth between heaven and earth. “For
if this come to pass,” saith He, “there will be no difference between
things below and above, separated as they are in nature; the earth
exhibiting to us another set of angels.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p96"></span>8. “Give us this day our daily
bread.” <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852)

<span id="iii.XIX-p98"></span>What is “*daily bread*”? That for one
day. <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853)

<span id="iii.XIX-p100"></span>For because He had said thus, “Thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven,” but was discoursing to men
encompassed with flesh, and subject to the necessities of nature, and
incapable of the same impassibility with the angels:—while He enjoins
the commands to be practised by us also, even as they perform them; He
condescends likewise, in what follows, to the infirmity of our nature.
Thus, “perfection of conduct,” saith He, “I require as great, not
however freedom from passions; no, for the tyranny of nature permits it
not: for it requires necessary food.” But mark, I pray thee, how even in
things that are bodily, that which is spiritual abounds. For it is
neither for riches, nor for delicate living, nor for costly raiment, nor
for any other such thing, but for bread only, that He hath commanded us
to make our prayer. And for “daily bread,” so as not to “take thought
for the morrow.” <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) Because of this
He added, “*daily* bread,” that is, bread for one day.

<span id="iii.XIX-p102"></span>And not even with this expression is He
satisfied, but adds another too afterwards, saying, “Give us *this
day*;” so that we may not, beyond this, wear ourselves out with the care
of the following day. For that day, the interval <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) before which thou knowest not whether
thou shalt see, wherefore dost thou submit to its cares?

<span id="iii.XIX-p104"></span>This, as He proceeded, he enjoined also
more fully, saying, “Take no thought for the morrow.” He would have us
be on every hand unencumbered and winged for flight, yielding just so
much to nature as the compulsion of necessity requires of us.

<span id="iii.XIX-p105"></span>9. Then forasmuch as it comes to pass
that we sin even after the washing of regeneration, He, showing His love
to man to be great even in this case, commands us for the remission of
our sins to come unto God who loves man, and thus to say,

<span id="iii.XIX-p106"></span>“Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive
our debtors.” <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856)

<span id="iii.XIX-p108"></span>Seest thou surpassing mercy? After taking
away so great evils, and after the unspeakable greatness of His gift, if
men sin again, He counts them such as may be forgiven. For that this
prayer belongs to believers, is taught us both by the laws of the
church, and by the beginning of the prayer. For the uninitiated could
not call God Father. If then the prayer belongs to believers, and they
pray, entreating that sins may be forgiven them, it is clear that not
even after the laver is the profit of repentance taken away. Since, had
He not meant to signify this, He would not have made a law that we
should so pray. Now He who both brings sins to <span id="page_133">p.
133</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_133"></span> remembrance, and bids us
ask forgiveness, and teaches how we may obtain remission and so makes
the way easy; it is perfectly clear that He introduced this rule of
supplication, as knowing, and signifying, that it is possible even after
the font <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) to wash ourselves from
our offenses; by reminding us of our sins, persuading us to be modest;
by the command to forgive others, setting us free from all revengeful
passion; while by promising in return for this to pardon us also, He
holds out good hopes, and instructs us to have high views <span
id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) concerning the unspeakable mercy of
God toward man.

<span id="iii.XIX-p111"></span>But what we should most observe is this,
that whereas in each of the clauses He had made mention of the whole of
virtue, and in this way had included also the forgetfulness of injuries
(for so, that “His name be hallowed,” is the exactness of a perfect
conversation; and that “His will be done,” declares the same thing
again: and to be able to call God “Father,” is the profession of a
blameless life; in all which things had been comprehended also the duty
of remitting our anger against them that have transgressed): still He
was not satisfied with these, but meaning to signify how earnest He is
in the matter, He sets it down also in particular, and after the prayer,
He makes mention of no other commandment than this, saying thus:

<span id="iii.XIX-p112"></span>“For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father also will forgive you.” <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859)

<span id="iii.XIX-p114"></span>So that the beginning is of us, and we
ourselves have control over the judgment that is to be passed upon us.
For in order that no one, even of the senseless, might have any
complaint to make, either great or small, when brought to judgment; on
thee, who art to give account, He causes the sentence to depend; and “in
what way soever thou hast judged for thyself, <span
id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860) in the same,” saith He, “do I also
judge thee.” And if thou forgive thy fellow servant, thou shalt obtain
the same favor from me; though indeed the one be not equal to the other.
For thou forgivest in thy need, but God, having need of none: thou, thy
fellow slave; God, His slave: thou liable to unnumbered charges; God,
being without sin. But yet even thus doth He show forth His
lovingkindness towards man.

<span id="iii.XIX-p116"></span>Since He might indeed, even without this,
forgive thee all thine offenses; but He wills thee hereby also to
receive a benefit; affording thee on all sides innumerable occasions of
gentleness and love to man, casting out what is brutish in thee, and
quenching wrath, and in all ways cementing thee to him who is thine own
member.

<span id="iii.XIX-p117"></span>For what canst thou have to say? that
thou hast wrongfully endured some ill of thy neighbor? (For these only
are trespasses, since if it be done with justice, the act is not a
trespass.) But thou too art drawing near to receive forgiveness for such
things, and for much greater. And even before the forgiveness, thou hast
received no small gift, in being taught to have a human soul, and in
being trained to all gentleness. And herewith a great reward shall also
be laid up for thee elsewhere, even to be called to account for none of
thine offenses.

<span id="iii.XIX-p118"></span>What sort of punishment then do we not
deserve, when after having received the privilege, we betray our
salvation? And how shall we claim to be heard in the rest of our
matters, if we will not, in those which depend on us, spare our own
selves?

<span id="iii.XIX-p119"></span>10. “And lead us not into temptation; but
deliver us from the evil one: for Thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory, for ever. Amen.” <span id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861)

<span id="iii.XIX-p121"></span>Here He teaches us plainly our own
vileness, and quells our pride, instructing us to deprecate all
conflicts, instead of rushing upon them. For so both our victory will be
more glorious, and the devil’s overthrow more to be derided. I mean,
that as when we are dragged forth, we must stand nobly; so when we are
not summoned, we should be quiet, and wait for the time of conflict;
that we may show both freedom from vainglory, and nobleness of spirit.

<span id="iii.XIX-p122"></span>And He here calls the devil “the wicked
one,” commanding us to wage against him a war that knows no truce, and
implying that he is not such by nature. For wickedness <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) is not of those things that are from
nature, but of them that are added by our own choice. And he is so
called pre-eminently, by reason of the excess of his wickedness, and
because he, in no respect injured by us, wages against us implacable
war. Wherefore neither said He, “deliver us from the wicked ones,” but,
“from the wicked one;” instructing us in no case to entertain
displeasure against our neighbors, for what wrongs soever we may suffer
at their hands, but to transfer our enmity from these to him, as being
himself the cause of all our wrongs.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_134"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p124"></span>Having then made us anxious as before
conflict, by putting us in mind of the enemy, and having cut away from
us all our remissness; He again encourages and raises our spirits, by
bringing to our remembrance the King under whom we are arrayed, and
signifying Him to be more powerful than all. “For Thine,” saith He, “is
the kingdom, and the power, and the glory.”

<span id="iii.XIX-p125"></span>Doth it not then follow, that if His be
the kingdom, we should fear no one, since there can be none to
withstand, and divide the empire with him. For when He saith, “Thine is
the kingdom,” He sets before us even him, who is warring against us,
brought into subjection, though he seem to oppose, God for a while
permitting it. For in truth he too is among God’s servants, though of
the degraded class, and those guilty of offense; and he would not dare
set upon any of his fellow servants, had he not first received license
from above. And why say I, “his fellow servants?” Not even against swine
did he venture any outrage, until He Himself allowed him; <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) nor against flocks, nor herds, until
he had received permission from above. <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864)

<span id="iii.XIX-p128"></span>“And the power,” saith He. Therefore,
manifold as thy weakness may be, thou mayest of right be confident,
having such a one to reign over thee, who is able fully to accomplish
all, and that with ease, even by thee.

<span id="iii.XIX-p129"></span>“And the glory, for ever. Amen.” Thus He
not only frees thee from the dangers that are approaching thee, but can
make thee also glorious and illustrious. For as His power is great, so
also is His glory unspeakable, and they are all boundless, and no end of
them. Seest thou how He hath by every means anointed His Champion, and
hath framed Him to be full of confidence?

<span id="iii.XIX-p130"></span>11. Then, as I said before, meaning to
signify, that of all things He most loathes and hates bearing malice,
and most of all accepts the virtue which is opposite to that vice; He
hath after the prayer also again put us in mind of this same point of
goodness; both by the punishment set, and by the reward appointed,
urging the hearer to obey this command.

<span id="iii.XIX-p131"></span>“For if ye forgive men,” saith He, “your
heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not, neither
will He forgive you.” <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865)

<span id="iii.XIX-p133"></span>With this view He hath again mentioned
heaven also, and their Father; to abash the hearer by this topic
likewise; that he of all people, being of such a Father, should be made
a wild beast of; and summoned as he is to heaven, should cherish an
earthly and ordinary <span id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) sort of
mind. Since not by grace only, you see, ought we to become His children,
but also by our works. And nothing makes us so like God, as being ready
to forgive the wicked and wrong-doers; even as indeed He had taught
before, when He spake of His “making the sun to shine on the evil and on
the good.” <span id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867)

<span id="iii.XIX-p136"></span>For this same cause again in every one of
the clauses He commands us to make our prayers common, saying, “Our
Father,” and “Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven,” and “Give
*us* the bread, and forgive *us* our debts,” and “lead *us* not into
temptation,” and “deliver *us*;” everywhere commanding us to use this
plural word, that we may not retain so much as a vestige of anger
against our neighbor.

<span id="iii.XIX-p137"></span>How great punishment then must they
deserve, who after all this, so far from themselves forgiving, do even
entreat God for vengeance on their enemies, and diametrically as it were
transgress this law; and this while He is doing and contriving all, to
hinder our being at variance one with another? For since love is the
root of all that is good, He removing from all sides whatever mars it,
brings us together, and cements us to each other. For there is not,
there is not one, be he father, or mother, or friend, or what you will,
who so loved us as the God who created us. And this, above all things,
both His daily benefits and His precepts make manifest. But if thou tell
me of the pains, and of the sorrows, and of the evils of life; consider
in how many things thou offendest Him every day, and thou wilt no longer
marvel, though more than these evils should come upon thee, but if thou
shouldest enjoy any good, then thou wilt marvel, and be amazed. But as
it is, we look upon the calamities that come upon us, but the offenses,
whereby we offend daily, we consider not: therefore we are perplexed.
Since if we did but reckon up with strictness our sins of one day only,
in that case we should know well how great evils we must be liable to.

<span id="iii.XIX-p138"></span>And to let pass the other misdoings of
which we have been guilty, each one for himself, and to speak of what
have been committed this day; although of course I know not in what each
of us may have sinned, yet such is the abundance of our misdoings, that
<span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_135"></span>
not even he who knew all exactly would be able to choose from among
these only. Which of us, for instance, hath not been careless in his
prayers? Which hath not been insolent, or vainglorious? Who hath not
spoken evil of his brother, hath not admitted a wicked desire, hath not
looked with unchaste eyes, hath not remembered things with hostile
feeling, even till he made his heart swell?

<span id="iii.XIX-p139"></span>And if while we are in church, and in a
short time we have become guilty of so great evils; what shall be when
we are gone out from hence? If in the harbor the waves are so high, when
we are gone forth into the channel of wickednesses, the forum I mean,
and to public business, and our cares at home, shall we indeed be able
so much as to know ourselves again?

<span id="iii.XIX-p140"></span>But yet from our so great and so many
sins, God hath given us a short and easy way of deliverance, and one
that is free from all toil. For what sort of toil is it to forgive him
that hath grieved us? Nay, it is a toil not to forgive, but to keep up
our enmity: even as to be delivered from the anger, both works in us a
great refreshment, and is very easy to him that is willing. For there is
no sea to be crossed, nor long journey to be travelled, nor summits of
mountains to be passed over, nor money to be spent, no need to torment
thy body; but it suffices to be willing only, and all our sins are done
away.

<span id="iii.XIX-p141"></span>But if so far from forgiving him thyself,
thou makest intercession to God against him, what hope of salvation wilt
thou then have, if at the very time when thou oughtest rather to appease
God, even then thou provokest Him; putting on the garb of a suppliant,
but uttering the cries of a wild beast, and darting out against thyself
those shafts of the wicked one? Wherefore Paul also, making mention of
prayer, required nothing so much as the observance of this commandment;
for He saith, “lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting.” <span
id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) And if when thou hast need of mercy,
not even then wilt thou let go thine anger, but art rather exceedingly
mindful of it, and that, although thou knowest thou art thrusting the
sword into thyself; when will it be possible for thee to become
merciful, and to spew out the evil venom of this wickedness?

<span id="iii.XIX-p143"></span>But if thou hast not yet seen this
outrageousness in its full extent, suppose it happening among men, and
then thou wilt perceive the excess of the insolence. As thus: should one
approach thee who are a man, seeking to obtain mercy, and then, in the
midst of his lying on the ground, should see an enemy, and leaving off
to supplicate thee, begin to beat him; wouldest thou not make thyself
more angry with him? This do thou consider as taking place with regard
to God also. For so thou likewise, making supplication unto God, leavest
thy supplication in the midst, and smitest thine enemy with thy words,
and insultest the laws of God. Him who made a law to dismiss all anger,
thou art summoning against those that have vexed thee, and requiring Him
to do things contrary to His own commandments. Is it not enough for thee
in the way of revenge, that thou thyself transgressest the law of God,
but entreatest thou Him likewise to do so? What? hath He forgotten what
He commanded? What? is He a man who spake these things? It is God, who
knows all things, and whose will is, that His own laws be kept with the
utmost exactness, and who, so far from doing these things which thou art
requiring of Him, doth even regard thee who sayest these things, merely
because thou sayest them, with aversion and hatred, and exacts of thee
the most extreme penalty. How then seekest thou to obtain of Him things,
from which He very seriously bids thee refrain?

<span id="iii.XIX-p144"></span>Yet some there are, who have come to such
a point of brutishness, as not only to make intercession against their
enemies, but even to curse their children, and to taste, if only it
might be, of their very flesh; or rather they are even tasting thereof.
For tell me not this, that thou hast not fixed thy teeth in the body of
him that vexed thee; since thou hast done, at least as far as concerned
thee, what is much more grievous; in claiming that wrath from above
should fall upon him, and that he should be delivered over to undying
punishment, and be overthrown with his whole house.

<span id="iii.XIX-p145"></span>Why, what sort of bites are as ferocious
as this? what kind of weapons as bitter? Not so did Christ instruct
thee; not so did He command thee to stain thy mouth with blood. Nay,
mouths made bloody with human flesh are not so shocking as tongues like
these.

<span id="iii.XIX-p146"></span>How then wilt thou salute thy brother?
how wilt thou touch the sacrifice? how taste the Lord’s blood, when thou
hast so much venom upon thy mind? Since when thou sayest, “Rend him in
pieces, and overthrow his house, and destroy all,” when thou art
imprecating on him ten thousand deaths, thou art in nothing different
from a murderer, or rather from a wild beast that devours men.

<span id="iii.XIX-p147"></span>Let us cease then from this disease and
madness, and that kindliness which He com <span id="page_136">p.
136</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_136"></span> manded let us show forth
towards them that have vexed us: that we may become like “our Father
which is in heaven.” And we shall cease therefrom, if we call to mind
our own sins; if we strictly search out all our misdeeds at home,
abroad, and in the market, and in church.

<span id="iii.XIX-p148"></span>12. For if for nothing else, surely for
our disrespectfulness here we are worthy to undergo the utmost
punishment. For when prophets are chanting, and apostles singing hymns,
and God is discoursing, we wander without, and bring in upon us a
turmoil of worldly business. And we do not afford to the laws of God so
great stillness, even as the spectators in the theatres to the emperor’s
letters, keeping silence for them. For there, when these letters are
being read, deputies at once, and governors, and senate, and people,
stand all upright, with quietness hearkening to the words. And if amid
that most profound silence any one should suddenly leap up and cry out,
he suffers the utmost punishment, as having been insolent to the
emperor. But here, when the letters from heaven are being read, great is
the confusion on all sides. And yet both He who sent the letters is much
greater than this our king, <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) and
the assembly more venerable: for not men only, but angels too are in it;
and these triumphs, of which the letters bear us the good tidings, are
much more awful than those on earth. Wherefore not men only, but angels
also and archangels; both the nations of heaven, and all we on the
earth, are commanded to give praise. For, “Bless the Lord,” it is said,
“all His works.” <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) Yea, for His
are no small achievements, rather they surpass all speech, and thought,
and understanding of man.

<span id="iii.XIX-p151"></span>And these things the prophets proclaim
every day, each of them in a different way publishing this glorious
triumph. For one saith, “Thou hast gone up on high, Thou hast led
captivity captive, and hast received gifts amongst men.” <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) And, “The Lord strong and mighty in
battle.” <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) And another saith, “He
shall divide the spoils of the strong.” <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) For indeed to this purpose He came,
that He might “preach deliverance to captives, and recovery of sight to
the blind.” <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)

<span id="iii.XIX-p156"></span>And raising aloud the cry of victory over
death, he said, “Where, O Death, is thy victory? Where, O Grave, is thy
sting?” <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) And another again,
declaring glad tidings of the most profound peace, said, “They shall
beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning
hooks.” <span id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) And while one calls on
Jerusalem, saying, “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion, for lo! thy
King cometh to thee meek, riding upon an ass, and a young colt;” <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) another proclaims His second coming
also, saying on this wise, “The Lord, whom ye seek, will come, and who
will abide the day of His coming? <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) Leap ye as calves set free from
bonds.” <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) And another again,
amazed at such things, said, “This is our God; there shall none other be
accounted of in comparison of Him.” <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880)

<span id="iii.XIX-p163"></span>Yet, nevertheless, while both these and
many more sayings than these are being uttered, while we ought to
tremble, and not so much as account ourselves to be on the earth; still,
as though in the midst of a forum, we make an uproar and disturbance,
and spend the whole time of our solemn assembly <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) in discoursing of things which are
nothing to us.

<span id="iii.XIX-p165"></span>When therefore both in little things, and
in great, both in hearing, and in doing, both abroad, and at home, in
the church, we are so negligent; and together with all this, pray also
against our enemies: whence are we to have any hope of salvation, adding
to so great sins yet another grievous enhancement, and equivalent to
them all, even this unlawful prayer?

<span id="iii.XIX-p166"></span>Have we then hereafter any right to
marvel, if aught befall us of the things which are unexpected and
painful? whereas we ought to marvel when no such thing befalls us. For
the former is in the natural order of things, but the latter were beyond
all reason and expectation. For surely it is beyond reason, that they
who are become enemies of God, and are provoking Him to anger, should
enjoy sunshine and showers, and all the rest; who being men surpass the
barbarity of wild beasts, setting themselves one against another, and by
the biting of their neighbors staining their own tongues with blood:
after the spiritual table, and His so great benefits, and His
innumerable injunctions.

<span id="iii.XIX-p167"></span>Therefore, considering these things, let
us cast up that venom; let us put an end to our enmities, and let us
make the prayers that become such as we are. Instead of the brutality of
devils, let us take upon us the mildness of angels; and in whatsoever
things we may have been injured, let us, consider <span id="page_137">p.
137</span> <span id="iii.XIX-Page_137"></span> ing our own case, and the
reward appointed us for this commandment, soften our anger; let us
assuage the billows, that we may both pass through the present life
calmly, and when we have departed thither, may find our Lord such as we
have been towards our fellow-servants. And if this be a heavy and
fearful thing, let us make it light and desirable; and let us open the
glorious gates of confidence towards Him; and what we had not strength
to effect by abstaining from sin, that let us accomplish by becoming
gentle to them who have sinned against us (for this surely is not
grievous, nor burdensome); and let us by doing kindnesses to our
enemies, lay up beforehand much mercy for ourselves.

<span id="iii.XIX-p168"></span>For so both during this present life all
will love us, and above all others, God will both befriend and crown us,
and will count us worthy of all the good things to come; unto which may
we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_814"></span>[127:815](1100027.htm#fr_814) <span
id="iii.XIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p4"></span>\[All authorities of an early period,
including many fathers prior to Chrysostom, read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XIX-p4.1"></span>δικαιοσνην</span> (comp.
R.V.). It seems likely that the apparent homiletical advantage of the
other reading made it the common one.—R.\]

<span id="fn_815"></span>[127:816](1100027.htm#fr_815) <span
id="iii.XIX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p9"></span>[Luke xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span id="iii.XIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[127:817](1100027.htm#fr_816) <span
id="iii.XIX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p10"></span>Or, “by the publican:” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XIX-p10.1"></span>τ τελν νεδεκνυτο</span>.
\[The dative is correctly rendered in the text, but the verb is used in
a figurative sense.—R.\]

<span id="fn_817"></span>[127:818](1100027.htm#fr_817) <span
id="iii.XIX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p11"></span>[Luke xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span id="iii.XIX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[127:819](1100027.htm#fr_818) <span
id="iii.XIX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p13"></span>[Phil. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)<span id="iii.XIX-p13.1"></span>.
\[“The dogs,” so R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_819"></span>[127:820](1100027.htm#fr_819) <span
id="iii.XIX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p14"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p14.1"></span>Κα γρ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_820"></span>[127:821](1100027.htm#fr_820) <span
id="iii.XIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p16"></span>[Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iii.XIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[128:822](1100027.htm#fr_821) <span
id="iii.XIX-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p20"></span>[Matt. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="iii.XIX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[128:823](1100027.htm#fr_822) <span
id="iii.XIX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p23"></span>[Matt. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)<span id="iii.XIX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[128:824](1100027.htm#fr_823) <span
id="iii.XIX-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p25"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p25.2"></span>κπομπεων</span>.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[128:825](1100027.htm#fr_824) <span
id="iii.XIX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p28"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p28.1"></span>δι τοτο</span>.\]

<span id="fn_825"></span>[128:826](1100027.htm#fr_825) <span
id="iii.XIX-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p30"></span>\[As in the previous clause, “ought we to
act.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_826"></span>[128:827](1100027.htm#fr_826) <span
id="iii.XIX-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p32"></span>[Matt. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003)<span id="iii.XIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[128:828](1100027.htm#fr_827) <span
id="iii.XIX-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p34"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p34.1"></span>σκαιο</span>, literally, “on the left hand.”

<span id="fn_828"></span>[128:829](1100027.htm#fr_828) <span
id="iii.XIX-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p37"></span>[Matt. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004)<span id="iii.XIX-p37.1"></span>.
\[The phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p37.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p37.3"></span>ν τ φανερ</span> is poorly supported in [Matt.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#018)<span id="iii.XIX-p37.4"></span>.
It seems, however, to be accepted by Chrysostom. The R.V. properly
renders “recompense thee” to distinguish from the word “reward” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XIX-p37.5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p37.6"></span>μισθν</span></span>), which occurs in [Matt.
6.2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)<span id="iii.XIX-p37.7"></span>and
similar passages.—R.\]

<span id="fn_829"></span>[129:830](1100027.htm#fr_829) <span
id="iii.XIX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p41"></span>[Matt. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)<span id="iii.XIX-p41.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “to stand and pray,” and, “They have received their
reward.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_830"></span>[129:831](1100027.htm#fr_830) <span
id="iii.XIX-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p43"></span>[Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="iii.XIX-p43.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Enter into thine inner chamber and having shut thy door, pray,”
etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_831"></span>[129:832](1100027.htm#fr_831) <span
id="iii.XIX-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p50.1"></span>συρφετωδ</span>.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[130:833](1100027.htm#fr_832) <span
id="iii.XIX-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p52"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p52.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p52.2"></span>πιεικεα</span>.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[130:834](1100027.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iii.XIX-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p54"></span>[Exod. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)<span id="iii.XIX-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[130:835](1100027.htm#fr_834) <span
id="iii.XIX-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p55"></span>[1 Sam. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013)<span id="iii.XIX-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[130:836](1100027.htm#fr_835) <span
id="iii.XIX-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p56"></span>[Gen. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)<span id="iii.XIX-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[130:837](1100027.htm#fr_836) <span
id="iii.XIX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p58"></span>[Joel ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)<span id="iii.XIX-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[130:838](1100027.htm#fr_837) <span
id="iii.XIX-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p59"></span>[Ps. cxxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)<span id="iii.XIX-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[130:839](1100027.htm#fr_838) <span
id="iii.XIX-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p62"></span>[Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="iii.XIX-p62.1"></span>.
\[See note on sec. 2, verse 4.—R.\]

<span id="fn_839"></span>[130:840](1100027.htm#fr_839) <span
id="iii.XIX-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p66"></span>[Matt. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)<span id="iii.XIX-p66.1"></span>.
(R.V., “And in praying use not vain repetitions, as the Gentiles
do.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_840"></span>[130:841](1100027.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iii.XIX-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p70"></span>[Matt. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#008)<span id="iii.XIX-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[130:842](1100027.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iii.XIX-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p72"></span>[Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span id="iii.XIX-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[130:843](1100027.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iii.XIX-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p74"></span>[Luke xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)<span id="iii.XIX-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[130:844](1100027.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iii.XIX-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p75"></span>[Luke xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)<span id="iii.XIX-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[131:845](1100027.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iii.XIX-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p78"></span>[Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="iii.XIX-p78.1"></span>.
\[In Latin editions of the Homilies a division has been made at this
point, so as to separate the comments on the Lord’s Prayer into a
distinct Homily. But the Greek <span class="c41"><span
id="iii.XIX-p78.2"></span>mss</span>. have no such division. The latter
half is numbered Homily XX., and the enumeration of all the subsequent
Homilies modified. In Migne’s edition, two sets of numbers are given to
the Homilies which follow.—R.\]

<span id="fn_845"></span>[131:846](1100027.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iii.XIX-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p84"></span>[Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iii.XIX-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[131:847](1100027.htm#fr_846) <span
id="iii.XIX-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p85"></span>[Isa.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003), [Rev.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008)<span id="iii.XIX-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[131:848](1100027.htm#fr_847) <span
id="iii.XIX-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p87"></span>[Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="iii.XIX-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[131:849](1100027.htm#fr_848) <span
id="iii.XIX-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p89"></span>[Rom. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="iii.XIX-p89.1"></span>.
\[The citation is slightly abridged, but the latter part agrees exactly
with the Greek text followed in the R.V., which renders: “waiting for
*our* adoption, *to wit*, the redemption of our body.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_849"></span>[131:850](1100027.htm#fr_849) <span
id="iii.XIX-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p90"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p90.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p90.2"></span>ρωτα</span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[131:851](1100027.htm#fr_850) <span
id="iii.XIX-p90.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p91"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p91.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p91.2"></span>νωμαλα</span>.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[132:852](1100027.htm#fr_851) <span
id="iii.XIX-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p94"></span>[Ps. ciii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#020)<span id="iii.XIX-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[132:853](1100027.htm#fr_852) <span
id="iii.XIX-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p97"></span>[Matt. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011)<span id="iii.XIX-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[132:854](1100027.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iii.XIX-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p99"></span>\[This is one of the most important
passages in these Homilies, from a lexical point of view. The Greek text
is, <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XIX-p99.1"></span>Τ στι, Τον ρτον
τν πιυσιον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p99.2"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p99.3"></span>Το φμερον</span>. The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XIX-p99.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XIX-p99.5"></span>πιοσιο</span> is found
only in [Matt. 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011), [Luke
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#003)<span id="iii.XIX-p99.6"></span>,
and in the Christian literature based on these passages. As all Biblical
scholars are aware, the etymology and meaning are still open to
discussion. See Thayer’s *Greek Lexicon, New Testament, sub voce*. The
Fathers generally gave it a spiritual or mystical sense, and
Chrysostom’s position is, therefore, the more important. The modern
views may be inferred from the R.V., which in the text of both renders
the word “daily,” with the margin “Greek, our bread for the coming day,”
but the American Company add as a second marginal rendering, “our
needful bread.” These two marginal renderings represent two distinct
etymologies, while “daily” is an explanatory or inferential rendering,
for which the authority of Chrysostom has furnished strong support.—R.\]

<span id="fn_854"></span>[132:855](1100027.htm#fr_854) <span
id="iii.XIX-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p101"></span>[Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="iii.XIX-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[132:856](1100027.htm#fr_855) <span
id="iii.XIX-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p103"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p103.1"></span>τ διστημα</span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[132:857](1100027.htm#fr_856) <span
id="iii.XIX-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p107"></span>[Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="iii.XIX-p107.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “have forgiven our debtors,” following a different and better
supported reading than that accepted by Chrysostom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_857"></span>[133:858](1100027.htm#fr_857) <span
id="iii.XIX-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p109"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p109.1"></span>μετ τ λουτρν</span>, rendered above, “after
the laver.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_858"></span>[133:859](1100027.htm#fr_858) <span
id="iii.XIX-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p110"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p110.1"></span>φιλοσοφεν</span>.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[133:860](1100027.htm#fr_859) <span
id="iii.XIX-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p113"></span>[Matt. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span id="iii.XIX-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[133:861](1100027.htm#fr_860) <span
id="iii.XIX-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p115"></span>Many <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XIX-p115.1"></span>mss</span>. read *hast given judgment on
him*.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[133:862](1100027.htm#fr_861) <span
id="iii.XIX-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p120"></span>[Matt. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013)<span id="iii.XIX-p120.1"></span>.
\[Two points of great interest are to be noticed here: (1) that the
interpretation “of the evil one” is unqualifedly accepted; (2) that the
doxology is given without any suggestion of doubt respecting the
genuineness of it. Here, as so often, the exegetical accuracy of
Chrysostom appears to exceed his critical estimate of the Greek text of
the New Testament.—R.\]

<span id="fn_862"></span>[133:863](1100027.htm#fr_862) <span
id="iii.XIX-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p123"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p123.1"></span>πονηρα</span>.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[134:864](1100027.htm#fr_863) <span
id="iii.XIX-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p126"></span>[Luke viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#032)<span id="iii.XIX-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[134:865](1100027.htm#fr_864) <span
id="iii.XIX-p126.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p127"></span>[Job i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012)<span id="iii.XIX-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[134:866](1100027.htm#fr_865) <span
id="iii.XIX-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p132"></span>[Matt.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015)<span id="iii.XIX-p132.1"></span>.
\[The latter verse is abridged, but there are variations in the <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XIX-p132.2"></span>mss</span>. of the New
Testament; comp. Tischendorf, *in loco*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_866"></span>[134:867](1100027.htm#fr_866) <span
id="iii.XIX-p133.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p134"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p134.1"></span>βιωτικν</span> \[here in the sense of
“secular.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_867"></span>[134:868](1100027.htm#fr_867) <span
id="iii.XIX-p134.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p135"></span>[Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iii.XIX-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[135:869](1100027.htm#fr_868) <span
id="iii.XIX-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p142"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.XIX-p142.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “disputing,” with margin, “doubting.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_869"></span>[136:870](1100027.htm#fr_869) <span
id="iii.XIX-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p149"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p149.1"></span>το βασιλω</span>, the Greek title of the
emperor. The term is so rendered above.—R.\]

<span id="fn_870"></span>[136:871](1100027.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iii.XIX-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p150"></span>[Ps. ciii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#022)<span id="iii.XIX-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[136:872](1100027.htm#fr_871) <span
id="iii.XIX-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p152"></span>[Ps. lxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span id="iii.XIX-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[136:873](1100027.htm#fr_872) <span
id="iii.XIX-p152.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p153"></span>[Ps. xxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008)<span id="iii.XIX-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[136:874](1100027.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iii.XIX-p153.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p154"></span>[Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="iii.XIX-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[136:875](1100027.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iii.XIX-p154.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p155"></span>[Isa.
61:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#000), [Isa.
50:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#000), [Luke
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#019)<span id="iii.XIX-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[136:876](1100027.htm#fr_875) <span
id="iii.XIX-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p157"></span>[Hosea xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)<span id="iii.XIX-p157.1"></span>.
\[The <span class="c20"><span id="iii.XIX-p157.2"></span>LXX</span>. has
been modified in this citation to accord, in the first clause, with [1
Cor. xv. 55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span
id="iii.XIX-p157.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_876"></span>[136:877](1100027.htm#fr_876) <span
id="iii.XIX-p157.4"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p158"></span>[Isa.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004), [Mic.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003)<span id="iii.XIX-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[136:878](1100027.htm#fr_877) <span
id="iii.XIX-p158.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p159"></span>[Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="iii.XIX-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[136:879](1100027.htm#fr_878) <span
id="iii.XIX-p159.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p160"></span>[Mal.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002)<span id="iii.XIX-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[136:880](1100027.htm#fr_879) <span
id="iii.XIX-p160.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p161"></span>[Mal. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="iii.XIX-p161.1"></span>.
The present reading of the LXX. is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p161.2"></span>σκιρτσετε</span>, “ye shall leap.” \[So the
Hebrew; comp. R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_880"></span>[136:881](1100027.htm#fr_880) <span
id="iii.XIX-p161.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p162"></span>[Bar. iii.
35](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035)<span id="iii.XIX-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[136:882](1100027.htm#fr_881) <span
id="iii.XIX-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XIX-p164"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XIX-p164.1"></span>τ συνξεω</span>: “of the Holy Communion.”
\[But see note 1 in Homily V., p. 31, and comp. Homily LXXXVIII. at the
close.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XX](1100028)
