[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100030)  [Next](1100032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXIII"></span> <span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_154"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. VII.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span
id="iii.XXIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p3"></span>“Judge not, that ye be not judged.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p4.1"></span>What</span> then? Ought we not to blame them
that sin? Because Paul also saith this selfsame thing: or rather, there
too it is Christ, speaking by Paul, and saying, <span
id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) “Why dost thou judge thy brother? And
thou, why dost thou set at nought thy brother?” and, “Who art thou that
judgest another man’s servant?” <span id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972)
And again, “Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come.” <span id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p8"></span>How then doth He say elsewhere, “Reprove,
rebuke, exhort,” <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) and, “Them that
sin rebuke before all?” <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) And
Christ too to Peter, “Go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone,” and if he neglect to hear, add to thyself another also; and if
not even so doth he yield, declare it to the church likewise?” <span
id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) And how hath He set over us so many to
reprove; and not only to reprove, but also to punish? For him that
hearkens to none of these, He hath commanded to be “as a heathen man and
a publican.” <span id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) And how gave He
them the keys also? since if they are not to judge, they will be without
authority in any matter, and in vain have they received the power to
bind and to loose.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p13"></span>And besides, if this were to obtain, all
would be lost alike, whether in churches, or in states, <span
id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978) or in houses. For except the master
judge the servant, and the mistress the maid, and the father the son,
and friends one another, there will be an increase of all wickedness.
And why say I, friends? unless we judge our enemies, we shall never be
able to put an end to our enmity, but all things will be turned upside
down.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p15"></span>What then can the saying be? Let us
carefully attend, lest the medicines of salvation, and the laws of
peace, be accounted by any man laws of overthrow and confusion. First of
all, then, even by what follows, He hath pointed out to them that have
understanding the excellency of this law, saying, “Why beholdest thou
the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but considerest not the beam that
is in thine own eye?” <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p17"></span>But if to many of the less attentive, it
seem yet rather obscure, I will endeavor to explain it from the
beginning. In this place, then, as it seems at least to me, He doth not
simply command us not to judge any of men’s sins, neither doth He simply
forbid the doing of such a thing, but to them that are full of
innumerable ills, and are trampling upon other men for trifles. And I
think that certain Jews too are here hinted at, for that while they were
bitter accusing their neighbors for small faults, and such as came to
nothing, they were themselves insensibly committing deadly <span
id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) sins. Herewith towards the end also He
was upbraiding them, when He said, “Ye bind heavy burdens, and grievous
to be borne, but ye will not move them with your finger,” <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981) and, “ye pay tithe of mint and anise,
and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and
faith.” <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p21"></span>Well then, I think that these are
comprehended in His invective; that He is checking them beforehand as to
those things, wherein they were hereafter to accuse His disciples. For
although His disciples had been guilty of no such sin, yet in them were
supposed to be offenses; as, for instance, not keeping the sabbath,
eating with unwashen hands, sitting at meat with publicans; of which He
saith also in another place, “Ye which strain at the gnat, and swallow
the camel.” <span id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) But yet it is also a
general law that He is laying down on these matters.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p23"></span>And the Corinthians <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) too Paul did not absolutely command
not to judge, but not to judge their own superiors, and upon grounds
that are not acknowledged; not absolutely to refrain from correcting
them that sin. Neither indeed was He then rebuking all without
distinction, but disciples doing so to their teachers were the object of
His reproof; and they who, being guilty of innumerable sins, bring an
evil report upon the guiltless.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p25"></span>This then is the sort of thing which
Christ also in this place intimated; not intimated merely, but
guarded <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) it too with a great ter
<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span id="iii.XXIII-Page_155"></span>
ror, and the punishment from which no prayers can deliver.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p27"></span>2. “For with what judgment ye judge,”
saith He, “ye shall be judged.” <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p29"></span>That is, “it is not the other,” saith
Christ, “that thou condemnest, but thyself, and thou art making the
judgment-seat dreadful to thyself, and the account strict.” As then in
the forgiveness of our sins the beginnings are from us, so also in this
judgment, it is by ourselves that the measures of our condemnation are
laid down. You see, we ought not to upbraid nor trample upon them, but
to admonish; not to revile, but to advise; not to assail with pride, but
to correct with tenderness. For not him, but thyself, dost thou give
over to extreme vengeance, by not sparing him, when it may be needful to
give sentence on his offenses.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p30"></span>Seest thou, how these two commandments
are both easy, and fraught with great blessings to the obedient, even as
of evils on the other hand, to the regardless? For both he that forgives
his neighbor, hath freed himself first of the two from the grounds of
complaint, and that without any labor; and he that with tenderness and
indulgence inquires into other men’s offenses, great is the
allowance <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) of pardon, which he
hath by his judgment laid up beforehand for himself.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p32"></span>“What then!” say you: “if one commit
fornication, may I not say that fornication is a bad thing, nor at all
correct him that is playing the wanton?” Nay, correct him, but not as a
foe, nor as an adversary exacting a penalty, but as a physician
providing medicines. For neither did Christ say, “stay not him that is
sinning,” but “judge not;” that is, be not bitter in pronouncing
sentence.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p33"></span>And besides, it is not of great things
(as I have already observed), nor of things prohibited, that this is
said, but of those which are not even counted offenses. Wherefore He
said also.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p34"></span>“Why beholdest thou the mote that is in
thy brother’s eye?” <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p36"></span>Yea, for many now do this; if they see
but a monk wearing an unnecessary garment, they produce against him the
law of our Lord, <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) while they
themselves are extorting without end, and defrauding men every day. If
they see him but partaking rather largely of food, they become bitter
accusers, while they themselves are daily drinking to excess and
surfeiting: not knowing, that besides their own sins, they do hereby
gather up for themselves a greater flame, and deprive themselves of
every plea. For on this point, that thine own doings must be strictly
inquired into, thou thyself hast first made the law, by thus sentencing
those of thy neighbor. Account it not then to be a grievous thing, if
thou art also thyself to undergo the same kind of trial.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p38"></span>“Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam
out of thine own eye.” <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p40"></span>Here His will is to signify the great
wrath, which He hath against them that do such things. For so,
wheresoever He would indicate that the sin is great, and the punishment
and wrath in store for it grievous, He begins with a reproach. <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) As then unto him that was exacting the
hundred pence, He said in His deep displeasure, “Thou wicked servant, I
forgave thee all that debt;” <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992)
even so here also, “Thou hypocrite.” For not of protecting care comes
such a judgment, but of ill will to man; and while a man puts forward a
mask of benevolence, he is doing a work of the utmost wickedness,
causing reproaches without ground, and accusations, to cleave unto his
neighbors, and usurping a teacher’s rank, when he is not worthy to be so
much as a disciple. On account of this He called him “hypocrite.” For
thou, who in other men’s doings art so bitter, as to see even the little
things; how hast thou become so remiss in thine own, as that even the
great things are hurried over by thee?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p43"></span>“First cast out the beam out of thine
own eye.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p44"></span>Seest thou, that He forbids not judging,
but commands to cast out first the beam from thine eye, and then to set
right the doings of the rest of the world? For indeed each one knows his
own things better than those of others; and sees the greater rather than
the less; and loves himself more than his neighbor. Wherefore, if thou
doest it out of guardian care, I bid thee care for thyself first, in
whose case the sin is both more certain and greater. But if thou neglect
thyself, it is quite evident that neither dost thou judge thy brother in
care for him, but in hatred, and wishing to expose him. For what if he
ought to be judged? it should be by one who commits no such sin, not by
thee.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p45"></span>Thus, because He had introduced great
and high doctrines of self denial, lest any man should say, it is easy
so to practise it in words; He willing to signify His entire confidence,
and that He was not chargeable with any of the things that had been
mentioned, but had duly fulfilled all, spake this parable. And that,
because He too was afterwards to <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_156"></span> judge, saying, “Woe unto you, Scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites.” <span id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) Yet
was not he chargeable with what hath been mentioned; for neither did He
pull out a mote, nor had He a beam on His eyes, but being clean from all
these, He so corrected the faults of all. “For it is not at all meet,”
saith He, “to judge others, when one is chargeable with the same
things.” And why marvel at His establishing this law, when even the very
thief knew it upon the cross, saying to the other thief, “Dost not thou
fear God, seeing we are in the same condemnation;” <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) expressing the same sentiments with
Christ?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p48"></span>But thou, so far from casting out thine
own beam, dost not even see it, but another’s mote thou not only seest,
but also judgest, and essayest to cast it out; as if any one seized with
a grievous dropsy, or indeed with any other incurable disease, were to
neglect this, and find fault with another who was neglecting a slight
swelling. And if it be an evil not to see one’s own sins, it is a
twofold and threefold evil to be even sitting in judgment on others,
while men themselves, as if past feeling, are bearing about beams in
their own eyes: since no beam is so heavy as sin.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p49"></span>His injunction therefore in these words
is as follows, that he who is chargeable with countless evil deeds,
should not be a bitter censor of other men’s offenses, and especially
when these are trifling. He is not overthrowing reproof nor correction,
but forbidding men to neglect their own faults, and exult over those of
other men.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p50"></span>For indeed this was a cause of men’s
going unto great vice, bringing in a twofold wickedness. For he, whose
practice it had been to slight his own faults, great as they were, and
to search bitterly into those of others, being slight and of no account,
was spoiling himself two ways: first, by thinking lightly of his own
faults; next, by incurring enmities and feuds with all men, and training
himself every day to extreme fierceness, and want of feeling for others.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p51"></span>3. Having then put away all these
things, by this His excellent legislation, He added yet another charge,
saying,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p52"></span>“Give not that which is holy unto the
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine.” <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p54"></span>“Yet surely further on,” it will be
said, “He commanded, “What ye have heard in the ear, that preach ye upon
the housetops.” <span id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) But this is in
no wise contrary to the former. For neither in that place did He simply
command to tell all men, but to whom it should be spoken, to them He
bade speak with freedom. <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997) And by
“dogs” here He figuratively described them that are living in incurable
ungodliness, and affording no hope of change for the better; and by
“swine,” them that abide continually in an unchaste life, all of whom He
hath pronounced unworthy of hearing such things. Paul also, it may be
observed, declared this when He said, “But a natural man receiveth not
the things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness unto him.” <span
id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) And in many other places too He saith
that corruption of life is the cause of men’s not receiving the more
perfect doctrines. Wherefore He commands not to open the doors to them;
for indeed they become more insolent after learning. For as to the
well-disposed and intelligent, things appear venerable when revealed, so
to the insensible, when they are unknown rather. “Since then from their
nature, they are not able to learn them, “let the thing be hidden,”
saith He, “that <span id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) at least for
ignorance they may reverence them. For neither doth the swine know at
all what a pearl is. Therefore since he knows not, neither let him see
it, lest he trample under foot what he knows not.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p59"></span>For nothing results, beyond greater
mischief to them that are so disposed when they hear; for both the holy
things are profaned <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000) by them,
not knowing what they are; and they are the more lifted up and armed
against us. For this is meant by, “lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rend you.” <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p62"></span>Nay, “surely,” saith one, “they ought to
be so strong as to remain equally impregnable after men’s learning them,
and not to yield to other people occasions against us.” But it is not
the things that yield it, but that these men are swine; even as when the
pearl is trampled under foot, it is not so trampled, because it is
really contemptible, but because it fell among swine.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p63"></span>And full well did He say, “turn again
and rend you:” for they feign gentleness, <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) so as to be taught: then after they
have learnt, <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_157"></span> quite changing from one sort to another,
they jeer, mock and deride us, as deceived persons. Therefore Paul also
said to Timothy, <span id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003) “Of whom be
thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood our words;” and again in
another place, “From such turn away,” <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) and, “A man that is an heretic,
after the first and second admonition, reject.” <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p68"></span>It is not, you see, that those truths
furnish them with armor, but they become fools in this way of their own
accord, being filled with more willfulness. On this account it is no
small gain for them to abide in ignorance, for so they are not such
entire scorners. But if they learn, the mischief is twofold. For neither
will they themselves be at all profited thereby, but rather the more
damaged, and to thee they will cause endless difficulties.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p69"></span>Let them hearken, who shamelessly
associate with all, and make the awful things contemptible. For the
mysteries we too therefore celebrate with closed doors, and keep out the
uninitiated, not for any weakness of which we have convicted our rites,
but because the many are as yet imperfectly prepared for them. For this
very reason He Himself also discoursed much unto the Jews in parables,
“because they seeing saw not.” For this, Paul likewise commanded “to
know how we ought to answer every man.” <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p71"></span>4. “Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.” <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p73"></span>For inasmuch as He had enjoined things
great and marvellous, and had commanded men to be superior to all their
passions, and had led them up to Heaven itself, and had enjoined them to
strive after the resemblance, not of angels and archangels, but (as far
as was possible) of the very Lord of all; and had bidden His disciples
not only themselves duly to perform all this, but also to correct
others, and to distinguish between the evil and them that are not such,
the dogs and them that are not dogs (although there be much that is
hidden in men):—that they might not say, “these things are grievous and
intolerable,” (for indeed in the sequel Peter did utter some such
things, saying, “Who can be saved?” <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) and again, “If the case of the man
be so, it is not good to marry): in order therefore that they might not
now likewise say so; as in the first place even by what had gone before
He had proved it all to be easy, setting down many reasons one upon
another, of power to persuade men: so after all He adds also the
pinnacle of all facility, devising as no ordinary relief to our toils,
the assistance derived from persevering prayers. Thus, we are not
ourselves, saith He, to strive alone, but also to invoke the help from
above: and it will surely come and be present with us, and will aid us
in our struggles, and make all easy. Therefore He both commanded us to
ask, and pledged Himself to the giving.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p75"></span>However, not simply to ask did He
command us, but with much assiduity and earnestness. For this is the
meaning of “seek.” For so he that seeks, putting all things out of his
mind, is taken up with that alone which is sought, and forms no idea of
any of the persons present. And this which I am saying they know, as
many as have lost either gold, or servants, and are seeking diligently
after them.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p76"></span>By “seeking,” then, He declared this; by
“knocking,” that we approach with earnestness and a glowing mind.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p77"></span>Despond not therefore, O man, nor show
less of zeal about virtue, than they do of desire for wealth. For things
of that kind thou hast often sought and not found, but nevertheless,
though thou know this, that thou art not sure to find them, thou puttest
in motion every mode of search; but here, although having a promise that
thou wilt surely receive, thou dost not show even the smallest part of
that earnestness. And if thou dost not receive straightway, do not even
thus despair. For to this end He said, “knock,” to signify that even if
He should not straightway open the door, we are to continue there.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p78"></span>5. And if thou doubt my affirmation, at
any rate believe His example.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p79"></span>“For what man is there of you,” saith
He, “whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?” <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p81"></span>Because, as among men, if thou keep on
doing so, thou art even accounted troublesome, and disgusting: so with
God, when thou doest not so, then thou dost more entirely provoke Him.
And if thou continue asking, though thou receive not at once, thou
surely wilt receive. For to this end was the door shut, that He may
induce thee to knock: to this end He doth not straightway assent, that
thou mayest ask. Continue then to do these things, and thou wilt surely
receive. For that thou mightest not say, “What then if I should ask and
not receive?” He hath <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_158"></span> blocked up <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010) thy approach with that similitude,
again framing arguments, and by those human things urging us to be
confident on these matters; implying by them that we must not only ask,
but ask what we ought. <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p84"></span>“For which of you is there, a father, of
whom if his son shall ask bread, will he give him a stone?” So that if
thou receive not, thy asking a stone is the cause of thy not receiving.
For though thou be a son, this suffices not for thy receiving: rather
this very thing even hinders thy receiving, that being a son, thou
askest what is not profitable.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p85"></span>Do thou also therefore ask nothing
worldly, but all things spiritual, and thou wilt surely receive. For so
Solomon, <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012) because he asked
what he ought, behold how quickly he received. Two things now, you see,
should be in him that prays, asking earnestly, and asking what he ought:
“since ye too,” saith He, “though ye be fathers, wait for your sons to
ask: and if they should ask of you anything inexpedient, ye refuse the
gifts; just as, if it be expedient, ye consent and bestow it.” Do thou
too, considering these things, not withdraw until thou receive; until
thou have found, retire not; relax not thy diligence, until the door be
opened. For if thou approach with this mind, and say, “Except I receive,
I depart not;” thou wilt surely receive, provided thou ask such things,
as are both suitable for Him of whom thou askest to give, and expedient
for thee the petitioner. But what are these? To seek the things
spiritual, all of them; to forgive them that have trespassed, and so to
draw nigh asking forgiveness; “to lift up holy hands without wrath and
doubting.” <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013) If we thus ask, we
shall receive. As it is, surely our asking is a mockery, and the act of
drunken rather than of sober men.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p88"></span>“What then,” saith one, “if I ask even
spiritual things, and do not receive?” Thou didst not surely knock with
earnestness; or thou madest thyself unworthy to receive; or didst
quickly leave off.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p89"></span>“And wherefore,” it may be inquired,
“did He not say, what things we ought to ask”? Nay verily, He hath
mentioned them all in what precedes, and hath signified for what things
we ought to draw nigh. Say not then, “I drew nigh, and did not receive.”
For in no case is it owing to God that we receive not, God who loves us
so much as to surpass even fathers, to surpass them as far as goodness
doth this evil nature.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p90"></span>“For if ye, being evil, know how to give
good gifts unto your children, how much more your heavenly
Father.” <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p92"></span>Now this He said, not to bring an evil
name on man’s nature, nor to condemn our race as bad; but in contrast to
His own goodness He calls paternal tenderness evil, <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) so great is the excess of His love
to man.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p94"></span>Seest thou an argument unspeakable, of
power to arouse to good hopes even him that hath become utterly
desperate?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p95"></span>Now here indeed He signifies His
goodness by means of our fathers, but in what precedes by the chief
among His gifts, by the “soul,” <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) by the body. And nowhere doth He
set down the chief of all good things, nor bring forward His own
coming:—for He who thus made speed to give up His Son to the slaughter,
“how shall He not freely give us all things?”—because it had not yet
come to pass. But Paul indeed sets it forth, thus saying, “He that
spared not His own Son, how shall He not also with Him freely give us
all things.” <span id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) But His
discourse with them is still from the things of men.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p98"></span>6. After this, to indicate that we ought
neither to feel confidence in prayer, while neglecting our own doings;
nor, when taking pains, trust only to our own endeavors; but both to
seek after the help from above, and contribute withal our own part; He
sets forth the one in connection with the other. For so after much
exhortation, He taught also how to pray, and when He had taught how to
pray, He proceeded again to His exhortation concerning what we are to
do; then from that again to the necessity of praying continually,
saying, “Ask,” and “seek,” and “knock.” And thence again, to the
necessity of being also diligent ourselves.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p99"></span>“For all things,” saith He, “whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them.” <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p101"></span>Summing up all in brief, and
signifying, that virtue is compendious, and easy, and readily known of
all men.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p102"></span>And He did not merely say, “All things
whatsoever ye would,” but, “Therefore all things whatsoever ye would.”
For this word, “therefore,” He did not add without purpose, but with a
concealed meaning: “if ye desire,” saith He, “to be heard, together with
what I have said, do these things also.” What then are these?
“Whatsoever ye <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_159"></span> would that men should do to you.” Seest
thou how He hath hereby also signified that together with prayer we need
exact conversation? <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) And He
did not say, “whatsoever things thou wouldest to be done unto thee of
God, those do unto thy neighbor;” lest thou should say, “But how is it
possible? He is God and I am man:” but, “whatsoever thou wouldest to be
done unto thee of thy fellow servant, these things do thou also thyself
show forth towards thy neighbor.” What is less burdensome than this?
what fairer?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p104"></span>Then the praise also, before the
rewards, is exceeding great.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p105"></span>“For this is the law and the prophets.”
Whence it is evident, that virtue is according to our nature; that we
all, of ourselves, know our duties; and that it is not possible for us
ever to find refuge in ignorance.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p106"></span>7. “Enter ye in at the strait gate, for
wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and
many there be which go in thereat: and strait is the gate and
narrow <span id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020) is the way which
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p109"></span>And yet after this He said, “My yoke is
easy, and my burden is light.” <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) And in what He hath lately said
also, He intimated the same: how then doth He here say it is strait and
confined? In the first place, if thou attend, even here He points to it
as very light, and easy, and accessible. “And how,” it may be said, “is
the narrow and confined way easy?” Because it is a way and a gate; even
as also the other, though it be wide, though spacious, is also a way and
a gate. And of these there is nothing permanent, but all things are
passing away, both the pains and the good things of life.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p111"></span>And not only herein is the part of
virtue easy, but also by the end again it becomes yet easier. For not
the passing away of our labors and toils, but also their issuing in a
good end (for they end in life) is enough to console those in conflict.
So that both the temporary nature of our labors, and the perpetuity of
our crowns, and the fact that the labors come first, and the crowns
after, must prove a very great relief in our toils. Wherefore Paul also
called their affliction “light”; not from the nature of the events, but
because of the mind of the combatants, and the hope of the future. “For
our light affliction,” saith he, “worketh an eternal weight of glory,
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen.” <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) For if to
sailors the waves and the seas, to soldiers their slaughters and wounds,
to husbandmen the winters and the frosts, to boxers the sharp blows, be
light and tolerable things, all of them, for the hope of those rewards
which are temporary and perishing; much more when heaven is set forth,
and the unspeakable blessings, and the eternal rewards, will no one feel
any of the present hardships. Or if any account it, even thus, to be
toilsome, the suspicion comes of nothing but their own remissness.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p113"></span>See, at any rate, how He on another
side also makes it easy, commanding not to hold intercourse with the
dogs, nor to give one’s self over to the swine, and to “beware of the
false prophets;” thus on all accounts causing men to feel as if in real
conflict. And the very fact too of calling it narrow contributed very
greatly towards making it easy; for it wrought on them to be vigilant.
As Paul then, when he saith, “We wrestle not against flesh and
blood,” <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024) doth so not to cast
down, but to rouse up the spirits of the soldiers: even so He also, to
shake the travellers out of their sleep, called the way rough. And not
in this way only did He work upon men, to be vigilant, but also by
adding, that it contains likewise many to supplant them; and, what is
yet more grievous, they do not even attack openly, but hiding
themselves; for such is the race of the false prophets. “But look not to
this,” saith He, “that it is rough and narrow, but where it ends; nor
that the opposite is wide and spacious, but where it issues.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p115"></span>And all these things He saith,
thoroughly to awaken our alacrity; even as elsewhere also He said,
“Violent men take it by force.” <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025) For whoever is in conflict, when he
actually sees the judge of the lists marvelling at the painfulness of
his efforts, is the more inspirited.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p117"></span>Let it not then bewilder us, when many
things spring up hence, that turn to our vexation. For the way is
strait, and the gate narrow, but not the city. <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026) Therefore must one neither look for
rest here, nor there expect any more aught that is painful.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p125"></span>Now in saying, “Few there be that find
it,” here again He both declared the careless <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> <span id="iii.XXIII-Page_160"></span> ness of the generality,
and instructed His hearers not to regard the felicities of the many, but
the labors of the few. For the more part, saith He, so far from walking
this way, do not so much as make it their choice: a thing of most
extreme criminality. But we should not regard the many, nor be troubled
thereat, but emulate the few; and, by all means equipping <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027) ourselves, should so walk therein.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p127"></span>For besides that it is strait, there
are also many to overthrow us in the way that leads thither. Wherefore
He also added,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p128"></span>8. “Beware of false prophets, for they
will come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves.” <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028) Behold together with
the dogs and swine another kind of ambush and conspiracy, far more
grievous than that. For those are acknowledged and open, but these
shaded over. For which cause also, while from those He commanded to hold
off, these He charged men to watch with exact care, as though it were
not possible to see them at the first approach. Wherefore He also said,
“beware”; making us more exact to discern them.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p130"></span>Then, lest when they had heard that it
was narrow and strait, and that they must walk on a way opposite to the
many, and must keep themselves from swine and dogs, and together with
these from another more wicked kind, even this of wolves; lest, I say,
they should sink down at this multitude of vexations, having both to go
a way contrary to most men, and therewith again to have such anxiety
about these things: He reminded them of what took place in the days of
their fathers, by using the term, “false prophets,” for then also no
less did such things happen. Be not now, I pray you, troubled (so He
speaks), for nothing new nor strange is to befall you. Since for all
truth the devil is always secretly substituting its appropriate deceit.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p131"></span>And by the figure of “false prophets,”
here, I think He shadows out not the heretics, but them that are of a
corrupt life, yet wear a mask of virtue; whom the generality are wont to
call by the name of impostors. <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029) Wherefore He also said further,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p133"></span>“By their fruits ye shall know
them.” <span id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p135"></span>For amongst heretics one may often find
actual goodness, <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031) but amongst
those whom I was mentioning, by no means.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p137"></span>“What then,” it may be said, “if in
these things too they counterfeit?” “Nay, they will be easily detected;
for such is the nature of this way, in which I commanded men to walk,
painful and irksome; but the hypocrite would not choose to take pains,
but to make a show only; wherefore also he is easily convicted.” Thus,
inasmuch as He had said, “there be few that find it,” He clears them out
again from among those, who find it not, yet feign so to do, by
commanding us not to look to them that wear the masks only, but to them
who in reality pursue it.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p138"></span>“But wherefore,” one may say, “did He
not make them manifest, but set us on the search for them?” That we
might watch, and be ever prepared for conflict, guarding against our
disguised as well as against our open enemies: which kind indeed Paul
also was intimating, when he said, that “by their good words they
deceive the hearts of the simple.” <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032) Let us not be troubled therefore,
when we see many such even now. Nay, for this too Christ foretold from
the beginning.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p140"></span>And see His gentleness: how He said
not, “Punish them,” but, “Be not hurt by them,” “Do not fall amongst
them unguarded.” Then that thou mightest not say, “it is impossible to
distinguish that sort of men,” again He states an argument from a human
example, thus saying,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p141"></span>“Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, but
the corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring
forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit.” <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p143"></span>Now what He saith is like this: they
have nothing gentle nor sweet; it is the sheep only so far as the skin;
wherefore also it is easy to discern them. And lest thou shouldest have
any the least doubt, He compares it to certain natural necessities, in
matters which admit of no result but one. In which sense Paul also said,
“The carnal mind is death; for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be.” <span id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p145"></span>And if He states the same thing twice,
it is not tautology. But, lest any one should say, “Though the evil tree
bear evil fruit, it bears also good, and makes the distinction
difficult, the crop being twofold:” “This is not so,” saith He, “for it
bears evil fruit only, and <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_161"></span> never can bear good: as indeed in the
contrary case also.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p146"></span>“What then? Is there no such thing as a
good man becoming wicked? And the contrary again takes place, and life
abounds with many such examples.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p147"></span>But Christ saith not this, that for the
wicked there is no way to change, or that the good cannot fall away, but
that so long as he is living in wickedness, he will not be able to bear
good fruit. For he may indeed change to virtue, being evil; but while
continuing in wickedness, he will not bear good fruit.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p148"></span>What then? did not David, being good,
bear evil fruit? Not continuing good, but being changed; since,
undoubtedly, had he remained always what he was, he would not have
brought forth such fruit. For not surely while abiding in the habit of
virtue, did he commit what he committed.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p149"></span>Now by these words He was also stopping
the mouths of those who speak evil at random, and putting a bridle on
the lips of all calumniators. I mean, whereas many suspect the good by
reason of the bad, He by this saying hath deprived them of all excuse.
“For thou canst not say, ‘I am deceived and beguiled;’ since I have
given thee exactly this way of distinguishing them by their works,
having added the injunction to go to their actions, and not to confound
all at random.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p150"></span>9. Then forasmuch as He had not
commanded to punish, but only to beware of them, He, at once both to
comfort those whom they vex, and to alarm and change them, set up as a
bulwark against <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) them the
punishment they should receive at His hands, saying,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p152"></span>“Every tree that bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.” <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p154"></span>Then, to make the saying less grievous,
He added,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p155"></span>“Wherefore by their fruits ye shall
know them.” <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p157"></span>That He might not seem to introduce the
threatening as His leading topic, but to be stirring up their mind in
the way of admonition and counsel.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p158"></span>Here He seems to me to be hinting at
the Jews also, who were exhibiting such fruits. Wherefore also He
reminded them of the sayings of John, in the very same terms delineating
their punishment. For he too said the very same, making mention to them
of an “axe,” and of a “tree cut down,” and of “unquenchable fire.”

<span id="iii.XXIII-p159"></span>And though it appear indeed to be some
single judgment, the being burnt up, yet if one examine carefully, these
are two punishments. For he that is burnt is also cast of course out of
God’s kingdom; and this latter punishment is more grievous than the
other. Now I know indeed that many tremble only at hell, but I affirm
the loss of that glory to be a far greater punishment than hell. And if
it be not possible to exhibit it such in words, this is nothing
marvellous. For neither do we know the blessedness of those good things,
that we should on the other hand clearly perceive the wretchedness
ensuing on being deprived of them; since Paul, as knowing these things
clearly, is aware, that to fall from Christ’s glory is more grievous
than all. And this we shall know at that time, when we shall fall into
the actual trial of it.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p160"></span>But may this never be our case, O thou
only-begotten Son of God, neither may we ever have any experience of
this irremediable punishment. For how great an evil it is to fall from
those good things, cannot indeed be accurately told: nevertheless, as I
may be able, I will labor and strive by an example to make it clear to
you, though it be but in some small degree.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p161"></span>Let us then imagine a wondrous child,
having besides His virtue the dominion of the whole world, and in all
respects so virtuous, as to be capable of bringing all men to the
yearning of a father’s affection. What theft do you think the father of
this child would not gladly suffer, not to be cast out of His society?
And what evil, small or great, would he not welcome, on condition of
seeing and enjoying Him? Now let us reason just so with respect to that
glory also. For no child, be he never so virtuous, is so desirable and
lovely to a father, as the having our portion in those good things, and
“to depart and be with Christ.” <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038)

<span id="iii.XXIII-p163"></span>No doubt hell, and that punishment, is
a thing not to be borne. Yet though one suppose ten thousand hells, he
will utter nothing like what it will be to fail of that blessed glory,
to be hated of Christ, to hear “I know you not,” <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) to be accused for not feeding Him
when we saw Him an hungered. <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040)
Yea, better surely to endure a thousand thunderbolts, than to see that
face of mildness turning away from us, and that eye of peace not
enduring to look upon us. For if He, while I was an enemy, and hating
Him, and turning from Him, did in such wise follow after me, as not to
spare even Himself, but to give <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="iii.XXIII-Page_162"></span> Himself up unto death: when after all
this I do not vouchsafe to Him so much as a loaf in His hunger, with
what kind of eyes shall I ever again behold Him?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p166"></span>But mark even here His gentleness; in
that He doth not at all speak of His benefits, nor say, “Thou hast
despised Him that hath done thee so much good:” neither doth He say,
“Me, who brought thee from that which is not into being, who breathed
into thee a soul, and set thee over all things on earth, who for thy
sake made earth, and heaven, and sea, and air, and all things that are,
who had been dishonored by thee, yea accounted of less honor than the
devil, and did not even so withdraw Himself, but had innumerable
thoughts for thee after it all; who chose to become a slave, who was
beaten with rods and spit upon, who was slain, who died the most
shameful death, who also on high makes intercession for thee, who freely
gives thee His Spirit, who vouchsafes to thee a kingdom, who makes thee
such promises, whose will it is to be unto thee Head, and Bridegroom,
and Garment, and House, and Root, and Meat, and Drink, and Shepherd, and
King, and who hath taken thee to be brother, and heir, and joint-heir
with Himself; who hath brought thee out of darkness into the dominion of
light.” These things, I say, and more than these He might speak of, but
He mentions none of these; but what? only the sin itself.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p167"></span>Even here He shows His love, and
indicates the yearning which He hath toward thee: not saying, “Depart
into the fire prepared for you,” but “prepared for the devil.” And
before He tells them what wrongs they had done, and neither so doth He
endure to mention all, but a few. And before these He calls the other
sort, those who have done well, to signify from this too that He is
blaming them justly.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p168"></span>What amount of punishment, then, is so
grievous as these words? For if any one seeing but a man who was his
benefactor an hungered, would not neglect him; or if he should neglect
him, being upbraided with it, would choose rather to sink into the earth
than to hear of it in the presence of two or three friends; what will be
our feelings, on hearing these words in the presence of the whole world;
such as He would not say even then, were He not earnestly accounting for
His own doings? For that not to upbraid did He bring these things
forward, but in self-defense, and for the sake of showing, that not
without ground nor at random was He saying, “depart from me;” this is
evident from His unspeakable benefits. For if He had been minded to
upbraid, He would have brought forwards all these, but now He mentions
only what treatment He had received.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p169"></span>10. Let us therefore, beloved, fear the
hearing these words. Life is not a plaything: or rather our present life
is a plaything, but the things to come are not such; or perchance our
life is not a plaything only, but even worse than this. For it ends not
in laughter, but rather brings exceeding damage on them who are not
minded to order their own ways strictly. For what, I pray thee, is the
difference between children who are playing at building houses, and us
when we are building our fine houses? what again between them making out
their dinners, and us in our delicate fare? None, but just that we do it
at the risk of being punished. And if we do not yet quite perceive the
poverty of what is going on, no wonder, for we are not yet become men;
but when we are become so, we shall know that all these things are
childish.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p170"></span>For so those other things too, as we
grow to manhood, we laugh to scorn; but when we are children we account
them to be worth anxiety; and while we are gathering together potsherds
and mire we think no less of ourselves than they who are erecting their
great circuits of walls. Nevertheless they straightway perish and fall
down, and not even when standing can they be of any use to us, as indeed
neither can those fine houses. For the citizen of Heaven they cannot
receive, neither can he bear to abide in them, who hath his country
above; but as we throw down these with our feet, so he too those by his
high spirit. And as we laugh at the children, weeping at that overthrow,
even so these also, when we are bewailing it all, do not laugh only, but
weep also: because both their bowels are compassionate, and great is the
mischief thence arising.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p171"></span>Let us therefore become men. How long
are we to crawl on the earth, priding ourselves on stones and stocks?
How long are we to play? And would we played only! But now we even
betray our own salvation; and as children when they neglect their
learning, and practise themselves in these things at their leisure,
suffer very severe blows; even so we too, spending all our diligence
herein, and having then our spiritual lessons required of us in our
works, and not being able to produce them, shall have to pay the utmost
penalty. And there is none to deliver us; though he be father, brother,
what you will. But while these things shall all pass away, the torment
ensuing upon them remains immortal and unceasing; which sort of thing
indeed takes place with respect to the <span id="page_163">p. 163</span>
<span id="iii.XXIII-Page_163"></span> children as well, their father
destroying their childish toys altogether for their idleness, and
causing them to weep incessantly.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p172"></span>11. And to convince thee that these
things are such, let us bring before us wealth, that which more than
anything seems to be worthy of our pains, and let us set against it a
virtue of the soul (which soever thou wilt), and then shalt thou see
most clearly the vileness thereof. Let us, I say, suppose there are two
men (and I do not now speak of injuriousness, <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) but as yet of honest wealth); and
of these two, let the one get together money, and sail on the sea, and
till the land, and find many other ways of merchandise (although I know
not quite, whether, so doing, he can make honest gains); nevertheless
let it be so, and let it be granted that his gains are gotten with
honesty; that he buys fields, and slaves, and all such things, and
suppose no injustice connected therewith. But let the other one,
possessing as much, sell fields, sell houses, and vessels of gold and
silver, and give to the poor; let him supply the necessitous, heal the
sick, free such as are in straits, some let him deliver from bonds,
others let him release that are in mines, these let him bring back from
the noose, those, who are captives, let him rescue from their
punishment. Of whose side then would you be? And we have not as yet
spoken of the future, but as yet of what is here. Of whose part then
would ye be? his that is gathering gold, or his that is doing away with
calamities? with him that is purchasing fields, or him who is making
himself a harbor of refuge for the human race? him that is clothed with
much gold, or him that is crowned with innumerable blessings? Is not the
one like some angel come down from Heaven for the amendment of the rest
of mankind; but the other not so much as like a man, but like some
little child that is gathering all together vainly and at random?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p174"></span>But if to get money honestly be thus
absurd, and of extreme madness; when not even the honesty is there, how
can such a man choose but be more wretched than any? I say, if the
absurdity be so great; when hell is added thereto, and the loss of the
kingdom, how great wailings are due to him, both living and dead?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p175"></span>12. Or wilt thou that we take in hand
some other part also of virtue? Let us then introduce again another man,
who is in power, commanding all, invested with great dignity, having a
gorgeous herald, and girdle, and lictors, and a large company of
attendants. Doth not this seem great, and meet to be called happy? Well
then, against this man again let us set another, him that is patient of
injuries, and meek, and lowly, and long suffering; and let this last be
despitefully used, be beaten, and let him bear it quietly, and bless
them that are doing such things.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p176"></span>Now which is the one to be admired, I
pray thee? He that is puffed up, and inflamed, or he that is
self-subdued? Is not the one again like the powers above, that are so
free from passion, but the other like a blown bladder, or a man who hath
the dropsy, and great inflammation? The one like a spiritual physician,
the other, a ridiculous child that is puffing out his cheeks?

<span id="iii.XXIII-p177"></span>For why dost thou pride thyself, O man?
Because thou art borne on high in a chariot? Because a yoke of mules is
drawing thee? And what is this? Why, this one may see befalling mere
logs of wood and stones. Is it that thou art clothed with beautiful
garments? But look at him that is clad with virtue for garments, and
thou wilt see thyself to be like withering hay, but him like a tree that
bears marvellous fruit, and affords much delight to the beholders. For
thou art bearing about food for worms and moths, who, if they should set
upon thee, will quickly strip thee bare of this adorning (for truly
garments and gold and silver, are the one, the spinning of worms; the
other earth and dust, and again become earth and nothing more): but he
that is clothed with virtue hath such raiment, as not only worms cannot
hurt, but not even death itself. And very naturally; for these virtues
of the soul have not their origin from the earth, but are a fruit of the
Spirit; wherefore neither are they subject to the mouths of worms. Nay,
for these garments are woven in Heaven, where is neither moth, nor worm,
nor any other such thing.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p178"></span>Which then is better, tell me? To be
rich, or to be poor? To be in power, or in dishonor? In luxury, or in
hunger? It is quite clear; to be in honor, and enjoyment, and wealth.
Therefore, if thou wouldest have the things and not the names, leave the
earth and what is here, and find thee a place to anchor in Heaven: for
what is here is a shadow, but all things there are immovable, stedfast,
and beyond any assault.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p179"></span>Let us therefore choose them with all
diligent care, that we may be delivered from the turmoil of the things
here, and having sailed into that calm harbor, may be found with our
lading abundant, and with that unspeakable wealth of almsgiving; unto
which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the might, world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_971"></span>[154:972](1100031.htm#fr_971) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p5"></span>[Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[154:973](1100031.htm#fr_972) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p6"></span>[Rom. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[154:974](1100031.htm#fr_973) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p7"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[154:975](1100031.htm#fr_974) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p9"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[154:976](1100031.htm#fr_975) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p10"></span>[1 Tim. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXIII-p10.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “reprove.” The Greek verb is the same in [Matt. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXIII-p10.2"></span>
also.—R.\]

<span id="fn_976"></span>[154:977](1100031.htm#fr_976) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p11"></span>[Matt.
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)<span id="iii.XXIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[154:978](1100031.htm#fr_977) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p12"></span>[Matt. xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)<span id="iii.XXIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[154:979](1100031.htm#fr_978) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p14"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p14.1"></span>πλεσι</span>.\]

<span id="fn_979"></span>[154:980](1100031.htm#fr_979) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p16"></span>[Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[154:981](1100031.htm#fr_980) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p18"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p18.1"></span>τ μεγαλ</span>. The article implies the
distinction.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[154:982](1100031.htm#fr_981) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p19"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[154:983](1100031.htm#fr_982) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p20"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span id="iii.XXIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[154:984](1100031.htm#fr_983) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p22"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span id="iii.XXIII-p22.1"></span>.
\[R.V., more correctly, “strain out;” the word “at” is probably a
typographical blunder of the A.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_984"></span>[154:985](1100031.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p24"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[154:986](1100031.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p26"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p26.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p26.2"></span>πστησε</span>.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[155:987](1100031.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p28"></span>[Matt. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[155:988](1100031.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p31"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p31.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p31.2"></span>ρανον</span>.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[155:989](1100031.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p35"></span>[Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[155:990](1100031.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p37"></span>[Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[155:991](1100031.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p39"></span>[Matt. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[155:992](1100031.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p41"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p41.1"></span>ὕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p41.2"></span>βρεω</span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[155:993](1100031.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p42"></span>[Matt. xviii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[156:994](1100031.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p46"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[156:995](1100031.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p47"></span>[Luke
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041)<span id="iii.XXIII-p47.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Dost thou not even fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation.” In several places Chrysostom gives the plural form, as
here, but there is little authority for it in the New Testament
text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_995"></span>[156:996](1100031.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p53"></span>[Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXIII-p53.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “the swine,” the article is in the Greek text of the Homily.\]

<span id="fn_996"></span>[156:997](1100031.htm#fr_996) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p55"></span>[Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[156:998](1100031.htm#fr_997) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p56"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXIII-p56.1"></span>.
In the verse before that to which reference is here made, our Saviour
says, “Fear them not therefore.” And again in the verse after, “Fear not
them which kill the body:” whence the natural conclusion is, that His
chief purpose here was to caution His disciples against the fear of man.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[156:999](1100031.htm#fr_998) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p57"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXIII-p57.1"></span>.
In the verse before that to which reference is here made, our Saviour
says, “Fear them not therefore.” And again in the verse after, “Fear not
them which kill the body:” whence the natural conclusion is, that His
chief purpose here was to caution His disciples against the fear of man.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[156:1000](1100031.htm#fr_999) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p58"></span>The words in italics are omitted in the
manuscripts. \[The construction of the Greek is very difficult, if the
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXIII-p58.1"></span>mss</span>. text is
accepted. One <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p58.2"></span>ms</span>., however, has an imperative in
the last clause: “let them reverence them,” thus relieving the
difficulty.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[156:1001](1100031.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p60"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p60.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p60.2"></span>μπαροινεται</span> .

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[156:1002](1100031.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p61"></span>\[R.V., properly omits “again.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[156:1003](1100031.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p64"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p64.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p64.2"></span>πιεκειαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[157:1004](1100031.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p65"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[157:1005](1100031.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p66"></span>[2 Tim. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXIII-p66.1"></span>.
\[The citation is modified.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[157:1006](1100031.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p67"></span>[Titus iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXIII-p67.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “A man that is heretical (or factious) after a first and second
admonition, refuse (or avoid).”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[157:1007](1100031.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p70"></span>[Col. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXIII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[157:1008](1100031.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p72"></span>[Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[157:1009](1100031.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p74"></span>[Matt.
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#025),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXIII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[157:1010](1100031.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p80"></span>[Matt. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXIII-p80.1"></span>.
\[The citation is not exact. Here, as below, Chrysostom gives the form:
“For which is there of you,” omitting “man.” The Oxford translator
follows the A.V. here but not below. “Of whom” (in R.V.) is better
English (see below); the Greek is the same in both passages.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[158:1011](1100031.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p82"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p82.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p82.2"></span>πετεχισε</span>.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[158:1012](1100031.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p82.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p83"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p83.1"></span>οκ ατεν χρ μνου, λλ κα χρ ιτεν</span>, “not
only is it fitting to ask,” but to ask what “is fitting.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[158:1013](1100031.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p86"></span>[1 Kings
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#010), [2 Chr.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXIII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[158:1014](1100031.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p87"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXIII-p87.1"></span>,
perhaps “disputing” rather than “doubting.” \[R.V. text “disputing,” in
the margin “doubting.” Comp. Homily XIX. 11, p. 138.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[158:1015](1100031.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p91"></span>[Matt. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXIII-p91.1"></span>.
\[“Heavenly” is substituted for “which is in Heaven.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[158:1016](1100031.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p93"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p93.1"></span>πονηραν</span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[158:1017](1100031.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p96"></span>Or “life:” see [Matt. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXIII-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[158:1018](1100031.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p97"></span>[Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXIII-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[158:1019](1100031.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p100"></span>[Matt. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXIII-p100.1"></span>.
\[<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXIII-p100.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXIII-p100.3"></span>οτω</span></span> is
omitted; so the Vulgate.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[159:1020](1100031.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p103"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p103.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[159:1021](1100031.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p107"></span>Confined, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p107.1"></span>τεθλιμμνη</span> .

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[159:1022](1100031.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p107.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p108"></span>[Matt.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.XXIII-p108.1"></span>. \[R.V., “by the narrow gate;” “enter in
thereby;” “For narrow is the gate, and straitened the way,” &c.
Chrysostom introduces verse 14 with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p108.2"></span>κα</span>; and in some <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XXIII-p108.3"></span>mss</span>. of the
Homilies <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXIII-p108.4"></span>τ</span>
is added. Comp. R.V. margin: “How narrow,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[159:1023](1100031.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p110"></span>[Matt. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXIII-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[159:1024](1100031.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p112"></span>[2 Cor.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)<span
id="iii.XXIII-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[159:1025](1100031.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p114"></span>[Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXIII-p114.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “our wrestling is not,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[159:1026](1100031.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p116"></span>[Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXIII-p116.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “men of violence,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[159:1027](1100031.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p118"></span>‘They pass in stooping low,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p119"></span>For strait and narrow was the way,
which he did shew.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p120"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="iii.XXIII-p121"></span>Each goodly thing is hardest to begin:

<span id="iii.XXIII-p122"></span>But entered in, a spacious court they
see,

<span id="iii.XXIII-p123"></span>Both plaine, and pleasant to be walked
in.

<span id="iii.XXIII-p124"></span>*Spenser’s Faery Queen*, b. i. c. x. 5,
6.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[160:1028](1100031.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p126"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p126.1"></span>συγκροτοντα</span> .

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[160:1029](1100031.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p129"></span>[Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXIII-p129.1"></span>.
\[“For they will come” is substituted by Chrysostom for “which come,”
but without any <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p129.2"></span>mss</span>. authority known to us.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[160:1030](1100031.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p132"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p132.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p132.2"></span>πιθετν</span>.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[160:1031](1100031.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p133.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p134"></span>[Matt. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXIII-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[160:1032](1100031.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p135.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p136"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p136.1"></span>βιν</span>. Comp. Hom. XLVI. p. 486, Ben.
\[In the passage referred to, the word is rendered “practice.” For the
ethical sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p136.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p136.3"></span>βι</span></span> in classical usage, see
Trench, *Synonymes New Testament*, *sub voce*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[160:1033](1100031.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p138.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p139"></span>[Rom. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXIII-p139.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “by their smooth and fair speech they beguile the hearts of the
innocent.” But Chrysostom omits <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p139.2"></span>κα ελογα</span>, agreeing with the reading
of the four principal Græco-Latin <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p139.3"></span>mss</span>. of the Pauline Epistles.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[160:1034](1100031.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p142"></span>[Matt. vii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span
id="iii.XXIII-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[160:1035](1100031.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p144"></span>[Rom.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXIII-p144.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “For the mind of the flesh,” etc. The translator has not
rendered <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p144.2"></span>γρ</span>, which occurs in the Greek of the
Homily, as in [Rom. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006)<span
id="iii.XXIII-p144.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[161:1036](1100031.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p150.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p151"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p151.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p151.2"></span>πετεχισεν ατο</span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[161:1037](1100031.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p152.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p153"></span>[Matt. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXIII-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[161:1038](1100031.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p155.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p156"></span>[Matt. vii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXIII-p156.1"></span>.
\[There is here a slight variation from the New Testament text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[161:1039](1100031.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p161.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p162"></span>[Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="iii.XXIII-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[161:1040](1100031.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p164"></span>[Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXIII-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[161:1041](1100031.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p164.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p165"></span>[Matt. xxv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042)<span id="iii.XXIII-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[163:1042](1100031.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="iii.XXIII-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIII-p173"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIII-p173.1"></span>πλεονεξα</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIV](1100032)
