[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100085)  [Next](1100087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXVIII"></span> <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_472"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXVI.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p3"></span>*“And as they were eating, Jesus took
bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave* <span
id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944) *it to the disciples, and said,
Take, eat; This is my body.”*

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p5"></span>*“And He took a cup, and gave thanks,
and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; This is my blood of the
New Testament, Which is shed for many, for the remission of
sins.”* <span id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945)

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p7.1"></span>Ah</span>! how great is the blindness of
the traitor! Even partaking of the mysteries, he remained the same; and
admitted to the most holy <span id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946)
table, he changed not. And this Luke shows by saying, that after this
Satan entered <span id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947) into him, not
as despising the Lord’s body, but thenceforth laughing to scorn the
traitor’s shamelessness. For indeed his sin became greater from both
causes, as well in that he came to the mysteries with such a
disposition, as that having approached them, he did not become better,
either from fear, or from the benefit, or from the honor. But Christ
forbad him not, although He knew all things, that thou mightest learn
that He omits none of the things that pertain to correction. Wherefore
both before this, and after this, He continually admonished him, and
checked him, both by deeds, and by words; both by fear, and by kindness;
both by threatening, and by honor. But none of these things withdrew him
from that grievous pest.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p10"></span>Wherefore thenceforth He leaves him,
and by the mysteries again reminds the disciples of His being slain, and
in the midst of the meal His discourse is of the cross, by the continual
repeating of the prediction, making His passion easy to receive. For if,
when so many things had been done and foretold, they were troubled; if
they had heard none of these things, what would they not have felt?

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p11"></span>“And as they were eating, He took
bread, and brake it.” Why can it have been that He ordained this
sacrament then, at the time of the passover? That thou mightest learn
from everything, both that He is the lawgiver of the Old Testament, and
that the things therein are foreshadowed because of these things.
Therefore, I say, where the type is, there He puts the truth.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p12"></span>But the evening is a sure sign of the
fullness of times, and that the things were now come to the very end.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p13"></span>And He gives thanks, to teach us how
we ought to celebrate this sacrament, and to show that not unwillingly
doth He come to the passion, and to teach us whatever we may suffer to
bear it thankfully, thence also suggesting good hopes. For if the type
was a deliverance from such bondage, how much more will the truth set
free the world, and will He be delivered up for the benefit of our race.
Wherefore, I would add, neither did He appoint the sacrament before
this, but when henceforth the rites of the law were to cease. And thus
the very chief of the feasts He brings to an end, removing them to
another most awful table, and He saith, “Take, eat, This is my body,
Which is broken for many.”

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p14"></span>And how were they not confounded at
hearing this? Because He had before told unto them many and great things
touching this. Wherefore that He establishes no more, for they had heard
it sufficiently, but he speaks of the cause of His passion, namely, the
taking away of sins. And He calls it blood of a New Testament, that of
the undertaking, the promise, the new law. For this He undertook also of
old, and this comprises the Testament that is in the new law. And like
as the Old Testament had sheep and bullocks, so this has the Lord’s
blood. Hence also He shows that He is soon to die, wherefore also He
made mention of a Testament, and He reminds them also of the former
Testament, for that also was dedicated with blood. And again He tells
the cause of His death, “which is shed for many for the remission of
<span id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_473"></span> sins;” and He saith, “Do this in
remembrance of me.” Seest thou how He removes and draws them off from
Jewish customs. For like as ye did that, He saith, in remembrance of the
miracles in Egypt, so do this likewise in remembrance of me. That was
shed for the preservation of the firstborn, this for the remission of
the sins of the whole world. For, “This,” saith He, “is my blood, which
is shed for the remission of sins.”

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p15"></span>But this He said, indicating thereby,
that His passion and His cross are a mystery, by this too again
comforting His disciples. And like as Moses saith, “This shall be to you
for an everlasting memorial,” <span id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948)
so He too, “in remembrance of me,” until I come. <span
id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949) Therefore also He saith, “With
desire I have desired to eat this passover,” <span
id="fr_2950"></span>[2951](#fn_2950) that is, to deliver you the new
rites, and to give a passover, by which I am to make you spiritual.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p19"></span>And He Himself drank of it. For lest
on hearing this, they should say, What then? do we drink blood, and eat
flesh? and then be perplexed (for when He began to discourse concerning
these things, even at the very sayings many were offended), <span
id="fr_2951"></span>[2952](#fn_2951) therefore lest they should be
troubled then likewise, He first did this Himself, leading them to the
calm participation of the mysteries. Therefore He Himself drank His own
blood. What then must we observe that other ancient rite also? some one
may say. By no means. For on this account He said, “Do this,” that He
might withdraw them from the other. For if this worketh remission of
sins, as it surely doth work it, the other is now superfluous.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p21"></span>As then in the case of the Jews, so
here also He hath bound up the memorial of the benefit with the mystery,
by this again stopping the mouths of heretics. For when they say, Whence
is it manifest that Christ was sacrificed? together with the other
arguments we stop their mouths from the mysteries also. For if Jesus did
not die, of what are the rites the symbols?

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p22"></span>2. Seest thou how much diligence hath
been used, that it should be ever borne in mind that He died for us? For
since the Marcionists, and Valentinians, and Manichæans were to arise,
denying this dispensation, He continually reminds us of the passion even
by the mysteries, (so that no man should be deceived); at once saving,
and at the same time teaching by means of that sacred table. For this is
the chief of the blessings; wherefore Paul also is in every way pressing
this.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p23"></span>Then, when He had delivered it, He
saith, “I will not drink of the fruit of this wine, until that day when
I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.” <span
id="fr_2952"></span>[2953](#fn_2952) For because He had discoursed with
them concerning passion and cross, He again introduces what He has to
say of His resurrection, having made mention of a kingdom before
them, <span id="fr_2953"></span>[2954](#fn_2953) table, and rise up in
drunkenness, whereas it were meet to give thanks, and end with an hymn.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p26"></span>Hear this, as many as wait not again
for the last prayer of the mysteries, for this is a <span
id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_474"></span>
symbol of that. He gave thanks before He gave it to His disciples, that
we also may give thanks. He gave thanks, and sang an hymn after the
giving, that we also may do this selfsame thing.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p27"></span>But for what reason doth He go forth
unto the mountain? Making Himself manifest, that He may be taken, in
order not to seem to hide himself. For He hastened to go to the place
which was also known to Judas.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p28"></span>Then “He saith unto them, All ye shall
be offended in me.” <span id="fr_2954"></span>[2955](#fn_2954) After
this He mentions also a prophecy, “For it is written, I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad:” <span
id="fr_2955"></span>[2956](#fn_2955) at once persuading them ever to
give heed to the things that are written, and at same time making it
plain that He was crucified, according to God’s purpose; and by
everything showing He was no alien from the old covenant, nor from the
God preached therein, but that what is done is a dispensation, <span
id="fr_2956"></span>[2957](#fn_2956) and that the prophets all
proclaimed all things beforehand from the beginning that are comprised
in the matter, so that they be quite confident about the better things
also.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p32"></span>And He teaches us to know what the
disciples were before the crucifixion, what after the crucifixion. For
indeed they who, when He was crucified, were not able so much as to
stand their ground, these after His death were mighty, and stronger than
adamant.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p33"></span>And this self-same thing is a
demonstration of His death, the fright and cowardice, I mean, of His
disciples. For if when so many things have been both done and said,
still some are shameless, and say that He was not crucified; if none of
these things had come to pass, to what pitch of wickedness would they
not have proceeded? So for this reason, not by His own sufferings only,
but by what took place with respect to the disciples, He confirms the
word concerning His death, and by the mysteries also, in every way
confounding those that are diseased with the pest of Marcion. For this
reason He suffers even the chief apostle to deny Him. But if He was not
bound nor crucified, whence sprung the fear to Peter, and to the rest of
the apostles.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p34"></span>He suffers them not however, on the
other hand, to wait until the sorrows, but what saith He? “But after I
am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.” <span
id="fr_2957"></span>[2958](#fn_2957) For not from Heaven doth He appear
at once, neither will He depart into any distant country, but in the
same nation, in which He had also been crucified, nearly in the same
place, so as hereby again to assure them that He that was crucified was
the very same that rose again, and in this way to comfort them more
abundantly when in sorrow. Therefore also He said “in Galilee,” that
being freed from the fears of the Jews they might believe His saying.
For which cause indeed He appeared there.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p36"></span>“But Peter answered and said, Though
all men should be offended because of Thee, yet will I never be
offended.” <span id="fr_2958"></span>[2959](#fn_2958)

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p38"></span>3. What sayest thou, O Peter? the
prophet said, “The sheep shall be scattered;” Christ hath confirmed the
saying, and sayest thou, No? Is not what passed before enough, when Thou
saidst, “Far be it from Thee,” <span
id="fr_2959"></span>[2960](#fn_2959) and thy mouth was stopped? For this
then He suffers him to fall, teaching him thereby to believe Christ in
all things, and to account His declaration more trustworthy than one’s
own conscience. And the rest too reaped no small benefit from his
denial, having come to know man’s weakness, and God’ s truth. For when
He foretells anything, we must no longer be subtle, nor lift up
ourselves above the common sort. For, “thy rejoicing,” it is said, “thou
shalt have in thyself, and not in another.” <span
id="fr_2960"></span>[2961](#fn_2960) For where he should have prayed,
and have said, Help us, that we be not cut off, he is confident in
himself, and saith, “Though all men should be offended in Thee, yet will
I never;” though all should undergo this, I shall not undergo it, which
led him on by little and little to self-confidence. Christ then, out of
a desire to put down this, permitted his denial. For since he neither
submitted to Him nor the prophet (and yet for this intent He brought in
the prophet besides, that they may not gainsay), but nevertheless since
he submitted not to His words, he is instructed by deeds.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p41"></span>For in proof that for this intent He
permitted it, that He might amend this in him, hear what He saith, “I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.” <span
id="fr_2961"></span>[2962](#fn_2961) For this He said sharply reproving
him, and showing that his fall was more grievous than the rest, and
needed more help. For the matters of blame were two; both that he
gainsaid; and, that he set himself before the other; or rather a third
too, namely, that he attributed all to himself.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p43"></span>To cure these things then, He suffered
the fall to take place, and for this cause also <span id="page_475">p.
475</span> <span id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_475"></span> leaves the others,
and addresses Himself earnestly to him. For, “Simon,” <span
id="fr_2962"></span>[2963](#fn_2962) saith He, “Simon, behold Satan hath
desired to have you that he may sift you as wheat;” that is, that he may
trouble, confound, tempt you; but “I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not.”

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p45"></span>And why, if Satan desired all, did He
not say concerning all, I have prayed for you? Is it not quite plain
that it is this, which I have mentioned before, that it is as reproving
him, and showing that his fall was more grievous than the rest, that He
directs His words to him?

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p46"></span>And wherefore said He not, But I did
not suffer it, rather than, “I have prayed?” He speaks from this time
lowly things, on His way to His passion, that He may show His humanity.
For He that has built His church upon Peter’s confession, and has so
fortified it, that ten thousand dangers and deaths are not to prevail
over it; He that hath given him the keys of Heaven, and hath put him in
possession of so much authority, and in no manner needed a prayer for
these ends (for neither did He say, I have prayed, but with His own
authority, “I will build my church, and I will give thee the keys of
Heaven”), how should He need to pray, that He might brace up the shaken
soul of a single man? Wherefore then did He speak in this way? For the
cause which I mentioned, and because of their weakness, for they had not
as yet the becoming view of Him.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p47"></span>How then was it that He denied? he
said not, that thou mayest not deny, but that thy faith fail not, that
thou perish not utterly. For this came from His care.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p48"></span>For indeed fear had driven out all
else, for it was beyond measure, and it became beyond measure, since God
had to an exceeding degree deprived him of His help, and He did
exceedingly deprive him thereof, because there was to an exceeding
degree in him the passion of self-will and contradiction. In order then
that He might pluck it up by the roots, therefore He suffered the terror
to overtake him.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p49"></span>For in proof that this passion was
grievous in him, he was not content with his former words, gainsaying
both prophet and Christ, but also after these things when Christ had
said unto him, “Verily I say unto thee, that this night, <span
id="fr_2963"></span>[2964](#fn_2963) before the cock crow, thou shalt
deny me thrice,” he replieth, “Though I should die with Thee, I will not
deny Thee in any wise.” <span id="fr_2964"></span>[2965](#fn_2964) And
Luke signifies moreover, that the more Christ warned him, so much the
more did Peter exceedingly oppose Him.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p52"></span>What mean these things, O Peter? When
He was saying, “One of you shall betray me,” thou didst fear lest thou
shouldest be the traitor, and didst constrain the disciple to ask,
although conscious to thyself of no such thing; but now, when He is
plainly crying out, and saying, “All shall be offended,” art thou
gainsaying it, and not once only, but twice and often? For this is what
Luke saith.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p53"></span>Whence then did this come to him? From
much love, from much pleasure. I mean, that after that he was delivered
from that distressing fear about the betrayal, and knew the traitor, he
then spoke confidently, and lifted himself up over the rest, saying,
“Though all men shall be offended, yet will I not be offended.” <span
id="fr_2965"></span>[2966](#fn_2965) And in some degree too his conduct
sprung from jealousy, for at supper they reasoned “which of them is the
greater,” <span id="fr_2966"></span>[2967](#fn_2966) to such a degree
did this passion trouble them. Therefore He checked him, not compelling
him to the denial, God forbid! but leaving him destitute of His help,
and convicting human nature.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p56"></span>See at any rate after these things how
he was subdued. For after the resurrection, when he had said, “And what
shall this man do?” <span id="fr_2967"></span>[2968](#fn_2967) and was
silenced, he ventured no more to gainsay as here, but held his peace.
Again, towards the assumption, <span
id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968) when he heard, “It is not for you
to know times or seasons,” <span id="fr_2969"></span>[2970](#fn_2969)
again he holds his peace, and contradicts not. After these things, on
the house, and by the sheet, when he heard a voice saying to him, “What
God hath cleansed, call not thou common,” <span
id="fr_2970"></span>[2971](#fn_2970) even though he knew not for the
time what the saying could be, he is quiet, and strives not.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p61"></span>4. All these things did that fall
effect, and whereas before that he attributes all to himself, saying,
“Though all men shall be offended, yet will I not be offended;” and, “If
I should die, I will not deny Thee” (when he should have said, If I
receive the assistance from Thee);—yet after these things altogether the
contrary, “Why do ye give heed to us, as though by our own power or
holiness we had made him to walk?” <span
id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971)

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p63"></span>Hence we learn a great doctrine, that
a man’s willingness is not sufficient, unless any one receive the succor
from above; and that again we shall gain nothing by the succor <span
id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_476"></span> from
above, if there be not a willingness. And both these things do Judas and
Peter show; for the one, though he had received much help, was profited
nothing, because he was not willing, neither contributed his part; but
this one, though he was ready in mind, because he received no
assistance, fell. For indeed of these two things is virtue’s web woven.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p64"></span>Wherefore I entreat you neither (when
you have cast all upon God) to sleep yourselves, nor, when laboring
earnestly, to think to accomplish all by your own toils. For neither is
it God’s will that we should be supine ourselves, therefore He worketh
it not all Himself; nor yet boasters, therefore He did not give all to
us; but having removed what was hurtful in either way, left that which
is useful for us. Therefore He suffered even the chief apostle to fall,
both rendering him more humbled in mind, and training him thenceforth to
greater love. “For to whom more is forgiven,” it is said, “he loveth
more.” <span id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972)

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p66"></span>Let us then in everything believe God,
and gainsay Him in nothing, though what is said seem to be contrary to
our thoughts and senses, but let His word be of higher authority than
both reasonings and sight. Thus let us do in the mysteries also, not
looking at the things set before us, but keeping in mind His sayings.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p67"></span>For His word cannot deceive, but our
senses are easily beguiled. That hath never failed, but this in most
things goeth wrong. Since then the word saith, “This is my body,” let us
both be persuaded and believe, and look at it with the eyes of the mind.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p68"></span>For Christ hath given nothing
sensible, but though in things sensible yet all to be perceived by the
mind. So also in baptism, the gift is bestowed by a sensible thing, that
is, by water; but that which is done is perceived by the mind, the
birth, I mean, and the renewal. For if thou hadst been incorporeal, He
would have delivered thee the incorporeal gifts bare; but because the
soul hath been locked up in a body, He delivers thee the things that the
mind perceives, in things sensible.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p69"></span>How many now say, I would wish to see
His form, the mark, His clothes, His shoes. Lo! thou seest Him, Thou
touchest Him, thou eatest Him. And thou indeed desirest to see His
clothes, but He giveth Himself to thee not to see only, but also to
touch and eat and receive within thee.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p70"></span>Let then no one approach it with
indifference, no one faint-hearted, but all with burning hearts, all
fervent, all aroused. For if Jews standing, and having on their shoes
and their staves in their hands, ate with haste, much more oughtest thou
to be watchful. For they indeed were to go forth to Palestine, wherefore
also they had the garb of pilgrims, but thou art about to remove unto
Heaven.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p71"></span>5. Wherefore it is needful in all
respects to be vigilant, for indeed no small punishment is appointed to
them that partake unworthily.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p72"></span>Consider how indignant thou art
against the traitor, against them that crucified Him. Look therefore,
lest thou also thyself become guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
They slaughtered the all-holy body, but thou receivest it in a filthy
soul after such great benefits. For neither was it enough for Him to be
made man, to be smitten and slaughtered, but He also commingleth Himself
with us, and not by faith only, but also in very deed maketh us His
body. What then ought not he to exceed in purity that hath the benefit
of this sacrifice, than what sunbeam should not that hand be more pure
which is to sever this flesh, the mouth that is filled with spiritual
fire, the tongue that is reddened by that most awful blood? Consider
with what sort of honor thou wast honored, of what sort of table thou
art partaking. That which when angels behold, they tremble, and dare not
so much as look up at it without awe on account of the brightness that
cometh thence, with this we are fed, with this we are commingled, and we
are made one body and one flesh with Christ. “Who shall declare the
mighty works of the Lord, and cause all His praises to be heard?” <span
id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973) What shepherd feeds his sheep with
his own limbs? And why do I say, shepherd? There are often mothers that
after the travail of birth send out their children to other women as
nurses; but He endureth not to do this, but Himself feeds us with His
own blood, and by all means entwines us with Himself.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p74"></span>Mark it, He was born of our substance.
But, you say, this is nothing to all men; though it does concern all.
For if He came unto our nature, it is quite plain that it was to all;
but if to all, then to each one. And how was it, you say, that all did
not reap the profit therefrom. This was not of His doing, whose choice
it was to do this in behalf of all, but the fault of them that were not
willing. With each one of the faithful doth He mingle Himself in the
mysteries, and whom He begat, He nourishes by Himself, and <span
id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_477"></span>
putteth not out to another; by this also persuading thee again, that He
had taken thy flesh. Let us not then be remiss, having been counted
worthy of so much both of love and honor. See ye not the infants with
how much eagerness they lay hold of the breast? with what earnest desire
they fix their lips upon the nipple? With the like let us also approach
this table, and the nipple of the spiritual cup. Or rather, with much
more eagerness let us, as infants at the breast, draw out the grace of
the spirit, let it be our one sorrow, not to partake of this food. The
works set before us are not of man’s power. He that then did these
things at that supper, this same now also works them. We occupy the
place of servants. He who sanctifieth and changeth them is the same. Let
then no Judas be present, no covetous man. If any one be not a disciple,
let him withdraw, the table receives not such. For “I keep the
passover,” He saith, “with my disciples.” <span
id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974)

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p76"></span>This table is the same as that, and
hath nothing less. For it is not so that Christ wrought that, and man
this, but He doth this too. This is that upper chamber, where they were
then; and hence they went forth unto the mount of Olives.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p77"></span>Let us also go out unto the hands of
the poor, for this spot is the mount of Olives. For the multitude of the
poor are olive-trees planted in the house of God, dropping the oil,
which is profitable for us there, which the five virgins had, and the
others that had not received perished thereby. Having received this, let
us enter in that with bright lamps we may meet the bridegroom; having
received this, let us go forth hence.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p78"></span>Let no inhuman person be present, no
one that is cruel and merciless, no one at all that is unclean.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p79"></span>6. These things I say to you that
receive, and to you that minister. For it is necessary to address myself
to you also, that you may with much care distribute the gifts there.
There is no small punishment for you, if being conscious of any
wickedness in any man, you allow him to partake of this table. “His
blood shall be required at your hands.” <span
id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975) Though any one be a general, though
a deputy, though it be he himself who is invested with the diadem, and
come unworthily, forbid him, the authority thou hast is greater than
his. Thou, if thou wert entrusted to keep a spring of water clean for a
flock, and then wert to see a sheep having much mire on its mouth, thou
wouldest not suffer it to stoop down unto it and foul the stream: but
now being entrusted with a spring not of water, but of blood and of
spirit, if thou seest any having on them sin, which is more grievous
than earth and mire, coming unto it, art thou not displeased? dost thou
not drive them off? and what excuse canst thou have?

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p81"></span>For this end God hath honored you with
this honor, that ye should discern these things. This is your office,
this your safety, this your whole crown, not that ye should go about
clothed in a white and shining vestment.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p82"></span>And whence know I, you may say, this
person, and that person? I speak not of the unknown, but of the
notorious.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p83"></span>Shall I say something more fearful. It
is not so grievous a thing for the energumens <span
id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976) to be within, as for such as these,
whom Paul affirms to trample Christ under foot, and to “account the
blood of the covenant unclean, and to do despite to the grace of the
Spirit.” <span id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977) For he that hath
fallen into sin and draws nigh, is worse than one possessed with a
devil. For they, because they are possessed are not punished, but those,
when they draw nigh unworthily, are delivered over to undying
punishment. Let us not therefore drive away these only, but all without
exception, whomsoever we may see coming unworthily.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p86"></span>Let no one communicate who is not of
the disciples. Let no Judas receive, lest he suffer the fate of Judas.
This multitude also is Christ’s body. Take heed, therefore, thou that
ministerest at the mysteries, lest thou provoke the Lord, not purging
this body. Give not a sword instead of meat.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p87"></span>Nay, though it be from ignorance that
he come to communicate, forbid him, be not afraid. Fear God, not man. If
thou shouldest fear man, thou wilt be laughed to scorn even by him, but
if God, thou wilt be an object of respect even to men.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p88"></span>But if thou darest not to do it
thyself, bring him to me; I will not allow any to dare do these things.
I would give up my life rather than impart of the Lord’s blood to the
unworthy; and will shed my own blood rather than impart of such awful
blood contrary to what is meet.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p89"></span>But if any hath not known the bad man,
after much inquiry, it is no blame. For these things have been said
about the open sinners. For if we amend these, God will speedily
discover to us the unknown also; but if we let these alone, wherefore
should He then make manifest those that are hidden.

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p90"></span>But these things I say, not that we
repel <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-Page_478"></span> them only, nor cut them off, but in
order that we may amend them, and bring them back, that we may take care
of them. For thus shall we both have God propitious, and shall find many
to receive worthily; and for our own diligence, and for our care for
others, receive great reward; unto which God grant we may all attain by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[472:2945](1100086.htm#fr_2944) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p4"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.1"></span>εχαριστσα</span> (from [Matt
26.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.2"></span>) is substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.3"></span>ελογσα</span>; and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.4"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.5"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.6"></span>δωκεν</span></span>
(from the same verse) for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.8"></span>δδου</span> (rec. text) or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p4.9"></span>δος</span>, of the more
ancient authorities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[472:2946](1100086.htm#fr_2945) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p6"></span>\[The text agrees exactly with the
received; except in the substitution of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p6.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p6.2"></span>πρ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p6.3"></span>περ</span>. The R.V. following the older
authorities, omits “new,” also rendering <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p6.4"></span>διαθκη</span> “covenant” in the text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[472:2947](1100086.htm#fr_2946) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p8"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p8.1"></span>φρικωδεσττη</span>, “most awful;”
literally, “most terrifying,” but applied to religious awe.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[472:2948](1100086.htm#fr_2947) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p9"></span>[Luke
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003), [John
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[473:2949](1100086.htm#fr_2948) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p16"></span>[Exod. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[473:2950](1100086.htm#fr_2949) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p17"></span>See [1 Cor. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p17.1"></span>, and St. Chrys. on the place, Hom. XXVII.
on 1 Cor., where he attributes the words “until He come,” expressly to
St. Paul. Various early writers attribute them to our Lord.

<span id="fn_2950"></span>[473:2951](1100086.htm#fr_2950) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p18"></span>[Luke xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2951"></span>[473:2952](1100086.htm#fr_2951) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p20"></span>[John
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060),
[61](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#061),
[66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2952"></span>[473:2953](1100086.htm#fr_2952) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p24"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p24.1"></span>. \[The word “henceforth” is omitted;
“this” is joined with “vine,” and “new” is in a different position in
the Greek. All these are variations from the received text, which is
also followed in the R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2953"></span>[473:2954](1100086.htm#fr_2953) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p25"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p25.1"></span>ε μσον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p25.2"></span>ασθητν</span>.

<span id="fn_2954"></span>[474:2955](1100086.htm#fr_2954) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p29"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2955"></span>[474:2956](1100086.htm#fr_2955) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p30"></span>See [Zech. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p30.1"></span>.
\[The words “of the flock” are omitted, as in [Mark xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#027)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p30.2"></span>. They do not occur in the passage in
Zechariah.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2956"></span>[474:2957](1100086.htm#fr_2956) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p31"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p31.1"></span>οκονομα</span>.

<span id="fn_2957"></span>[474:2958](1100086.htm#fr_2957) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p35"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#032)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p35.1"></span>. \[R.V., “am raised up.”\]

<span id="fn_2958"></span>[474:2959](1100086.htm#fr_2958) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p37"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p37.1"></span>. \[The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p37.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p37.3"></span>λλ</span> is inserted, as in [Mark xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#029)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p37.4"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2959"></span>[474:2960](1100086.htm#fr_2959) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p39"></span>[Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2960"></span>[474:2961](1100086.htm#fr_2960) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p40"></span>[Gal. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p40.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “glorying.”\]

<span id="fn_2961"></span>[474:2962](1100086.htm#fr_2961) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p42"></span>[Luke xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p42.1"></span>. \[R.V., “made supplication.”\]

<span id="fn_2962"></span>[475:2963](1100086.htm#fr_2962) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p44"></span>[Luke xxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p44.1"></span>. \[R.V., “Satan asked;” margin, “Or,
obtained you by asking.”\]

<span id="fn_2963"></span>[475:2964](1100086.htm#fr_2963) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p50"></span>\[The preposition <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p50.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXVIII-p50.2"></span>ν</span> is omitted
from the Greek text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2964"></span>[475:2965](1100086.htm#fr_2964) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p51"></span>[Matt.
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#035)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p51.1"></span>. \[R.V., “If I must die with thee, *yet*
will I not deny thee.”\]

<span id="fn_2965"></span>[475:2966](1100086.htm#fr_2965) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p54"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p54.1"></span>. \[Slightly changed.\]

<span id="fn_2966"></span>[475:2967](1100086.htm#fr_2966) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p55"></span>[Luke xxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2967"></span>[475:2968](1100086.htm#fr_2967) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p57"></span>[John xxi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#021)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[475:2969](1100086.htm#fr_2968) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p58"></span>*i.e*., the Ascension.

<span id="fn_2969"></span>[475:2970](1100086.htm#fr_2969) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p59"></span>[Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2970"></span>[475:2971](1100086.htm#fr_2970) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p60"></span>[Acts x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[475:2972](1100086.htm#fr_2971) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p62"></span>[Acts iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p62.1"></span>. \[Slightly altered.\]

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[476:2973](1100086.htm#fr_2972) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p65"></span>[Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[476:2974](1100086.htm#fr_2973) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p73"></span>[Ps. cvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[477:2975](1100086.htm#fr_2974) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p75"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#018)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[477:2976](1100086.htm#fr_2975) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p80"></span>[Ezek. xxxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[477:2977](1100086.htm#fr_2976) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p84"></span>*i.e*., vexed with devils.

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[477:2978](1100086.htm#fr_2977) <span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXVIII-p85"></span>[Heb. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span
id="iii.LXXVIII-p85.1"></span>. \[Slightly altered, as in Homily LXXV.
5, p. 455.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXIX](1100087)
