[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100036)  [Next](1100038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXIX"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span
id="iii.XXIX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p3"></span>*“And He entered into a ship, and passed
over, and came into His own city. And, behold, they brought to Him a man
sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said
unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven
thee.”* <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p5.1"></span>By</span> His own city here he means
Capernaum. For that which gave Him birth was Bethlehem; that which
brought Him up, Nazareth; that which had Him continually inhabiting it,
Capernaum.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p6"></span>This paralytic, however, was different
from that one who is set forth in John. <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) For he lay at the pool, but this at
Capernaum; and that man had his infirmity thirty and eight years, but
concerning this, no such thing is mentioned; and the other was in a
state destitute of protectors, but this had some to take care of him,
who also took him up, and carried him. And to this He saith, “Son, thy
sins be forgiven thee,” <span id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) but
to that He saith, “Wilt thou be made whole?” <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) And the other He healed on a
sabbath day, but this not on a sabbath, for else the Jews would have
laid this also to His charge; and in the case of this man they were
silent, but in that of the other they were instant in persecuting him.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p10"></span>And this I have said, not without
purpose, lest any one should think there is a discrepancy from
suspecting it to be one and the same paralytic.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p11"></span>But do thou, I pray thee, mark the
humility and meekness of our Lord. For He had also before this put away
the multitudes from Him, and moreover when sent away by them at Gadara,
He withstood not, but retired, not however to any great distance.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p12"></span>And again He entered into the ship and
passed over, when He might have gone over afoot. For it was His will not
to be always doing miracles, that He might not injure the doctrine of
His humanity. <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p14"></span>Now Matthew indeed saith, that “they
brought him,” but the others, that they also broke up the roof, and let
him down. <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215) And they put the
sick man before Christ, saying nothing, but committing the whole to Him.
For though in the beginning He Himself went about, and did not require
so much faith of them that came unto Him; yet in this case they both
approached Him, and had faith required on their part. For, “Seeing,” it
is said, “their faith;” that is, the faith of them that had let the man
down. For He doth not on all occasions require faith on the part of the
sick only: as for instance, when they are insane, or in any other way,
through their disease, are out of their own control. Or rather, in this
case the sick man too had part in the faith; for he would not have
suffered himself to be let down, unless he had believed.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p16"></span>Forasmuch then as they had evinced so
great faith, He also evinces His own power, with all authority absolving
his sins, and signifying in all ways that He is equal in honor with Him
that begat Him. And mark; He implied it from the beginning, by His
teaching, when He taught them as one having <span id="page_192">p.
192</span> <span id="iii.XXIX-Page_192"></span> authority; by the leper,
when He said, “I will, be thou clean,” <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) by the centurion, when upon his
saying, “Speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed, He
marvelled at him,” <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217) and
celebrated him above all men; by the sea, when He curbed it with a mere
word; by the devils, when they acknowledged Him as their judge, and He
cast them out with great authority.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p19"></span>Here again in another and a greater way
He constrains His very enemies to confess His equality in honor, and by
their own mouth He makes it manifest. For He, to signify His
indifference to honor (for there stood a great company of spectators
shutting up the entrance, wherefore also they let him down from above),
did not straightway hasten to heal the visible body, but He takes His
occasion from them; and He healed first that which is invisible, the
soul, by forgiving his sins; which indeed saved the other, but brought
no great glory to Himself. They themselves rather, troubled by their
malice, and wishing to assail Him, caused even against their will what
was done to be conspicuous. He, in fact, in His abundance of counsel,
made use of their envy for the manifestation of the miracle.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p20"></span>Upon their murmuring, <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218) then, and saying, “This man
blasphemeth; who can forgive sins but God only?” <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219) let us see what He saith. Did He
indeed take away the suspicion? And yet if He were not equal, He should
have said, “Why fix upon me a notion which is not convenient? I am far
from this power.” But now hath He said none of these things, but quite
the contrary He hath both affirmed and ratified, as well by His own
voice, as by the performance of the miracle. Thus, it appearing that His
saying certain things of Himself gave disgust to his hearers, He affirms
what He had to say concerning Himself by the others; and what is truly
marvellous, not by His friends only, but also by His enemies; for this
is the excellency of His wisdom. By His friends on the one hand, when He
said, “I will, be thou clean,” <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220) and when He said, “I have not found
so great faith, no, not in Israel;” <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221) but by His enemies, now. For
because they had said, “No man can forgive sins but God only,” He
subjoined,

<span id="iii.XXIX-p25"></span>“But that ye may know that the Son of Man
hath power to forgive sins upon the earth (then saith He to the sick of
the palsy), Arise, and take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.” <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p27"></span>And not here only, but also in another
case again, when they were saying, “For a good work we stone thee not,
but for blasphemy, and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself
God,” <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223) neither in that
instance did He put down this opinion, but again confirmed it, saying,
“If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I do, though
ye believe not me, believe the works.” <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p30"></span>2. In this case indeed He discloses also
another sign, and that no small one, of His own Godhead, and of His
equality in honor with the Father. For whereas they said, “To unbind
sins pertains to God only,” He not only unbinds sins, but also before
this He makes another kind of display in a thing which pertained to God
only; the publishing the secrets in the heart. For neither had they
uttered what they were thinking.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p31"></span>For “behold, certain of the scribes,” it
saith, “said within themselves, This man blasphemeth. And Jesus knowing
their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?” <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p33"></span>But that it belongs to God only to know
men’s secrets, hear what saith the prophet, “Thou most entirely
alone <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226) knowest the
hearts;” <span id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227) and again, “God
trieth the hearts and reins; <span id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228)
” and Jeremiah too saith, “The heart is deep above all things, and it is
man, and who shall know him?” <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229)
and, “Man shall look on the face, but God on the heart.” <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230) And by many things one may see,
that to know what is in the mind belongs to God alone.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p39"></span>Implying therefore that He is God, equal
to Him that begat Him; what things they were reasoning in themselves
(for through fear of the multitude, they durst not utter their mind),
this their opinion He unveils and makes manifest, evincing herein also
His great gentleness. <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p41"></span>“For wherefore,” saith He, “think ye evil
in your hearts?” <span id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p43"></span>And yet if there were cause for
displeasure, it was the sick man who should have been displeased, as
being altogether deceived, and should have said “One thing I came to
have healed, and amendest Thou another? Why, whence is it manifest that
my sins are forgiven?”

<span id="iii.XXIX-p44"></span>But now he for his part utters no such
word, but gives himself up to the power of <span id="page_193">p.
193</span> <span id="iii.XXIX-Page_193"></span> the healer; but these
being curious and envious, plot against the good deeds of others.
Wherefore He rebukes them indeed, but with all gentleness. “Why, if ye
disbelieve,” saith He, “what went before, and account my saying a boast;
behold I add to it also another, the uncovering of your secrets; and
after that again another.” What then is this? The giving tone to the
body of the paralyzed.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p45"></span>And whereas, when He spake unto the sick
of the palsy, He spake without clearly manifesting His own authority:
for He said not, “I forgive thee thy sins,” but, “thy sins be forgiven
thee:” upon their constraining, He discloses His authority more clearly,
saying, “But that ye may know that the Son of Man hath power <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) on earth to forgive sins.”

<span id="iii.XXIX-p47"></span>Seest thou, how far He was from
unwillingness to be thought equal to the Father? For He said not at all,
“The Son of Man hath need of another;” or, “He hath given Him
authority,” but, “He hath authority.” Neither doth He say it for love of
honor, but “to convince you,” so He speaks, “that I do not blaspheme in
making myself equal with God.”

<span id="iii.XXIX-p48"></span>Thus everywhere His will is to offer
proofs clear and indisputable; as when He saith, “Go thy way, show
thyself to the priest;” <span id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) and
when He points to Peter’s wife’s mother ministering, and permits the
swine to cast themselves down headlong. And in the same manner here
also; first, for a certain token of the forgiveness of his sins, He
provides the giving tone to his body: and of that again, his carrying
his bed; to hinder the fact from being thought a mere fancy. And He
doeth not this, before He had asked them a question. “For whether is
easier,” saith He, “to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee? or to say, Take
up thy bed, and go unto thine house?” <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235) Now what He saith is like this,
“Which seems to you easier, to bind up a disorganized <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) body, or to undo <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237) the sins of a soul? It is quite
manifest; to bind up a body. For by how much a soul is better than a
body, by so much is the doing away sins a greater work than this; but
because the one is unseen, the other in sight, I throw in that, which
although an inferior thing, is yet more open to sense; that the greater
also and the unseen may thereby receive its proof;” thus by His works
anticipating even now the revelation of what had been said by John, that
“He taketh away the sins of the world.”

<span id="iii.XXIX-p53"></span>Well then, having raised him up, He sends
him to his house; here again signifying His unboastfulness, <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) and that the event was not a mere
imagination; for He makes the same persons witnesses of his infirmity,
and also of his health. For I indeed had desired, saith He, through thy
calamity to heal those also, that seem to be in health, but are diseased
in mind; but since they will not, depart thou home, to heal them that
are there.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p55"></span>Seest thou how He indicates Him <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) to be Creator both of souls and
bodies? He heals therefore the palsy in each of the two substances, and
makes the invisible evident by that which is in sight. But nevertheless
they still creep upon the earth.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p57"></span>“For when the multitudes saw it, they
marvelled, and glorified God, which” (it is said) “had given such power
unto men:” <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) for the flesh was
an offense unto them. <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) But He
did not rebuke them, but proceeds by His works to arouse them, and exalt
their thoughts. Since for the time it was no small thing for Him to be
thought greater than all men, as having come from God. For had they well
established these things in their own minds, going on orderly they would
have known, that He was even the Son of God. But they did not retain
these things clearly, wherefore neither were they able to approach Him.
For they said again, “This man is not of God;” <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) “how is this man of God?” And they
were continually harping on these things, putting them forward as cloaks
for their own passions.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p61"></span>3. Which thing many now also do; and
thinking to avenge God, fulfill their own passions, when they ought to
go about all with moderation. For even the God of all, having power to
launch His thunderbolt against them that blaspheme Him, makes the sun to
rise, and sends forth the showers, and affords them all other things in
abundance; whom we ought to imitate, and so to entreat, advise,
admonish, with meekness, not angry, not making ourselves wild beasts.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p62"></span>For no harm at all ensues unto God by
their blasphemy, that thou shouldest be angered, but he who blasphemed
hath himself also received the wound. Wherefore groan, bewail, for the
calamity indeed deserves tears. And the wounded man, again,—noth <span
id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span id="iii.XXIX-Page_194"></span> ing can
so heal him as gentleness: gentleness, I say, which is mightier than any
force.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p63"></span>See, for example, how He Himself, the
insulted one, discourses with us, both in the Old Testament, and in the
New; in the one saying, “O my people, what have I done unto thee?” <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) in the other, “Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me.” <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244) And
Paul too bids, “In meekness instruct those that oppose
themselves.” <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) And Christ
again, when His disciples had come to Him, requiring fire to come down
from heaven, strongly rebuked them, saying, “Ye know not what manner of
spirit ye are of.” <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p68"></span>And here again He said not, “O accursed,
and sorcerers as ye are; O ye envious, and enemies of men’s salvation;”
but, “Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?”

<span id="iii.XXIX-p69"></span>We must, you see, use gentleness to
eradicate the disease. Since he who is become better through the fear of
man, will quickly return to wickedness again. For this cause He
commanded also the tares to be left, giving an appointed day of
repentance. Yea, and many of them in fact repented, and became good, who
before were bad; as for instance, Paul, the Publican, the Thief; for
these being really tares turned into kindly wheat. Because, although in
the seeds this cannot be, yet in the human will it is both manageable
and easy; for our will is bound by no limits of nature, but hath freedom
of choice for its privilege.

<span id="iii.XXIX-p70"></span>Accordingly, when thou seest an enemy of
the truth, wait on him, take care of him, lead him back into virtue, by
showing forth an excellent life, by applying “speech that cannot be
condemned,” <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) by bestowing
attention and tender care, by trying every means of amendment, in
imitation of the best physicians. For neither do they cure in one manner
only, but when they see the wound not yield to the first remedy, they
add another, and after that again another; and now they use the knife,
and now bind up. And do thou accordingly, having become a physician of
souls, put in practice every mode of cure according to Christ’s laws;
that thou mayest receive the reward both of saving thyself and of
profiting others, doing all to the glory of God, and so being glorified
also thyself. “For them that glorify me,” saith He, “I will glorify; and
they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.” <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248)

<span id="iii.XXIX-p73"></span>Let us, I say, do all things unto His
glory; that we may attain unto that blessed portion, unto which God
grant we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[191:1211](1100037.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p4"></span>\[R.V., accepting the same Greek text with
Chrysostom, “thy sins are forgiven.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[191:1212](1100037.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p7"></span>[John v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXIX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[191:1213](1100037.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p8"></span>\[R.V., accepting the same Greek text with
Chrysostom, “thy sins are forgiven.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[191:1214](1100037.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p9"></span>[John v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[191:1215](1100037.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p13.1"></span>τ τ οκονομα λγ</span>. \[“Incarnation”
expresses better the technical sense of the Greek term, as here used.
Comp. Homily XIII. 2, p. 81, note.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[191:1216](1100037.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p15"></span>[Mark
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004), [Luke
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXIX-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[192:1217](1100037.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p17"></span>[Matt. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXIX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[192:1218](1100037.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p18"></span>[Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXIX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[192:1219](1100037.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p21"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p21.2"></span>θορυβοντο</span>; a stronger word than the
Gospel narratives suggest. The translator tones it down, as above.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[192:1220](1100037.htm#fr_1219) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p22"></span>[Matt.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003), [Mark
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXIX-p22.1"></span>
\[from which the latter part of the citation is taken.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[192:1221](1100037.htm#fr_1220) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p23"></span>[Matt. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXIX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[192:1222](1100037.htm#fr_1221) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p24"></span>[Matt. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[192:1223](1100037.htm#fr_1222) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p26"></span>[Matt. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXIX-p26.1"></span>.
\[“Upon the earth” is placed in this peculiar position by Chrysostom
here. In the next reference to the passage the correct order is
followed.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[192:1224](1100037.htm#fr_1223) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p28"></span>[John x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033)<span id="iii.XXIX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[192:1225](1100037.htm#fr_1224) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p29"></span>[John
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span id="iii.XXIX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[192:1226](1100037.htm#fr_1225) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p32"></span>[Matt.
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[192:1227](1100037.htm#fr_1226) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p34"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p34.1"></span>μοντατο</span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[192:1228](1100037.htm#fr_1227) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p35"></span>[2 Chron. vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXIX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[192:1229](1100037.htm#fr_1228) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p36"></span>[Ps. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXIX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[192:1230](1100037.htm#fr_1229) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p37"></span>[Jer. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXIX-p37.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXIX-p37.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[192:1231](1100037.htm#fr_1230) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p38"></span>[1 Sam. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXIX-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[192:1232](1100037.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p40.1"></span>τ νεπαχθς</span>.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[192:1233](1100037.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p42"></span>[Matt. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXIX-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[193:1234](1100037.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p46"></span>\[R.V., margin, “authority;” compare the
next paragraph. On the order, see note 7, p. 196.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[193:1235](1100037.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p49"></span>[Matt. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXIX-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[193:1236](1100037.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p50"></span>[Matt.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXIX-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[193:1237](1100037.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p51"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p51.1"></span>δικισμνον</span>, literally, “distributed
into different habitations;” as when the population of Mantinea was
broken up by the Lacedæmonians, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p51.2"></span>δικσθη Μαντινεα</span>: see Xen. *Hellenic*,
v. 2, 7; comp. Dem. *de Pace*, i. 59, ed. Reiske; *de Fals. Leg*. i.
366.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[193:1238](1100037.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p52"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p52.1"></span>λσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[193:1239](1100037.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p54"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p54.1"></span>το τυφον</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[193:1240](1100037.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p56"></span>\[The reference here seems to be to God,
but a reflexive sense is not improbable; “indicates that He Himself is,”
etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[193:1241](1100037.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p58"></span>[Matt. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXIX-p58.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “they were afraid,” for “they marvelled” (A.V.). But
Chrysostom’s text agrees with that of the received, followed by the
A.V.\]

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[193:1242](1100037.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p59"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p59.1"></span>προσστατο ατο</span>.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[193:1243](1100037.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p60"></span>[John ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXIX-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[194:1244](1100037.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p64"></span>[Micah vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXIX-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[194:1245](1100037.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p65"></span>[Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXIX-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[194:1246](1100037.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p66"></span>[2 Tim. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXIX-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[194:1247](1100037.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p67"></span>[Luke ix.
55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="iii.XXIX-p67.1"></span>.
\[This clause is not found in the oldest Greek <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXIX-p67.2"></span>mss</span>. of the New Testament. Comp. R.V.
text and margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[194:1248](1100037.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p71"></span>[Tit. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXIX-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[194:1249](1100037.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="iii.XXIX-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXIX-p72"></span>[1 Sam. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXIX-p72.1"></span>.
\[“Shall be despised,” according to the form given in the text. But in
the <span class="c41"><span id="iii.XXIX-p72.2"></span>LXX</span>. the
last verb is not the same as the preceding one.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXX](1100038)
