[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100058)  [Next](1100060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LI"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LI-p1.1"></span>Homily LI.</span>

<span id="iii.LI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XV.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001)<span
id="iii.LI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LI-p3"></span>*“Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees,
which were of Jerusalem, saying, Why do Thy disciples,” etc.* <span
id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977)

<span id="iii.LI-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LI-p5.1"></span>Then</span>; when? when He had wrought His
countless miracles; when He had healed the infirm by the touch of the
hem of His garment. For even with this intent doth the evangelist mark
the time, that He might signify their unspeakable wickedness, by nothing
repressed.

<span id="iii.LI-p6"></span>But what means, “The Scribes and Pharisees,
which were of Jerusalem?” <span id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978) In
every one of the tribes were they scattered abroad, and divided into
twelve parts; but they who occupied the chief city were worse than the
others, as both enjoying more honor, and having contracted much
haughtiness.

<span id="iii.LI-p8"></span>But mark, I pray thee, how even by the
question itself they are convicted; in not saying, “Why do they
transgress the law of Moses,” but, “the tradition of the elders.” Whence
it is evident that the priests were inventing many novelties, although
Moses, with much terror and with much threatening, had enjoined neither
to add nor take away. “For ye shall not add,” saith he, “unto the word
which I command you this day, and ye shall not take away from it.” <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979)

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span id="iii.LI-Page_305"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p10"></span>But not the less were they innovating; as
in this instance, that one ought not to eat with unwashen hands, that we
must wash cups and brazen vessels, that we must wash also ourselves.
Thus, when men were henceforth, as time advanced, to be freed from their
observances, at that very time they bound them with the same in more and
more instances, fearing lest any one should take away their power, and
wishing to strike more dread, as though they were themselves also
lawgivers. The thing in fact proceeded so far in enormity, that while
their own commandments were kept, those of God were transgressed; and
they so far prevailed, that the matter had actually become a ground of
accusation. Which was a twofold charge against them, in that they both
invented novelties, and were so strict exactors on their own account,
while of God they made no reckoning.

<span id="iii.LI-p11"></span>And omitting to speak of the other things,
the pots and the brazen vessels (for it was too ridiculous), what seemed
more reasonable than the rest, that they bring forward, wishing, as
seems at least to me, in that way to provoke Him to anger. Wherefore
also they made mention of the elders, in order that He, as setting them
at nought, might give occasion against Himself.

<span id="iii.LI-p12"></span>But it were meet first to inquire, why the
disciples ate with unwashen hands. Wherefore then did they so eat? Not
as making a point of it, but as overlooking henceforth the things that
are superfluous, and attending to such as are necessary; having no law
to wash or not to wash, but doing either as it happened. For they that
despised even their own necessary food, how were they to hold these
things worth much consideration? This then having often happened
unintentionally,—for instance, when they ate in the wilderness, when
they plucked the ears of corn,—is now put forward as a charge by these
persons, who are always transgressing in the great things, and making
much account of the superfluous.

<span id="iii.LI-p13"></span>2. What then saith Christ? He did not set
Himself against it, neither made He any defense, but straightway blames
them again, plucking down their confidence, and signifying that he who
commits great sins ought not to be strict with others concerning small
matters. “What? when you ought to be blamed,” saith He, “do ye even
blame?”

<span id="iii.LI-p14"></span>But do thou observe, how when it is His
will to set aside any of the things enjoined by the law, He does it in
the form of an apology; and so He did in that case. For by no means doth
He proceed at once to transgress it, nor doth He say, “It is nothing;”
for surely He would have made them more audacious; but first He clean
cuts away their boldness, bringing forward the far heavier charge, and
directing it upon their head. And He neither saith, “they do well in
transgressing it,” lest He should give them a hold on Him; nor doth He
speak ill of their proceeding, lest He should confirm the law: nor
again, on the other hand, doth He blame the elders, as lawless and
unholy men; for doubtless they would have shunned Him as a reviler and
injurious: but all these things He gives up, and proceeds another way.
And He seems indeed to be rebuking the persons themselves who had come
to Him, but He is reprehending them that enacted these laws; nowhere
indeed making mention of the elders, but by His charge against the
Scribes casting down them also, and signifying that their sin is
twofold, first in disobeying God, next in doing so on men’s account; as
though He had said, “Why this, this hath ruined you, your obeying the
elders in all things.”

<span id="iii.LI-p15"></span>Yet He saith not so, but this is just what
He intimates, by answering them as follows:

<span id="iii.LI-p16"></span>“Why do ye also transgress the commandment
of God by <span id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) your tradition? For
God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and thy mother: and, He that
curseth father or mother, let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever
shall say to his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou
mightest be profited by me, and <span
id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981) honor not his father or his
mother <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) —And ye have made void
the commandment <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983) of God by
your tradition. <span id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984)

<span id="iii.LI-p22"></span>And He said not, “the elders’ tradition,”
but “your own.” And, “ye say;” again He said not, “the elders say:” in
order to make His speech less galling. That is, because they wanted to
prove the disciples transgressors of the law, He signifies that they
themselves are doing so, but that these are free from blame. For of
course that is not a law, which is enjoined by men (wherefore also He
calls it “a tradition”), and especially by men that are transgressors of
the law.

<span id="iii.LI-p23"></span>And since this had no shade of contrariety
to the law, to command men to wash their hands, He brings forward
another tradition, which is opposed to the law. And what He <span
id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span id="iii.LI-Page_306"></span> saith is
like this. “They taught the young, under the garb of piety, to despise
their fathers.” How, and in what way? “If one of their parents said to
his child, Give me this sheep that thou hast, or this calf, or any such
thing, they used to say, ‘This is a gift to God, whereby thou wouldest
be profited by me, and thou canst not have it.’ And two evils hence
arose: on the one hand they did not bring them to God, on the other they
defrauded their parents under the name of the offering, alike insulting
their parents for God’s sake, and God for their parents’ sake.” But He
doth not say this at once, but first rehearses the law, by which He
signifies His earnest desire that parents should be honored. For,
“honor,” saith He, “thy father and thy mother, that thou mayest live
long upon the earth.” <span id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985) And
again, “He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death.” <span
id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986)

<span id="iii.LI-p26"></span>But He, omitting the first, the reward
appointed for them that honor their parents, states that which is more
awful, the punishment, I mean, threatened to such as dishonor them;
desiring both to dismay them, and to conciliate such as have
understanding; and He implies them to be for this worthy of death. For
if he who dishonors them in word is punished, much more ye, who do so in
deed, and who not only dishonor, but also teach it to others. “Ye then
who ought not so much as to live, how find ye fault with the disciples?”

<span id="iii.LI-p27"></span>“And what wonder is it, if ye offer such
insults to me, who am as yet unknown, when even to the Father ye are
found doing the like?” For everywhere He both asserts and implies, that
from Him they began with this their arrogance.

<span id="iii.LI-p28"></span>But some do also otherwise interpret, “It
is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me;” that is, I
owe thee no honor, but it is a free gift from me to thee, if indeed I do
honor thee. But Christ would not have mentioned an insult of that sort.

<span id="iii.LI-p29"></span>And Mark again makes this plainer, by
saying, “It is Corban, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by
me;” <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987) which means, not a gift
and present, but properly an offering.

<span id="iii.LI-p31"></span>Having then signified that they who were
trampling on the law could not be justly entitled to blame men for
transgressing a command of certain elders, He points out this same thing
again from the prophet likewise. Thus, having once laid hold of them
severely, He proceeds further: as on every occasion He doth, bringing
forward the Scriptures, and so evincing Himself to be in accordance with
God.

<span id="iii.LI-p32"></span>And what saith the prophet? “This people
honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But in vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men.” <span id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988)

<span id="iii.LI-p34"></span>Seest thou a prophecy in exact accordance
with His sayings, and from the very first proclaiming beforehand their
wickedness? For what Christ laid to their charge now, of this Isaiah
also spake from the very first; that the words of God they despise, “for
in vain do they worship me,” saith He; but of their own they make much
account, “teaching,” saith He, “for doctrines the commandments of men.”
Therefore with reason the disciples keep them not.

<span id="iii.LI-p35"></span>3. Having, you see, given them their mortal
blow; and from the facts first, then from their own suffrage, then from
the prophet having aggravated the charge, with them indeed He discourses
not at all, incorrigibly disposed as they are now come to be, but
directs His speech to the multitudes, so as to introduce His doctrine,
great and high, and full of much strictness; and taking occasion from
the former topic, He proceeds to insert that which is greater, casting
out also the observance of meats.

<span id="iii.LI-p36"></span>But see when. When He had cleansed the
leper, when He had repealed the Sabbath, when He had shown Himself King
of earth and sea, when He had made laws, when He had remitted sins, when
He had raised dead men, when He had afforded them many proofs of His
Godhead, then He discourses of meats.

<span id="iii.LI-p37"></span>For indeed all the religion of the Jews is
comprised in this; if thou take this away, thou hast even taken away
all. For hereby He signifies, that circumcision too must be abrogated.
But of Himself He doth not prominently introduce this (forasmuch as that
was older than the other commandments, and had higher estimation), but
He enacts it by His disciples. For so great a thing was it, that even
the disciples after so long a time being minded to do it away, first
practise it, and so put it down. <span
id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989)

<span id="iii.LI-p39"></span>But see how He introduces His law: how “He
called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear and understand.” <span
id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990)

<span id="iii.LI-p41"></span>Thus He doth by no means simply reveal it
to them, but by respect and courtesy, first, He makes His saying
acceptable (for this the evangelist declares by saying, “He called <span
id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span id="iii.LI-Page_307"></span> them unto
Him”): and secondly, by the time also; in that after their refutation,
and His victory over them, and the accusation by the prophet, then He
begins His legislation, when they too would more easily receive His
sayings.

<span id="iii.LI-p42"></span>And He doth not merely call them unto Him,
but also makes them more attentive. For “understand,” saith He, that is,
“consider, rouse yourselves; for of that sort is the law now about to be
enacted. For if they set aside the law, even unseasonably, for their own
tradition, and ye hearkened; much more ought ye to hearken unto me, who
at the proper season am leading you unto a higher rule of self
restraint.”

<span id="iii.LI-p43"></span>And He did not say, “The observance of
meats is nothing, neither that Moses had given wrong injunctions, nor
that of condescension He did so;” but in the way of admonition and
counsel, and taking His testimony from the nature of the things, He
saith: “Not the things that go into the mouth, defile the man, but the
things that go out of the mouth;” <span
id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991) resorting to nature herself both in
His enactment and in His demonstration. Yet they hearing all this, made
no reply, neither did they say, “What sayest Thou? When God hath given
charges without number concerning the observance of meats, dost thou
make such laws?” But since He had utterly stopped their mouths, not by
refuting them only, but also by publishing their craft, and exposing
what was done by them in secret, and revealing the secrets of their
mind; their mouths were stopped, and so they went away.

<span id="iii.LI-p45"></span>But mark, I pray thee, how He doth not yet
venture distinctly to set Himself with boldness against the meats.
Therefore neither did He say “the meats,” but, “the things that enter in
defile not the man;” which it was natural for them to suspect concerning
the unwashen hands also. For He indeed was speaking of meats, but it
would be understood of these matters too.

<span id="iii.LI-p46"></span>Why, so strong was the feeling of scruple
about the meats, that even after the resurrection Peter said, “Not so,
Lord, for I have never eaten anything common or unclean.” <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992) For although it was for the sake of
others that He said this, and in order to leave Himself a justification
against his censurers, by pointing out that he actually remonstrated,
and not even so was excused, nevertheless it implies the depth of their
impression on that point.

<span id="iii.LI-p48"></span>Wherefore you see He Himself also at the
beginning spake not openly concerning meats, but, “The things that go
into the mouth;” and again, when He had seemed afterwards to speak more
plainly, He veiled it by His conclusion, saying, “But to eat with
unwashen hands defileth not the man:” <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993) that He might seem to have had His
occasion from thence, and to be still discoursing of the same. Therefore
He said not, “To eat meats defileth not a man,” but is as though He were
speaking on that other topic; that they may have nothing to say against
it.

<span id="iii.LI-p50"></span>4. When therefore they had heard these
things, “the Pharisees,” it is said, “were offended,” <span
id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994) not the multitudes. For “His
disciples,” so it is said, “came and said unto Him, Knowest thou that
the Pharisees were offended, when they heard the saying?” Yet surely
nothing had been said unto them.

<span id="iii.LI-p52"></span>What then saith Christ? He did not remove
the offense in respect of them, but reproved them, saying, “Every plant
which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.” <span
id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995) For He is wont both to despise
offenses, and not to despise them. Elsewhere, for example, He saith,
“But lest we should offend them, cast an hook into the sea:” <span
id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996) but here He saith, “Let them alone,
they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch.” <span
id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997)

<span id="iii.LI-p56"></span>But these things His disciples said, not as
grieving for those men only, but as being themselves also slightly
perplexed. But because they durst not say so in their own person, they
would fain learn it by their telling Him of others. And as to its being
so, hear how after this the ardent and ever-forward Peter came to Him,
and saith, “Declare unto us this parable,” <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998) discovering the trouble in his
soul, and not indeed venturing to say openly, “I am offended,” but
requiring that by His interpretation he should be freed from his
perplexity; wherefore also he was reproved.

<span id="iii.LI-p58"></span>What then saith Christ? “Every plant which
my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.”

<span id="iii.LI-p59"></span>This, they that are diseased with the
Manichæan pest affirm to be spoken of the law; but their months are
stopped by what had been said before. For if He was speaking of the law,
how doth He further back defend it, and fight for it, saying, “Why do ye
transgress the commandments of God for your tradition?” And how doth He
bring for <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iii.LI-Page_308"></span> ward the prophet? But of themselves and of
their traditions He so speaks. For if God said, “Honor thy father and
thy mother,” how is not that of God’s planting, which was spoken by God?

<span id="iii.LI-p60"></span>And what follows also indicates, that of
themselves it was said, and of their traditions. Thus He added, “They
are blind leaders of the blind.” Whereas, had He spoken it of the law,
He would have said, “It is a blind leader of the blind.” But not so did
He speak, but, “They are blind leaders of the blind:” freeing it from
the blame, and bringing it all round upon them.

<span id="iii.LI-p61"></span>Then to sever the people also from them, as
being on the point of falling into a pit by their means, He saith, “If
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.”

<span id="iii.LI-p62"></span>It is a great evil merely to be blind, but
to be in such a case and have none to lead him, nay, to occupy the place
of a guide, is a double and triple ground of censure. For if it be a
dangerous thing for the blind man not to have a guide, much more so that
he should even desire to be guide to another.

<span id="iii.LI-p63"></span>What then saith Peter? He saith not, “What
can this be which Thou hast said?” but as though it were full of
obscurity, he puts his question. And he saith not, “Why hast thou spoken
contrary to the law?” for he was afraid, lest he should be thought to
have taken offense, but asserts it to be obscure. However, that it was
not obscure, but that he was offended, is manifest, for it had nothing
of obscurity.

<span id="iii.LI-p64"></span>Wherefore also He rebukes him, saying, “Are
ye also yet without understanding?” <span
id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999) For as to the multitude, they did
not perhaps so much as understand the saying; but themselves were the
persons offended. Wherefore, whereas at first, as though asking in
behalf of the Pharisees, they were desirous to be told; when they heard
Him denouncing a great threat, and saying, “Every plant, which my
heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up,” and, “They are
blind leaders of the blind,” they were silenced. But he, always ardent,
not even so endures to hold his peace, but saith, “Declare unto us this
parable.” <span id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000)

<span id="iii.LI-p67"></span>What then saith Christ? With a sharp rebuke
He answers, “Are ye also yet without understanding? Do ye not yet
understand?”

<span id="iii.LI-p68"></span>But these things He said, and reproved
them, in order to cast out their prejudice; He stopped not however at
this, but adds other things also, saying, “That whatsoever entereth in
at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught; but
those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart,
and they defile the man. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, blasphemies,
false-witnessings: and these are the things that defile the man: but to
eat with unwashen hands defileth not the man.” <span
id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001)

<span id="iii.LI-p70"></span>Seest thou how sharply He deals with them,
and in the way of rebuke?

<span id="iii.LI-p71"></span>Then He establishes His saying by our
common nature, and with a view to their cure. For when He saith, “It
goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught,” he is still
answering according to the low views of the Jews. For He saith, “it
abides not, but goes out:” and what if it abode? it would not make one
unclean. But not yet were they able to hear this.

<span id="iii.LI-p72"></span>And one may remark, that because of this
the lawgiver allows just so much time, as it may be remaining within
one, but when it is gone forth, no longer. For instance, at evening He
bids you wash yourself, and so be clean; measuring the time of the
digestion, and of the excretion. <span
id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002) But the things of the heart, He
saith, abide within, and when they are gone forth they defile, and not
when abiding only. And first He puts our evil thoughts, a kind of thing
which belonged to the Jews; and not as yet doth He make His refutation
from the nature of the things, but from the manner of production from
the belly and the heart respectively, and from the fact that the one
sort remains, the other not; the one entering in from without, and
departing again outwards, while the others are bred <span
id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003) within, and having gone forth they
defile, and then more so, when they are gone forth. Because they were
not yet able, as I said, to be taught these things with all due
strictness.

<span id="iii.LI-p75"></span>But Mark saith, that “cleansing the
meats,” <span id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004) He spake this. He did
not however express it, nor at all say, “but to eat such and such meats
defileth not the man,” for neither could they endure to be told it by
Him thus distinctly. And accordingly <span id="page_309">p. 309</span>
<span id="iii.LI-Page_309"></span> His conclusion was, “But to eat with
unwashen hands defileth not the man.” <span
id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005)

<span id="iii.LI-p78"></span>5. Let us learn then what are the things
that defile the man; let us learn, and let us flee them. For even in the
church we see such a custom prevailing amongst the generality, and men
giving diligence to come in clean garments, and to have their hands
washed; but how to present a clean soul to God, they make no account.

<span id="iii.LI-p79"></span>And this I say, not forbidding them to wash
hands or mouth; but willing men so to wash as is meet, not with water
only, but instead of water, with all virtues. For the filth of the mouth
is evil speaking, blasphemy, reviling, angry words, filthy talking,
laughter, jesting: if then thou art conscious to thyself of uttering
none of them, neither of being defiled with this filth, draw near with
confidence; but if thou hast times out of number received these stains,
why dost thou labor in vain, washing thy tongue indeed with water, but
bearing about on it such deadly and hurtful filth? For tell me, hadst
thou dung on thy hands, and mire, wouldest thou indeed venture to pray?
By no means. And yet this were no hurt; but that is ruin. How then art
thou reverential in the different things, but in the forbidden remiss?

<span id="iii.LI-p80"></span>What then? should not we pray? saith one.
We should indeed, but not while defiled, and having upon us mire of that
sort.

<span id="iii.LI-p81"></span>“What then, if I have been overtaken?”
saith one. Cleanse thyself. “How, and in what way?” Weep, groan, give
alms, apologize to him that is affronted, reconcile him to thyself
hereby, wipe clean thy tongue, lest thou provoke God more grievously.
For so if one had filled his hands with dung, and then should lay hold
of thy feet, entreating thee, far from hearing him, thou wouldest rather
spurn him with thy foot; how then durst thou in such sort draw nigh to
God? Since in truth the tongue is the hand of them that pray, and by it
we lay hold on the knees of God. Defile it not therefore, lest to thee
also He say, “Though ye make many prayers, I will not hearken.” <span
id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006) Yea, and “in the power of the
tongue are death and life;” <span id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007)
and, “By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt
be condemned.” <span id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008)

<span id="iii.LI-p85"></span>I bid thee then watch thy tongue more than
the apple of thine eye. The tongue is a royal steed. If then thou put a
bridle on it, and teach it to pace orderly, the King will rest and take
His seat thereon; but if thou suffer it to rush about unbridled and leap
wantonly, it becomes a beast for the devil and bad spirits to ride on.
And while thou, fresh from the company of thine own wife, darest not
pray, although this is no blame at all; dost thou lift up thine hands,
fresh from reviling and insult, which brings after it no less than hell,
before thou hast well cleansed thyself? And how dost thou not shudder?
tell me. Hast thou not heard Paul, saying, “Marriage is honorable, and
the bed undefiled?” <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009) But if on
rising from the undefiled bed, thou darest not draw nigh in prayer, how
dost thou coming from the bed of the devil call on that awful and
terrible name? For it is truly the devil’s bed, to wallow in insults and
reviling. And like some wicked adulterer, wrath dallies with us in great
delight, casting into us deadly seed, and making us give birth to
diabolical enmity, and doing all things in a way opposite to marriage.
For whereas marriage causes the two to become one flesh, wrath severs
into many parts them that were united, and cleaves and cuts in pieces
the very soul.

<span id="iii.LI-p87"></span>That thou mayest therefore with confidence
draw nigh to God, receive not wrath, when it comes in upon thee, and
desires to be with thee, but drive it away like a mad dog.

<span id="iii.LI-p88"></span>For so Paul too commanded: his phrase
being, “lifting up holy hands without wrath and disputing.” <span
id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010) Dishonor not then thy tongue, for
how will it entreat for thee, when it hath lost its proper confidence?
but adorn it with gentleness, with humility, make it worthy of the God
who is entreated, fill it with blessing, with much almsdoing. For it is
possible even with words to do alms. “For a word is a better thing than
a gift,” <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011) and “answer the poor
man peaceably with meekness.” <span id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012)
And all the rest of thy time too adorn it with the rehearsing of the
laws of God; “Yea, let all thy communication be in the law of the Most
High.” <span id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013)

<span id="iii.LI-p93"></span>Having thus adorned ourselves, let us come
to our King, and fall at His knees, <span
id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014) not with the body only, but also
with the mind. Let us consider whom we are approaching, and on whose
behalf, and what we would accomplish. We are drawing nigh unto God, whom
the seraphim behold and turn away their faces, not bearing His
brightness; at sight of whom the earth trembles. We draw nigh unto God,
“who dwelleth in the light, which no man can approach unto.” <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) And we draw nigh unto Him for
deliverance from hell, for remission of sins, for escape from those in
<span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="iii.LI-Page_310"></span>
tolerable punishments, for attaining to the Heavens, and to the good
things that are there. Let us, I say, fall down before Him both in body
and in mind, that He may raise us up when we are down; let us converse
with all gentleness and meekness.

<span id="iii.LI-p96"></span>And who is so wretched and miserable, one
may say, as not to become gentle in prayer? He that prays with an
imprecation, and fills himself with wrath, and cries out against his
enemies.

<span id="iii.LI-p97"></span>6. Nay, if thou wilt accuse, accuse
thyself. If thou wilt whet and sharpen thy tongue, let it be against
thine own sins. And tell not what evil another hath done to thee, but
what thou hast done to thyself; for this is most truly an evil; since no
other will really be able to injure thee, unless thou injure thyself.
Wherefore, if thou desire to be against them that wrong thee, approach
as against thyself first; there is no one to hinder; since by coming
into court against another, thou hast but the greater injury to go away
with.

<span id="iii.LI-p98"></span>And what injury at all hast thou really to
mention? That such an one insulted and spoiled thee by violence, and
encompassed thee with dangers? Nay, this is receiving not injury, but if
we be sober, the very greatest benefit; the injured being he that did
such things, not he that suffered them. And this is more than any one
thing the cause of all our evils, that we do not so much as know at all
who is the injured, and who the injurious person. Since if we knew this
well, we should not ever injure ourselves, we should not pray against
another, having learnt that it is impossible to suffer ill of another.
For not to be spoiled, but to spoil, is an evil. Wherefore, if thou hast
spoiled, accuse thyself; but if thou hast been spoiled, rather pray for
him that spoiled thee, because he hath done thee the greatest good. For
although the intent of the doer was not such, yet thou hast received the
greatest benefit, if thou hast endured it nobly. For him, both men, and
the laws of God declare to be wretched, but thee, the injured party,
they crown, and proclaim thy praise.

<span id="iii.LI-p99"></span>For so if any one sick of a fever had
violently taken from any other a vessel containing water, and had had
his fill of his pernicious desire, we should not say that the despoiled
had been injured, but the spoiler; for he has aggravated his fever, and
made his disease more grievous. Now in this way I bid thee reason
concerning him also that loves wealth and money. For he too, having a
far worse fever than the other, has by this rapine fanned the flame in
himself.

<span id="iii.LI-p100"></span>Again, were some madman to snatch a sword
from any one, and destroy himself, which again is the injured? He that
hath been robbed, or the robber? It is quite clear, he that did the
robbery.

<span id="iii.LI-p101"></span>Well then, in the case of seizing property
also, let us give the same suffrage. For what a sword is to a madman,
much the same is wealth to a covetous man; nay, it is even a worse
thing. For the madman, when he has taken the sword, and thrust it
through himself, is both delivered from his madness, and hath no second
blow to receive; but the lover of money receives daily ten thousand
wounds more grievous than his, without delivering himself from his
madness, but aggravating it more exceedingly: and the more wounds he
receives, the more doth he give occasion for other more grievous blows.

<span id="iii.LI-p102"></span>Reflecting then on these things, let us
flee this sword; let us flee the madness; though late, let us become
temperate. For this virtue too ought to be called temperance, not less
than that which is used to be so called among all men. For whereas there
the dominion of one lust is to be struggled against, here we have to
master many lusts, and those of all kinds.

<span id="iii.LI-p103"></span>Yea, nothing, nothing is more
foolish <span id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016) than the slave of
wealth. He thinks he overcomes when he is overcome. He thinks he is
master, when he is a slave, and putting bonds on himself, he rejoices;
making the wild beast fiercer, he is pleased; and becoming a captive, he
prides himself, and leaps for joy; and seeing a dog rabid and flying at
his soul, when he ought to bind him and weaken him by hunger, he
actually supplies him with abundance of food, that he may leap upon him
more fiercely, and be more formidable.

<span id="iii.LI-p105"></span>Reflecting then on all these things, let
us loose the bonds, let us slay the monster, let us drive away the
disease, let us cast out this madness; that we may enjoy a calm and pure
health, and having with much pleasure sailed into the serene haven, may
attain unto the eternal blessings; unto which may we all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might, now and always, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[304:1978](1100059.htm#fr_1977) <span
id="iii.LI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p4"></span>\[In the Oxford edition verses 3–6 are
printed here in full from the A.V. But in the Greek text of the Homily
only the first part of ver. 1 appears. As the larger part of the other
verses is given below, and as several questions of text and
interpretation arise, the passage has been printed here to correspond
with the Greek.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[304:1979](1100059.htm#fr_1978) <span
id="iii.LI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p7"></span>\[R.V., “from Jerusalem Pharisees and
Scribes.” But Chrysostom’s text is as above, agreeing with the received.
The omission of the article affects the sense, as indicated in the
R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[304:1980](1100059.htm#fr_1979) <span
id="iii.LI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p9"></span>[Deut. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002)<span id="iii.LI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[305:1981](1100059.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="iii.LI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p17"></span>\[R.V., “because of.”\]

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[305:1982](1100059.htm#fr_1981) <span
id="iii.LI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p18"></span>\[Chrysostom read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p18.1"></span>κα</span>, with the rec. text, thus making the
sentence break off. The A.V. supplies “he shall be free.” R.V., omitting
“and,” with the best authorities, makes this clause the conclusion: “he
shall not honor,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[305:1983](1100059.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="iii.LI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p19"></span>\[R.V. text omits “and his mother.”\]

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[305:1984](1100059.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="iii.LI-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p20"></span>\[So rec. text, but R.V. reads “word” in
the text, with “law” in the margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[305:1985](1100059.htm#fr_1984) <span
id="iii.LI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p21"></span>[Matt. xv.
3-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003)<span id="iii.LI-p21.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “because of your tradition.”\]

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[306:1986](1100059.htm#fr_1985) <span
id="iii.LI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p24"></span>[Exod.
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012), [Eph.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002)<span id="iii.LI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[306:1987](1100059.htm#fr_1986) <span
id="iii.LI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p25"></span>[Exod. xxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017)<span id="iii.LI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[306:1988](1100059.htm#fr_1987) <span
id="iii.LI-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p30"></span>[Mark vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011)<span id="iii.LI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[306:1989](1100059.htm#fr_1988) <span
id="iii.LI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p33"></span>[Matt.
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009), [Isa.
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="iii.LI-p33.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “teaching *as their* doctrines the precepts of men.”\]

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[306:1990](1100059.htm#fr_1989) <span
id="iii.LI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p38"></span>[Acts xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)<span id="iii.LI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[306:1991](1100059.htm#fr_1990) <span
id="iii.LI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p40"></span>[Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span id="iii.LI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[307:1992](1100059.htm#fr_1991) <span
id="iii.LI-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p44"></span>[Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span id="iii.LI-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[307:1993](1100059.htm#fr_1992) <span
id="iii.LI-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p47"></span>[Acts x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014)<span id="iii.LI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[307:1994](1100059.htm#fr_1993) <span
id="iii.LI-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p49"></span>[Matt. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#020)<span id="iii.LI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[307:1995](1100059.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="iii.LI-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p51"></span>[Matt. xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#012)<span id="iii.LI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[307:1996](1100059.htm#fr_1995) <span
id="iii.LI-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p53"></span>[Matt. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span id="iii.LI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[307:1997](1100059.htm#fr_1996) <span
id="iii.LI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p54"></span>[Matt. xvii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)<span id="iii.LI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[307:1998](1100059.htm#fr_1997) <span
id="iii.LI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p55"></span>[Matt. xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="iii.LI-p55.1"></span>.
\[So rec. text. The R.V. follows a briefer reading, but properly
substitutes “a pit” for “the ditch.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[307:1999](1100059.htm#fr_1998) <span
id="iii.LI-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p57"></span>[Matt. xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015)<span id="iii.LI-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[308:2000](1100059.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="iii.LI-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p65"></span>[Matt. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016)<span id="iii.LI-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[308:2001](1100059.htm#fr_2000) <span
id="iii.LI-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p66"></span>[Matt. xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015)<span id="iii.LI-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[308:2002](1100059.htm#fr_2001) <span
id="iii.LI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p69"></span>[Matt. xv.
17-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017)<span id="iii.LI-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[308:2003](1100059.htm#fr_2002) <span
id="iii.LI-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p73"></span>[Lev.
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#025)<span id="iii.LI-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[308:2004](1100059.htm#fr_2003) <span
id="iii.LI-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p74"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p74.1"></span>τκτεται</span>; the Oxford edition has “bad,”
which is probably a misprint for “bred.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[308:2005](1100059.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="iii.LI-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p76"></span>[Mark vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#019)<span id="iii.LI-p76.1"></span>.
Origen in his commentary on this passage of St. Matthew, refers also to
St. Mark, where he reads as St. Chrysostom here, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LI-p76.2"></span>καθαρζων</span> instead of
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LI-p76.3"></span>καθαρζον</span>. The
word “cleansing” or “purging” is therefore referred to our Lord, and our
Saviour’s words will stand as a parenthesis. See Field *in loc*. \[The
translator doubtless means that this view makes our Lord’s own words a
parenthetical explanation of the evangelist. So the R.V. gives the
clause. That <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p76.4"></span>καθαρζων</span> is the correct reading is quite
certain, but German commentators refer it to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p76.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p76.6"></span>φδρνα</span>, accepting a change of
construction. The evangelist Mark rarely inserts explanations. The
citation from Origen will be found in Tischendorf, VIII., note on [Mark
vii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#019)<span
id="iii.LI-p76.7"></span>. Despite the authority of Origen and
Chrysostom, the rendering of the R.V. is of doubtful propriety.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[309:2006](1100059.htm#fr_2005) <span
id="iii.LI-p76.8"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p77"></span>[Matt. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#020)<span id="iii.LI-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[309:2007](1100059.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="iii.LI-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p82"></span>[Is. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)<span id="iii.LI-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[309:2008](1100059.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="iii.LI-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p83"></span>[Prov. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021)<span id="iii.LI-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[309:2009](1100059.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="iii.LI-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p84"></span>[Matt. xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)<span id="iii.LI-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[309:2010](1100059.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="iii.LI-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p86"></span>[Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="iii.LI-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[309:2011](1100059.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="iii.LI-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p89"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.LI-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[309:2012](1100059.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="iii.LI-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p90"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
18.16](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#016)<span id="iii.LI-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[309:2013](1100059.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="iii.LI-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p91"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
4.8](../../../bib/apo/sir004.htm#008)<span id="iii.LI-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[309:2014](1100059.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="iii.LI-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p92"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
9.15](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#015)<span id="iii.LI-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[309:2015](1100059.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="iii.LI-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p94"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p94.1"></span>ππτωμεν π γνατα</span>, “fall on our knees”
seems to be the more probable sense, as the context indicates. Compare
the last sentence in the paragraph.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[309:2016](1100059.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="iii.LI-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p95"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="iii.LI-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[310:2017](1100059.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="iii.LI-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LI-p104"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p104.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LI-p104.2"></span>φρονστερον</span> opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LI-p104.3"></span>σωφροσνη</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LII](1100060)
