[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100033)  [Next](1100035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXVI"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. VIII.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.XXVI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p3"></span>*“And when He was entered into Capernaum,
there came unto Him a centurion, beseeching Him, and saying, Lord, my
servant lieth at home* <span id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092.md) *sick
of the palsy, grievously tormented.”*

<span id="iii.XXVI-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p5.1"></span>The</span> leper came unto Him “when He was
come down from the mountain,” but this centurion, “when He was entered
into Capernaum.” Wherefore then did neither the one nor the other go up
into the mountain? Not out of remissness, for indeed the faith of them
both was fervent, but in order not to interrupt His teaching.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p6"></span>But having come unto Him, he saith, “My
servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.” Now some
say, that by way of excuse he mentioned also the cause, why he had not
brought him. “For neither was it possible,” saith he, “paralyzed as he
was, and tormented, and at his last gasp, to lift and convey him.” For
that he was at the point of expiring, Luke saith; “He was even ready to
die.” <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093.md) But I say, this is a
sign of his having great faith, even much greater than theirs, who let
one down through the roof. <span id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094.md)
For because he knew for certain, that even a mere command was enough for
the raising up of the patient, he thought it superfluous to bring him.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p9"></span>What then doth Jesus? What He had in no
case done before, here He doeth. For whereas on every occasion He was
used to follow the wish of His supplicants, here He rather springs
toward it, and offers not only to heal him, but also to come to the
house. And this He doth, that we might learn the virtue of the
centurion. For if He had not made this offer, but had said, “Go thy way,
let thy servant be healed;” we should have known none of these things.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p10"></span>This at least He did, in an opposite way,
in the case also of the Phœnician woman. For here, when not summoned to
the house, of His own accord He saith, He will come, that thou mightest
learn the centurion’s faith and great humility; but in the case of the
Phœnician woman, He both refuses the grant, and drives her, persevering
therein, to great perplexity.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p11"></span>For being a wise physician and full of
resources, He knows how to bring about contraries the one by the
other. <span id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095.md) And as here by His
freely-offered coming, so there by His peremptory putting off and
denial, He unfolds the woman’s faith. So likewise He doth in Abraham’s
case, saying, “I will by no means hide from Abraham my servant;” <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096.md) to make thee know that man’s kindly
affection, and his care for Sodom. And in the instance of Lot, <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097.md) they that were sent refuse to enter
into his house, to make thee know the greatness of that righteous man’s
hospitality.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p15"></span>What then saith the centurion? “I am not
worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof.” <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098.md) Let us hearken, as many as are
<span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span id="iii.XXVI-Page_173"></span>
to receive Christ: for it is possible to receive Him even now. Let us
hearken, and emulate, and receive Him with as great zeal; for indeed,
when thou receivest a poor man who is hungry and naked, thou hast
received and cherished Him.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p17"></span>2. “But say in a word only, <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099.md) and my servant shall be healed.”

<span id="iii.XXVI-p19"></span>See this man also, how, like the leper,
he hath the right opinion touching Him. For neither did this one say,
“entreat,” nor did he say, “pray, and beseech,” but “command only.” And
then from fear lest out of modesty He refuse, he saith,

<span id="iii.XXVI-p20"></span>“For I also am a man under authority,
having under me soldiers; and I say to this man, go, and he goeth; and
to another, come, and he cometh; and to my servant, do this, and he
doeth it.” <span id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100.md)

<span id="iii.XXVI-p22"></span>“And what of that,” saith one, “if the
centurion did suspect it to be so? For the question is, whether Christ
affirmed and ratified as much.” Thou speakest well, and very sensibly.
Let us then look to this very thing; and we shall find what happened in
the case of the leper, the same happening here likewise. For even as the
leper said, “If thou wilt” (and not from the leper only are we positive
about His authority, but also from the voice of Christ; in that, so far
from putting an end to the suspicion, He did even confirm it more, by
adding what were else superfluous to say, in the phrase, “I will, be
thou cleansed,” in order to establish that man’s doctrine): so here too,
it is right to see whether any such thing occurred. In fact, we shall
find this same thing again taking place. For when the centurion had
spoken such words, and had testified His so great prerogative; so far
from blaming, He did even approve it, and did somewhat more than approve
it. For neither hath the evangelist said, that He praised the saying
only, but declaring a certain earnestness in His praise, that He even
“marvelled;” and neither did He simply marvel, but in the presence also
of the whole people, and set Him as an example to the rest, that they
should emulate Him.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p23"></span>Seest thou how each of them that bore
witness of His authority is “marvelled at? And the multitudes were
astonished at His doctrine, because He taught as one having
authority;” <span id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101.md) and so far from
blaming them, He both took them with Him when He came down, and by His
words of cleansing to the leper, confirmed their judgment. Again, that
leper said, “If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean;” <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102.md) and so far from rebuking, He on the
contrary cleansed him by such treatment as He had said. Again, this
centurion saith, “Speak the word only, and my servant shall be
healed:” <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103.md) and “marvelling” at
him, He said, “I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel.” <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104.md)

<span id="iii.XXVI-p28"></span>Now, to convince thee of this by the
opposite also; Martha having said nothing of this sort, but on the
contrary, “Whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, He will give Thee;” <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105.md) so far from being praised, although
an acquaintance, and dear to Him, and one of them that had shown great
zeal toward Him, she was rather rebuked and corrected by Him, as not
having spoken well; in that He said to her, “Said I not unto thee, that
if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?” <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106.md) blaming her, as though she did not
even yet believe. And again, because she had said, “Whatsoever Thou wilt
ask of God, He will give Thee;” to lead her away from such a surmise,
and to teach her that He needs not to receive from another, but is
Himself the fountain of all good things, He saith, “I am the
resurrection and the life;” <span id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107.md)
that is to say, “I wait not to receive active power, <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108.md) but work all of myself.”

<span id="iii.XXVI-p33"></span>Wherefore at the centurion He both
marvels, and prefers him to all the people, and honors him with the gift
of the kingdom, and provokes the rest to the same zeal. And to show thee
that for this end He so spake, *viz*. for the instructing of the rest to
believe in like manner, listen to the exactness of the evangelist, how
he hath intimated it. For,

<span id="iii.XXVI-p34"></span>“Jesus,” saith he, “turned Him about, and
said to them that followed Him, I have not found so great faith, no, not
in Israel.” <span id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109.md)

<span id="iii.XXVI-p36"></span>It follows, that to have high
imaginations concerning Him, this especially is of faith, and tends to
procure the kingdom and His other blessings. For neither did His praise
reach to words only, but He both restored the sick man whole, in
recompence of his faith, and weaves for him a glorious crown, and
promises great gifts, saying on this wise,

<span id="iii.XXVI-p37"></span>“Many shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down in the bosoms of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; but
the children of the kingdom shall be cast out.” <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110.md)

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span id="iii.XXVI-Page_174"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p39"></span>Thus, since He had shown many miracles,
He proceeds to talk with them more unreservedly.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p40"></span>Then, that no one might suppose His words
to come of flattery, but that all might be aware that such was the mind
of the centurion, He saith,

<span id="iii.XXVI-p41"></span>“Go thy way; as thou hast believed, so be
it done unto thee.” <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111.md)

<span id="iii.XXVI-p43"></span>And straightway the work followed,
bearing witness to his character. <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112.md) nothing; for the question is,
whether each of them has set before us the zealousness of the man, and
his having had the right opinion concerning Christ. But it is likely,
that after sending his friends, he himself also came and said these
things. And if Luke did not speak of the one, no more did Matthew of the
other; and this is not the part of men disagreeing amongst themselves,
but rather of those that are filling up the things omitted by one
another. But see by another thing also how Luke hath proclaimed his
faith, saying that his servant “was ready to die.” <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113.md) Nevertheless, not even this cast
him into despondency, neither did it cause him to give up: but even so
he trusted that he should prevail. And if Matthew affirm Christ to have
said, “I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel,” and hereby
to show clearly that he was not an Israelite; while Luke saith, “He
built our synagogue;” neither is this a contradiction. For it was
possible for one, even though not a Jew, both to build the synagogue,
and to love the nation.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p46"></span>4. But do not thou, I pray thee, merely
inquire what was said by him, but add thereto his rank also, and then
thou wilt see the man’s excellency. Because in truth great is the pride
of them that are in places of command, and not even in afflictions do
they take <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span
id="iii.XXVI-Page_175"></span> lower ground. He, for example, who is set
down in John, is for dragging Him unto his house, and saith, “Come down,
for my child is ready to die.” <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114.md) But not so this man; rather he is
far superior both to him, and to those who let down the bed through the
roof. For he seeks not for His bodily presence, neither did He bring the
sick man near the physician; a thing which implied no mean imaginations
concerning Him, but rather a suspicion of His divine dignity. And he
saith, “speak the word only.” And at the beginning he saith not even,
“speak the word,” but only describe his affliction: for neither did he,
of great humility, expect that Christ would straightway consent, and
inquire for his house. Therefore, when he heard Him say, “I will come
and heal him,” then, not before he saith, “speak the word.” Nor yet did
the suffering confound him, but still under calamity he reasons
coolly, <span id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115.md) not looking so much
to the health of the servant, as to the avoiding all appearance of doing
anything irreverent.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p49"></span>And yet it was not he that pressed it,
but Christ that offered it: nevertheless even so he feared, lest
perchance he should be thought to be going beyond his own deservings,
and to be drawing upon himself a thing above his strength. <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116.md) Seest thou his wisdom? Mark the
folly of the Jews, in saying, “He was worthy for whom He should do the
favor.” <span id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117.md) For when they should
have taken refuge in the love of Jesus towards man, they rather allege
this man’s worthiness; and know not so much as on what ground to allege
it. But not so he, but he affirmed himself even in the utmost degree
unworthy, not only of the benefit, but even of receiving the Lord in his
house. Wherefore even when he said, “My servant lieth sick,” he did not
add, “speak,” for fear lest he should be unworthy to obtain the gift;
but he merely made known his affliction. And when he saw Christ zealous
in His turn, not even so did he spring forward, but still continues to
keep to the end his own proper measure.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p52"></span>And if any one should say, “wherefore did
not Christ honor him in return?” we would say this, that He did make
return to him in honor, and that exceedingly: first by bringing out his
mind, which thing chiefly appeared by His not coming to his house; and
in the second place, by introducing him into His kingdom, and preferring
him to the whole Jewish nation. For because he made himself out unworthy
even to receive Christ into his house, he became worthy both of a
kingdom, and of attaining unto those good things which Abraham enjoyed.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p53"></span>“But wherefore,” one may say, “was not
the leper commended, who showed forth things greater than these?” For he
did not so much as say, “speak the word,” but what was far more, “be
willing only,” which is what the prophet saith concerning the Father,
“He hath done whatsoever He pleased.” <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118.md) But he also was commended. For when
He said, “Offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto
them,” <span id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119.md) He means nothing else
but, “thou shalt be an accuser of them, in that thou didst believe.” And
besides, it was not the same for one that was a Jew to believe, and for
one from without that nation. For that the centurion was not a Jew is
evident, both from his being a centurion and from its being said, “I
have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.” And it was a very
great thing for a man who was out of the list of the Jewish people to
admit so great a thought. For he did no less than imagine to himself, as
it seems to me, the armies in Heaven; or that the diseases and death,
and everything else, were so subject to Him, as his soldiers to himself.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p56"></span>Wherefore he said likewise, “For I also
am a man set under authority;” that is, Thou art God, and I man; I under
authority, but Thou not under authority. If I therefore, being a man,
and under authority, can do so much; far more He, both as God, and as
not under authority. Thus with the strongest expression he desires to
convince Him, that he saith this, as one giving not a similar example,
but one far exceeding. For if I (said he), being equal in honor to them
whom I command, and under authority, yet by reason of the trifling
superiority of my rank am able to do such great things; and no man
contradicts me, but what I command, that is done, though the injunctions
be various (“for I say to this man, go, and he goeth; and to another,
come, and he cometh”: <span id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120) .md) much
more wilt Thou Thyself be able.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p58"></span>And some actually read the place in this
way, “For if I, being a man,” and having inserted a stop, they add,
“having soldiers under authority under me.”

<span id="iii.XXVI-p59"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, how he
signified that Christ is able both to overcome even death as a slave,
and to command it as its master. For in saying, “come, and he cometh,”
and “go, and he goeth;” he expresses this: “If Thou shouldest command
his end not to come upon him, it will not come.”

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span id="iii.XXVI-Page_176"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p60"></span>Seest thou how believing he was? For that
which was afterwards to be manifest to all, here is one who already hath
made it evident; that He hath power both of death and of life, and
“leadeth down to the gates of hell, and bringeth up again.” <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121.md) Nor was he speaking of soldiers
only, but also of slaves; which related to a more entire obedience.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p62"></span>5. But nevertheless, though having such
great faith, he still accounted himself to be unworthy. Christ however,
signifying that he was worthy to have Him enter into his house, did much
greater things, marvelling at him, and proclaiming him, and giving more
than he had asked. For he came indeed seeking for his servant health of
body, but went away, having received a kingdom. Seest thou how the
saying had been already fulfilled, “Seek ye the kingdom of heaven, and
all these things shall be added unto you.” <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122.md) For, because he evinced great
faith, and lowliness of mind, He both gave him heaven, and added unto
him health.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p64"></span>And not by this alone did He honor him,
but also by signifying upon whose casting out he is brought in. For now
from this time forth He proceeds to make known to all, that salvation is
by faith, not by works of the law. And this is why not to Jews only, but
to Gentiles also the gift so given shall be proffered, and to the latter
rather than to the former. For “think not,” saith He, “by any means,
that so it hath come to pass in regard of this man alone; nay, so it
shall be in regard of the whole world. And this He said, prophesying of
the Gentiles, and suggesting to them good hopes. For in fact there were
some following Him from Galilee of the Gentiles. And this He said, on
the one hand, not letting the Gentiles despair, on the other, putting
down the proud spirits of the Jews.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p65"></span>But that His saying might not
affront <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123.md) the hearers, nor
afford them any handle; He neither brings forward prominently what He
hath to say of the Gentiles, but upon occasion taken from the centurion;
nor doth He use nakedly the term, Gentiles: not saying, “many of the
Gentiles,” but, “many from east and west:” <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124.md) which was the language of one
pointing out the Gentiles, but did not so much affront the hearers,
because His meaning was under a shadow.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p68"></span>Neither in this way only doth He soften
the apparent novelty of His doctrine, but also by speaking of “Abraham’s
bosom” instead of “the kingdom.” For neither was that term familiar to
them: <span id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125.md) moreover, the
introduction of Abraham would be a sharper sting to them. Wherefore John
also spake nothing at first concerning hell, but, what was most apt to
grieve them, He saith, “Think not to say, we are children of
Abraham.” <span id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126.md)

<span id="iii.XXVI-p71"></span>He is providing for another point also;
not to seem in any sense opposed to the ancient polity. For he that
admires the patriarchs, and speaks of their bosom as an inheritance of
blessings, doth much more than sufficiently remove also this suspicion.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p72"></span>Let no man therefore suppose that the
threat is one only, for both the punishment of the one and the joy of
the other is double: of the one, not only that they fell away, but that
they fell away from their own; of the other, not only that they
attained, but that they attained what they had no expectation of: and
there is a third together with these, that the one received what
pertained to the other. And he calls them “children of the kingdom,” for
whom the kingdom had been prepared: which also more than all was apt to
gall them; in that having pointed to them as being in their bosom by His
offer and promise, after all He puts them out.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p73"></span>6. Then, because what He had said was
mere affirmation, He confirms it by the miracle; as indeed He shows the
miracles in their turn, by the subsequent accomplishment of the
prediction. He accordingly, who disbelieves the health which the servant
then received, let him from the prophecy, which hath this day come to
pass, believe that other also. For so that prophecy again, even before
the event, was made manifest to all by the sign which then took place.
To this end, you see, having first uttered that prediction, then and not
before He raised up the sick of the palsy; that He might make the future
credible by the present, and the less by the greater. Since for virtuous
men to enjoy His good things, and for the contrary sort to undergo His
penalties, were nothing improbable, but a reasonable event, and
according to the tenor of laws: but to brace up the feeble, and to raise
the dead, was something beyond nature.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p74"></span>But nevertheless, unto this great and
marvellous work the centurion too contributed no little; which thing, we
see, Christ also declared, saying, “Go thy way, and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee.” Seest thou how the health of the
servant proclaimed <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="iii.XXVI-Page_177"></span> aloud both Christ’s power, and the faith
of the centurion, and also became a pledge of the future? Or rather it
was all a proclamation of Christ’s power. For not only did He quite heal
the servant’s body, but the soul also of the centurion He did Himself
bring over unto the faith by His miracles.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p75"></span>And do thou look not to this only, that
the one believed, and the other was healed, but marvel how quickly also.
For this too the evangelist declared, saying, “And his servant was
healed in the self-same hour:” even as of the leper also he said, “he
was straightway cleansed.” For not by healing, but by doing so both in a
wonderful manner and in a moment of time, did He display His power.
Neither in this way only doth He profit us, but also by his constant
practice, in the manifestation of His miracles, of opening incidentally
His discourses about His kingdom, and of drawing all men towards it.
For, those even whom He was threatening to cast out, He threatened not
in order to cast them out, but in order that through such fear, He might
draw them into it by His words. And if not even hereby were they
profited, theirs is the whole blame, as also of all who are in the like
distemper.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p76"></span>For not at all among Jews only may one
see this taking place, but also among them that have believed. For Judas
too was a child of the kingdom, and it was said to him with the
disciples, “Ye shall sit on twelve thrones;” <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127.md) yet he became a child of hell;
whereas the Ethiopian, barbarian as he was, and of them “from the east
and west,” shall enjoy the crowns with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob.
This takes place among us also now. “For many,” saith He, “that are
first shall be last, and the last first.” <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128.md) And this He saith, that neither the
one may grow languid, as unable to return; nor the others be confident,
as standing fast. This John also declared before from the beginning,
when he said, “God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham.” <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129.md) Thus, since it was
so to come to pass, it is proclaimed long before; that no one may be
confounded at the strangeness of the event. But he indeed speaks of it
as a possible thing (for he was first); Christ on the other hand as what
will surely be, affording the proof of it from His works.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p80"></span>7. Let us not then be confident, who
stand, but let us say to ourselves, “Let him that thinketh he standeth
take heed lest he fall;” <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md)
neither let us who are fallen despair, but let us say to ourselves, “He
that falleth, doth he not arise?” <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) For many even who have mounted to
the very summit of Heaven, and have shown forth all austerity, and had
made their abode in the deserts, nor saw any woman so much as in a
dream; having become a little remiss, have been tripped up, and have
come unto the very gulf of wickedness. While others again from thence
have gone up to Heaven, and from the stage and orchestra have passed
over unto the discipline of angels, and have displayed so great virtue,
as to drive away devils, and to work many other such miracles. And of
these examples both the Scriptures are full, and our life is also full.
Even whoremongers and effeminate persons stop the mouths of the
Manichæans, who say that wickedness is immoveable, enrolling themselves
on the devil’s side, and weakening the hands of them that would wish to
be in earnest, and overturning all our life.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p83"></span>For they who inculcate these things, not
only injure men as to the future, but here also turn all things upside
down, for their own part at least. Because when will any regard virtue,
from among those that are living in wickedness, so long as he accounts
his return that way, and his change for the better, a thing impossible?
For if now, when both laws exist, and penalties are threatened, and
there is common opinion to recall the ordinary sort, and hell is looked
for, and a kingdom promised, and wrong things reproached, and the good
praised; hardly do any choose the labors that are to be undergone for
virtue’s sake: shouldest thou take away all these things, what is there
to hinder ruin and corruption universal?

<span id="iii.XXVI-p84"></span>Knowing therefore the devil’s craft, and
that as well the lawgivers of the Gentiles as the oracles of God, and
the reasonings of nature, and the common opinion of all men, yea
barbarians, and Scythians, and Thracians, and generally all, are
directly opposed both to these, and to such as strive to enact the
doctrines of fate: let us be sober, beloved, and bidding farewell to all
those, let us travel along the narrow way, being both confident and in
fear: in fear because of the precipices on either side, confident
because of Jesus our guide. Let us travel on, sober and wakeful. For
though but for a little while one slumber, he is swept away quickly.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p85"></span>8. For we are not more perfect than
David, who by a little carelessness was hurled into the very gulf of
sin. Yet he arose again quickly. Look not then to his having sinned
only, but also to his having washed away his <span id="page_178">p.
178</span> <span id="iii.XXVI-Page_178"></span> sin. For to this end He
wrote that history, not that thou shouldest behold him fallen, but
admire him risen; to teach thee, when thou art fallen, how thou
shouldest arise. Thus, as physicians choose out the most grievous
diseases, and write them in their books, and teach their method of cure
in similar cases; if so be men having practised on the greater, may
easily master the less; even so God likewise hath brought forward the
greatest of sins, that they also who offend in small things may find the
cure of these easy, by means of the other: since if those admitted of
healing, much more the less.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p86"></span>Let us look then to the manner both of
the sickness, and of the speedy recovery of that blessed man. What then
was the manner of his sickness? He committed adultery and murder. For I
shrink not from proclaiming these things with a loud voice. Since if the
Holy Ghost thought it no shame to record <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) all this history, much less ought
we to draw any shade over it. Wherefore I not only proclaim it, but I
add another circumstance also. For in fact, whosoever hide these things,
they most of all men throw his virtue into the shade. And as they that
say nothing of the battle with Goliath deprive him of no small crowns,
so also they that hurry by this history. Doth not my saying seem a
paradox? Nay, wait a little, and then ye shall know that with reason
have we said this. For to this end do I magnify the sin, and make my
statement stranger, that I may the more abundantly provide the
medicines.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p88"></span>What is it then which I add? The man’s
virtue; which makes the fault also greater. For all things are not
judged alike in all men. “For mighty” men (it is said) “shall be
mightily tormented:” <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) and “He
that knew his Lord’s will, and doeth it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes.” <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) So that more
knowledge is a ground of more punishment. For this same reason the
priest, if he commit the same sin as those under government, shall not
have the same to endure, but things far more grievous.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p91"></span>Perhaps, seeing the charge against him
amplified, ye tremble and fear, and marvel at me, as though I were going
down a precipice. But I am so confident on that righteous man’s behalf,
that I will proceed even farther; for the more I aggravate the charge,
so much the more shall I be able to show forth the praise of David.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p92"></span>“And what more than this,” you will say,
“can be uttered?” Abundantly more. For as in the case of Cain, what was
done was not a murder only, but worse than even many murders; for it was
not a stranger, but a brother, whom he slew; and a brother who had not
done but suffered wrong; not after many murderers, but having first
originated the horrid crime: so here too that which was perpetrated was
not murder only. For it was no ordinary man that did it, but a prophet:
and he slays not him that had done wrong, but him that had suffered
wrong; for indeed he had been mortally wronged, by the forcing away his
wife: nevertheless after that he added this also.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p93"></span>9. Perceive ye, how I have not spared
that righteous one? how without any the least reserve I have mentioned
his offenses? But yet, so confident am I concerning his defense, that
after so great load as this of his sin, I would there were present both
the Manichæans who most deride all this, and they that are diseased in
Marcion’s way, <span id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) that I might
fully stop their mouths. For they indeed say “he committed murder and
adultery;” but I say not this only, but have also proved the murder to
be twofold, first from him who suffered the wrong, then from the quality
of the person who offended. For it is not the same thing, for one to
whom the Spirit was vouchsafed, and on whom so great benefits had been
conferred, and who had been admitted to such freedom of speech, and at
such a time of life, to venture on crimes of that sort; as without all
these, to commit this self-same thing. Nevertheless even in this respect
is that illustrious man most of all worthy of admiration, that when he
had fallen into the very pit of wickedness, he did not sink nor despair,
nor cast himself down in supineness, on receiving of the devil so fatal
a wound; but quickly, or rather straightway, and with great force, he
gave a more fatal blow than he had received.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p95"></span>And the same thing occurred, as if in war
and in battle some barbarian had struck his spear into the heart of a
chieftain, or shot an arrow into his liver, and had added to the former
wound a second more fatal than it, and he that had received these
grievous blows, when fallen, and wallowing in much blood all about him,
were first to rise up quickly, then to hurl a spear at him that wounded
him, and exhibit him dead on the ground in a moment. Even so in this
case also, the greater thou declarest the wound, so much the more
admirable dost thou imply the soul of him that was wounded to be, that
he <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span
id="iii.XXVI-Page_179"></span> had power after this grievous wound both
to rise up again, and to stand in the very forefront of the battle
array, and bear down him that had wounded him.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p96"></span>And how great a thing this is, they best
know, whosoever are fallen into grievous sins. For it is not so much a
proof of a generous and vigorous soul to walk upright, and to run all
the way (for such a soul hath the good hope going along with it, to
cheer and to rouse it, to nerve and render it more zealous); as after
those innumerable crowns, and so many trophies, and victories, having
undergone the utmost loss, to be able to resume the same course. And
that what I say may be made plain, I will endeavor to bring before you
another example, not at all inferior to the former.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p97"></span>For imagine, I pray thee, some pilot,
when he had compassed seas without number, and sailed over the whole
ocean; after those many storms, and rocks and waves, to sink, having
with him a great freight, in the very mouth of the harbor, and hardly
with his naked body to escape this grievous shipwreck; how would he
naturally feel towards the sea, and navigation, and such labors? Will
such a one then ever choose, unless he be of a very noble soul, to see a
beach, or a vessel, or a harbor? I trow not; but he will lie hiding his
face, seeing night all through the day, and shrinking from all things;
and he will choose rather to live by begging, than to put his hand to
the same labors.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p98"></span>But not such was this blessed man; but
though he had undergone such a shipwreck, after those innumerable
troubles and toils, he stayed not with his face covered, but launched
his vessel, and having spread his sails, and taken the rudder in hand,
he applies himself to the same labors, and hath made his wealth more
abundant again. Now if to stand be so admirable, and not to lie down for
ever after one has fallen; to rise up again, and to do such deeds, what
crowns would not this deserve?

<span id="iii.XXVI-p99"></span>And yet surely there were many things to
drive him to despair; as first, the greatness of his sins; secondly,
that not at the beginning of life, when our hopes also are more
abundant, but near the end, these things befell him. For neither doth
the merchant, who hath just gone out of the harbor and been wrecked,
grieve equally with him, who after very many traffickings strikes on a
rock. Thirdly, that when he had already obtained great wealth, he
incurred this. Yea, for by that time he had stored up no small
merchandise: for instance, the deeds of his early youth, when he was a
shepherd; those about Goliath, when he set up the glorious trophy; those
pertaining to his self-command respecting Saul. Since he showed forth
even the evangelical long-suffering, in that he got his enemy ten
thousand times into his hands, and continually spared him; and chose
rather to be an outcast from his country and from liberty, and from life
itself, than to slay him that was unjustly plotting against him.
Likewise after his coming to the kingdom, there were noble deeds of his
to no small amount.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p100"></span>And besides what I have said, his credit
also among the many, and his fall from glory so bright, would cause no
ordinary perplexity. For the purple did by no means so much adorn him,
as the stain of his sin disgraced him. And ye know of course what a
great thing it is for evil deeds to be exposed, and how great a soul is
required in such an one, not to despond after the censure of the
multitude, and when he hath so many witnesses of his own offenses.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p101"></span>Nevertheless all these darts that noble
person drew out of his soul, and so shone forth after this, so wiped out
the stain, became so pure, that his offspring even after his death had
their sins mitigated by him: and that which was said of Abraham, we find
God saying the same of this man also; or rather, much more of the
latter. For with respect to the patriarch it is said, “I remembered my
covenant with Abraham;” <span id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) but
here He saith not “the covenant,” but how? “I will defend this city for
my servant David’s sake.” <span id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137.md) And
besides, on account of His favor towards him, He suffered not Solomon to
fall from the kingdom, great as the sin was which he had committed. And
so great was the glory of the man, that Peter, so many years after, in
exhorting the Jews, spake on this wise: “Let me freely speak unto you of
the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried.” <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138.md) And Christ too, discoursing with
the Jews, signifies him after his sin to have had the Spirit vouchsafed
to such a degree, that he was counted worthy to prophesy again even
concerning His Godhead; and thereby stopping their mouths, He said, “How
then doth David in spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand ?” <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139.md) And much as with Moses, so it fell
out also with David. For as Miriam, even against Moses’ will, was
punished by God for insolence to her brother, <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md) because He greatly loved the holy
man; even so this man, injuriously treated by his son, <span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="iii.XXVI-Page_180"></span> God did
swiftly avenge, and that against his will.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p107"></span>These things then are sufficient, yea
rather before all others these are sufficient to indicate the man’s
excellency. For when God pronounces His judgment, we ought to inquire no
further. But if ye would become particularly acquainted with His self
command, ye may by perusing his history after his sin, perceive his
confidence towards God, his benevolence, his growth in virtue, his
strictness unto his last breath.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p108"></span>10. Having then these examples, let us
be sober, and let us strive not to despond, and if at any time we fall,
not to lie prostrate. For not to cast you into slothfulness, did I speak
of the sins of David, but to work in you more fear. For if that
righteous man through a little remissness received such wounds, what
shall we have to suffer, who are every day negligent? Do not therefore
look at his fall, and be remiss, but consider what great things he did
even after this, what great mournings, how much repentance he showed
forth, adding his nights to his days, pouring forth fountains of tears,
washing his couch with his tears, withal clothing himself in sackcloth.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p109"></span>Now if he needed so great a conversion,
when will it be possible for us to be saved, feeling insensible after so
many sins? For he that hath many good deeds, would easily even by this
throw a shade over his sins; but he that is unarmed, wherever he may
receive a dart, receives a mortal wound.

<span id="iii.XXVI-p110"></span>In order therefore that this may not be
so, let us arm ourselves with good works; and if any offense have
befallen us, let us wash it away: that we may be counted worthy, after
having lived the present life to the glory of God, to enjoy the life to
come; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[172:1093](1100034.htm#fr_1092.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p4"></span>\[R.V., “in the house.”\]

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[172:1094](1100034.htm#fr_1093.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p7"></span>[Luke vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p7.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “and” at the point of death; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p7.2"></span>κα</span> in the citation means “and,” not
“even.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[172:1095](1100034.htm#fr_1094.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p8"></span>[Luke v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[172:1096](1100034.htm#fr_1095.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p12.1"></span>δι τν ναντων τ νντια</span>. The argument
seems to require <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVI-p12.2"></span>τ
ατ</span><span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVI-p12.3"></span>,</span>
“the same things by opposite means:” but no <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p12.4"></span>ms</span>. authority appears for such a
change.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[172:1097](1100034.htm#fr_1096.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p13"></span>[Gen. xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p13.1"></span>
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVI-p13.2"></span>LXX</span>.\].

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[172:1098](1100034.htm#fr_1097.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p14"></span>[Gen. xix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[172:1099](1100034.htm#fr_1098.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p16"></span>[Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[173:1100](1100034.htm#fr_1099.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p18"></span>\[R.V., “only say the word,” “Gr. with a
word.” Chrysostom varies from the order, placing “only” last.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[173:1101](1100034.htm#fr_1100.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p21"></span>[Matt. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[173:1102](1100034.htm#fr_1101.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p24"></span>[Matt. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[173:1103](1100034.htm#fr_1102.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p25"></span>[Matt. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[173:1104](1100034.htm#fr_1103.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p26"></span>[Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[173:1105](1100034.htm#fr_1104.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p27"></span>[Matt. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p27.1"></span>.
\[The reading of the received text is found here. Comp. R.V. margin for
the reading of the Vatican <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p27.2"></span>ms</span>., accepted by Augustin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[173:1106](1100034.htm#fr_1105.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p29"></span>[John xi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[173:1107](1100034.htm#fr_1106.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p30"></span>[John xi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#040.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[173:1108](1100034.htm#fr_1107.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p31"></span>[John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[173:1109](1100034.htm#fr_1108.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p32"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p32.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p32.2"></span>νεργεαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[173:1110](1100034.htm#fr_1109.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p35"></span>[Matt.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010.md), [Luke
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p35.1"></span>
Comp. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p35.2"></span>στραφες</span>, is taken from the latter
passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[173:1111](1100034.htm#fr_1110.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p38"></span>[Matt.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p38.1"></span>.
\[For “with” Chrysostom substitutes “in the bosom of” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVI-p38.2"></span>ε το κλπου</span>),
commenting upon the term below (sec. 5). There is no authority for this
reading, so far as now known.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[174:1112](1100034.htm#fr_1111.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p42"></span>[Matt. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[174:1113](1100034.htm#fr_1112.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p44"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p44.1"></span>τ προαιρσει</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p44.2"></span>ποιε</span>.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[174:1114](1100034.htm#fr_1113.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p45"></span>[Luke vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[175:1115](1100034.htm#fr_1114.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p47"></span>[John iv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#049.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[175:1116](1100034.htm#fr_1115.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p48"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p48.1"></span>φιλοσοφε</span>.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[175:1117](1100034.htm#fr_1116.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p50.1"></span>βαρ πργμα</span>.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[175:1118](1100034.htm#fr_1117.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p51"></span>[Luke vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[175:1119](1100034.htm#fr_1118.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p54"></span>[Ps. cxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[175:1120](1100034.htm#fr_1119.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p55"></span>[Matt. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[175:1121](1100034.htm#fr_1120.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p57"></span>[Matt. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[176:1122](1100034.htm#fr_1121.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p61"></span>[1 Sam.
xxvi](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[176:1123](1100034.htm#fr_1122.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p63"></span>[Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p63.1"></span>.
\[Comp. Hom. XXII. 4, p.148, on the reading “kingdom of heaven.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[176:1124](1100034.htm#fr_1123.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p66"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p66.1"></span>προσστναι</span>, “disagree with, be nauseous
to.”

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[176:1125](1100034.htm#fr_1124.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p67"></span>[Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[176:1126](1100034.htm#fr_1125.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p69"></span>\[Both terms were current in Jewish
theological language; but it is implied in the argument that “Abraham’s
bosom” was not so well known, or so definitely apprehended.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[176:1127](1100034.htm#fr_1126.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p70"></span>[Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[177:1128](1100034.htm#fr_1127.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p77"></span>[Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[177:1129](1100034.htm#fr_1128.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p78"></span>[Matt. xix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[177:1130](1100034.htm#fr_1129.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p79"></span>[Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[177:1131](1100034.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p81"></span>[1 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[177:1132](1100034.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p82"></span>[Jer. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[178:1133](1100034.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p87"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p87.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p87.2"></span>ναθεναι</span>.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[178:1134](1100034.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p89"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p89.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVI-p89.2"></span>τασθσονται</span>. [Wisdom vi.
6](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p89.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[178:1135](1100034.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p89.4"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p90"></span>[Luke xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[178:1136](1100034.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p94"></span>Both these sects ascribed the Old
Testament to an evil principle, and argued against it from such cases as
this of David. Of Marcion, see St. Iren. i. 29, iv. 45. Of Manes, St.
Aug. *contra Faustum*. xxii. 5, 66. \[*Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*,
first series, vol. iv. p. 297.\]

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[179:1137](1100034.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p102"></span>[Exod. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[179:1138](1100034.htm#fr_1137.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p103"></span>[Isa. xxxvii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#035.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[179:1139](1100034.htm#fr_1138.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p104"></span>[Acts ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[179:1140](1100034.htm#fr_1139.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p104.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p105"></span>[Matt.
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043.md), [Ps.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.XXVI-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[179:1141](1100034.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iii.XXVI-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVI-p106"></span>[Num.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.XXVI-p106.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVII](1100035.md)
