[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100007)  [Next](1100009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="II_1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="II_1-p1.1"></span>II. Extent and Character of Chrysostom’s
Exegetical Labors.</span>

<span id="II_1-p2"></span>1. The exegetical labors of Chrysostom are
embodied in his Homilies, of which more than six hundred have been
preserved. These are for the most part expository in their character,
usually forming a continuous series upon some book of Scripture. The
parts of <span id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span id="II_1-Page_xx"></span>
the Bible thus treated are: in the Old Testament, Genesis and the Book
of Psalms; in the New Testament, all the books except the gospels of
Mark and Luke, the Catholic Epistles and Revelation. “Commentaries,
properly so-called, he wrote only on the first eight chapters of Isaiah
and on the Epistle to the Galatians” (Schaff <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) ). Most of the Homilies were preserved by
short-hand reports, but some were published by Chrysostom himself. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) There are internal evidences that in many
cases the spoken discourse had not been previously written, *e.g*., the
rebuke of applause and of inattention on account of some distracting
incident. Previous study is equally manifest in the expository portions;
but the method of delivery as well as the method of preservation must
modify our judgment of the preacher’s exegetical accuracy. Probably many
of the inconsistencies and inexact citations, noticeable in the
Homilies, are due to one or the other of these causes.

<span id="II_1-p5"></span>From an exegetical point of view the Homilies
on the Old Testament rank lowest, those on the Pauline Epistles highest.
The reasons for this are easily discovered. For the exposition of the
Old Testament Chrysostom did not have the necessary equipment, being
ignorant of Hebrew. In explaining the Gospels he fails to discuss the
historical questions with fullness. This was owing no doubt to his
distinct homiletical purpose. For the same reason he passes over most of
the harmonistic questions, or answers them indefinitely. But in
expounding our Lord’s longer discourses the same qualities as an
interpreter which fitted him so well for explaining the Pauline Epistles
enable him to rise to his full eminence.

<span id="II_1-p6"></span>2. In all the Homilies there is apparent a
proper conception of the relation of the Old Testament and the New.
Chrysostom’s treatment of the two parts of revelation agrees in many
respects with the methods now generally accepted in the subdivision of
Exegetical Theology technically termed Biblical Theology. He recognized
the progressive movement; thus holding to the essential unity of
Scripture, but also admitting the incompleteness of the Old Testament
and superiority of the New. The distinction between the two is never
regarded as an antagonism. Indeed some of the severest utterances in the
Homilies is in opposition to the error that denies the authority of the
Old Testament as a revelation from the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But the unity of the two parts of Scripture are not maintained at the
expense of the historical sense of the Old Testament. While Chrysostom
finds in the older revelation a prophecy of Christ who was to come, “he
fails not also to point out the moral aspect of prophecy as a system of
teaching rather than prediction, as preparatory to the advent of Jesus
Christ in the flesh, not only by informing men’s minds, but disciplining
their hearts to receive Him.” <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) Probably
the absence of any polemical purpose against the Jews aided him in
attaining a position more correct than most of some of the earlier
Fathers. His view of the relation of Christ to the law is set forth in
Homily XVI. on Matthew. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) In his view of
inspiration Chrysostom recognized the Divine-human character of the
Scriptures. While he does not formally state his theory, the method he
adopts implies the value of each and every part of the Bible, the
importance of marking the sense of every word. But the mechanical theory
is nowhere suggested: it is in fact opposed by his statements regarding
the variations in the Gospels. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) Indeed
no one could be such an expositor as Chrysostom was without an
acceptance alike of the Divine authority and human authorship of the
Scriptures. These not in antithesis, but in synthesis. Denying the
former, there could have been no such power in preaching; ignoring the
latter, there would have been no such care in his comments. This view of
the Bible was the result of his profound and constant study of it. The
same study gave him the <span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span
id="II_1-Page_xxi"></span> wealth of Scriptural illustration and
suggestion so noticeable in his Homilies. Knowledge of the whole Bible
and love of the whole Bible are manifest everywhere.

<span id="II_1-p10"></span>3. In textual criticism Chrysostom does not
afford us the help that might be expected from the extent of his labors.
Origen is incomparably more useful to the textual critic. Even in citing
the LXX. many inaccuracies occur, and the Hebrew text is ignored, except
in a few cases where doctrinal discussion had arisen. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)

<span id="II_1-p12"></span>As Westcott and Hort have shown, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) the Syrian text of the New Testament had
become dominant in the Eastern church about A.D. 350. It held in the
time of Chrysostom very much the same position afterwards allowed to the
received text during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Accordingly we find few indications of any critical investigations of
the text, and the variations from the Syrian text in the Homilies are
neither numerous nor important. Yet the differences from the received
text of our day are worth noticing. <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)
In all such matters, however, there enter several elements of
uncertainty, combining to subtract from the value of the Homilies or
critical purposes. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) In the case of
Chrysostom we know that the Homilies were taken down by others. Hence we
are not sure how accurately the preacher made his citations, how
correctly they were reported, nor how much of change has been made by
copyists in the interest of conformity to the text prevalent at the time
of transcription. Quite frequently the same passage occurs in two forms
within the limits of the same Homily. The labors of Mr. Field on the
Greek text of Chrysostom show how much remains to be done before we can
cite this Father as a trustworthy witness in regard to the minor
variations of the New Testament text. Fortunately Tischendorf, who had
access to a very ancient codex of the Homilies on Matthew, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) has given the results of his collation in
his painstaking way. As this codex was not included in the *apparatus
criticus* of Mr. Field, the supplementary value of Tischendorf’s
citations is increased.

<span id="II_1-p17"></span>Some peculiar readings occur in the Homilies
on Matthew; the most remarkable is, however, a reading of [Luke ix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031)<span id="II_1-p17.1"></span>. In
Homily LVI. 3 (p. 346 of this volume), Chrysostom expressly reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="II_1-p17.2"></span>δξαν</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="II_1-p17.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="II_1-p17.4"></span>ἔ</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="II_1-p17.5"></span>ξοδον</span>, commenting upon the word. It seems
altogether probable that there was no such reading prevalent in his day,
but that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="II_1-p17.6"></span>δξ</span>, which stands immediately before in
[Luke ix. 31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031)<span
id="II_1-p17.7"></span>, was accidentally substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="II_1-p17.8"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="II_1-p17.9"></span>ξοδον</span>. This might
happen from a slip of the memory on the part of Chrysostom, or some
scribe might have made the blunder in an isolated copy used by the
preacher. In other respects Chrysostom is a witness for the prevalence
of the Antiochian or Syrian text, from which our received text has
descended. He ignores the pericope of the woman taken in adultery ([John
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#053), [John
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011)<span id="II_1-p17.10"></span>),
as do all the Greek Fathers before the eighth century.

<span id="II_1-p18"></span>The minor variations do not fully appear in
the Oxford translation, owing to the habit of using the text of the
Authorized Version, even when its differences from the text of
Chrysostom were quite obvious. Accordingly the emendations of the
Revised Version have been given, without comment, in the additional
foot-notes to this volume, wherever that Version represents more
accurately the readings in the Homilies.

<span id="II_1-p19"></span>4. As already intimated, Chrysostom’s
ignorance of Hebrew detracts from his trustworthiness as an Old
Testament expositor. In the New Testament he is much superior. Yet even
here he is open to criticism. Besides an occasional allegorizing
comment, he shows much inaccuracy, sometimes inconsistency, in dealing
with the historical questions that arise in connection with the Gospel
History. He seems to have no taste for the dis <span id="page_xxii">p.
xxii</span> <span id="II_1-Page_xxii"></span> cussion of such questions.
Augustin shows far more judgment in his treatment of these problems. But
the ethical purpose probably debarred Chrysostom from such
investigations. As regards the length of our Lord’s ministry, the vexed
question of our Lord’s brethren, the identity of Mary Magdalene and the
woman who was a sinner, etc., we derive little satisfaction from these
Homilies. Occasionally topographical and archæological topics are
referred to in terms that are misleading or positively erroneous. Hence
the Homilies on the Gospels are usually estimated as less valuable than
those on the Epistles.

<span id="II_1-p20"></span>But where the exegesis deals with the human
heart, its motives, its weakness, or with the grace and love of Jesus
Christ, there Chrysostom rises, and remains “the Master in Israel.” Few
have made advances beyond him in commenting upon the parables, the
miracles of healing, the great discourses of our Lord. His sturdy common
sense enabled him to expound the great eschatological discourse (<span
id="II_1-p20.1"></span>Matt. xxiv, xxv.) in a manner so free from
chiliastic extravagance, that to-day his exposition can be used with
little alteration.

<span id="II_1-p21"></span>These characteristics of his exegesis fitted
Chrysostom to excel in his exposition of the Epistles. Here there is
more of continuated and logical method than in the Homilies on the
Gospels. Each Epistle he is careful to consider “as a connected whole;
and, in order to impress this on his hearers, he frequently
recapitulates at the beginning of a Homily all the steps by which the
part under consideration has been reached. In his introduction to each
letter he generally makes useful observations on the author, the time,
place, and style of composition, the readers for whom it was intended,
the general character and arrangement of its contents.” <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) The Pauline authorship of the Epistle to
the Hebrews is accepted in all the references to that book which occur
in the Homilies or other portions of Scripture.

<span id="II_1-p23"></span>The doctrinal positions of Chrysostom
naturally influence his explanations of certain portions of the Epistle,
but these are to be judged by the stage of development attained by the
theology of the Eastern Church in the Post-Nicene period.

<span id="II_1-p24"></span>The minute attention necessary in editing
this volume has compelled the writer to note the excellence of the great
Greek Father as an exegete. Beginning the task with some prejudice,
mainly due to a knowledge of the inaccuracy of Chrysostom’s citations,
he now gladly pays his humble tribute to the genius of the author,
hoping that students of the volume will be enabled to echo the praises
that for so many centuries have been bestowed upon John of the Golden
Mouth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xx:4](1100008.htm#fr_3) <span
id="II_1-p2.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p3"></span>*History of the Christian Church*, III., p.
939.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xx:5](1100008.htm#fr_4) <span
id="II_1-p3.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="II_1-p4.1"></span>Stephens</span>, *St. Chrysostom*, p. 427. He
refers to <span class="c41"><span
id="II_1-p4.2"></span>Tillemont</span>, *Memoires*, vol. xi. p. 37.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xx:6](1100008.htm#fr_5) <span
id="II_1-p6.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="II_1-p7.1"></span>Stephens</span>, pp. 423–4.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xx:7](1100008.htm#fr_6) <span
id="II_1-p7.2"></span>

<span id="II_1-p8"></span>See pp. 103, etc. in this volume.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xx:8](1100008.htm#fr_7) <span
id="II_1-p8.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p9"></span>See p. 3, in this volume.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxi:9](1100008.htm#fr_8) <span
id="II_1-p10.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p11"></span>See, for example, on p. 32, where the
pre-eminence of the LXX. version is asserted, in the discussion of [Isa.
viii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003)<span id="II_1-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxi:10](1100008.htm#fr_9) <span
id="II_1-p12.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p13"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="II_1-p13.1"></span>Westcott and Hort</span>, *Greek Testament*, vol.
ii. pp. 135–143.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxi:11](1100008.htm#fr_10) <span
id="II_1-p13.2"></span>

<span id="II_1-p14"></span>In this volume most of the variations from
the received text are indicated in the additional foot-notes.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxi:12](1100008.htm#fr_11) <span
id="II_1-p14.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p15"></span>On the untrustworthiness of patristic
citations, see <span class="c20"><span
id="II_1-p15.1"></span>Scrivener</span>, *Introduction to Criticism of
New Testament*, 3d Ed., pp. 416–7. The labor bestowed on the present
volume enables the editor to endorse, *con amore*, the judgment of Mr.
Scrivener.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxi:13](1100008.htm#fr_12) <span
id="II_1-p15.2"></span>

<span id="II_1-p16"></span>The codex is of the sixth century
(Wolfenbüttel), designated in Tischendorf’s notes as Chrgue. See <span
class="c20"><span id="II_1-p16.1"></span>Scrivener</span>,
*Introduction*, etc., p. 419.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxii:14](1100008.htm#fr_13) <span
id="II_1-p21.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p22"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="II_1-p22.1"></span>Stephens</span>, *St. Chrysostom*, p. 425.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I](1100009)
