[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100016)  [Next](1100018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.IX"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.IX-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="iii.IX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.IX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. II.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span
id="iii.IX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.IX-p3"></span>“Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked
of the wise men, was exceeding wroth.”

<span id="iii.IX-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.IX-p4.1"></span>Yet</span> surely it was a case not for anger,
but for fear and awe: he ought to have perceived that he was attempting
impossible things. But he is not refrained. For when a soul is
insensible and incurable, it yields to none of the medicines given by
God. See for example this man following up his former efforts, <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) and adding many murders to one, and
hurried down the steep any whither. For driven wild by this anger, and
envy, as by some demon, he takes account of nothing, but rages even
against nature herself, and his anger against the wise men who had
mocked him he vents upon the children that had done no wrong: venturing
then in Palestine upon a deed akin to the things that had been done in
Egypt. For he “sent forth,” it is said, “and slew all the children that
were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the
wise men.”

<span id="iii.IX-p6"></span>Here attend to me carefully. Because many
things are uttered by many very idly touching these children, and the
course of events is charged with injustice, and some of these express
their perplexity about it in a more moderate way, others with more of
audaciousness and frenzy. In order then that we may free these of their
madness and those of their perplexity, suffer us to discourse a little
upon this topic. Plainly, then, if this be their charge, that the
children were left to be slain, they should find fault likewise with the
slaughter of the soldiers that kept Peter. <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) For as here, when the young child had
fled, other children are massacred in the place of Him who was sought;
even so then, too, Peter having been delivered from his prison and
chains by the angel, one of like name with this tyrant, and like temper
too, when he had sought him, and found him not, slew instead of him the
soldiers that kept him.

<span id="iii.IX-p8"></span>“But what is this?” it may be said; “why
this is not a solution, but an enhancement of our difficulty.” I know it
too, and for this intent I bring forward all such cases, that to all I
may adduce one and the same solution. What then is the solution of these
things? or what fair account of them can we give? That Christ was not
the cause of their slaughter, but the king’s cruelty; as indeed neither
was Peter to those others, but the madness of Herod. For if he had seen
the wall broken through, or the doors overthrown, he might, perhaps,
have had ground to accuse the soldiers that kept the apostle, of
neglect; but now when all things continued in due form, <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) and the doors were thrown wide open,
<span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span id="iii.IX-Page_53"></span> and
the chains fastened to the hands of them that kept him (for in fact they
were bound unto him), he might have inferred from these things (that is,
if he had been strictly doing a judge’s office on the matters before
him), that the event was not of human power or craft, but of some divine
and wonder-working power; he might have adored the doer of these things,
instead of waging war with the sentinels. For God had so done all that
He did, that so far from exposing the keepers, He was by their means
leading the king unto the truth. But if he proved senseless, what
signifies to <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) the skillful
Physician of Souls, managing all things to do good, the insubordination
of him that is diseased?

<span id="iii.IX-p11"></span>And just this one may say in the present
case likewise. For, wherefore art thou wroth, O Herod, at being mocked
of the wise men? didst thou not know that the birth was divine? didst
thou not summon the chief priests? didst thou not gather together the
scribes? did not they, being called, bring the prophet also with them
into thy court of judgment, proclaiming these things beforehand from of
old? Didst thou not see how the old things agreed with the new? Didst
thou not hear that a star also ministered to these men? Didst thou not
reverence the zeal of the barbarians? Didst thou not marvel at their
boldness? Wast thou not horror-struck at the truth of the prophet? Didst
thou not from the former things perceive the very last also? Wherefore
didst thou not reason with thyself from all these things, that this
event was not of the craft of the wise men, but of a Divine Power, duly
dispensing all things? And even if thou wert deceived by the wise men,
what is that to <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) the young
children, who have done no wrong?

<span id="iii.IX-p13"></span>2. “Yea,” saith one, “Herod thou hast full
well deprived of excuse, and proved him blood-thirsty; but thou hast not
yet solved the question about the injustice of what took place. For if
he did unjustly, wherefore did God permit it?” Now, what should we say
to this? That which I do not cease to say continually, in church, in the
market-place and everywhere; that which I also wish you carefully to
keep in mind, for it is a sort of rule for us, suited to every such
perplexity. What then is our rule, and what our saying? That although
there be many that injure, yet is there not so much as one that is
injured. And in order that the riddle may not disturb you too much, I
add the solution too with all speed. I mean, that what we may suffer
unjustly from any one, it tells either to the doing away of our sins,
God so putting that wrong to our account; or unto the recompense of
rewards.

<span id="iii.IX-p14"></span>And that what I may say may be clearer, let
us conduct our argument in the way of illustration. As thus: suppose a
certain servant who owes much money to his master, and then that this
servant has been despitefully used by unjust men, and robbed of some of
his goods. If then the master, in whose power it was to stay the
plunderer and wrong doer, should not indeed restore that same property,
but should reckon what was taken away towards what was owed him by his
servant, is the servant then injured? By no means. But what if he should
repay him even more? Has he not then even gained more than he has lost?
Every one, I suppose, perceives it.

<span id="iii.IX-p15"></span>Now this same reckoning we are to make in
regard of our own sufferings. For as to the fact, that in consideration
of what we may suffer wrongfully, we either have sins done away, or
receive more glorious crowns, if the amount of our sins be not so great:
hear what Paul says concerning him that had committed fornication,
“Deliver ye such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved.” <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) “But
what is this?” you may say, “for the discourse was about them that were
injured by others, not about them that are corrected by their teachers.”
I might answer, that there is no difference; <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) for the question was, whether to
suffer evil be not an indignity to the sufferer. But, to bring my
argument nearer the very point inquired of; remember David, how, when he
saw Shimei at a certain time assailing him, and trampling on his
affliction, and pouring on him revilings without end, his captains
desiring to slay him, he utterly forbade them, saying, “Let him curse,
that the Lord may look upon mine abasement, and that he may requite me
good for this cursing this day.” <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369)
And in the Psalms too in his chanting, he said, “Consider mine enemies,
that they are multiplied, and they hate me with unjust hatred,” and
“forgive all my sins.” <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) And
Lazarus again for the same cause enjoyed remission, having in this life
suffered innumerable evils. They therefore who are wronged, are not
wronged if they bear nobly all that they suffer, yea, rather they gain
even more abundantly, whether they be smitten of God, or scourged by the
devil.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="iii.IX-Page_54"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p20"></span>3. “But what kind of sin had these
children,” it may be said, “that they should do it away? for touching
those who are of full age, and have been guilty of many negligences, one
might with show of reason speak thus: but they who so underwent
premature death, what sort of sins did they by their sufferings put
away?” Didst thou not hear me say, that though there were no sins, there
is a recompense of rewards hereafter for them that suffer ill here?
Wherein then were the young children hurt in being slain for such a
cause, and borne away speedily into that waveless harbor? “Because,”
sayest thou, “they would in many instances have achieved, had they
lived, many and great deeds of goodness.” Why, for this cause He lays up
for them beforehand no small reward, the ending their lives for such a
cause. Besides, if the children were to have been any great persons, He
would not have suffered them to be snatched away beforehand. For if they
that eventually will live in continual wickedness are endured by Him
with so great long-sufferings, much more would He not have suffered
these to be so taken off had He foreknown they would accomplish any
great things.

<span id="iii.IX-p21"></span>And these are the reasons we have to give;
yet these are not all; but there are also others more mysterious than
these, which He knoweth perfectly, who Himself ordereth these things.
Let us then give up unto Him the more perfect understanding of this
matter, and apply ourselves to what follows, and in the calamities of
others let us learn to bear all things nobly. Yea, for it was no little
scene of woe, which then befell Bethlehem, the children were snatched
from their mother’s breast, and dragged unto this unjust slaughter.

<span id="iii.IX-p22"></span>And if thou art yet faint-hearted, and not
equal to controlling thyself in these things, learn the end of him who
dared all this, and recover thyself a little. For very quickly was he
overtaken by punishment for these things; and he paid the due penalty of
such an abominable act, ending his life by a grievous death, and more
pitiable than that which he now dared inflict; <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) suffering also countless additional
ills, which ye may know of by perusing Josephus’ account of these
events. But, lest we should make our discourse long, and interrupt its
continuity, we have not thought it necessary to insert that account in
what we are saying.

<span id="iii.IX-p24"></span>4. “Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by Jeremy the prophet, <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372)
saying, In Rama was there a voice heard, Rachel weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they are not.” <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373)

<span id="iii.IX-p27"></span>Thus having filled the hearer with horror
by relating these things: the slaughter so violent and unjust, so
extremely cruel and lawless; he comforts him again, by saying, Not from
God’s wanting power to prevent it did all this take place, nor from any
ignorance of His, but when He both knew it, and foretold it, <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) and that loudly by His prophet. Be not
troubled then, neither despond, looking unto His unspeakable providence,
which one may most clearly see, alike by what He works, and by what He
permits. And this He intimated in another place also, when discoursing
to His disciples. I mean where, having forewarned them of the judgment
seats, and executions, and of the wars of the world, and of the battle
that knows no truce, to uphold their spirit and to comfort them He
saith, “Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your Father which is in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) These things He said, signifying that
nothing is done without His knowledge, but while He knows all, yet not
in all doth He act. “Be not then troubled,” He saith, “neither be
disturbed.” For if He know what ye suffer, and hath power to hinder it,
it is quite clear that it is in His providence and care for you that He
doth not hinder it. And this we ought to bear in mind in our own
temptations also, and great will be the consolation we shall thence
receive.

<span id="iii.IX-p30"></span>But what, it may be said, hath Rachel to do
with Bethlehem? For it saith, “Rachel weeping for her children.” And
what hath Rama to do with Rachel? Rachel was the mother of Benjamin, and
on his death, they buried her in the horse-course that was near this
place. <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) The tomb then being near,
and the portion pertaining unto Benjamin her infant (for Rama was of the
tribe of Benjamin), from the head of the tribe first, and next from the
place of her sepulture, He naturally denominates her young children who
were massacred. <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) Then to show
that the wound that befell her was incurable and cruel, He saith, “she
would not be comforted because they are not.”

<span id="iii.IX-p33"></span>Hence again we are taught this, which I
mentioned before, never to be confounded when what is happening is
contrary to the promise of God. Behold, for instance, when <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span id="iii.IX-Page_55"></span> He was come
for the salvation of the people, or rather for the salvation of the
world, of what kind were His beginnings. His mother, first, in flight;
His birth-place is involved in irremediable calamities, and a murder is
perpetrated of all murders the bitterest, and there is lamentation and
great mourning, and wailings everywhere. But be not troubled; for He is
wont ever to accomplish His own dispensations by their contraries,
affording us from thence a very great demonstration of His power.

<span id="iii.IX-p34"></span>Thus did He lead on His own disciples also,
and prepared them to do all their duty, bringing about things by their
contraries, that the marvel might be greater. They, at any rate, being
scourged and persecuted, and suffering terrors without end, did in this
way get the better of them that were beating and persecuting them.

<span id="iii.IX-p35"></span>5. “But when Herod was dead, behold, an
angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph saying, Arise, and take
the young Child and His mother, and go into the land of Israel.” <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378)

<span id="iii.IX-p37"></span>He no more saith “fly,” but “go.” Seest
thou again after the temptation refreshment? then after the refreshment
danger again? in that he was freed indeed from his banishment, and came
back again to his own country; and beheld the murderer of the children
brought to the slaughter; <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) but
when he hath set foot on his own country, he finds again a remnant of
the former perils, the son of the tyrant living, and being king.

<span id="iii.IX-p39"></span>But how did Archelaus reign over Judæa,
when Pontius Pilate was governor? Herod’s death had recently taken
place, and the kingdom had not yet been divided into many parts; but as
he had only just ended his life, the son for a while kept possession of
the kingdom “in the room of his father Herod;” his brother also bearing
this name, which is the reason why the evangelist added, “in the room of
*his father* Herod.”

<span id="iii.IX-p40"></span>It may be said, however, “if he was afraid
to settle in Judæa on account of Archelaus, he had cause to fear Galilee
also on account of Herod.” I answer, By his changing the place, the
whole matter was thenceforward thrown into shade; for the whole assault
was upon “Bethlehem and the coasts thereof.” Therefore now that the
slaughter had taken place, the youth Archelaus had no other thought, but
that the whole was come to an end, and that amongst the many, He that
was sought had been destroyed. And besides, his father having come to
such an end of his life before his eyes, he became for the future more
cautious about farther proceedings, and about urging on that course of
iniquity.

<span id="iii.IX-p41"></span>Joseph therefore comes to Nazareth, partly
to avoid the danger, partly also delighting to abide in his native
place. To give him the more courage, he receives also an oracle from the
angel touching this matter. Luke, however, doth not say that he came
there by Divine warning, but that when they had fulfilled all the
purification, they returned to Nazareth. <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) What then may one say? That Luke is
giving an account of the time before the going down to Egypt, when he
saith these things. For He would not have brought them down thither
before the purification, in order that nothing should be done contrary
to the law, but he waited for her to be purified, and to go to Nazareth,
and that then they should go down to Egypt. Then, after their return, He
bids them go to Nazareth. But before this they were not warned of God to
go thither, but yearning after their native place, they did so of their
own accord. For since they had gone up for no other cause but on account
of the taxing, and had not so much as a place where to stay, when they
had fulfilled that for which they had come up, they went down to
Nazareth. <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381)

<span id="iii.IX-p44"></span>6. We see here the cause why the angel
also, putting them at ease for the future, restores them to their home.
And not even this simply, but he adds to it a prophecy, “That it might
be fulfilled,” saith he, “which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be
called a Nazarene.” <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382)

<span id="iii.IX-p46"></span>And what manner of prophet said this? Be
not curious, nor overbusy. For many of the prophetic writings have been
lost; and this one may see from the history of the Chronicles. <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) For being negligent, and continually
falling into ungodliness, some they suffered to perish, others they
themselves burnt up <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) and cut to
pieces. The latter fact Jeremiah relates; <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) the former, he who composed the fourth
book of Kings, saying, that after <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) a long time the book of Deuteronomy
was hardly found, buried somewhere and lost. But if, when there was no
barbarian there, they so betrayed their books, much <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="iii.IX-Page_56"></span> more when
the barbarians had overrun them. For as to the fact, that the prophet
had foretold it, the apostles themselves in many places call Him a
Nazarene. <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387)

<span id="iii.IX-p52"></span>“Was not this then,” one may say, “casting
a shade over the prophecy touching Bethlehem?” By no means: rather this
very fact was sure greatly to stir up men, and to awaken them to the
search of what was said of Him. Thus, for example, Nathanael too enters
on the inquiry concerning Him, saying, “Can there any good thing come
out of Nazareth?” <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) For the place
was of little esteem; or rather not that place only, but also the whole
district of Galilee. Therefore the Pharisees said, “Search and look, for
out of Galilee ariseth no prophet.” <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) Nevertheless, He is not ashamed to be
named even from thence, signifying that He needs not ought of the things
of men; and His disciples also He choses out of Galilee; everywhere
cutting off the pretexts of them who are disposed to be remiss, and
giving tokens that we have no need of outward things, if we practise
virtue. For this cause He doth not choose for Himself so much as a
house; for “the Son of Man,” saith He, “hath not where to lay His
head;” <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) and when Herod is
plotting against Him, He fleeth, and at His birth is laid in a manger,
and abides in an inn, and takes a mother of low estate; teaching us to
think no such thing a disgrace, and from the first outset trampling
under foot the haughtiness of man, and bidding us give ourselves up to
virtue only.

<span id="iii.IX-p56"></span>7. For why dost thou pride thyself on thy
country, when I am commanding thee to be a stranger to the whole world?
(so He speaks); when thou hast leave to become such as that all the
universe shall not be worthy of thee? For these things are so utterly
contemptible, that they are not thought worthy of any consideration even
amongst the philosophers of the Greeks, but are called *Externals*, and
occupy the lowest place.

<span id="iii.IX-p57"></span>“But yet Paul,” one may say, “allows them,
saying on this wise, ‘As touching the election, they are beloved for the
fathers’ sake.’” <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) But tell me,
when, and of what things was he discoursing, and to whom? Why, to those
of Gentile origin, who were puffing themselves up on their faith, and
exalting themselves against the Jews, and so breaking them off the more:
to quell the swelling pride of the one, and to win over the others, and
thoroughly excite them to the same emulation. For when he is speaking of
those noble and great men, hear how he saith, “They that say these
things, show plainly that they seek a country; and truly if they had
been mindful of that from whence they came out, they might have had
opportunity to have returned: but now they desire another, a better
country.” <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) And again, “These all
died in faith, not having obtained the promises, but having seen them
afar off, and embraced them.” <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393)
And John too said unto those that were coming to him, “Think not to say,
We have Abraham to our father.” <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394)
And Paul again, “For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel;
neither they, which are the children of the flesh, are they the children
of God.” <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) For what were the sons
of Samuel advantaged, tell me, by their father’s nobleness, when they
were not heirs of their father’s virtue? And what profit had Moses’
sons, not having emulated his perfection? <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) Therefore neither did they inherit the
dominion; but whilst they enrolled him as their father, the rule of the
people passed away to another, to him who had become his son in the way
of virtue. And what harm was it to Timothy, that he was of a Greek
father? Or what on the other hand again was Noah’s son profited by the
virtue of his father, when he became a slave instead of free? Seest
thou, how little the nobleness of a father avails his children in the
way of advocacy? <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) For the
wickedness of Ham’s disposition overcame the laws of nature, and cast
him not only out of the nobility which he had in respect of his father,
but also out of his free estate. And what of Esau? Was he not son of
Isaac, and had he not his father to stand his friend? Yea, his father
too endeavored and desired that he should partake of the blessings, and
he himself for the sake of this did all that was commanded him.
Nevertheless, because he was untoward, <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) none of these things profited him; but
although he was by birth first, and had his father on his side doing
everything for this object, yet not having God with him, he lost all.

<span id="iii.IX-p66"></span>But why do I speak of men? The Jews were
sons of God, and gained nothing by this their high birth. Now if a man,
having become a son of God, but failing to show forth an excellency meet
for this noble birth, is even punished the more abundantly; why <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span id="iii.IX-Page_57"></span> dost thou
bring me forward the nobleness of ancestors remote or near? For not
under the old covenant <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) only, but
even under the new, one may find this rule to have held. For “as many as
received Him,” it is said “to them gave He power to become the sons of
God.” <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) And yet many of these
children Paul hath affirmed to be nothing profited by their father; “For
if ye be circumcised,” saith he, “Christ shall profit you
nothing.” <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) And if Christ be no
help to those who will not take heed to themselves, how shall a man
stand up in their behalf?

<span id="iii.IX-p70"></span>8. Let us not therefore pride ourselves
either on high birth, or on wealth, but rather despise them who are so
minded: neither let us be dejected at poverty. But let us seek that
wealth, which consists in good works; let us flee that poverty, which
causes men to be in wickedness, by reason of which also that rich man
was poor; <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) wherefore he had not
at his command so much as a drop of water, and that, although he made
much entreaty. Whereas, who can be so poor amongst us, <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) *as to want water enough even for
comfort*? There is none such. For even they that are pining with extreme
hunger, may have the comfort of a drop of water; and not of a drop only,
but of refreshment too far more abundant. Not so that rich man, but he
was poor even to this degree: and what was yet more grievous, he could
not so much as soothe his poverty from any source. Why then do we gape
after riches, since they bring us not into Heaven?

<span id="iii.IX-p73"></span>For tell me, if any king among those upon
earth had said, It is impossible for him that is rich to be
distinguished at court, or to enjoy any honor; would ye not have thrown
away every one his riches with contempt? So then, if they cast us out
from such honor as is in the palaces below, they shall be worthy of all
contempt: but, when the King of Heaven is day by day crying aloud and
saying, “It is hard with them, to set foot on that sacred threshold;”
shall we not give up all, and withdraw from our possessions, that with
boldness we may enter into the kingdom? And of what consideration are we
worthy, who are at great pains to encompass ourselves with the things
that obstruct our way thither; and to hide them not only in chests, but
even in the earth, when we might entrust them to the guard of the very
Heavens? Since now surely thou art doing the same, as if any husbandman,
having gotten wheat wherewith to sow a rich land, was to leave the land
alone, and bury all the wheat in a pit, so as neither to enjoy it
himself, nor for the wheat to come to ought, but decay and waste. But
what is their common plea, when we accuse them of these things? It gives
no little comfort, say they, to know that all is laid up for us in
safety at home. Nay, rather not to know of its being laid up is a
comfort. For even if thou art not afraid of famine, yet other more
grievous things, on account of this store, must needs be a terror to
thee: deaths, wars, plots laid against thee. And if a famine should ever
befall us, the people again, constrained by the belly, takes weapon in
hand against thy house. Or rather, in so doing, thou art first of all
bringing famine into our cities, and next thou art forming for thine own
house this gulf, more grievous than famine. For by stress of famine I
know not any who have come to a speedy end; there being in fact many
means in many quarters which may be devised to assuage that evil: but
for possessions and riches, and the pursuits connected with them, I can
show many to have come by their ruin, some in secret, some openly. And
with many such instances the highways abound, with many the courts of
law, and the market-places. But why speak I of the highways, the courts
of law and the market-places? Why, the very sea thou mayest behold
filled with their blood. For not over the land only, as it seems, hath
this tyranny prevailed, but over the ocean also hath walked in festal
procession with great excess. And one makes a voyage for gold, another,
again, is stabbed for the same; and the same tyrannical power hath made
one a merchant, the other a murderer.

<span id="iii.IX-p74"></span>What then can be less trustworthy than
Mammon, seeing that for his sake one travels, and ventures, and is
slain? “But who,” it is said, “will pity a charmer that is bitten with a
serpent?” <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) For we ought, knowing
its cruel tyranny, to flee that slavery, and destroy that grievous
longing. “But how,” saith one, “is this possible?” By introducing
another longing, the longing for Heaven. Since he that desires the
kingdom will laugh covetousness to scorn; he that is become Christ’s
slave is no slave of mammon, but rather his lord; for him that flieth
from him, he is wont to follow, and to fly from him that pursues. He
honors not so much his pursuer as his despiser; no one doth he so laugh
to scorn, as them that desire him; nor <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>
<span id="iii.IX-Page_58"></span> doth he only laugh them to scorn, but
wraps round them also innumerable bonds.

<span id="iii.IX-p76"></span>Be it ours then, however late, to loose
these grievous chains. Why bring thy reasonable soul into bondage to
brute matter, to the mother of those untold evils? But, oh the
absurdity! that while we are warring against it in words, it makes war
with us by deeds, and leads and carries us everywhere about, insulting
us as purchased with money, and meet for the lash; and what can be more
disgraceful and dishonorable than this?

<span id="iii.IX-p77"></span>Again: if we do not get the better of
senseless forms of matter, how shall we have the advantage of the
incorporeal powers? If we despise not vile earth and abject stones, how
shall we bring into subjection the principalities and authorities? How
shall we practise temperance? I mean, if silver dazzle and overpower us,
when shall we be able to hurry by a fair face? For, in fact, some are so
sold under this tyranny, as be moved somehow even at the mere show of
the gold, and in playfulness to say, that the very eyes are the better
for a gold coin coming in sight. But make not such jests, whoever thou
art; <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) for nothing so injures the
eyes, both those of the body and those of the soul, as the lust of these
things. For instance; it was this grievous longing that put out the
lamps of those virgins, and cast them out of the bride chamber. This
sight, which (as thou saidst) “doeth good to the eyes,” suffered not the
wretched Judas to hearken unto the Lord’s voice, but led him even to the
halter, made him burst asunder in the midst; and, after all that,
conducted him on to hell.

<span id="iii.IX-p79"></span>What then can be more lawless than this?
what more horrible? I do not mean the substance of riches, but the
unseasonable and frantic desire of them? Why, it even drops human gore,
and looks murder, and is fiercer than any wild beast, tearing in pieces
them that fall in its way, and what is much worse, it suffers them not
even to have any sense of being so mangled. For reason would that those
who are so treated should stretch forth their hand to them that pass by,
and call them to their assistance, but these are even thankful for such
rendings of their flesh, than which what can be more wretched?

<span id="iii.IX-p80"></span>Let us then, bearing in mind all these
things, flee the incurable disease; let us heal the wounds it hath made,
and withdraw ourselves from such a pest: in order that both here we may
live a secure and untroubled life, and attain to the future treasure;
*unto which God grant that we may all attain*, <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom unto the Father together with the Holy
Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_362"></span>[52:363](1100017.htm#fr_362) <span
id="iii.IX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p5.1"></span>το προτροι παγωνιζμενον</span>. Comp. [Jude
3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003)<span id="iii.IX-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[52:364](1100017.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iii.IX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p7"></span>[Acts xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#019)<span id="iii.IX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[52:365](1100017.htm#fr_364) <span
id="iii.IX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p9.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p9.2"></span>π σχματο</span>.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[53:366](1100017.htm#fr_365) <span
id="iii.IX-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p10"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p10.1"></span>τ πρς</span>, “what is that to,” as in
following paragraph.—R.\]

<span id="fn_366"></span>[53:367](1100017.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iii.IX-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p12"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p12.1"></span>τ πρς</span>.\]

<span id="fn_367"></span>[53:368](1100017.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iii.IX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p16"></span>[1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="iii.IX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[53:369](1100017.htm#fr_368) <span
id="iii.IX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p17"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p17.1"></span>Μλιστα μν οδν τ μσον</span>.\]

<span id="fn_369"></span>[53:370](1100017.htm#fr_369) <span
id="iii.IX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p18"></span>[2 Sam.
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#012)<span id="iii.IX-p18.1"></span>.
\[The citation varies from the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.IX-p18.2"></span>LXX</span>., and the latter from the Hebrew:
comp. R.V. *in loco*, where the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.IX-p18.3"></span>LXX</span>. is represented in the marginal
note.—R.\]

<span id="fn_370"></span>[53:371](1100017.htm#fr_370) <span
id="iii.IX-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p19"></span>[Ps.
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017)<span id="iii.IX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[54:372](1100017.htm#fr_371) <span
id="iii.IX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p23"></span>See Josephus, A.J. xvii. 6, 5.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[54:373](1100017.htm#fr_372) <span
id="iii.IX-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p25"></span>[Jer. xxxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)<span id="iii.IX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[54:374](1100017.htm#fr_373) <span
id="iii.IX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p26"></span>[Matt.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018)<span id="iii.IX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[54:375](1100017.htm#fr_374) <span
id="iii.IX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p28"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p28.1"></span>προανακηρττοντο</span>, “proclaiming
beforehand,” a technical term of ecclesiastical Greek.—R.\]

<span id="fn_375"></span>[54:376](1100017.htm#fr_375) <span
id="iii.IX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p29"></span>[Matt. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span id="iii.IX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[54:377](1100017.htm#fr_376) <span
id="iii.IX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p31"></span>[Gen.
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019), [Gen.
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007)<span id="iii.IX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[54:378](1100017.htm#fr_377) <span
id="iii.IX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p32"></span>\[“He calls the young children who were
massacred hers,” *i.e*., Rachel’s.—R.\]

<span id="fn_378"></span>[55:379](1100017.htm#fr_378) <span
id="iii.IX-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p36"></span>[Matt.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020)<span id="iii.IX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[55:380](1100017.htm#fr_379) <span
id="iii.IX-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p38.1"></span>σφαγιασθντα</span>. \[“Massacred,” a bold
figure of speech.—R.\]

<span id="fn_380"></span>[55:381](1100017.htm#fr_380) <span
id="iii.IX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p42"></span>[Luke ii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#039)<span id="iii.IX-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[55:382](1100017.htm#fr_381) <span
id="iii.IX-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p43"></span>\[Of this there is no hint in the
narrative; it is a harmonistic conjecture, with little to recommend
it.—R.\]

<span id="fn_382"></span>[55:383](1100017.htm#fr_382) <span
id="iii.IX-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p45"></span>[Matt. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)<span id="iii.IX-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[55:384](1100017.htm#fr_383) <span
id="iii.IX-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p47"></span>See [2 Chron. ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029)<span id="iii.IX-p47.1"></span>,
where it is said that certain of the acts of Solomon were *written in
the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the
Shilonite; and in the visions of Iddo the Seer against Jeroboam the son
of Nebat*. See also [2 Chr. 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015), [2
Chr. 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022)<span
id="iii.IX-p47.2"></span>. \[The explanation given above is as bold as
it is ingenious.—R.\]

<span id="fn_384"></span>[55:385](1100017.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iii.IX-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p48"></span>\[The Oxford edition reads “brought up;”
evidently a misprint for “burnt up” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p48.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p48.2"></span>κατκαιον</span></span> ).—R.\]

<span id="fn_385"></span>[55:386](1100017.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iii.IX-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p49"></span>[Jer. xxxvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#023)<span id="iii.IX-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[55:387](1100017.htm#fr_386) <span
id="iii.IX-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p50"></span>[2 Kings xxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008)<span id="iii.IX-p50.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[56:388](1100017.htm#fr_387) <span
id="iii.IX-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p51"></span>See [Acts
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006), [Acts
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010), [Acts
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014)<span id="iii.IX-p51.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[56:389](1100017.htm#fr_388) <span
id="iii.IX-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p53"></span>[John i.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046)<span id="iii.IX-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[56:390](1100017.htm#fr_389) <span
id="iii.IX-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p54"></span>[John vii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052)<span id="iii.IX-p54.1"></span>.
\[R.V. text: “Search, and see that out of Galilee ariseth no
prophet.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_390"></span>[56:391](1100017.htm#fr_390) <span
id="iii.IX-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p55"></span>[Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="iii.IX-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[56:392](1100017.htm#fr_391) <span
id="iii.IX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p58"></span>[Rom. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028)<span id="iii.IX-p58.1"></span>.
\[The Oxford edition reads: “for the Fathers sake;” a misprint,
conveying an incorrect sense.—R.\]

<span id="fn_392"></span>[56:393](1100017.htm#fr_392) <span
id="iii.IX-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p59"></span>[Heb.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#015)<span id="iii.IX-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[56:394](1100017.htm#fr_393) <span
id="iii.IX-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p60"></span>[Heb. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span id="iii.IX-p60.1"></span>.
\[R.V., more correctly: “having seen them and greeted them from
afar.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_394"></span>[56:395](1100017.htm#fr_394) <span
id="iii.IX-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p61"></span>[Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="iii.IX-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[56:396](1100017.htm#fr_395) <span
id="iii.IX-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p62"></span>[Rom. ix.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="iii.IX-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[56:397](1100017.htm#fr_396) <span
id="iii.IX-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p63"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p63.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p63.2"></span>κρβειαν</span>, “strictness.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_397"></span>[56:398](1100017.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iii.IX-p63.3"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p64"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p64.1"></span>προστασαν</span>, “advancement.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_398"></span>[56:399](1100017.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iii.IX-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p65"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p65.1"></span>σκαο</span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[57:400](1100017.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iii.IX-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p67"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p67.1"></span>τ παλαι</span>, without a substantive, the
technical term in ecclesiastical Greek for the Old Testament.—R.\]

<span id="fn_400"></span>[57:401](1100017.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iii.IX-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p68"></span>[John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="iii.IX-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[57:402](1100017.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iii.IX-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p69"></span>[Gal. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span id="iii.IX-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[57:403](1100017.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iii.IX-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p71"></span>[Luke xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span id="iii.IX-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[57:404](1100017.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iii.IX-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p72"></span>The words in italics are omitted in several
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.IX-p72.1"></span>mss</span>. \[In four
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.IX-p72.2"></span>mss</span> and two
versions the clause is wanting; see note at close of this Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_404"></span>[57:405](1100017.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iii.IX-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p75"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
12.13](../../../bib/apo/sir012.htm#013)<span id="iii.IX-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[58:406](1100017.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iii.IX-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p78"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p78.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.IX-p78.2"></span>νθρωπε</span>.\]

<span id="fn_406"></span>[58:407](1100017.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iii.IX-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.IX-p81"></span>Om. in one or two <span class="c41"><span
id="iii.IX-p81.1"></span>mss</span>. \[The clause in brackets is wanting
in four <span class="c20"><span id="iii.IX-p81.2"></span>mss</span>. and
in two versions; the identical authorities which omit the clause in sec.
8. The Oxford editor estimates the facts differently in the two
instances, without any adequate reason.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily X](1100018)
