[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100052)  [Next](1100054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLV"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLV-p1.1"></span>Homily XLV.</span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.XLV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p3"></span>*“And the disciples came and said unto Him,
Why speakest Thou unto them in parables? He answered and said unto them,
Because it is given unto you* <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787.md)
*to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not
given.”*

<span id="iii.XLV-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLV-p5.1"></span>We</span> have good cause to admire the
disciples, how, longing as they do to learn, they know when they ought
to ask. For they do it not before all: and this Matthew shows by saying,
“And they came.” And, as to this assertion not being conjecture, Mark
hath expressed it more distinctly, by saying, that “they came to Him
privately.” <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788.md) This then His
brethren and His mother should also have done, and not have called Him
out, and made a display.

<span id="iii.XLV-p7"></span>But mark their kindly affection also, how
they have much regard for the others, and seek their good first, and
then their own. “For why,” it is said, “speakest Thou unto them in
parables?” They did not say, why speakest thou unto us in parables? Yea,
and on other occasions also their kindliness towards men appears in many
ways; as when they say, “Send the multitude away;” <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789.md) and, “Knowest thou that they were
offended ?” <span id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790.md)

<span id="iii.XLV-p10"></span>What then saith Christ? “Because it is
given unto you,” so He speaks, “to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, but to them it is not given.” <span
id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791.md) But this He said, not bringing in
necessity, or any allotment <span id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792.md)
made causelessly and at random, but implying them to be the authors of
all their own evils, and wishing to represent that the thing is a gift,
and a grace bestowed from above.

<span id="iii.XLV-p13"></span>It by no means follows, however, because
it is a gift, that therefore free will is taken away; and this is
evident from what comes after. To this purpose, in order that neither
the one sort may despair, nor the other grow careless, upon being told
that “it is given,” He signifies the beginning to be with ourselves.

<span id="iii.XLV-p14"></span>“For whosoever hath, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance; but whosoever hath not, from
him shall be taken away, even that which he seemeth to have.” <span
id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793.md)

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span id="iii.XLV-Page_278"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p16"></span>And although the saying be full of much
obscurity, yet it indicates unspeakable justice. For what He saith is
like this: When any one hath forwardness and zeal, there shall be given
unto him all things on God’s part also: but if he be void of these, and
contribute not his own share, neither are God’s gifts bestowed. For even
“what he seemeth to have,” so He saith, “shall be taken away from him;”
God not so much taking it away, as counting him unworthy of His gifts.
This we also do; when we see any one listening carelessly, and when with
much entreaty we cannot persuade him to attend, it remains for us to be
silent. For if we are still to go on, his carelessness is aggravated.
But him that is striving to learn, we lead on, and pour in much.

<span id="iii.XLV-p17"></span>And well said He, “Even that which he
seemeth to have.” For he hath not really even this.

<span id="iii.XLV-p18"></span>Then He also made what He had said more
distinct, pointing out the meaning of, “To him that hath, shall be
given, but from him that hath not, even that which he seemeth to have,
shall be taken away.”

<span id="iii.XLV-p19"></span>“Therefore,” saith He, “speak I to them in
parables; because they seeing see not.” <span
id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794.md)

<span id="iii.XLV-p21"></span>“It were meet then,” one may say, “to have
opened their eyes, if they see not.” Nay, if the blindness were natural,
it were meet to open them; but because it was a voluntary and
self-chosen blindness, therefore He said not simply, “They see not,”
but, “seeing, they see not;” so that the blindness is of their own
wickedness. For they saw even devils cast out, and said, “By Beelzebub,
prince of the devils, He casteth out the devils.” <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795.md) They heard Him guiding them unto
God, and evincing His great unanimity with Him, and they say, “This man
is not of God.” <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796.md) Since then
the judgment they pronounced was contrary both to their sight and
hearing, therefore, saith He, the very hearing do I take away from them.
For they derive thence no advantage, but rather greater condemnation.
For they not only disbelieved, but found fault also, and accused, and
laid snares. However, He saith not this, for it is not His will to give
disgust in accusing them. Therefore neither at the beginning did He so
discourse to them, but with much plainness; but because they perverted
themselves, thenceforth He speaks in parables.

<span id="iii.XLV-p24"></span>2. After this, lest any one should suppose
His words to be a mere accusation, and lest men should say, Being our
enemy He is bringing these charges and calumnies against us; He
introduces the prophet also, pronouncing the same judgment as Himself.

<span id="iii.XLV-p25"></span>“For in them is fulfilled,” saith He, “the
prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand, and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive.” <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797.md)

<span id="iii.XLV-p27"></span>Seest thou the prophet likewise, accusing
them with this same accuracy? for neither did He say, Ye see not, but
“Ye shall see and not perceive;” nor again, Ye shall not hear, but “Ye
shall hear and not understand.” So that they first inflicted the loss on
themselves, by stopping their ears, by closing their eyes, by making
their heart fat. For they not only failed to hear, but also “heard
heavily,” and they did this, He saith,

<span id="iii.XLV-p28"></span>“Lest at any time they should be
converted, and I should heal them;” <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798.md) describing their aggravated
wickedness, and their determined defection from Him. And this He saith
to draw them unto Him, and to provoke them, and to signify that if they
would convert <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799.md) He would heal
them: much as if one should say, “He would not look at me, and I thank
him; for if he had vouchsafed me this, I should straightway have given
in:” and this he saith, to signify how he would have been reconciled.
Even so then here too it is said, “Lest at any time they should
convert, <span id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800.md) and I should heal
them;” implying that both their conversion was possible, and that upon
their repentance they might be saved, and that not for His own glory,
but for their salvation, He was doing all things.

<span id="iii.XLV-p32"></span>For if it had not been His will that they
should hear and be saved, He ought to have been silent, not to have
spoken in parables; but now by this very thing He stirs them up, even by
speaking under a veil. “For God willeth not the death of the sinner, but
that he should turn unto Him and live.” <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801.md)

<span id="iii.XLV-p34"></span>For in proof that our sin belongs not to
nature, nor to necessity and compulsion, hear what He saith to the
apostles, “But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for
they hear;” <span id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802.md) not meaning this
kind of sight nor hearing, but that of the mind. For indeed these too
were Jews, and brought up in the same circumstances; but nevertheless
they took no hurt from the prophecy, because they had the root of His
blessings well settled in them, their principle of choice, I mean, and
their judgment.

<span id="iii.XLV-p36"></span>Seest thou that, “unto you it is given,”
was not of necessity? For neither would <span id="page_279">p.
279</span> <span id="iii.XLV-Page_279"></span> they have been blessed,
unless the well-doing had been their own. For tell me not this, that it
was spoken obscurely; for they might have come and asked Him, as the
disciples did: but they would not, being careless and supine. Why say I,
they would not? nay, they were doing the very opposite, not only
disbelieving, not only not hearkening, but even waging war, and disposed
to be very bitter against all He said: which He brings in the prophet
laying to their charge, in the words, “They heard heavily.”

<span id="iii.XLV-p37"></span>But not such were these; wherefore He also
blessed them. And in another way too He assures them again, saying,

<span id="iii.XLV-p38"></span>“For verily I say unto you, many prophets
and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and
have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them;” <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803.md) my coming, He
means; my very miracles, my voice, my teaching. For here He prefers them
not to these depraved only, but even to such as have done virtuously;
yea, and He affirms them to be more blessed even than they. Why can this
be? Because not only do these see what the Jews saw not, but even what
those of old desired to see. For they indeed beheld by faith only: but
these by sight too, and much more distinctly.

<span id="iii.XLV-p40"></span>Seest thou how again He connects the old
dispensation with the new, signifying that those of old not only knew
the things to come but also greatly desired them? But had they pertained
to some strange and opposing God, they would never have desired them.

<span id="iii.XLV-p41"></span>“Hear ye therefore the parable of the
sower,” <span id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804.md) saith He; and He
speaks what we before mentioned, of carelessness and attention, of
cowardice and fortitude, of wealth and voluntary poverty; pointing out
the hurt from the one, and the benefit from the other.

<span id="iii.XLV-p43"></span>Then of virtue also He brings forward
different forms. For being full of love to man, He marked out not one
only way, nor did He say, “unless one bring forth an hundred, he is an
outcast;” but he that brings forth sixty is saved also, and not he only,
but also the producer of thirty. And this He said, making out salvation
to be easy.

<span id="iii.XLV-p44"></span>3. And thou then, art thou unable to
practise virginity? Be chaste in marriage. Art thou unable to strip
thyself of thy possessions? Give of thy substance. Canst thou not bear
that burden? Share thy goods with Christ. Art thou unwilling to yield
Him up all? Give Him but the half, but the third part. He is thy
brother, and joint-heir, make Him joint-heir with thee here too.
Whatsoever thou givest Him, thou wilt give to thyself. Hearest thou not
what saith the prophet? “Them that pertain to thy seed thou shalt not
overlook.” <span id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805.md) But if we must not
overlook our kinsmen, much less our Lord, having towards thee, together
with His authority as Lord, the claim also of kindred, and many more
besides. Yea, for He too hath made thee a sharer in His goods, having
received nothing of thee, but having begun with this unspeakable
benefit. What then can it be but extreme senselessness, not even by this
gift to be made kind towards men, not even to give a return for a free
gift, and less things for greater? Thus whereas He hath made thee heir
of Heaven, impartest thou not to Him even of the things on earth? He,
when thou hadst done no good work, but wert even an enemy, reconciled
thee: and dost thou not requite Him, being even a friend and benefactor?

<span id="iii.XLV-p46"></span>Yet surely, even antecedently to the
kingdom, and to all the rest, even for the very fact of His giving, we
ought to feel bound to Him. For so servants too, when bidding their
masters to a meal, account themselves not to be giving but receiving;
but here the contrary hath taken place: not the servant the Lord, but
the Lord hath first bidden the servant unto His own table; and dost thou
not bid Him, no not even after this? He first hath introduced thee under
His own roof; dost thou not take Him in, so much as in the second place?
He clad thee, being naked; and dost thou not even after this receive Him
being a stranger? He first gave thee to drink out of His own cup, and
dost thou not impart to Him so much as cold water? He hath made thee
drink of the Holy Spirit, and dost thou not even soothe His bodily
thirst? He hath made thee drink of the Spirit, when thou wast deserving
of punishment; and dost thou neglect Him even when thirsty, and this
when it is out of His own, that thou art to do all these things? Dost
thou not then esteem it a great thing, to hold the cup out of which
Christ is to drink, and to put it to His lips? Seest thou not that for
the priest alone is it lawful <span id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806.md)
to give the cup of His blood? But I am by no means strict about this,
saith He; but though thyself should give, I receive; though thou be a
layman, I refuse it not. And I do not require such as I have given: for
not blood do I seek, but cold water. Consider to whom thou art giving
drink, and tremble. Consider, thou art become a priest of Christ, giv
<span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="iii.XLV-Page_280"></span>
ing with thine own hand, not flesh but bread, not blood, but a cup of
cold water. He clothed thee with a garment of salvation, and clothed
thee by Himself; do thou at least by thy servant clothe Him. He made
thee glorious in Heaven, do thou deliver Him from shivering, and
nakedness, and shame. He made thee a fellow-citizen of angels, do thou
impart to Him at least of the covering of thy roof, give house-room to
Him at least as to thine own servant. “I refuse not this lodging and
that, having opened to thee the whole Heaven. I have delivered thee from
a most grievous prison; this I do not require again, nor do I say,
deliver me; but if thou wouldest look upon me only, when I am bound,
this suffices me for refreshment. When thou wert dead, I raised thee; I
require not this again of thee, but I say, visit me only when sick.”

<span id="iii.XLV-p48"></span>Now when His gifts are so great, and His
demands exceeding easy, and we do not supply even these; what deep of
hell must we not deserve? Justly shall we depart into the fire that is
prepared for the devil and his angels, being more insensible than any
rock. For how great insensibility is it, tell me, for us, who have
received, and are to receive so much, to be slaves of money, from which
we shall a little while hence be separated even against our will? And
others indeed have given up even their life, and shed their blood; and
dost thou not even give up thy superfluities for Heaven’s sake, for the
sake of so great crowns?

<span id="iii.XLV-p49"></span>And of what favor canst thou be worthy? of
what justification? who in thy sowing of the earth, gladly pourest forth
all, and in lending to men at usury sparest nothing; but in feeding thy
Lord through His poor art cruel and inhuman?

<span id="iii.XLV-p50"></span>Having then considered all these things,
and calculated what we have received, what we are to receive, what is
required of us, let us show forth all our diligence on the things
spiritual. Let us become at length mild and humane, that we may not draw
down on ourselves the intolerable punishment. For what is there that
hath not power to condemn us? Our having enjoyed so many and such great
benefits; our having no great thing required of us; our having such
things required, as we shall leave here even against our will; our
exhibiting so much liberality in our worldly matters. Why each one of
these, even by itself, were enough to condemn us; but when they all meet
together, what hope will there be of salvation?

<span id="iii.XLV-p51"></span>In order then that we may escape all this
condemnation, let us show forth some bounty towards those who are in
need. For thus shall we enjoy all the good things, both here, and there;
unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[277:1788](1100053.htm#fr_1787.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p4"></span>\[R.V., “Unto you it is given,” omitting
“Because.”\]

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[277:1789](1100053.htm#fr_1788.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p6"></span>[Mark iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[277:1790](1100053.htm#fr_1789.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p8"></span>[Luke ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[277:1791](1100053.htm#fr_1790.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p9"></span>[Matt. xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[277:1792](1100053.htm#fr_1791.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p11"></span>[Matt. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p11.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Unto you it is given,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[277:1793](1100053.htm#fr_1792.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLV-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLV-p12.2"></span>ποκλρωσι</span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[277:1794](1100053.htm#fr_1793.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p15"></span>[Matt.
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012.md), [Luke
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p15.1"></span>.
\[<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLV-p15.2"></span>δοκε</span> is
inserted from the latter passage, and repeated in the comments.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[278:1795](1100053.htm#fr_1794.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p20"></span>[Matt. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[278:1796](1100053.htm#fr_1795.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p22"></span>[Matt. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[278:1797](1100053.htm#fr_1796.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p23"></span>[John ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[278:1798](1100053.htm#fr_1797.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p26"></span>[Matt.
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014.md), [Isa.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[278:1799](1100053.htm#fr_1798.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p29"></span>[Matt. xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p29.1"></span>.
\[The passage is abridged. R.V., “should turn again ” (so in Isaiah).
Chrysostom takes it in this sense, as the context shows.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[278:1800](1100053.htm#fr_1799.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p30"></span>\[“turn again.”\]

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[278:1801](1100053.htm#fr_1800.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p31"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLV-p31.1"></span>τ πιστραφναι</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[278:1802](1100053.htm#fr_1801.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p33"></span>[Ezek. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p33.1"></span>.
\[Freely cited in the first part.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[278:1803](1100053.htm#fr_1802.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p35"></span>[Matt. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[279:1804](1100053.htm#fr_1803.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p39"></span>[Matt. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[279:1805](1100053.htm#fr_1804.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p42"></span>[Matt. xiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[279:1806](1100053.htm#fr_1805.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p45"></span>[Isa. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.XLV-p45.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[279:1807](1100053.htm#fr_1806.md) <span
id="iii.XLV-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLV-p47"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLV-p47.1"></span>θμι</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLVI](1100054.md)
