[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100048)  [Next](1100050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLI"></span> <span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="iii.XLI-Page_258"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLI-p1.1"></span>Homily XLI.</span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.XLI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p3"></span>“And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said
unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself shall be brought to
desolation; and every city or house divided against itself, shall not
stand: and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how
shall then his kingdom stand?”

<span id="iii.XLI-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLI-p4.1"></span>Even</span> before now they had accused Him of
this, that “by Beelzebub He casteth out the devils.” <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704.md) But whereas then He did not rebuke
them, allowing them both to know His power by His more numerous
miracles, and by His teaching to learn His majesty: now, since they
continued saying the same, He proceeds also to rebuke them, showing His
Godhead by this first, that He made their secrets public; and secondly,
by the very act of casting out the devils with ease.

<span id="iii.XLI-p6"></span>And indeed the accusation too was very
shameless. Because, as I have said, envy seeks not what to say, but only
that it may say somewhat. Yet for all that, not even so did Christ
despise them, but defends Himself with the forbearance proper to Him,
teaching us to be meek to our enemies; and though they say such things,
as we are neither conscious of, nor have they any the least probability,
not to be disturbed, nor troubled, but with all long suffering to render
them an account. This then He did most especially on that very occasion,
affording the strongest proof, that the things were false that were said
by them. For neither was it a demoniac’s part to exhibit so much
meekness; it was not a demoniac’s part to know men’s secrets.

<span id="iii.XLI-p7"></span>For, in truth, both because of the
exceeding impudence of such a suspicion, and because of the fear of the
multitude, they durst not publicly make these charges, but were turning
them in their mind. But He, to show them that He knew all that likewise,
doth not set down the accusation, nor doth He expose their wickedness;
but the refutation He adds, leaving it to the conscience of them that
had said it to convict them. For on one thing only was He bent, to do
good to them that were sinning, not to expose them.

<span id="iii.XLI-p8"></span>Yet surely, if He had been minded to extend
his speech in length, and to make them ridiculous, and withal to have
exacted of them also the most extreme penalty, there was nothing to
hinder Him. Nevertheless He put aside all these things, and looked to
one object only, not to render them more contentious, but more candid,
and so to dispose them better toward amendment.

<span id="iii.XLI-p9"></span>How then doth He plead with them? Not by
allegation out of the Scriptures (for they would not so much as attend,
but were sure rather to distort their meaning), but by the events of
ordinary life. For “every kingdom,” saith He, “divided against itself
shall not stand; and a city and a house, if it be divided, is soon
dissolved.” <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p11"></span>For the wars from without are not so
ruinous as the civil ones. Yea, and this is the case in bodies too; it
is the case even in all things; but for this time He takes His
illustration from those that are more publicly known.

<span id="iii.XLI-p12"></span>And yet, what is there more powerful on
earth than a kingdom? Nothing, but nevertheless it perishes if in
dissension. And if in that case one throw the blame on the great burden
of the affairs thereof, as breaking down by its own weight; what
wouldest thou say of a city? and what of a house? Thus, whether it be a
small thing, or a great, if at dissension with itself, it perishes. If
then I, having a devil, do by him cast out the devils, there is
dissension and fighting among devils, and they take their stand one
against another. But if they stand one against another, their strength
is wasted and destroyed. “For if Satan cast out Satan” (and He said not
“the devils,” implying their great unanimity one with another), “he is
then divided against himself;” so He speaks. But if he be divided, he is
become weaker, and is ruined; and if he be ruined, how can he cast out
another?

<span id="iii.XLI-p13"></span>Seest thou how great the absurdity of the
accusation, how great the folly, the inconsistency? Since it is not for
the same persons to say first, that He stands, and casts out devils, and
then to say, that He stands by <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="iii.XLI-Page_259"></span> that, which it was likely would be the
cause of His undoing.

<span id="iii.XLI-p14"></span>2. This then being the first refutation,
the next after it is that which relates to the disciples. For not always
in one way only, but also in a second and third, He solves their
objections, being minded most abundantly to silence their shamelessness.
Which sort of thing He did also with respect to the Sabbath, bringing
forward David, the priests, the testimony that saith, “I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice,” the cause of the Sabbath, for which it was
ordained; “for the Sabbath,” saith He,” was for man.” <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706.md) This then He doth in the present
case also: where after the first He proceeds to a second refutation,
plainer than the former.

<span id="iii.XLI-p16"></span>“For if I,” saith He, “by Beelzebub cast
out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out?” <span
id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p18"></span>See here too His gentleness. For He said
not, “my disciples,” nor, “the apostles,” but “your sons;” to the end
that if indeed they were minded to return to the same nobleness <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708.md) with them, they might derive hence
a powerful spring that way; but if they were uncandid, and continued in
the same course, they might not thenceforth be able to allege any plea,
though ever so shameless.

<span id="iii.XLI-p20"></span>But what He saith is like this, “By whom
do the apostles cast them out?” For in fact they were doing so already,
because they had received authority from Him, and these men brought no
charge against them; their quarrel not being with the acts, but with the
person only. As then it was His will to show that their sayings arose
only from their envy against Him, He brings forward the apostles; thus:
If I so cast them out, much more those, who have received their
authority from me. Nevertheless, no such thing have ye said to them. How
then bring ye these charges against me, the author of their doings,
while acquitting them of the accusations? This, however, will not free
you from your punishment, rather it will condemn you the more. Therefore
also He added, “They shall be your judges.” For when persons from among
you, and having been practised in these things, both believe me and
obey, it is most clear that they will also condemn those who are against
me both in deed and word.

<span id="iii.XLI-p21"></span>“But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of
God, then the Kingdom of God is come unto you.” <span
id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p23"></span>What means “the Kingdom”? “My coming.” See
how again He conciliates and soothes them, and draws them to the
knowledge of Himself, and signifies that they are warring with their own
good, and contentious against their own salvation. “For whereas ye ought
to rejoice,” saith He, “and leap for joy, that One is come bestowing
those great and unutterable blessings, hymned of old by the prophets,
and that the time of your prosperity is at hand; ye do the contrary; so
far from receiving the blessings, you do even speak ill of them, and
frame accusations that have no real being.”

<span id="iii.XLI-p24"></span>Now Matthew indeed saith, “If I by the
Spirit of God cast out”; but Luke, “If I by the finger of God cast out
the devils:” <span id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710.md) implying that to
cast out devils is a work of the greatest power, and not of any ordinary
grace. And He means indeed that from these things they should infer and
say, If this be so, then the Son of God is come. This, however, He saith
not, but in a reserved way, and so as not to be galling to them, He
darkly intimates it by saying, “Then the kingdom of God is come unto
you.”

<span id="iii.XLI-p26"></span>Seest thou exceeding wisdom? By the very
things which they were blaming, He showed His presence shining forth.

<span id="iii.XLI-p27"></span>Then, to conciliate them, He said not
simply, “The Kingdom is come,” but, “unto you,” <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711.md) as though He had said, To you the
good things are come; wherefore then feel displeased at your proper
blessings? why war against your own salvation? This is that time, which
the prophets long ago foretold: this, the sign of that advent which was
celebrated by them, even these things being wrought by divine power. For
the fact indeed, that they are wrought, yourselves know; but that they
are wrought by divine power, the deeds themselves cry out. Yea, and it
is impossible that Satan should be stronger now; rather he must of
absolute necessity be weak. But it cannot be, that he who is weak
should, as though he were strong, cast out the strong devil.

<span id="iii.XLI-p29"></span>Now thus speaking He signified the power
of charity, and the weakness of separation and contentiousness.
Wherefore He was Himself also continually charging His disciples, on
every occasion, concerning charity, and teaching them that the devil, to
subvert it, leaves nothing undone.

<span id="iii.XLI-p30"></span>3. Having then uttered His second
refutation, He adds also a third, thus saying:

<span id="iii.XLI-p31"></span>“How can one enter into the strong man’s
house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man, and
then spoil his goods?” <span id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712.md)

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="iii.XLI-Page_260"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p33"></span>For that Satan cannot possibly cast out
Satan is evident from what hath been said; but that neither in any other
way is it possible to cast him out, except one first get the better of
him, this too is acknowledged by all.

<span id="iii.XLI-p34"></span>What then is established hereby? The
former statement, with more abundant evidence. “Why, I am so far,” saith
He, “from using the devil as an ally, that I make war upon him, and bind
him; and an infallible proof thereof is the plundering of his goods.”
See how the contrary is proved, of what they were attempting to
establish. For whereas they wished to show, that not by His own power
doth He cast out devils, He shows that not only the devils, but even
their very chief leader is held by Him bound with all authority; and
that over him, before them, did He prevail by His own power. And this is
evident from the things that are done. For if he be the prince, and they
subjects, how, except he were worsted, and made to bow down, could they
have been spoiled?

<span id="iii.XLI-p35"></span>And here His saying seems to me to be a
prophecy likewise. For not only, I suppose, are the evil spirits the
goods of the devil, but also the men that are doing his works. Therefore
to declare that He doth not only cast out devils, but also will drive
away all error from the world, and will put down his sorceries, and make
all his arts useless, He said these things.

<span id="iii.XLI-p36"></span>And He said not, He will take away, but
“He will spoil,” to express what is done with authority. But He calls
him “strong,” not because he is so by nature, God forbid, but declaring
his former tyranny, which arose from our remissness.

<span id="iii.XLI-p37"></span>4. “He that is not with me is against me,
and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p39"></span>Behold also a fourth refutation. For what
is my desire? saith He. To bring men to God, to teach virtue, to
proclaim the kingdom. What, that of the devil, and the evil spirits? The
contrary to these. How then should he that gathers not with me, nor is
at all with me, be likely to co-operate with me? And why do I say
co-operate? Nay, on the contrary, his desire is rather to scatter abroad
my goods. He then who is so far from cooperating that he even scatters
abroad, how should he have exhibited such unanimity with me, as with me
to cast out the devils?

<span id="iii.XLI-p40"></span>Now it is a natural surmise that He said
this not of the devil only, but Himself also of Himself, as being for
His part against the devil, and scattering abroad his goods. And how,
one may say, is he that is not with me against me? By this very fact, of
his not gathering. But if this be true, much more he that is against
him. For if he that doth not co-operate is an enemy, much more he that
wages war.

<span id="iii.XLI-p41"></span>But all these things He saith, to indicate
His enmity against the devil, how great and unspeakable it is. For tell
me, if thou must go to war with any one, he that is not willing to fight
on thy side, by this very fact is he not against thee? And if elsewhere
He saith, “He that is not against you is for you,” <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714.md) it is not contrary to this. For
here He signified one actually against them, but there He points to one
who in part is on their side: “For they cast out devils,” it is said “in
Thy name.” <span id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p44"></span>But to me He seems here to be hinting also
at the Jews, setting them on the devil’s side. For they too were against
Him, and were scattering what He gathered. As to the fact that He was
hinting at them also, He declared it by speaking thus,

<span id="iii.XLI-p45"></span>“Therefore I say unto you, that all manner
of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men.” <span
id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p47"></span>5. Thus having defended Himself, and
refuted their objection, and proved the vanity of their shameless
dealings, He proceeds to alarm them. For this too is no small part of
advice and correction, not only to plead and persuade, but to threaten
also; which He doth in many passages, when making laws and giving
counsel.

<span id="iii.XLI-p48"></span>And though the saying seem to have much
obscurity, yet if we attend, its solution will prove easy.

<span id="iii.XLI-p49"></span>First then it were well to listen to the
very words: “All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men;
but the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto them. And
whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven
him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to
come.” <span id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717.md)

<span id="iii.XLI-p51"></span>What now is it that He affirms? Many
things have ye spoken against me; that I am a deceiver, an adversary of
God. These things I forgive you on your repentance, and exact no penalty
of you; but blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven, no,
<span id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span id="iii.XLI-Page_261"></span>
not to those who repent. And how can this be right? For even this was
forgiven upon repentance. Many at least of those who said these words
believed afterward, and all was forgiven them. What is it then that He
saith? That this sin is above all things unpardonable. Why so? Because
Himself indeed they knew not, who He might be, but of the Spirit they
received ample experience. For the prophets also by the Spirit said
whatever they said; and indeed all in the Old Testament had a very high
notion of Him.

<span id="iii.XLI-p52"></span>What He saith, then, is this: Be it so: ye
are offended at me, because of the flesh with which I am encompassed:
can ye say of the Spirit also, We know it not? And therefore is your
blasphemy unpardonable, and both here and hereafter shall ye suffer
punishment. For many indeed have been punished here only (as he who had
committed fornication, <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718.md) as
they who partook unworthily of the mysteries, <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) amongst the Corinthians.md); but ye,
both here and hereafter.

<span id="iii.XLI-p55"></span>Now as to your blasphemies against me,
before the cross, I forgive them: and the daring crime too of the cross
itself; neither shall ye be condemned for your unbelief alone. (For
neither had they, that believed before the cross, perfect faith. And on
many occasions He even charges them to make Him known to no man before
the Passion; and on the cross He said that this sin was forgiven them.)
But as to your words touching the Spirit, they will have no excuse. For
in proof that He is speaking of what was said of Him before the
crucifixion, He added, “Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of
Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the
Holy Ghost,” there is no more forgiveness. Wherefore? Because this is
known to you; and the truths are notorious which you harden yourselves
against. For though ye say that ye know not me; yet of this surely ye
are not ignorant, that to cast out devils, and to do cures, is a work of
the Holy Ghost. It is not then I only whom ye are insulting, but the
Holy Ghost also. Wherefore your punishment can be averted by no prayers,
neither here nor there.

<span id="iii.XLI-p56"></span>For so of men, some are punished both
here, and there, some here only, some there only, others neither here
nor there. Here and there, as these very men (for both here did they pay
a penalty, when they suffered those incurable ills at the taking of
their city, and there shall they undergo a very grievous one), as the
inhabitants of Sodom; as many others. There only, as the rich man who
endured the flames, <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720.md) and had
not at his command so much as a drop of water. Here, as he that had
committed fornication amongst the Corinthians. Neither here nor there,
as the apostles, as the prophets, as the blessed Job; for their
sufferings were not surely in the way of punishment, but as contests and
wrestlings.

<span id="iii.XLI-p58"></span>Let us labor, therefore, to be of the same
part with these: or if not with these, at least with them that wash away
their sins here. For fearful indeed is that other judgment, and
inexorable the vengeance, and incurable the punishment.

<span id="iii.XLI-p59"></span>6. But if thou desire not to be punished
even here, pass judgment on thyself, exact thine own penalty. Listen to
Paul, when he saith, “If we would judge ourselves, we should not be
judged.” <span id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721.md) If thou do this,
proceeding in order thou shalt even arrive at a crown.

<span id="iii.XLI-p61"></span>But how are we to exact our own penalty?
one may ask.

<span id="iii.XLI-p62"></span>Lament, groan bitterly, humble, afflict
thyself, call to remembrance thy sins in their particulars. This thing
is no small torture to a man’s soul. If any man hath been in a state of
contrition, he knows that the soul is punished by this more than
anything. If any hath been living in remembrance of sins, he knows the
anguish thence arising. Therefore doth God appoint righteousness as a
reward for such repentance, saying, “Be thou first to tell thy sins,
that thou mayest be justified.” <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722.md) For it is not, it is not indeed, a
small step towards amendment, to lay together all our sins, and to be
continually revolving and reckoning them up with their particulars. For
he that is doing this will be so heart-broken, as not to think himself
worthy so much as to live; and he that thinks thus, will be tenderer
than any wax. For tell me not of acts of fornication only, nor of
adulteries, nor of these things that are manifest, and acknowledged
amongst all men: but lay together also thy secret crafts, and thy false
accusations, and thine evil speakings, and thy vain gloryings, and thine
envy, and all such things. For neither will these bring a trifling
punishment. For the reviler too shall fall into hell; and the drunkard
hath no part in the kingdom; and he that lovest not his neighbor so
offends God, as to find no help even in his own martyrdom; and he that
neglects his own hath denied the faith, and he who overlooks the poor is
sent into the fire.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span id="iii.XLI-Page_262"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p64"></span>Account not then these things to be
little, but put all together, and write them as in a book. For if thou
write them down, God blots them out; even as on the other hand, if thou
omit writing them, God both inscribes them, and exacts their penalty. It
were then far better for them to be written by us, and blotted out
above, than on the contrary, when we have forgotten them, for God to
bring them before our eyes in that day.

<span id="iii.XLI-p65"></span>Therefore that this may not be so, let us
reckon up all with strictness, and we shall find ourselves answerable
for much. For who is clear from covetousness? Nay, tell me not of the
quantity, but since even in a small amount we shall pay the same
penalty, consider this and repent. Who is rid of all insolence? Yet this
casts into hell. Who hath not secretly spoken evil of his neighbor? Yet
this deprives one of the Kingdom. <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723.md) Who hath not been self-willed? Yet
this man is more unclean than all. Who hath not looked with unchaste
eyes? Yet this is a complete adulterer. Who hath not been “angry with
his brother without a cause”? Yet such an one is “in danger of the
council.” Who hath not sworn? Yet this thing is of the evil one. Who
hath not forsworn himself? but this man is something more than of the
evil one. Who hath not served mammon? but this man is fallen away from
the genuine service of Christ.

<span id="iii.XLI-p67"></span>I have also other things greater than
these to mention: but even these are enough, and able, if a man be not
made of stone, nor utterly past feeling, to bring him to compunction.
For if each one of them casts into hell, what will they not bring to
pass when all are met together?

<span id="iii.XLI-p68"></span>How then can one be saved? it may be
asked. By application of the countervailing remedies: alms, prayers,
compunction, repentance, humility, a contrite heart, contempt of
possessions. For God hath marked out for us innumerable ways of
salvation, if we be willing to attend. Let us then attend, and let us
every way cleanse out our wounds, showing mercy, remitting our anger
against them that have displeased us, giving thanks for all things to
God, fasting according to our power, praying sincerely, “making unto
ourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness.” <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724.md) For so shall we be able to obtain
pardon for our offenses, and to win the promised good things; whereof
may we all be counted worthy, by the grace and love toward man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[258:1705](1100049.htm#fr_1704.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p5"></span>[Matt. ix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p5.1"></span>.
\[“Demons,” and so throughout.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[258:1706](1100049.htm#fr_1705.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p10"></span>\[Comp. verse 25.\]

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[259:1707](1100049.htm#fr_1706.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p15"></span>See [Matt.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#003.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#005.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007.md), [Mark
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[259:1708](1100049.htm#fr_1707.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p17"></span>[Matt. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[259:1709](1100049.htm#fr_1708.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p19"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLI-p19.1"></span>εγνειαν</span>, “hereditary good feeling.”
\[Comp. [Acts xvii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.XLI-p19.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[259:1710](1100049.htm#fr_1709.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p22"></span>[Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p22.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “upon you.”\]

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[259:1711](1100049.htm#fr_1710.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p25"></span>[Luke xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[259:1712](1100049.htm#fr_1711.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p28"></span>\[“upon you,” see note 4.\]

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[259:1713](1100049.htm#fr_1712.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p32"></span>[Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p32.1"></span>.
\[The R.V and A.V. follow a different reading in the last clause.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[260:1714](1100049.htm#fr_1713.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p38"></span>[Matt. xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[260:1715](1100049.htm#fr_1714.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p42"></span>[Mark
9:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#040.md), [Luke
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#050.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p42.1"></span>.
\[In Mark “us” is better supported.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[260:1716](1100049.htm#fr_1715.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p43"></span>[Mark
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038.md), [Luke
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#049.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[260:1717](1100049.htm#fr_1716.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p46"></span>[Matt. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p46.1"></span>.
\[R.V. “every sin,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[260:1718](1100049.htm#fr_1717.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p50"></span>[Matt.
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p50.1"></span>.
\[The Greek text is almost identical with that followed in the R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[261:1719](1100049.htm#fr_1718.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p53"></span>See [1 Cor.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#000.md), [1 Cor.
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[261:1720](1100049.htm#fr_1719.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p54"></span>See [1 Cor.
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#000.md), [1 Cor.
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[261:1721](1100049.htm#fr_1720.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p57"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLI-p57.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLI-p57.2"></span>ποτηγανιζμενο</span>, “was broiling.”

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[261:1722](1100049.htm#fr_1721.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p60"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p60.1"></span>.
\[The Greek text of [1 Cor. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p60.2"></span> is
slightly modified here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[261:1723](1100049.htm#fr_1722.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p63"></span>[Isa. xliii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p63.1"></span>
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XLI-p63.2"></span>LXX</span>.\].

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[262:1724](1100049.htm#fr_1723.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p66"></span>\[This clause is wanting in three <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XLI-p66.1"></span>mss</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[262:1725](1100049.htm#fr_1724.md) <span
id="iii.XLI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLI-p69"></span>[Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.XLI-p69.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “by means of,” with margin, “Greek, out of.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLII](1100050.md)
