[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100072)  [Next](1100074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXV"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXV-p1.1"></span>Homily LXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXI.
33-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033.md)<span
id="iii.LXV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p3"></span>*“Hear another parable. There was a certain
householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and
digged a winepress, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and
went into a far country.* <span id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551.md)
*And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to
receive the fruits. And the husbandmen took the servants, and beat some,
and killed some, and stoned some. Again he sent other servants more than
the first: and they did unto them likewise. But last he sent unto them
his son, saying, It may be they will reverence my son. But when the
husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir,
come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And they
cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. When the Lord therefore of
the vineyard cometh, what will he do to those husbandmen? They say unto
Him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his
vineyard to other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their
seasons. Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The
Stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner?”* <span id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552.md)

<span id="iii.LXV-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXV-p6.1"></span>Many</span> things doth He intimate by this
parable, God’s providence, which had been exercised towards them from
the first; their murderous disposition from the beginning; that nothing
had been omitted of whatever pertained to a heedful care of them; that
even when prophets had been slain, He had not turned away from them, but
had sent His very Son; that the God both of the New and <span
id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span id="iii.LXV-Page_397"></span> of the
Old Testament was one and the same; that His death should effect great
blessings; that they were to endure extreme punishment for the
crucifixion, and their crime; the calling of the Gentiles, the casting
out of the Jews.

<span id="iii.LXV-p7"></span>Therefore He putteth it after the former
parable, that He may show even hereby the charge to be greater, and
highly unpardonable. How, and in what way? That although they met with
so much care, they were worse than harlots and publicans, and by so
much.

<span id="iii.LXV-p8"></span>And observe also both His great care, and
the excessive idleness of these men. For what pertained to the
husbandmen, He Himself did, the hedging it round about, the planting the
vineyard, and all the rest, and He left little for them to do; to take
care of what was there, and to preserve what was given to them. For
nothing was left undone, but all accomplished; and not even so did they
gain, and this, when they had enjoyed such great blessings from Him. For
when they had come forth out of Egypt, He gave a law, and set up a city,
and built a temple, and prepared an altar.

<span id="iii.LXV-p9"></span>“And went into a far country;” that is, He
bore long with them, not always bringing the punishments close upon
their sins; for by His going into a far country, <span
id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553.md) He means His great long-suffering.

<span id="iii.LXV-p11"></span>And “He sent His servants,” that is, the
prophets, “to receive the fruit;” that is, their obedience, the proof of
it by their works. But they even here showed their wickedness, not only
by failing to give the fruit, after having enjoyed so much care, which
was the sign of idleness, but also by showing anger towards them that
came. For they that had not to give when they owed, should not have been
indignant, nor angry, but should have entreated. But they not only were
indignant, but even filled their hands with blood, and while deserving
punishment, themselves inflicted punishment.

<span id="iii.LXV-p12"></span>Therefore He sent both a second, and a
third company, both that the wickedness of these might be shown, and the
love towards man of Him who sent them.

<span id="iii.LXV-p13"></span>And wherefore sent He not His Son
immediately? In order that they might condemn themselves for the things
done to the others, and leave off their wrath, and reverence Him when He
came. There are also other reasons, but for the present let us go on to
what is next. But what means, “It may be they will reverence?” It is not
the language of one ignorant, away with the thought! but of one desiring
to show the sin to be great; and without any excuse. Since Himself
knowing that they would slay Him, He sent Him. But He saith, “They will
reverence,” declaring what ought to have been done, that it was their
duty to have reverenced Him. Since elsewhere also He saith, “if
perchance they will hear;” <span id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554.md)
not in this case either being ignorant, but lest any of the obstinate
should say, that His prediction was the thing that necessitated their
disobedience, therefore He frames His expressions in this way, saying,
“Whether they will,” and, “It may be.” For though they had been
obstinate towards His servants, yet ought they to have reverenced the
dignity of the Son.

<span id="iii.LXV-p15"></span>What then do these? When they ought to
have run unto Him, when they ought to have asked pardon for their
offenses, they even persist more strongly in their former sins, they
proceed to add unto their pollutions, forever throwing into the shade
their former offenses by their later; as also He Himself declared when
He said, “Fill ye up the measure of your fathers.” <span
id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555.md) For from the first the prophets
used to charge them with these things, saying, “Your hands are full of
blood;” <span id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556.md) and, “They mingle
blood with blood;” <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557.md) and, “They
build up Sion with blood.” <span id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558.md)

<span id="iii.LXV-p20"></span>But they did not learn self-restraint,
albeit they received this commandment first, “Thou shalt not kill;” and
had been commanded to abstain from countless other things because of
this, and by many and various means urged to the keeping of this
commandment.

<span id="iii.LXV-p21"></span>Yet, for all that, they put not away that
evil custom; but what say they, when they saw Him? Come, let us kill
Him. With what motive, and for what reason? what of any kind had they to
lay to His charge, either small or great? Is it that He honored you, and
being God became man for your sakes, and wrought His countless miracles?
or that He pardoned your sins? or that He called you unto a kingdom?

<span id="iii.LXV-p22"></span>But see together with their impiety great
was their folly, and the reason of His murder was full of much madness.
“For let us kill Him,” it is said, “and the inheritance shall be ours.”

<span id="iii.LXV-p23"></span>And where do they take counsel to kill
Him? “Out of the vineyard.”

<span id="iii.LXV-p24"></span>2. Seest thou how He prophesies even the
place where He was to be slain. “And they cast Him out, and slew Him.”

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span id="iii.LXV-Page_398"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p25"></span>And Luke indeed saith, that He declared
what these men should suffer; and they said, “God forbid;” and He added
the testimony \[of Scripture\]. For “He beheld them, and said, What is
it then that is written? The stone which the builders rejected, the same
is become the head of the corner; and every one that falleth upon it
shall be broken.” <span id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559.md) But
Matthew, that they themselves delivered the sentence. But this is not a
contradiction. For indeed both things were done, both themselves passed
the sentence against themselves; and again, when they perceived what
they had said, they added, “God forbid;” and He set up the prophet
against them, persuading them that certainly this would be.

<span id="iii.LXV-p27"></span>Nevertheless, not even so did He plainly
reveal the Gentiles, that He might afford them no handle, but signified
it darkly by saying, “He will give the vineyard to others.” For this
purpose then did He speak by a parable, that themselves might pass the
sentence, which was done in the case of David also, when He passed
judgment on the parable of Nathan. But do thou mark, I pray thee, even
hereby how just is the sentence, when the very persons that are to be
punished condemn themselves.

<span id="iii.LXV-p28"></span>Then that they might learn that not only
the nature of justice requires these things, but even from the beginning
the grace of the Spirit had foretold them, and God had so decreed, He
both added a prophecy, and reproves them in a way to put them to shame,
saying, “Did ye never read, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner? this is the Lord’s doing, and it
is marvellous in our eyes;” by all things showing, that they should be
cast out for unbelief, and the Gentiles brought in. This He darkly
intimated by the Canaanitish woman also; this again by the ass, and by
the centurion, and by many other parables; this also now.

<span id="iii.LXV-p29"></span>Wherefore He added too, “This is the
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes,” declaring beforehand
that the believing Gentiles, and as many of the Jews as should also
themselves believe, shall be one, although the difference between them
had been so great before.

<span id="iii.LXV-p30"></span>Then, that they might learn that nothing
was opposed to God’s will of the things doing, but that the event was
even highly acceptable, and beyond expectation, and amazing every one of
the beholders (for indeed the miracle was far beyond words), He added
and said, “It is the Lord’s doing.” And by the stone He means Himself,
and by builders the teachers of the Jews; as Ezekiel also saith, “They
that build the wall, and daub it with untempered mortar.” <span
id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560.md) But how did they reject Him? By
saying, “This man is not of God; <span
id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561.md) This man deceiveth the
people;” <span id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562.md) and again, “Thou art
a Samaritan, and hast a devil.” <span
id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563.md)

<span id="iii.LXV-p35"></span>Then, that they might know that the
penalty is not limited to their being cast out, He added the punishments
also, saying, “Every one that falleth on this stone, shall be broken;
but upon whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.” <span
id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564.md) He speaks here of two ways of
destruction, one from stumbling and being offended; for this is,
“Whosoever falleth on this stone:” but another from their capture, and
calamity, and utter destruction, which also He clearly foretold, saying,
“It will grind him to powder.” By these words He darkly intimated His
own resurrection also.

<span id="iii.LXV-p37"></span>Now the Prophet Isaiah saith, that He
blames the vineyard, but here He accuses in particular the rulers of the
people. And there indeed He saith, “What ought I to have done to my
vineyard, that I did not;” <span id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565.md)
and elsewhere again, “What transgression have your fathers found in
me?” <span id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566.md) And again, “O my people,
what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I grieved thee?” <span
id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567.md) showing their thankless
disposition, and that when in the enjoyment of all things, they requited
it by the contraries; but here He expresses it with yet greater force.
For He doth not plead, Himself, saying, “What ought I to have done that
I have not done?” but brings in themselves to judge, that nothing hath
been wanting, and to condemn themselves. For when they say, “He will
miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out the vineyard to
other husbandmen,” they say nothing else than this, publishing their
sentence with much greater force.

<span id="iii.LXV-p41"></span>With this Stephen also upbraids them,
which thing most of all stung them, that having enjoyed always much
providential care, they requited their benefactor with the contraries,
which very thing itself was a very great sign, that not the punisher,
but the punished, were the cause of the vengeance brought upon them.

<span id="iii.LXV-p42"></span>This here likewise is shown, by the
parable, by the prophecy. For neither was He <span id="page_399">p.
399</span> <span id="iii.LXV-Page_399"></span> satisfied with a parable
only, but added also a twofold prophecy, one David’s, the others from
Himself.

<span id="iii.LXV-p43"></span>What then ought they to have done on
hearing these things? ought they not to have adored, to have marvelled
at the tender care, that shown before, that afterwards? But if by none
of these things they were made better, by the fear of punishment at any
rate ought they not to have been rendered more temperate?

<span id="iii.LXV-p44"></span>But they did not become so, but what do
they after these things? “When they had heard it,” it is said, “they
perceived that He spake of them. And when they sought to lay hands on
Him, they were afraid because of the multitudes, for they took Him for a
prophet.” <span id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568.md) For they felt
afterwards that they themselves were intimated. Sometimes indeed, when
being seized, He withdraws through the midst of them, and is not seen;
and sometimes while appearing to them He lays a check upon their
laboring eagerness; at which indeed men marveled, and said, “Is not this
Jesus? Lo, He speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto Him.” <span
id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569.md) But in this instance, forasmuch as
they were held in restraint by the fear of the multitude, He is
satisfied with this, and doth not work miracles, as before, withdrawing
through the midst, and not appearing. For it was not His desire to do
all things in a superhuman way, in order that the Dispensation <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570.md) might be believed.

<span id="iii.LXV-p48"></span>But they, neither by the multitude, nor by
what had been said, were brought to a sound mind; they regarded not the
prophet’s testimony, nor their own sentence, nor the disposition of the
people; so entirely had the love of power and the lust of vainglory
blinded them, together with the pursuit of things temporal.

<span id="iii.LXV-p49"></span>3. For nothing so urges men headlong and
drives them down precipices, nothing so makes them fail of the things to
come, as their being riveted to these decaying things. Nothing so surely
makes them enjoy both the one and the other, as their esteeming the
things to come above all. For, “Seek ye,” saith Christ, “the kingdom of
God, and all these things shall be added unto you.” <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571.md) And indeed, even if this were not
joined, not even in that case ought we to aim at them. But now in
obtaining the others, we may obtain these two; and not even so are some
persuaded, but are like senseless stones, and pursue shadows of
pleasure. For what is pleasant of the things in this present life? what
is delightful? For with greater freedom do I desire to discourse with
you to-day; but suffer it, that ye may learn that this life which seems
to you to be a galling and wearisome life, I mean that of the monks and
of them that are crucified, is far sweeter, and more to be desired than
that which seems to be easy, and more delicate.

<span id="iii.LXV-p51"></span>And of this ye are witnesses, who often
have asked for death, in the reverses and despondencies that have
overtaken you, and have accounted happy them that are in mountains, them
that are in caves, them that have not married, them that live the
unworldly life; ye that are engaged in crafts, ye that are in military
services, ye that live without object or rules, and pass your days at
the theatres and orchestras. For of these, although numberless fountains
of pleasures and mirth seem to spring up, yet are countless darts still
more bitter brought forth.

<span id="iii.LXV-p52"></span>For if any one be seized with a passion
for one of the damsels that dance there, beyond ten thousand marches,
beyond ten thousand journeys from home, will he undergo a torture more
grievous, being in a more miserable state than any besieged city.

<span id="iii.LXV-p53"></span>However, not to inquire into those things
for the present, having left them to the conscience of those that have
been taken captive, come let us discourse of the life of the common sort
of men, and we shall find the difference between either of these kinds
of life as great as between a harbor, and a sea continually beaten about
with winds.

<span id="iii.LXV-p54"></span>And observe from their retreats at once
the first signs of their tranquillity. For they have fled from market
places, and cities, and the tumults amidst men, and have chosen the life
in mountains, that which hath nothing in common with the things present,
that which undergoes none of the ills of man, no worldly sorrows, no
grief, no care so great, no dangers, no plots, no envy, no jealousy, no
lawless lusts, nor any other thing of this kind.

<span id="iii.LXV-p55"></span>Here already they meditate upon the things
of the kingdom, holding converse with groves, and mountains, and
springs, and with great quietness, and solitude, and before all these,
with God. And from all turmoil is their cell pure, and from every
passion and disease is their soul free, refined and light, and far purer
than the finest air.

<span id="iii.LXV-p56"></span>And their work is what was Adam’s also at
the beginning and before his sin, when he was clothed with the glory,
and conversed freely with God, and dwelt in that place that was <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span id="iii.LXV-Page_400"></span> full of
great blessedness. For in what respect are they in a worse state than
he, when before his disobedience he was set to till the garden? Had he
no worldly care? But neither have these. Did he talk to God with a pure
conscience? this also do these; or rather they have a greater confidence
than he, inasmuch as they enjoy even greater grace by the supply of the
Spirit.

<span id="iii.LXV-p57"></span>Now ye ought indeed by the sight to take
in these things; but forasmuch as ye are not willing, but pass your time
in turmoils and in markets, by word at least let us teach you, taking
one part of their way of living (for it is not possible to go over their
whole life). These that are the lights of the world, as soon as the sun
is up, or rather even long before its rise, rise up from their bed,
healthy, and wakeful, and sober (for neither doth any sorrow and care,
nor headache, and toil, and multitude of business, nor any other such
thing trouble them, but as angels live they in Heaven); having risen
then straightway from their bed cheerful and glad, and having made one
choir, with their conscience bright, with one voice all, like as out of
one mouth, they sing hymns unto the God of all, honoring Him and
thanking Him for all His benefits, both particular, and common. <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572.md)

<span id="iii.LXV-p59"></span>So that if it seem good, let us leave
Adam, and inquire what is the difference between the angels and this
company of them who on earth sing and say, “Glory to God in the highest,
and on earth peace, good will towards men.” <span
id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573.md)

<span id="iii.LXV-p61"></span>And their dress is suitable to their
manliness. For not indeed, like those with trailing garments, the
enervated and mincing, are they dressed, but like those blessed angels,
Elijah, Elisha, John, like the apostles; their garments being made for
them, for some of goat’s hair, for some of camel’s hair, and there are
some for whom skins suffice alone, and these long worn.

<span id="iii.LXV-p62"></span>Then, after they have said those songs,
they bow their knees, and entreat the God who was the object of their
hymns for things, to the very thought of which some do not easily
arrive. For they ask nothing of things present, for they have no regard
for these, but that they may stand with boldness before the fearful
judgment-seat, when the Only-Begotten Son of God is come to judge quick
and dead, and that no one may hear the fearful voice that saith, “I know
you not,” and that with a pure conscience and many good deeds they may
pass through this toilsome life, and sail over the angry sea with a
favorable wind. And he leads them in their prayers, who is their Father,
and their ruler.

<span id="iii.LXV-p63"></span>After this, when they have risen up and
finished those holy and continual prayers, the sun being risen, they
depart each one to their work, gathering thence a large supply for the
needy.

<span id="iii.LXV-p64"></span>4. Where now are they who give themselves
to devilish choirs, and harlot’s songs, and sit in theatres? For I am
indeed ashamed to make mention of them; nevertheless, because of your
infirmity it is needful to do even this. For Paul too saith, “Like as ye
have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, even so now yield
your members servants to righteousness unto holiness.” <span
id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574.md)

<span id="iii.LXV-p66"></span>Come let us also therefore compare the
company that is made up of harlot women, and prostituted youths on the
stage, and this same that consists of these blessed ones in regard of
pleasure, for which most of all, many of the careless youths are taken
in their snares. For we shall find the difference as great as if any one
heard angels singing above that all-harmonious melody of theirs, and
dogs and swine howling and grunting on the dunghill. For by the mouths
of these Christ speaketh, by their tongues <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575.md) the devil.

<span id="iii.LXV-p68"></span>But is the sound of pipes joined to them
with unmeaning noise, and unpleasing show, when cheeks are puffed out,
and their strings stretched to breaking? But here the grace of the
Spirit pours forth a sound, using, instead of flute or lyre or pipes,
the lips of the saints.

<span id="iii.LXV-p69"></span>Or rather, whatever we may say, it is not
possible to set forth the pleasure thereof, because of them that are
riveted to their clay, and their brick-making? Therefore I would even
wish to take one of those who are mad about these matters, and to lead
him off there, and to show him the choir of those saints, and I should
have no more need for these words. Nevertheless, though we speak unto
miry ones, we will try, though by word, still by little and little, to
draw them out of the slime and the fens. For there the hearer receives
straightway the fire of illicit love; for as though the sight of the
harlot were not enough to set the mind on fire, they add the mischief
also from the voice; but here even should the soul have any such thing,
it lays it aside straightway. But not their voice only, nor their
countenance, but even their clothes do more than these confound the
beholders. And should it be some poor man <span id="page_401">p.
401</span> <span id="iii.LXV-Page_401"></span> of the grosser and
heedless sort, from the sight he will cry out ten thousand times in
bitter despair, and will say to himself, “The harlot, and the
prostituted boy, children of cooks and cobblers, and often even of
slaves live in such delicacy, and I a freeman, and born of freemen,
choosing honest labor, am not able so much as to imagine these things in
a dream;” and thus he will go his way inflamed with discontent.

<span id="iii.LXV-p70"></span>But in the case of the monks there is no
such result, but rather the contrary altogether. For when he shall see
children of rich men and descendants of illustrious ancestors clothed in
such garments as not even the lowest of the poor, and rejoicing in this,
consider how great a consolation against poverty he will receive as he
goes away. And should he be rich, he returns sobered, become a better
man. Again in the theatre, when they see the harlot clothed with golden
ornaments, while the poor man will lament, and bemoan, seeing his own
wife having nothing of the kind, the rich will in consequence of this
spectacle contemn and despise the partners of their home. For when the
harlot present to the beholders garb and look, and voice and step, all
luxurious, they depart set on fire, and enter into their own houses,
thenceforth captives.

<span id="iii.LXV-p71"></span>Hence the insults, and the affronts, hence
the enmities, the wars, the daily deaths; hence to them that are taken
captive, life is insupportable, and the partner of their home
thenceforth unpleasing, and their children not as much objects of
affection, and all things in their houses turned upside down, and after
that they seem to be thrown into disorder by the very sunbeam.

<span id="iii.LXV-p72"></span>But not from these choirs does any such
dissatisfaction arise, but the wife will receive her husband quiet and
meek, freed from all unlawful lust, and will find him more gentle to her
than before this. Such evil things doth that choir bring forth, but this
good things, the one making wolves of sheep, this lambs of wolves. But
as yet we have perhaps said nothing hitherto touching the pleasure.

<span id="iii.LXV-p73"></span>And what could be more pleasant than not
to be troubled or grieved in mind, neither to despond and groan?
Nevertheless, let us carry on our discourse still further, and examine
the enjoyment of either kind of song and spectacle; and we shall see the
one indeed continuing until evening, so long as the spectator sits in
the theatre, but after this paining him more grievously than any sting;
but in the other case forever vigorous in the souls of them that have
beheld it. For as well the fashion of the men, and the delightfulness of
the place, and the sweetness of their manner of life, and the purity, of
their rule, and the grace of that most beautiful and spiritual song they
have for ever infixed in them. They at least who are in continual
enjoyment of those havens, thenceforth flee as from a tempest, from the
tumults of the multitude.

<span id="iii.LXV-p74"></span>But not when singing only, and praying,
but also when riveted to their books, they are a pleasing spectacle to
the beholders. For after they have ended the choir, one takes Isaiah and
discourses with him, another converses with the apostles, and another
goes over the labors of other men, and seeks wisdom concerning God,
concerning this universe, concerning the things that are seen,
concerning the things that are not seen, concerning the objects of
sense, and the objects of intellect, concerning the vileness of this
present life, and the greatness of that to come.

<span id="iii.LXV-p75"></span>5. And they are fed on a food most
excellent, not setting before themselves cooked flesh of beasts; but
oracles of God, beyond honey and the honey comb, a honey marvellous, and
far superior to that whereon John fed of old in the wilderness. For this
honey no wild bees collect, settling on the flowers, neither do lay it
up in hives digesting the dew, but the grace of the Spirit forming it,
layeth it up in the souls of the saints, in the place of honeycombs, and
hives, and pipes, so that he that will may eat thereof continually in
security. These bees then they also imitate, and hover around the
honeycombs of those holy books, reaping therefrom great pleasure.

<span id="iii.LXV-p76"></span>And if thou desirest to learn about their
table, be near it, and thou shalt see them bursting forth <span
id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576.md) with such things, all gentle and
sweet, and full of a spiritual fragrance. No foul word can those
spiritual mouths bring forth, nothing of foolish jesting, nothing harsh,
but all worthy of Heaven. One would not be wrong in comparing the mouths
of them that crawl about in the market places, and are mad after worldly
things, to ditches of some mire; but the lips of these to fountains
flowing with honey, and pouring forth pure streams.

<span id="iii.LXV-p78"></span>But if any felt displeased that I have
called the mouths of the multitude ditches of some mire, let him know
that I have said it, sparing them very much. For Scripture hath not used
this measure, but a comparison far stronger. “For adder’s poison,” it is
said, “is under their lips, <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577.md)
and their throat is an open sepulchre.” But theirs are not so, but full
of much fragrance.

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span id="iii.LXV-Page_402"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p80"></span>And their state here is like this, but
that hereafter what speech can set before us? what thought shall
conceive? the portion of angels, the blessedness unspeakable, the good
things untold?

<span id="iii.LXV-p81"></span>Perchance some are warmed now, and have
been moved to a longing after this good rule of life. But what is the
profit, when whilst ye are here only, ye have this fire; but when ye
have gone forth, ye extinguish the flame, and this desire fades. How
then, in order that this may not be? While this desire is warm in you,
go your way unto those angels, kindle it more. For the account that we
give will not be able to set thee on fire, like as the sight of the
things. Say not, I will speak with my wife, and I will settle my affairs
first. This delay is the beginning of remissness. Hear, how one desired
to bid farewell to them at his house, <span
id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578.md) and the prophet suffered him not.
And why do I say, to bid farewell? The disciple desired to bury his
father, <span id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579.md) and Christ allowed
not so much as this. And yet what thing seems to thee to be so necessary
as the funeral of a father? but not even this did He permit.

<span id="iii.LXV-p84"></span>Why could this have been? Because the
devil is at hand fierce, desiring to find some secret approach; and
though it be but a little hindrance or delay he takes hold of, he works
a great remissness. Therefore one adviseth, “Put not off from day to
day.” <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580.md) For thus shalt thou be
able to succeed in most things, thus also shall the things in thine
house be well ordered for thee. “For seek ye,” it is said, “the kingdom
of God, and all these things shall be added unto you.” <span
id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581.md) For if we establish in great
security them that overlook their own interests, and prefer the care of
ours, much more doth God, who even without these things hath a care for
us, and provides for us.

<span id="iii.LXV-p87"></span>Be not thoughtful then about thine
interests, but leave them to God. For if thou art thoughtful about them,
thou art thoughtful as a man; but if God provide, He provides as God. Be
not so thoughtful about them as to let go the greater things, since then
He will not much provide for them. In order therefore that He may fully
provide for them, leave them to Him alone. For if thou also thyself
takest them in hand, having let go the things spiritual, He will not
make much provision for them.

<span id="iii.LXV-p88"></span>In order then that both these things may
be well disposed for thee, and that thou mayest be freed from all
anxiety, cleave to the things spiritual, overlook the things of the
world; for in this way thou shalt have earth also with heaven, and shalt
attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might world without end.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[396:2552](1100073.htm#fr_2551.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p4"></span>\[R.V., “another country.”\]

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[396:2553](1100073.htm#fr_2552.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p5"></span>\[The Greek text agrees, as a rule, with
the received: but a few peculiarities appear: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p5.1"></span>ατοἴσω</span> is inserted from Luke in verse
37, and the beginning of verse 39 is abridged. The Oxford edition adds
verses 43, 44, which are not given in the Greek text of the Homily in
Migne, but added in Field’s edition.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[397:2554](1100073.htm#fr_2553.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p10"></span>\[The verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p10.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p10.2"></span>πεδμησε</span> means “went into another
country.” But Chrysostom here speaks of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p10.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p10.4"></span>ποδημαν</span> as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p10.5"></span>τν πολλν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p10.6"></span>, thus</span> agreeing with the interpretation
of the A.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[397:2555](1100073.htm#fr_2554.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p14"></span>[Ezek. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[397:2556](1100073.htm#fr_2555.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p16"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[397:2557](1100073.htm#fr_2556.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p17"></span>[Is. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[397:2558](1100073.htm#fr_2557.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p18"></span>[Hosea iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[397:2559](1100073.htm#fr_2558.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p19"></span>[Micah iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[398:2560](1100073.htm#fr_2559.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p26"></span>[Luke
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[398:2561](1100073.htm#fr_2560.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p31"></span>[Ezek. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[398:2562](1100073.htm#fr_2561.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p32"></span>[John ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[398:2563](1100073.htm#fr_2562.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p33"></span>[John vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[398:2564](1100073.htm#fr_2563.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p34"></span>[John viii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[398:2565](1100073.htm#fr_2564.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p36"></span>\[R.V., “scatter him as dust.” Chrysostom
seems to accept [Matt. 21.44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044.md)<span
id="iii.LXV-p36.1"></span> as part of Matthew’s account; but as he has
just cited the parallel passage in Luke (where this occurs), it is not
certain that he refers to Matthew’s here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[398:2566](1100073.htm#fr_2565.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p38"></span>[Is. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[398:2567](1100073.htm#fr_2566.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p39"></span>[Jer. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[398:2568](1100073.htm#fr_2567.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p40"></span>[Micah vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[399:2569](1100073.htm#fr_2568.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p45"></span>[Matt.
21:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#045.md),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#046.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p45.1"></span>.
\[“because of” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p45.2"></span>δι</span>) is peculiar to this citation.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[399:2570](1100073.htm#fr_2569.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p46"></span>\[[John
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p46.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[399:2571](1100073.htm#fr_2570.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p47"></span>Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p47.1"></span>οκονομα</span>, *i.e*., the verity of the
Incarnation.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[399:2572](1100073.htm#fr_2571.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p50"></span>[Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p50.1"></span>.
\[“first” is omitted; inserted by the Oxford translator against the
Greek text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[400:2573](1100073.htm#fr_2572.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p58"></span>“For all Thy goodness and loving kindness
*to us, and to all men.*” Thanksgiving Prayer. See the Morning
Thanksgiving; Const. Apost. viii. 38, and The Eucharistic Prayer, ib. c.
12.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[400:2574](1100073.htm#fr_2573.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p60"></span>\[[Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p60.1"></span>, as
in the received text. But “among men” is the only possible rendering,
whichever reading he accepted.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[400:2575](1100073.htm#fr_2574.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p65"></span>[Rom. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p65.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “sanctification.”\]

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[400:2576](1100073.htm#fr_2575.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p67"></span>\[“by the tongues of those;” there being a
contrast in the Greek, which is obscured in the English rendering.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[401:2577](1100073.htm#fr_2576.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p77"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p77.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXV-p77.2"></span>ρευγομνου</span> .

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[401:2578](1100073.htm#fr_2577.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p79"></span>[Ps.
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003.md), [Ps.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[402:2579](1100073.htm#fr_2578.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p82"></span>[1 Kings xix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[402:2580](1100073.htm#fr_2579.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p83"></span>[Matt. viii.
21-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[402:2581](1100073.htm#fr_2580.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p85"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
5.7](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[402:2582](1100073.htm#fr_2581.md) <span
id="iii.LXV-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXV-p86"></span>[Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.LXV-p86.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXVI](1100074.md)
