[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100071)  [Next](1100073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXIV"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p1.1"></span>Homily LXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.LXIV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p3"></span>*“And Jesus went into the temple,* <span
id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515.md) *and cast out all them that sold
and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers
and the seats of them that sold doves, and saith unto them, It is
written, my house shall be called a house of prayer; but ye have made it
a den of thieves.”* <span id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p6.1"></span>This</span> John likewise saith, but he in the
beginning of his Gospel, this at the end. Whence it is probable this was
done twice, and at different seasons.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p7"></span>And it is evident both from the times, and
from their reply. For there He came at the very passover, but here much
before. And there the Jews say, “What sign showest thou us?” <span
id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517.md) but here they hold their peace,
although reproved, because He was now marvelled at amongst all men.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p9"></span>And this is a heavier charge against the
Jews, that when He had done this not once only, but a second time, they
continued in their trafficking, and said that He was an adversary of
God, when they ought even from hence to have learnt His honor for His
Father and His own might. For indeed He also wrought miracles, and they
saw His words agreeing with His works.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p10"></span>But not even so were they persuaded, but
“were sore displeased,” and this while they heard the prophet crying
aloud, and the children in a manner beyond their age proclaiming Him.
Wherefore also He Himself sets up Isaiah against them as an accuser,
saying, “My house shall be called a house of prayer.” <span
id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p12"></span>But not in this way only doth He show His
authority, but also by His healing divers infirmities. “For the blind
and the lame came unto Him, and He healed them,” <span
id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519.md) and His power and authority He
indicates.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p14"></span>But they not even so would be persuaded,
but together with the rest of the miracles hearing even the children
proclaiming, were ready to choke, and say, “Hearest thou not what these
say?” <span id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520.md) And yet it was Christ’s
part to have said this to them, “Hear ye not what these say?” for the
children were singing to Him as to God.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p16"></span>What then saith He? Since they were
speaking against things manifest, He applies His correction more in the
way of reproof, saying, “Have ye never read, Out of the mouths of babes
and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise?” And well did He say, “Out of
the mouth.” For what was said was not of their understanding, but of His
power giving articulation to their tongue yet immature.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p17"></span>And this was also a type of the Gentiles
lisping, and sounding forth at once great things with understanding and
faith.

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span id="iii.LXIV-Page_392"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p18"></span>And for the apostles also there was from
hence no small consolation. For that they might not be perplexed, how
being unlearned they should be able to publish the gospel, the children
anticipate them, and remove all their anxiety, teaching them, that He
would grant them utterance, who made even these to sing praises.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p19"></span>And not so only, but the miracle showed
that He is Creator even of nature. The children then, although of age
immature, uttered things that had a clear meaning, and were in
accordance with those above, but the men things teeming with frenzy and
madness. For such is the nature of wickedness.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p20"></span>Forasmuch then as there were many things
to provoke them, from the multitude, from the casting out of the
sellers, from the miracles, from the children, He again leaves them,
giving room to the swelling passion, and not willing to begin His
teaching, lest boiling with envy they should be the more displeased at
His sayings.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p21"></span>“Now in the morning as He returned into
the city, He was an hungered.” <span
id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521.md) How is He an hungered in the
morning? When He permits the flesh, then it shows its feeling. “And when
He saw a fig tree in the way, He came to it, and found nothing thereon,
but leaves only.” <span id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522.md) Another
evangelist saith, “The time *of figs* was not yet;” <span
id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523.md) but if it was not time, how doth
the other evangelist say, “He came, if haply He might find fruit
thereon.” Whence it is manifest that this belongs to the suspicion of
His disciples, who were yet in a somewhat imperfect state. For indeed
the evangelists in many places record the suspicions of the disciples.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p25"></span>Like as this then was their suspicion, so
also was it too to suppose it was cursed for this cause, because of
having no fruit. Wherefore then was it cursed? For the disciples’ sakes,
that they might have confidence. For because everywhere He conferred
benefits, but punished no man; and it was needful that He should afford
them a demonstrative proof of His power to take vengeance also, that
both the disciples might learn, and the Jews, that being able to blast
them that crucify Him, of His own will He submits, and does not blast
them; and it was not His will to show forth this upon men; upon the
plant did He furnish the proof of His might in taking vengeance. But
when unto places, or unto plants, or unto brutes, any such thing as this
is done, be not curious, neither say, how was the fig-tree justly dried
up, if it was not the time *of figs*; for this it is the utmost trifling
to say; but behold the miracle, and admire and glorify the worker
thereof.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p26"></span>Since in the case also of the swine that
were drowned, many have said this, working out the argument of justice;
but neither there should one give heed, for these again are brutes, even
as that was a plant without life.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p27"></span>Wherefore then was the act invested with
such an appearance, and with this plea for a curse? As I said, this was
the disciple’s suspicion.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p28"></span>But if it was not yet time, vainly do
some say the law is here meant. For the fruit of this was faith, and
then was the time of this fruit, and it had indeed borne it; “For
already <span id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524.md) are the fields white
to harvest,” saith He; and, “I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed
no labor.” <span id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p31"></span>2. Not any therefore of these things doth
He here intimate, but it is what I said, He displays His power to
punish, and this is shown by saying, “The time was not yet,” making it
clear that of this special purpose He went, and not for hunger, but for
His disciples’ sake, who indeed marvelled exceedingly, although many
miracles had been done greater; but, as I said, this was strange, for
now first He showed forth His power to take vengeance. Wherefore not in
any other, but in the moistest of all planted things did He work the
miracle, so that hence also the miracle appeared greater.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p32"></span>And that thou mightest learn, that for
their sakes this was done, that He might train them to feel confidence,
hear what He saith afterwards. But what saith He? “Ye also shall do
greater things, if ye are willing to believe and to be confident in
prayer.” Seest thou that all is done for their sake, so that they might
not be afraid and tremble at plots against them? Wherefore He saith this
a second time also, to make them cleave to prayer and faith. “For not
this only shall ye do, but also shall remove mountains; and many more
things shall ye do, being confident in faith and prayer.” <span
id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p34"></span>But the boastful and arrogant Jews,
wishing to interrupt His teaching, came unto Him, and asked, “By what
authority doest thou these things?” <span
id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527.md) For since they could not object
against the miracles, they bring forward against Him the correction of
the traffickers in the temple. And this in John also they appear to ask,
although not in these words, but with the same intent. For there too
they say, “What sign showest thou unto us? seeing that thou doest these
things.” <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="iii.LXIV-Page_393"></span> But there He answers them, saying,
“Destroy this temple, and I in three days will raise it up,” <span
id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528.md) whereas here He drives them into a
difficulty. Whence it is manifest, that then indeed was the beginning
and prelude of the miracles, but here the end.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p37"></span>But what they say is this: Hast thou
received the teacher’s chair? Hast thou been ordained a priest, that
thou didst display such authority? it is said. And yet He had done
nothing implying arrogance, but had been careful for the good order of
the temple, yet nevertheless having nothing to say, they object against
this. And indeed when He cast them out, they did not dare to say
anything, because of the miracles, but when He showed Himself, then they
find fault with Him.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p38"></span>What then saith He? He doth not answer
them directly, to show that, if they had been willing to see His
authority, they could; but He asks them again, saying, “The baptism of
John, whence is it? From heaven, or of men?” <span
id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p40"></span>And what sort of inference is this? The
greatest surely. For if they had said, from heaven, He would have said
unto them, why then did ye not believe him? For if they had believed,
they would not have asked these things. For of Him John had said, “I am
not worthy to loose the latchet of His shoe;” and, “Behold the Lamb of
God, which taketh away the sins of the world;” and, “This is the Son of
God;” <span id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530.md) and, “He that cometh
from above is above all;” <span id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531.md)
and, “His fan is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge His
floor.” <span id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532.md) So that if they had
believed him, there was nothing to hinder them from knowing by what
authority Christ doeth these things.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p44"></span>After this, because they, dealing
craftily, said, “We know not,” He said not, neither know I, but what?
“Neither tell I you.” <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533.md) For if
indeed they had been ignorant it would have been requisite for them to
be instructed; but since they were dealing craftily with good reason He
answers them nothing.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p46"></span>And how was it they did not say that the
baptism was of men? “They feared the people” <span
id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534.md) it is said. Seest thou a perverse
heart? In every case they despise God and do all things for the sake of
men. For this man too they feared for their sakes not reverencing the
saint <span id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535.md) but on account of
men, <span id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536.md) and they were not
willing to believe in Christ, because of men, and all their evils were
engendered to them from hence.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p50"></span>After this, He saith, “What think ye? A
man had two sons; and he saith to the first, go, work to-day in the
vineyard. But he answered and said, I will not: but afterward he
repented, and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he
answered and said, I go sir: and went not. Whether then of them twain
did the will of his father? They say, the first.” <span
id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p52"></span>Again He convicts them by a parable,
intimating both their unreasonable obstinacy, and the submissiveness of
those who were utterly condemned by them. For these two children declare
what came to pass with respect to both the Gentiles and the Jews. For
the former not having undertaken to obey, neither having become hearers
of the law, showed forth their obedience in their works; and the latter
having said, “All that the Lord shall speak, we will do, and will
hearken,” <span id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538.md) in their works were
disobedient. And for this reason, let me add, that they might not think
the law would benefit them, He shows that this self-same thing condemns
them, like as Paul also saith, “Not the hearers of the law are just
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.” <span
id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539.md) For this intent, that He might make
them even self-condemned, He causes the judgment to be delivered by
themselves, like as He does also in the ensuing parable of the vineyard.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p55"></span>3. And that this might be done, He makes
trial of the accusation in the person of an other. For since they were
not willing to confess directly, He by a parable drives them on to what
He desired.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p56"></span>But when, not understanding His sayings,
they had delivered the judgment, He unfolds His concealed meaning after
this, and saith, “Publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of Heaven
before you. For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believed him not; but the publicans <span
id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540.md) believed him; and ye, when ye had
seen it, repented not afterwards, that ye might believe him.” <span
id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541.md)

<span id="iii.LXIV-p59"></span>For if He had said simply, harlots go
before you, the word would have seemed to them to be offensive; but now,
being uttered after their own judgment it appears to be not too hard.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p60"></span>Therefore He adds also the accusation.
What then is this? “John came,” He saith, “unto you,” not unto them, and
not this only, but; also “in the way of righteousness.” “For neither
with this can ye find fault, that he was <span id="page_394">p.
394</span> <span id="iii.LXIV-Page_394"></span> some careless one, and
of no profit; but both his life was irreprehensible, and his care for
you great, and ye gave no heed to him.”

<span id="iii.LXIV-p61"></span>And with this there is another charge
also, that publicans gave heed; and with this, again another, that “not
even after them did ye. For ye should have done so even before them, but
not to do it even after them was to be deprived of all excuse;” and
unspeakable was both the praise of the one, and the charge against the
other. “To you he came, and ye accepted him not; he came not to them,
and they receive him, and not even them did ye take for instructors.”

<span id="iii.LXIV-p62"></span>See by how many things is shown the
commendation of those, and the charge against these. To you he came, not
to them. Ye believed not, this offended not them. They believed, this
profited not you.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p63"></span>But the word, “go before you,” is not as
though these were following, but as having a hope, if they were willing.
For nothing, so much as jealousy, rouses the grosser sort. Therefore He
is ever saying, “The first shall be last, and the last first.” Therefore
He brought in both harlots and publicans, that they might provoke them
to jealousy.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p64"></span>For these two indeed are chief sins,
engendered of violent lust, the one of sexual desire, the other of the
desire of money. And He indicates that this especially was hearing the
law of God, to believe John. For it was not of grace only, that harlots
entered in, but also of righteousness. For not, as continuing harlots,
did they enter in, but having obeyed and believed, and having been
purified and converted, so did they enter in.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p65"></span>Seest thou how He rendered His discourse
less offensive, and more penetrating, by the parable, by His bringing in
the harlots? For neither did He say at once, wherefore believed ye not
John? but what was much more pricking, when, He had put forward the
publicans and the harlots, then He added this, by the order of their
actions convicting their unpardonable conduct, and showing that for fear
of men they do all things, and for vainglory. For they did not confess
Christ for fear, lest they should be put out of the synagogue; and
again, of John they dared not speak evil, and not even this from
reverence, but for fear. All which things He convicted by His sayings,
and with more severity afterwards did He go on to inflict the blow,
saying, “But ye, when ye knew it, repented not afterwards, that ye might
believe him.”

<span id="iii.LXIV-p66"></span>For an evil thing it is not at the first
to choose the good, but it is a heavier charge not even to be brought
round. For this above all maketh many wicked, which I see to be the case
with some now from extreme insensibility.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p67"></span>But let no one be like this; but though
he be sunk down to the extremity of wickedness, let him not despair of
the change for the better. For it is an easy thing to rise up out of the
very abysses of wickedness.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p68"></span>Heard ye not how that harlot, that went
beyond all in lasciviousness, outshone all in godly reverence. Not the
harlot in the gospels do I mean, but the one in our generation, who came
from Phœnice, that most lawless city. For she was once a harlot among
us, having the first honors on the stage, and great was her name
everywhere, not in our city only, but even as far as the Cilicians and
Cappadocians. And many estates did she ruin, and many orphans did she
overthrow; and many accused her of sorcery also, as weaving such toils
not by her beauty of person only, but also by her drugs. This harlot
once won even the brother of the empress, for mighty indeed was her
tyranny.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p69"></span>But all at once, I know not how, or
rather I do know well, for it was being so minded, and converting, and
bringing down upon herself God’s grace, she despised all those things,
and having cast away the arts of the devils, mounted up to heaven.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p70"></span>And indeed nothing was more vile than she
was, when she was on the stage; nevertheless, afterwards she outwent
many in exceeding continence, and having clad herself with sackcloth,
all her time she thus disciplined herself. On the account of this woman
both the governor was stirred up, and soldiers armed, yet they had not
strength to carry her off to the stage, nor to lead her away from the
virgins that had received her.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p71"></span>This woman having been counted worthy of
the unutterable mysteries, and having exhibited a diligence
proportionate to the grace (given her) so ended her life, having washed
off all through grace, and after her baptism having shown forth much
self-restraint. For not even a mere sight of herself did she allow to
those who were once her lovers, when they had come for this, having shut
herself up, and having passed many years, as it were, in a prison. Thus
“shall the last be first, and the first last;” thus do we in every case
need a fervent soul, and there is nothing to hinder one from becoming
great and admirable:

<span id="iii.LXIV-p72"></span>4. Let no man then of them that live in
vice despair; let no man who lives in virtue slumber. Let neither this
last be confident, for often the harlot will pass him by; nor let the
other despair, for it is possible for him to pass by even the first.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p73"></span>Hear what God saith unto Jerusalem, “I
<span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span id="iii.LXIV-Page_395"></span>
said, after she had committed all these whoredoms, Turn thou unto me,
and she returned not.” <span id="fr_2542"></span>[2543](#fn_2542.md) When
we have come back unto the earnest love of God, He remembers not the
former things. God is not as man, for He reproaches us not with the
past, neither doth He say, Why wast thou absent so long a time? when we
repent; only let us approach Him as we ought. Let us cleave to Him
earnestly, and rivet our hearts to His fear.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p75"></span>Such things have been done not under the
new covenant only, but even under the old. For what was worse than
Manasseh? but he was able to appease God. What more blessed than
Solomon? but when he slumbered, he fell. Or rather I can show even both
things to have taken place in one, in the father of this man, for he the
same person became at different times both good and bad. What more
blessed than Judas? but he became a traitor. What more wretched than
Matthew? but he became an evangelist. What worse than Paul? but he
became an apostle. What more to be envied than Simon? but he became even
himself the most wretched of all.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p76"></span>How many other such changes wouldest thou
see, both to have taken place of old, and now taking place every day?
For this reason then I say, Neither let him on the stave despair, nor
let him in the church be confident. For to this last it is said, “Let
him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall;” <span
id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543.md) and to the other, “Shall not he
that falleth arise?” <span id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544.md) and,
“Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.” <span
id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545.md) Again, to these He saith, “Watch;”
but to those, “Awake, thou that sleepest and arise from the dead.” <span
id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546.md) For these need to preserve what
they have, and those to become what they are not; these to preserve
their health, those to be delivered from their infirmity, for they are
sick; but many even of the sick become healthy, and of the healthy many
by remissness grow infirm.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p81"></span>To the one then He saith, “Behold, thou
art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee;” <span
id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547.md) but to these, “Wilt thou be made
whole? Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.” <span
id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548.md) For a dreadful, dreadful palsy is
sin, or rather it is not palsy only, but also somewhat else more
grievous. For such a one is not only in inactivity as to good works, but
also in the active doing of evil works. But nevertheless, though thou be
so disposed, and be willing to rouse thyself a little, all the terrors
are at an end.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p84"></span>Though thou hast been so “thirty and
eight years,” and art earnest to become whole, there is no one to hinder
thee. Christ is present now also, and saith, “Take up thy bed,” only be
willing to rouse thyself, despair not. Hast thou no man? but thou hast
God. Hast thou no one to put thee into the pool? but thou hast Him who
suffers thee not to need the pool. Hast thou had no one to cast thee in
there? but thou hast Him that commands thee to take up thy bed.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p85"></span>Thou mayest not say, “While I am coming,
another steppeth down before me.” <span
id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549.md) For if it be thy will to go down
into the fountain, there is none to hinder thee. Grace is not consumed,
is not spent, it is a kind of fountain springing up constantly; by His
fullness are we all healed both soul and body. Let us come unto it then
even now. For Rahab also was a harlot, yet was she saved; and the thief
was a murderer, yet he became a citizen of paradise; and while Judas
being with his Master perished, the thief being on a cross became a
disciple. Such are the wonderful works of God. Thus the magi approved
themselves, thus the publican became an evangelist, thus the blasphemer
an apostle.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p87"></span>5. Look at these things, and never
despair, but be ever confident, and rouse thyself. Lay hold only on the
way that leads thither, and thou wilt advance quickly. Shut not up the
doors, close not up the entrance. Short is the present life, small the
labor. But though it were great, not even so ought one to decline it.
For if thou toil not at this most glorious toil that is spent upon
repentance and virtue, in the world thou wilt assuredly toil and weary
thyself in other ways. But if both in the one and the other there be
labor, why do we not choose that which hath its fruit abundant, and its
recompense greater.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p88"></span>Yet neither is this labor and that the
same. For in worldly pursuits are continual perils, and losses one upon
another, and the hope uncertain; great is the servility, and the
expenditure alike of wealth, and of bodies, and of souls; and then the
return of the fruits is far below our expectation, if perchance it
should grow up.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p89"></span>For neither doth toil upon worldly
matters everywhere bear fruit; nay but even, when it hath not failed,
but has brought forth its produce even abundantly, short is the time
wherein it continues.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p90"></span>For when thou art grown old, and hast no
longer after that the feeling of enjoyment in perfection, then and not
till then doth the labor bear thee its recompense. And whereas the labor
was with the body in its vigor, the <span id="page_396">p. 396</span>
<span id="iii.LXIV-Page_396"></span> fruit and the enjoyment is with one
grown old and languid, when time has dulled even the feeling, although
if it had not dulled it, the expectation of the end suffers us not to
find pleasure.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p91"></span>But in the other case not so, but the
labor is in corruption and a dying body, but the crown in one
incorruptible, and immortal, and having no end. And the labor is both
first and short-lived; but the reward both subsequent and endless, that
with security thou mayest take thy rest after that, looking for nothing
unpleasant.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p92"></span>For neither mayest thou fear change any
more or loss as here. What sort of good things, then, are these, which
are both insecure, and short-lived, and earthly, and vanishing before
they have appeared, and acquired with many toils? And what good things
are equal to those, that are immovable, that grow not old, that have no
toil, that even at the time of the conflicts bring thee crowns?

<span id="iii.LXIV-p93"></span>For he that despises money even here
already receives his reward, being freed from anxiety, from rivalry,
from false accusation, from plotting from envy. He that is temperate,
and lives orderly, even before his departure, is crowned and lives in
pleasure, being delivered from unseemliness, ridicule, dangers of
accusation, <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550.md) and the other
things that are to be feared. All the remaining parts of virtue likewise
make us a return here already.

<span id="iii.LXIV-p95"></span>In order therefore that we may attain
unto both the present and the future blessings, let us flee from vice
and choose virtue. For thus shall we both enjoy delight, and obtain the
crowns to come, unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[391:2516](1100072.htm#fr_2515.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p4"></span>\[The words “of God” are omitted in the
text here. So three of our best Greek <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. and R.V. margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[391:2517](1100072.htm#fr_2516.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p5"></span>\[R.V., “robbers.”\]

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[391:2518](1100072.htm#fr_2517.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p8"></span>[John ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[391:2519](1100072.htm#fr_2518.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p11"></span>[Is. lvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[391:2520](1100072.htm#fr_2519.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p13"></span>[Matt. xxi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[391:2521](1100072.htm#fr_2520.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p15"></span>[Matt. xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p15.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “are saying.”\]

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[392:2522](1100072.htm#fr_2521.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p22"></span>[Matt. xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[392:2523](1100072.htm#fr_2522.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p23"></span>[Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[392:2524](1100072.htm#fr_2523.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p24"></span>[Mark xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p24.1"></span>.
\[The passage is freely cited; “of figs” is applied here and below by
the translator.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[392:2525](1100072.htm#fr_2524.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p29"></span>[John iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[392:2526](1100072.htm#fr_2525.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p30"></span>[John iv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[392:2527](1100072.htm#fr_2526.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p33"></span>[Matt.
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p33.1"></span>.
\[Paraphrased.\]

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[392:2528](1100072.htm#fr_2527.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p35"></span>[Matt. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[393:2529](1100072.htm#fr_2528.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p36"></span>[John
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p36.1"></span>.
\[The emphatic <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p36.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p36.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p36.4"></span>γ</span></span> is inserted here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[393:2530](1100072.htm#fr_2529.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p39"></span>[Matt. xxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p39.1"></span>.
\[“Is” substituted for “was.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[393:2531](1100072.htm#fr_2530.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p41"></span>[John
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[393:2532](1100072.htm#fr_2531.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p42"></span>[John iv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[393:2533](1100072.htm#fr_2532.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p43"></span>[Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[393:2534](1100072.htm#fr_2533.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p45"></span>[Matt. xxi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[393:2535](1100072.htm#fr_2534.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p47"></span>[Matt. xxi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[393:2536](1100072.htm#fr_2535.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p48"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p48.1"></span>τν νδρα</span>, the (great) man.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[393:2537](1100072.htm#fr_2536.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p49"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p49.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p49.2"></span>νθρπου</span>.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[393:2538](1100072.htm#fr_2537.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p51"></span>[Matt. xxi.
28-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.LXIV-p51.1"></span>. \[There are a few slight variations from
the received text.\]

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[393:2539](1100072.htm#fr_2538.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p53"></span>[Exod. xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[393:2540](1100072.htm#fr_2539.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p54"></span>[Rom. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p54.1"></span>.
\[The article is given before <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIV-p54.2"></span>νμου</span> in both instances; against the
best <span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXIV-p54.3"></span>mss</span>.
authorities in [Rom. ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.LXIV-p54.4"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[393:2541](1100072.htm#fr_2540.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p57"></span>\[“and harlots” omitted here.\]

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[393:2542](1100072.htm#fr_2541.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p58"></span>[Matt.
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#032.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2542"></span>[395:2543](1100072.htm#fr_2542.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p74"></span>[Jer. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[395:2544](1100072.htm#fr_2543.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p77"></span>[1 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[395:2545](1100072.htm#fr_2544.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p78"></span>[Jer. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[395:2546](1100072.htm#fr_2545.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p79"></span>[Heb. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p79.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[395:2547](1100072.htm#fr_2546.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p80"></span>[Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[395:2548](1100072.htm#fr_2547.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p82"></span>[John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[395:2549](1100072.htm#fr_2548.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p83"></span>[John
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#006.md), [Matt.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[395:2550](1100072.htm#fr_2549.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p86"></span>[John v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.LXIV-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[396:2551](1100072.htm#fr_2550.md) <span
id="iii.LXIV-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIV-p94"></span>\[The rendering above has been corrected
to conform to the punctuation of the Greek text.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXV](1100073.md)
