[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100047)  [Next](1100049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XL"></span> <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="iii.XL-Page_254"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XL-p1.1"></span>Homily XL.</span>

<span id="iii.XL-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XL-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010)<span
id="iii.XL-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XL-p3"></span>“And when He was departed thence, He went
into their synagogue: and, behold, a man which had his hand withered.”

<span id="iii.XL-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XL-p4.1"></span>Again</span> He heals on a Sabbath day,
vindicating what had been done by His disciples. And the other
evangelists indeed say, that He “set” the man “in the midst,” and asked
them, “If it was lawful to do good on the Sabbath days.” <span
id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675)

<span id="iii.XL-p6"></span>See the tender bowels of the Lord. “He set
him in the midst,” that by the sight He might subdue them; that overcome
by the spectacle they might cast away their wickedness, and out of a
kind of shame towards the man, cease from their savage ways. But they,
ungentle and inhuman, choose rather to hurt the fame of Christ, than to
see this person made whole: in both ways betraying their wickedness; by
their warring against Christ, and by their doing so with such
contentiousness, as even to treat with despite His mercies to other men.

<span id="iii.XL-p7"></span>And while the other evangelists say, He
asked the question, this one saith, it was asked of Him. “And they asked
Him,” so it stands, “saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath days?
that they might accuse Him.” <span id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676)
And it is likely that both took place. For being unholy wretches, and
well assured that He would doubtless proceed to the healing, they
hastened to take Him beforehand with their question, thinking in this
way to hinder Him. And this is why they asked, “Is it lawful to heal on
the Sabbath days?” not for information, but that “they might accuse
Him.” Yet surely the work was enough, if it were really their wish to
accuse Him; but they desired to find a handle in His words too,
preparing for themselves beforehand an abundance of arguments.

<span id="iii.XL-p9"></span>But He in His love towards man doth this
also: He answers them, teaching His own meekness, and turning it all
back upon them; and points out their inhumanity. And He “setteth” the
man “in the midst;” not in fear of them, but endeavoring to profit them,
and move them to pity.

<span id="iii.XL-p10"></span>But when not even so did He prevail with
them, then was He grieved, it is said, and wroth with them for the
hardness of their heart, and He saith,

<span id="iii.XL-p11"></span>“What man is there among you that shall
have one sheep, and if this fall into a pit on the Sabbath days, will he
not lay hold of it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better than
a sheep? <span id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) Wherefore it is
lawful to do well <span id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678) on the
Sabbath days.” <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679)

<span id="iii.XL-p15"></span>Thus, lest they have ground of obstinacy,
and of accusing him again of transgression, He convicts them by this
example. And do thou mark, I pray thee, how variously and suitably in
each case, He introduces His pleas for the breaking of the sabbath.
Thus, first, in the case of the blind man, <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680) He doth not so much as defend
Himself to them, when He made the clay: and yet then also were they
blaming Him; but the manner of the creation was enough to indicate the
Lord and Owner <span id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) of the law.
Next, in the case of the paralytic, when he carried his bed, and they
were finding fault, <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) He
defends Himself, now as God, and now as man; as man, when He saith, “If
a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law should not
be broken;” (and He said not “that a man should be profited”); “are ye
angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath
day?” <span id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683) As God again, when He
saith, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684)

<span id="iii.XL-p21"></span>But when blamed for His disciples, He said,
“Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungered, himself and
they that were with him, how he entered into the house of God, and did
eat the show-bread?” <span id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) He
brings forward the priests also.

<span id="iii.XL-p23"></span>And here again; “Is it lawful to do good on
the Sabbath days, or to do evil? <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686) Which of you shall have one sheep?”
For He knew their love of wealth, that they were all <span
id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span id="iii.XL-Page_255"></span> taken up
with it, rather than with love of mankind. And indeed the other
evangelist saith, <span id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687) that He
also looked about upon them when asking these questions, that by His
very eye He might win them over; but not even so did they become better.

<span id="iii.XL-p26"></span>And yet here He speaks only; whereas
elsewhere in many cases He heals by laying on of hands also. But
nevertheless none of these things made them meek; rather, while the man
was healed, they by his health became worse.

<span id="iii.XL-p27"></span>For His desire indeed was to cure them
before him, and He tried innumerable ways of healing, both by what He
did in their presence, and by what He said: but since their malady after
all was incurable, He proceeded to the work. “Then saith He to the man,
Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth, and it was restored
whole, like as the other.” <span id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688)

<span id="iii.XL-p29"></span>2. What then did they? They go forth, it is
said, and take counsel together to slay Him. For “the Pharisees,” saith
the Scripture, “went out and held a council against Him, how they might
destroy Him.” <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689) They had
received no injury, yet they went about to slay Him. So great an evil is
envy. For not against strangers only, but even against our own, is it
ever warring. And Mark saith, they took this counsel with the
Herodians. <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690)

<span id="iii.XL-p32"></span>What then doth the gentle and meek One? He
withdrew, on being aware of it. “But when Jesus knew their
devices, <span id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) He withdrew
Himself,” it is said, “from them.” <span
id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) Where now are they who say,
miracles ought to be done? Nay, by these things He signified, that the
uncandid soul is not even thereby persuaded; and He made it plain that
His disciples too were blamed by them without cause. This however we
should observe, that they grow fierce especially at the benefits done to
their neighbors; and when they see any one delivered either from disease
or from wickedness, then is the time for them to find fault, and become
wild beasts. Thus did they calumniate Him, both when He was about to
save the harlot, and when He was eating with publicans, and now again,
when they saw the hand restored.

<span id="iii.XL-p35"></span>But do thou observe, I pray thee, how He
neither desists from His tender care over the infirm, and yet allays
their envy. “And great multitudes <span
id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693) followed Him, and He healed them
all; and He charged them that were healed, that they should make Him
known to no man.” <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) Because,
while the multitudes everywhere both admire and follow Him, they desist
not from their wickedness.

<span id="iii.XL-p38"></span>Then, lest thou shouldest be confounded at
what is going on, and at their strange frenzy, He introduces the prophet
also, foretelling all this. For so great was the accuracy of the
prophets, that they omit not even these things, but foretell His very
journeyings, and changes of place, and the intent with which He acted
therein; that thou mightest learn, how they spake all by the Spirit. For
if the secrets of men cannot by any art be known, much more were it
impossible to learn Christ’s purpose, except the Spirit revealed
it. <span id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695)

<span id="iii.XL-p40"></span>What then saith the prophet? Nay, it is
subjoined: “That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
Prophet, saying, Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in
whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my Spirit upon Him, and He
shall show judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive nor cry, <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) neither shall any man hear His
voice in the streets. A bruised reed shall He not break, and smoking
flax shall He not quench, till He send forth judgment unto victory. And
in His name shall the Gentiles trust.” <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697)

<span id="iii.XL-p43"></span>The prophet celebrates His meekness, and
His unspeakable power, and opens to the Gentiles “a great door and
effectual;” he foretells also the ills that are to overtake the Jews,
and signifies His unanimity with the Father. For “behold,” saith He, “my
servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul is well
pleased.” Now if He chose Him, not as an adversary doth Christ set aside
the law, nor as being an enemy of the lawgiver, but as having the same
mind with Him, and the same objects.

<span id="iii.XL-p44"></span>Then proclaiming His meekness, he saith,
“He shall not strive nor cry.” For His desire indeed was to heal in
their presence; but since they thrust Him away, not even against this
did He contend.

<span id="iii.XL-p45"></span>And intimating both His might, and their
weakness, he saith, “A bruised reed shall He not break.” For indeed it
was easy to break them all to pieces like a reed, and not a reed merely,
but one already bruised.

<span id="iii.XL-p46"></span>“And smoking flax shall He not quench.”
Here he sets forth both their anger that is kindled, and His might that
is able to put <span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="iii.XL-Page_256"></span> down their anger, and to quench it with all
ease; whereby His great mildness is signified.

<span id="iii.XL-p47"></span>What then? Shall these things always be?
And will He endure them perpetually, forming such frantic plots against
Him? Far from it; but when He hath performed His part, then shall He
execute the other purposes also. For this He declared by saying “Till He
send forth judgment unto victory: and in His name shall the Gentiles
trust.” As Paul likewise saith, “Having in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.” <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698)

<span id="iii.XL-p49"></span>But what is, “when He sends forth judgment
unto victory?” When He hath fulfilled all His own part, then, we are
told, He will bring down upon them His vengeance also, and that a
perfect vengeance. Then shall they suffer His terrors, when His trophy
is gloriously set up, and the ordinances that proceed from Him have
prevailed, and He hath left them no plea of contradiction, however
shameless. For He is wont to call righteousness, “judgment.”

<span id="iii.XL-p50"></span>But not to this will His dispensation be
confined, to the punishment of unbelievers only, but He will also win to
Himself the whole world. Wherefore He added, “And in His name shall the
Gentiles trust.”

<span id="iii.XL-p51"></span>Then, to inform thee that this too is
according to the purpose of the Father, in the beginning the prophet had
assured us of this likewise, together with what had gone before; saying,
“My well-beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased.” For of the
well-beloved it is quite evident that He did these things also according
to the mind of the beloved. <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699)
becoming worse than the heathens? Wherefore also I do exceedingly
grieve, that we who are commanded to copy the angels, or rather the Lord
of the angels, emulate the devil. For indeed there is much envy, even in
the church; and more among us, than among those under authority.
Wherefore we must even discourse unto ourselves.

<span id="iii.XL-p53"></span>5. Tell me then, why dost thou envy thy
neighbor? Because thou seest him reaping honor, and words of good
report? Then dost thou not bear in mind how much evil honors bring on
the unguarded? lifting them up to pride, to vainglory, to arrogance, to
contemptuousness; making them more careless? and besides these evils,
they wither also lightly away. For the most grievous thing is this, that
the evils arising therefrom abide immortal, but the pleasure at the
moment of its appearing, is flown away. For these things then dost thou
envy? tell me.

<span id="iii.XL-p54"></span>“But he hath great influence with the
Ruler, and leads and drives all things which way he will, and inflicts
pain on them that offend him, and benefits his flatterers, and hath much
power.” These are the sayings of secular persons, and of men that are
riveted to the earth. For the spiritual man nothing shall be able to
hurt.

<span id="iii.XL-p55"></span>For what serious harm shall he do to him?
vote him out of his office? And what of that? For if it be justly done,
he is even profited; for nothing so provokes God, as for one to hold the
priest’s office unworthily. But if unjustly, the blame again falls on
the other, not on him; for he who hath suffered anything unjustly, and
borne it nobly, obtains in this way the greater confidence towards God.

<span id="iii.XL-p56"></span>Let us not then aim at this, how we may be
in places of power, and honor, and authority, but that we may live in
virtue and self denial. For indeed places of authority persuade men to
do many things which are <span id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span
id="iii.XL-Page_257"></span> not approved of God; and great vigor of
soul is needed, in order to use authority aright. For as he that is
deprived thereof, practises self restraint, whether with or against his
will, so he that enjoys it is in some such condition, as if any one
living with a graceful and beautiful damsel were to receive rules never
to look upon her unchastely. For authority is that kind of thing.
Wherefore many, even against their will, hath it induced to show
insolence; it awakens wrath, and removes the bridle from the tongue, and
tears off the door of the lips; fanning the soul as with a wind, and
sinking the bark in the lowest depth of evils. Him then who is in so
great danger dost thou admire, and sayest thou he is to be envied? Nay,
how great madness is here! Consider, at any rate (besides what we have
mentioned), how many enemies and accusers, and how many flatterers this
person hath besieging him. Are these then, I pray thee, reasons for
calling a man happy? Nay, who can say so?

<span id="iii.XL-p57"></span>“But the people,” you say, “hold high
account of him.” And what is this? For the people surely is not God, to
whom he is to render account: so that in naming the people, thou art
speaking of nothing else than of other breakers, and rocks, and shoals,
and sunken ridges. For to be in favor with the people, the more it makes
a man illustrious, the greater the dangers, the cares, the despondencies
it brings with it. For such an one has no power at all to take breath or
stand still, having so severe a master. And why say I, “stand still and
take breath”? Though such an one have never so many good works, hardly
doth he enter into the kingdom. For nothing is so wont to
overthrow <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) men, as the honor
which comes of the multitude, making them cowardly, ignoble, flatterers,
hypocrites.

<span id="iii.XL-p59"></span>Why, for instance, did the Pharisees say
that Christ was possessed? Was it not because they were greedy of the
honor of the multitude?

<span id="iii.XL-p60"></span>And whence did the multitude pass the right
judgment on Him? Was it not because this disease had no hold on them?
For nothing, nothing so much tends to make men lawless and foolish, as
gaping after the honor of the multitude. Nothing makes them glorious and
immoveable, like despising the same.

<span id="iii.XL-p61"></span>Wherefore also great vigor of soul is
needed for him who is to hold out against such an impulse, and so
violent a blast. For as when things are prosperous, he prefers himself
to all, so when he undergoes the contrary, he would fain bury himself
alive: and this is to him both hell, and the kingdom, when he hath come
to be overwhelmed by this passion.

<span id="iii.XL-p62"></span>Is all this then, I pray thee, matter of
envyings, and not rather of lamentations and tears? Every one surely can
see. But thou doest the same, in envying one in that kind of credit, as
if a person, seeing another bound and scourged and torn by innumerable
wild beasts, were to envy him his wounds and stripes. For in fact, as
many men as the multitude comprises, so many bonds also, so many tyrants
hath he: and, what is yet more grievous, each of these hath a different
mind: and they all judge whatever comes into their heads concerning him
that is a slave to them, without examining into anything; but whatever
is the decision of this or that person, this they also confirm.

<span id="iii.XL-p63"></span>What manner of waves then, what tempest so
grievous as this? Yea, such a one is both puffed up in a moment by the
pleasure, and is under water again easily, being ever in fluctuation, in
tranquillity never. Thus, before the time of the assembly, and of the
contests in speaking, he is possessed with anxiety and fear; but after
the assembly he is either dead with despondency, or rejoices on the
contrary without measure; a worse thing than sorrow. For that pleasure
is not a less evil than sorrow is plain from the effect it has on the
soul; how light it makes it, and unsteady, and fluttering.

<span id="iii.XL-p64"></span>And this one may see even from those of
former times. When, for instance, was David to be admired; when he
rejoiced, or when he was in anguish? When, the people of the Jews?
groaning and calling upon God, or exulting in the wilderness, and
worshipping the calf? Wherefore Solomon too, who best of all men knew
what pleasure is, saith, “It is better to go to the house of mourning,
than to the house of laughter.” <span
id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) Wherefore Christ also blesses the
one, saying, “Blessed are they that mourn,” <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) but the other sort He bewails,
saying, “Woe unto you that laugh, for ye shall weep.” <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) And very fitly. For in delight the
soul is more relaxed and effeminate, but in mourning it is braced up,
and grows sober, and is delivered from the whole swarm of passions, and
becomes higher and stronger.

<span id="iii.XL-p68"></span>Knowing then all these things, let us shun
the glory that comes from the multitude, and the pleasure that springs
therefrom, that we may win the real and everlasting glory; unto which
may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might, forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[254:1676](1100048.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="iii.XL-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p5"></span>See [Mark
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#004), [Luke
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#009)<span id="iii.XL-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[254:1677](1100048.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="iii.XL-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p8"></span>[Matt. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010)<span id="iii.XL-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[254:1678](1100048.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="iii.XL-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p12"></span>\[R.V., “How much, then, is a man of more
value than a sheep!”\]

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[254:1679](1100048.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="iii.XL-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p13"></span>\[R.V. “to do good.”\]

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[254:1680](1100048.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="iii.XL-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p14"></span>[Matt. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#003)<span id="iii.XL-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[254:1681](1100048.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="iii.XL-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p16"></span>[John ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006)<span id="iii.XL-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[254:1682](1100048.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="iii.XL-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p17"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p17.1"></span>τν Δεσπτην</span>, not two titles, as the
English rendering would suggest.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[254:1683](1100048.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="iii.XL-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p18"></span>[John
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010)<span id="iii.XL-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[254:1684](1100048.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="iii.XL-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p19"></span>[John vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023)<span id="iii.XL-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[254:1685](1100048.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="iii.XL-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p20"></span>[John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="iii.XL-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[254:1686](1100048.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="iii.XL-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p22"></span>[Matt.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004)<span id="iii.XL-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[254:1687](1100048.htm#fr_1686) <span
id="iii.XL-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p24"></span>\[So Mark and Luke, but not Matthew.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[255:1688](1100048.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="iii.XL-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p25"></span>[Mark
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005), [Luke
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#010)<span id="iii.XL-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[255:1689](1100048.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="iii.XL-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p28"></span>[Matt. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013)<span id="iii.XL-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[255:1690](1100048.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="iii.XL-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p30"></span>[Matt. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014)<span id="iii.XL-p30.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “took counsel,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[255:1691](1100048.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="iii.XL-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p31"></span>[Mark iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006)<span id="iii.XL-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[255:1692](1100048.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="iii.XL-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p33"></span>\[“Their devices” is borrowed from [Matt.
12.25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)<span id="iii.XL-p33.1"></span>,
where the Greek phrase occurs (“their thoughts,” A.V.)—R.\]

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[255:1693](1100048.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="iii.XL-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p34"></span>[Matt. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#015)<span id="iii.XL-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[255:1694](1100048.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="iii.XL-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p36"></span>\[So Chrysostom, with the received text.
Comp. R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[255:1695](1100048.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="iii.XL-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p37"></span>[Matt.
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#016)<span id="iii.XL-p37.1"></span>.
\[“To no man,” peculiar to Chrysostom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[255:1696](1100048.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="iii.XL-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p39"></span>Cf. [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span id="iii.XL-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[255:1697](1100048.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="iii.XL-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p41"></span>\[R.V., “cry aloud.”\]

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[255:1698](1100048.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="iii.XL-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p42"></span>[Matt.
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#017), [Isa.
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)<span id="iii.XL-p42.1"></span>.
\[ R.V., “hope” for “trust.”\]

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[256:1699](1100048.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="iii.XL-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p48"></span>[2 Cor. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="iii.XL-p48.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “being in readiness to avenge all disobedience, when your
obedience shall be fulfilled.”\]

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[256:1700](1100048.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="iii.XL-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p52"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p52.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p52.2"></span>γαπητ</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p52.3"></span>το φιλουμνου</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p52.4"></span>γενναν</span> \]

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[257:1701](1100048.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="iii.XL-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p58"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p58.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XL-p58.2"></span>κτραχηλιζειν</span> .

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[257:1702](1100048.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="iii.XL-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p65"></span>[Eccles. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002)<span id="iii.XL-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[257:1703](1100048.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="iii.XL-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p66"></span>[Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="iii.XL-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[257:1704](1100048.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="iii.XL-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XL-p67"></span>[Luke vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#025)<span id="iii.XL-p67.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLI](1100049)
