[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100035)  [Next](1100037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXVIII"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.XXVIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p3"></span>“And when He was entered into a ship,
His disciples followed Him. And, behold, there arose a great tempest in
the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves, but He was
asleep.”

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p4.1"></span>Now</span> Luke, <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177.md) to free himself from having the
order of time required of him, saith thus, “And it came to pass on a
certain day that He went into a ship with His disciples;” and Mark in
like manner. <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178.md) But this
evangelist not so, but he maintains the order in this place also. For
they did not all of them write all things in this way. And these things
I have mentioned before, lest any one from the omission should suppose
there was a discordance.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p7"></span>The multitudes then He sent on, but the
disciples He took with Himself: for the others mention this too. And He
took them with Him, not for nought, nor at hazard, but in order to make
them spectators of the miracle that was to take place. For like a most
excellent trainer, He was anointing them with a view to both objects; as
well to be undismayed in dangers, as to be modest in honors. Thus, that
they might not be high minded, because having sent away the rest, He
retained them, He suffers them to be tossed with the tempest; at once
correcting this, and disciplining them to bear trials nobly.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p8"></span>For great indeed were the former
miracles too, but this contained also in it a kind of discipline, and
that no inconsiderable one, and was a sign akin to that of old. <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179.md) For this cause He takes the
disciples only with Himself. For as, when there was a display of
miracles, He suffers the people also to be present; so when trial and
terrors were rising up against Him, then He takes with Him none but the
champions of the whole world, whom He was to discipline.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span id="iii.XXVIII-Page_186"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p10"></span>And while Matthew merely mentioned that
“He was asleep,” <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180.md) Luke saith
that it was “on a pillow;” signifying both His freedom from pride, and
to teach us hereby a high degree of austerity. <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181.md)

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p13"></span>The tempest therefore being thoroughly
excited, and the sea raging, “They awake Him, saying, Lord, save us: we
perish.” <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182.md) But He rebuked them
before He rebuked the sea. Because as I said, for discipline these
things were permitted, and they were a type of the temptations that were
to overtake them. Yea, for after these things again, He often suffered
them to fall into more grievous tempests of fortune, <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183.md) and bare long with them. Wherefore
Paul also said, “I would not, brethren, have you ignorant, that we were
pressed out of measure beyond strength, insomuch that we despaired even
of life;” <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184.md) and after this
again, “Who delivered us from so great deaths.” Signifying therefore
hereby, that they ought to be confident, though the waves rise high, and
that He orders all things for good, He first of all reproves them. For
indeed their very alarm was a profitable occurrence, that the miracle
might appear greater, and their remembrance of the event be rendered
lasting. Since when anything strange is about to happen, there are
prepared beforehand many things to cause remembrance, lest after the
miracle hath passed by, men should sink into forgetfulness.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p17"></span>Thus Moses also first is in fear of the
serpent, and not merely in fear, but even with much distress: and then
he sees that strange thing come to pass. <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185.md) So these too, having first looked
to perish, were then saved, that having confessed the danger, they might
learn the greatness of the miracle.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p19"></span>Therefore also He sleeps: for had He
been awake when it happened, either they would not have feared, or they
would not have besought Him, or they would not so much as have thought
of His being able to do any such thing. Therefore He sleeps, to give
occasion for their timidity, and to make their perception of what was
happening more distinct. For a man looks not with the same eyes on what
happens in the persons of others, as in his own. Therefore since they
had seen all benefitted, while themselves had enjoyed no benefit, and
were supine (for neither were they lame, nor had they any other such
infirmity); and it was meet they should enjoy His benefits by their own
perception: He permits the storm, that by their deliverance they might
attain to a clearer perception of the benefit.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p20"></span>Therefore neither doth He this in the
presence of the multitudes, that they might not be condemned for little
faith, but He has them apart, and corrects them, and before the tempest
of the waters He puts an end to the tempests of their soul, rebuking
them, and saying,

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p21"></span>“Why are ye fearful, O ye of little
faith:” instructing them also, that men’s fear is wrought not by the
approach of the temptations, but by the weakness of their mind.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p22"></span>But should any one say, that it was not
fearfulness, or little faith, to come near and awaken Him; I would say
this, that that very thing was an especial sign of their wanting the
right opinion concerning Him. That is, His power to rebuke when awakened
they knew, but that He could do so even sleeping, they knew not as yet.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p23"></span>And why at all marvel that it was so
now, when even after many other miracles their impressions were still
rather imperfect? wherefore also they are often rebuked; as when He
saith, “Are ye also yet without understanding?” <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186.md) Marvel not then, if when the
disciples were in such imperfect dispositions, the multitudes had no
exalted imagination of Him. For

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p25"></span>“They marvelled, saying, What manner of
man is this, that even the sea and the winds obey Him?” <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187.md)

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p27"></span>But Christ chode not with them for
calling Him a man, but waited to teach them by His signs, that their
supposition was mistaken. But from what did they think Him a man? First
from His appearance, then from His sleeping, and His making use of a
ship. So on this account they were cast into perplexity, saying, “What
manner of man is this?” since while the sleep and the outward appearance
showed man, the sea and the calm declared Him God.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p28"></span>For because Moses had once done some
such thing, in this regard also doth He signify His own superiority, and
that the one works miracles as a slave, the other as Lord. Thus, He put
forth no rod, as Moses did, neither did He stretch forth His hands to
Heaven, nor did He need any prayer, but, as was meet for a master
commanding His handmaid, or a creator His creature, so did He quiet and
curb it by word and command only; and all the surge was straightway at
an <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="iii.XXVIII-Page_187"></span> end, and not one trace of the
disturbance remained. For this the evangelist declared saying, “And
there was a great calm.” <span id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188.md) And
that which had been spoken of the Father as a great thing, this He
showed forth again by His works. And what had been said concerning Him?
“He spake,” it saith, “and the stormy wind ceased.” <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189.md) So here likewise, He spake, and
“there was a great calm.” And for this most of all did the multitudes
marvel at him; who would not have marvelled, had He done it in such
manner as did Moses.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p31"></span>2. Now when He is departed from the
sea, there follows another miracle yet more awful. For men possessed
with devils, <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190.md) like wicked
runaways at sight of their master, said,

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p33"></span>“What have we to do with Thee, Jesus,
Thou Son of God? Art Thou come hither to torment us before the
time?” <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191.md)

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p35"></span>For, because the multitudes called Him
man, the devils came proclaiming His Godhead, and they that heard not
the sea swelling and subsiding, heard from the devils the same cry, as
it by its calm was loudly uttering.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p36"></span>Then, lest the thing might seem to come
of flattery, according to their actual experience they cry out and say,
“Art Thou come hither to torment us before the time?” With this view,
then, their enmity is avowed beforehand, that their entreaty may not
incur suspicion. For indeed they were invisibly receiving stripes, and
the sea was not in such a storm as they; galled, and inflamed, and
suffering things intolerable from His mere presence. Accordingly, no man
daring to bring them to Him, Christ of Himself goes unto them.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p37"></span>And Matthew indeed relates that they
said, “Art Thou come hither before the time to torment us?” but the
other evangelists have added, that they also entreated and adjured Him
not to cast them into the deep. <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192.md) For they supposed that their
punishment was now close upon them, and feared, as even now about to
fall into vengeance.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p39"></span>And though Luke and those who follow
him <span id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193.md) say that it was one
person, but this evangelist two, this doth not exhibit any discrepancy
at all. I grant if they had said, there was only one, and no other, they
would appear to disagree with Matthew; but if that spake of the one,
this of the two, the statement comes not of disagreement, but of a
different manner of narration. That is, I for my part think, Luke
singled out the fiercest one of them for his narrative, wherefore also
in more tragical wise doth he report their miserable case; as, for
instance, that bursting his bonds and chains he used to wander about the
wilderness. And Mark saith, that he also cut himself with the stones.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p41"></span>And their words too are such as well
betray their implacable and shameless nature. For, saith he, “Art thou
come hither to torment us before the time?” You see, that they had
sinned, they could not deny, but they demand not to suffer their
punishment before the time. For, since He had caught them in the act of
perpetrating those horrors so incurable and lawless, and deforming and
punishing <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194.md) His creature in
every way; and they supposed that He, for the excess of their crimes,
would not await the time of their punishment: therefore they besought
and entreated Him: and they that endured not even bands of iron come
bound, and they that run about the mountains, are gone forth into the
plain; and those who hinder all others from passing, at sight of Him
blocking up the way, stand still.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p43"></span>3. But what can be the reason that they
love also to dwell in the tombs? They would fain suggest to the
multitude a pernicious opinion, as though the souls of the dead become
demons, <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195.md) which God forbid we
should ever admit into our conception. “But what then wilt thou say,”
one may ask, “when many of the sorcerers take children and slay them, in
order to have the soul afterwards to assist them?” Why, whence is this
evident? for of their slaying them, indeed, many tell us, but as to the
souls of the slain being with them, whence knowest thou it, I pray thee?
“The possessed themselves,” it is replied, “cry out, I am the soul of
such a one.” But this too is a kind of stage-play, and devilish deceit.
For it is not the spirit of the dead that cries out, but the evil spirit
that feigns these things in order to deceive the hearers. For if it were
possible for a soul to enter into the substance of an evil spirit, much
more into its own body.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p45"></span>And besides, it stands not to reason
that <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span
id="iii.XXVIII-Page_188"></span> the injured soul should co-operate with
the wrong-doer, or that a man should be able to change an incorporeal
power into another substance. For if in bodies this were impossible, and
one could not make a man’s body become that of an ass; much more were
this impossible in the invisible soul; neither could one transform it
into the substance of an evil spirit. So that these are the sayings of
besotted old wives, and spectres to frighten children.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p46"></span>Nor indeed is it possible for a soul,
torn away from the body, to wander here any more. For “the souls of the
righteous are in the hand of God;” <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196.md) and if of the righteous, then those
children’s souls also; for neither are they wicked: and the souls too of
sinners are straightway led away hence. And it is evident from Lazarus
and the rich man; and elsewhere too Christ saith, “This day they require
thy soul of thee.” <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197.md) And it may
not be that a soul, when it is gone forth from the body, should wander
here; nor is the reason hard to see. For if we, going about on the earth
which is familiar and well known to us, being encompassed with a body,
when we are journeying in a strange road, know not which way to go
unless we have some one to lead us; how should the soul, being rent away
from the body, and having gone out from all her accustomed region, know
where to walk without one to show her the way?

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p49"></span>And from many other things too one
might perceive, that it is not possible for a disembodied soul to remain
here. For both Stephen saith, “Receive my spirit;” <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198.md) and Paul, “To depart and to be with
Christ is far better;” <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199.md) and of
the patriarch too the Scripture saith, that “he was gathered unto his
fathers, being cherished in a good old age.” <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200.md) And as to the proof, that neither
can the souls of sinners continue here; hear the rich man making much
entreaty for this, and not obtaining it; since had it been at all
possible, he would have come, and have told what had come to pass
there. <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201.md) Whence it is evident
that after their departure hence our souls are led away into some place,
having no more power of themselves to come back again, but awaiting that
dreadful day.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p54"></span>4. Now, should any one say, “And
wherefore did Christ fulfill the devils’ request, suffering them to
depart into the herd of swine?” this would be our reply, that He did so,
not as yielding to them, but as providing for many objects thereby. One,
to teach them that are delivered from those wicked tyrants, how great
the malice of their insidious enemies: another, that all might learn,
how not even against swine are they bold, except He allow them; a third,
that they would have treated those men more grievously than the swine,
unless even in their calamity they had enjoyed much of God’s
providential care. For that they hate us more than the brutes is surely
evident to every man. So then they that spared not the swine, but in one
moment of time cast them all down the precipice, much more would they
have done so to the men whom they possessed, leading them towards the
desert, and carrying them away, unless even in their very tyranny the
guardian care of God had abounded, to curb and check the excess of their
violence. Whence it is manifest that there is no one, who doth not enjoy
the benefit of God’s providence. And if not all alike, nor after one
manner, this is itself a very great instance of providence; in that
according to each man’s profit, the work also of providence is
displayed.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p55"></span>And besides what hath been mentioned,
there is another thing also, which we learn from this; that His
providence is not only over all in common, but also over each in
particular; which He also declared with respect to His disciples,
saying, “But the very hairs of your head are numbered.” <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202.md) And from these demoniacs too, one
may clearly perceive this; who would have “been choked” long before, if
they had not enjoyed the benefit of much tender care from above.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p57"></span>For these reasons then He suffered them
to depart into the herd of swine, and that they also who dwelt in those
places should learn His power. For where His name was great, He did not
greatly display Himself: but where no one knew Him, but they were still
in an insensible condition, He made His miracles to shine out, so as to
bring them over to the knowledge of His Godhead. For it is evident from
the event that the inhabitants of that city were a sort of senseless
people; for when they ought to have adored and marvelled at His power,
they sent Him away, and “besought Him that He would depart out of their
coasts.” <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203.md)

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p59"></span>But for what intent did the devils
destroy the swine? Everywhere they have labored to drive men to dismay,
and everywhere they rejoice in destruction. This, for instance, the
devil did with respect to Job, although in that case too God suffered
it, but neither in that case as complying with the devil, but willing to
show His own servant the more <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iii.XXVIII-Page_189"></span> glorious, cutting off from the evil
spirit all pretext for his shamelessness, and turning on his own head
what was done against the righteous man. Because now also the contrary
of what they wished came to pass. For the power of Christ was gloriously
proclaimed, and the wickedness of the demons, from which He delivered
those possessed by them, was more plainly indicated; and how they want
power to touch even swine, without permission from the God of all.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p60"></span>And if any would take these things in a
hidden sense, <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204.md) there is
nothing to hinder. For the history indeed is this, but we are to know
assuredly, that the swinish sort of men are especially liable to the
operations of the demons. And as long as they are men that suffer such
things, they are often able yet to prevail; but if they are become
altogether swine, they are not only possessed, but are also cast down
the precipice. And besides, lest any should suppose what was done to be
mere acting, instead of distinctly believing that the devils <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205.md) were gone out; by the death of the
swine this is rendered manifest.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p63"></span>And mark also His meekness together
with His power. For when the inhabitants of that country, after having
received such benefits, were driving Him away, He resisted not, but
retired, and left those who had shown themselves unworthy of His
teaching, having given them for teachers them that had been freed from
the demons, and the swine-herds, that they might of them learn all that
had happened; whilst Himself retiring leaves the fear vigorous in them.
For the greatness withal of the loss was spreading the fame of what had
been done, and the event penetrated their mind. And from many quarters
were wafted sounds, proclaiming the strangeness of the miracle; from the
cured, and from the drowned, from the owners of the swine, from the men
that were feeding them.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p64"></span>5. These things any one may see
happening now also, even many in the tombs possessed of evil spirits,
whom nothing restrains from their madness; not iron, nor chain, nor
multitude of men, nor advice, nor admonition, nor terror, nor threat,
nor any other such thing.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p65"></span>For so when any man is dissolute, eager
after all embraces, <span id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206.md) he
differs not at all from the demoniac, but goes about naked like him,
clad indeed in garments, but deprived of the true covering, and stripped
of his proper glory; cutting himself not with stones, but with sins more
hurtful than many stones. Who then shall be able to bind such a one?
Who, to stay his unseemliness and frenzy, his way of never coming to
himself, but forever haunting the tombs? For such are the resorts of the
harlots, full of much evil savor, of much rottenness.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p67"></span>And what of the covetous man? Is he not
like this? For who will be able ever to bind him? Are there not fears
and daily threats, and admonitions, and counsels? Nay, all these bonds
he bursts asunder; and if any one come to set him free, he adjures him
that he may not be freed, accounting it the greatest torture not to be
in torture: than which what can be more wretched? For as to that evil
spirit, even though he despised men, yet he yielded to the command of
Christ, and quickly sprang out of the man’s body; but this man yields
not even to His commandment. See at least how he daily hears Him saying,
“Ye cannot serve God and mammon,” <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207.md) and threatening hell, and the
incurable torments, and obeys not: not that He is stronger than Christ,
but because against our will Christ corrects us not. <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208.md) Therefore such men live as in
desert places, though they be in the midst of cities. For who, that hath
reason, would choose to be with such men? I for my part would sooner
consent to dwell with ten thousand demoniacs, than with one diseased in
this way.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p70"></span>And that I am not mistaken in saying
this, is manifest from their respective feelings. For these last account
him an enemy that hath done them no wrong, and desire even to take him
for a slave when he is free, and encompass him with ten thousand evils;
but the demoniacs do no such thing, but toss their disease to and for
within themselves. And while these overturn many houses, and cause the
name of God to be blasphemed, and are a pest to the city and to the
whole earth; they that are troubled by evil spirits, deserve rather our
pity and our tears. And the one for the more part act in insensibility,
but the others are frantic while they reason, keeping their orgies in
the midst of cities, and maddened with some new kind of madness. For
what do all the demoniacs so bad, as what Judas dared to do, when he
showed forth that extremity of wickedness? And all too that imitate him,
like fierce wild beasts escaped from their cage, trouble their cities,
no man restraining them. For these also have bonds upon them on every
side; such as the fears of the judges, the threatening of the laws, the
condemnation of the multitude, <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span
id="iii.XXVIII-Page_190"></span> and other things more than these; yet
bursting asunder even these, they turn all things upside down. And
should any one remove these altogether from them, then would he know
assuredly the demon that is in them to be far fiercer, and more frantic
than he who is just now gone forth.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p71"></span>But since this may not be, let us for
the time suppose it for argument’s sake: and let us take off from him
all his chains, and then shall we clearly know his manifest madness. But
be not afraid of the monster, when we uncover it; for it is the
representation in word, not the thing in truth. Let there be then some
man, darting fire from his eyes, black, having from either shoulder
serpents hanging down instead of hands; and let him have also a mouth,
with sharp swords set in it instead of teeth, and for a tongue a gushing
fountain of poison and some baneful drug; and a belly more consuming
than any furnace, devouring all that is cast unto it, and a sort of
winged feet more vehement than any flame; and let his face be made up of
a dog and of a wolf; and let him utter nothing human, but something
discordant, and unpleasing, and terrible; and let him have also in his
hands a firebrand. Perhaps what we have said seems to you to be
terrible, but we have not even yet fashioned him worthily; for together
with these things we must add others besides. I mean, that he is also to
slay them that meet with him, to devour them, to fasten upon their
flesh.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p72"></span>Yet is the covetous man much more
fierce even than this, assailing all like hell, swallowing all up, going
about a common enemy to the race of men. Why, he would have no man
exist, that he may possess all things. And he stops not even at this,
but when in his longing he shall have destroyed all men, he longs also
to mar the substance of the earth, and to see it all become gold; nay,
not the earth only, but hills also, and woods, and fountains, and in a
word all things that appear.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p73"></span>And to convince you that not even yet
have we set forth his madness, let there be no man to accuse and
frighten him, but take away the terror of the laws in supposition
awhile, and thou wilt see him snatching up a sword, laying violent hands
on all, and sparing none; neither friend, nor kinsman, nor brother, nor
even his very parent. Nay rather, in this case there is not even need of
supposing, but let us ask him, if he is not for ever framing to himself
such imaginations, and if he does not in thought range among all men to
destroy them; both friends and kinsmen, and even his very parents. Nay
rather there is no need even to ask, because in truth all men know that
they who are under the power of this disease are wearied even of their
father’s old age; and that which is sweet, and universally desirable,
the having children, they esteem grievous and unwelcome: many at least
with this view have even paid money to be childless, and have maimed
their nature, not only by slaying their children after birth, but by not
suffering them even to be born at all.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p74"></span>6. Marvel not, therefore, if we have
thus sketched the covetous man (for in truth he is far worse than what
we have said); but let us consider how we shall deliver him from the
demon. How then shall we deliver him? If he may be clearly made aware,
that his love of money stands very much in his way in respect of this
very object, the gaining of money; for they that wish to gain in little
things undergo great losses; whence accordingly a proverb hath been put
forth to this same effect. <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209.md)
Many, for instance, on many occasions, wishing to lend at large usury,
and through the expectation of gain not having inquired about them who
receive their money, have together with the interest lost also all their
capital. Others again falling into dangers, and not willing to give up a
little have together with the substance lost their life too.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p76"></span>Again, when it has been in men’s power
to purchase either gainful offices, or some other such thing, by some
trifling meanness they have lost all. For because they know not how to
sow, but have ever practised reaping, they of course continually fail of
their harvest. For no man can be always reaping, as neither can he be
always gaining. Therefore since they are not willing to spend, neither
do they know how to gain. And should they have to take a wife, the same
thing again befalls them; for either they are deceived into taking a
poor wife for a rich one, or when they have brought home one that is
rich, but full of faults without number, here too they have incurred
more loss than gain. For it is not superfluity but virtue, that causes
wealth. For what profit is there of her wealth, when she is expensive
and dissolute, and scatters all abroad more vehemently than any wind?
What if she be unchaste, and bring in numberless lovers? what if she be
drunken? Will she not quickly make her husband the poorest of men? But
they do not only marry, but also buy at great risk, from their great
covetousness, laboring to find not good slaves, but cheap ones.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span id="iii.XXVIII-Page_191"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p77"></span>Consider then all these things (for the
words concerning hell and the kingdom ye are not yet able to hear), and
bearing in mind the losses which ye have often undergone from your love
of money, in loans, and in purchases, and in marriages, and in offices
of power, and in all the rest; withdraw yourselves from doating on
money.

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p78"></span>For so shall ye be able to live the
present life in security, and after a little advance to hear also the
words that treat on self-government, and see through and look upon the
very Sun of Righteousness, and to attain unto the good things promised
by Him; unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever
and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[185:1178](1100036.htm#fr_1177.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p5"></span>[Luke viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[185:1179](1100036.htm#fr_1178.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p6"></span>See [Mark iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p6.1"></span>.
\[But Mark is very specific as to time. This event is placed very much
out of chronological position in Matthew’s account. But Chrysostom does
not discuss such questions with any fullness. Indeed, the order of
Matthew seems to have been accepted up to his time. The earliest
harmonies were based upon Matthew. Comp. even Augustin, *Harmony, Nicene
and Post-Nicene Fathers*, vol. vi., first series, pp. 67–69, and
elsewhere.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[185:1180](1100036.htm#fr_1179.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p9"></span>*i.e*., the miracle at the Red Sea,
afterwards mentioned.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[186:1181](1100036.htm#fr_1180.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p11"></span>See [Mark iv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#038.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[186:1182](1100036.htm#fr_1181.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p12.1"></span>φιλοσοφαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[186:1183](1100036.htm#fr_1182.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p14"></span>[Matt. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[186:1184](1100036.htm#fr_1183.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p15"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p15.1"></span>πραγμτων</span>, “of things.”

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[186:1185](1100036.htm#fr_1184.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p16"></span>[2 Cor.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.XXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[186:1186](1100036.htm#fr_1185.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p18"></span>[Exod.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[186:1187](1100036.htm#fr_1186.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p24"></span>[Matt. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p24.1"></span>.
\[“For” is part of the citation, in the Greek text of the Homily, but
does not occur in the Gospel narratives. The order, “the sea and the
winds,” is also peculiar to the text of the Homily. The Oxford
translator gives the order of the A.V., which is well attested, but not
followed here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[186:1188](1100036.htm#fr_1187.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p26"></span>[Matt. viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[187:1189](1100036.htm#fr_1188.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p29"></span>[Matt. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[187:1190](1100036.htm#fr_1189.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p30"></span>[Ps. cvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p30.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVIII-p30.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[187:1191](1100036.htm#fr_1190.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p32"></span>\[R.V., “demons,” and so the translator
in many places in this Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[187:1192](1100036.htm#fr_1191.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p34"></span>[Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[187:1193](1100036.htm#fr_1192.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p38"></span>[Mark
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#010.md), [Luke
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.XXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[187:1194](1100036.htm#fr_1193.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p40.1"></span>ο περ τν Λουκν</span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[187:1195](1100036.htm#fr_1194.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p42.1"></span>τιμωρουμνου</span> .

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[187:1196](1100036.htm#fr_1195.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p44"></span>So St. Augustin *de Civitate De*i, ix.
11. “Plotinus says that the souls of men are demons, and of men become
Lares, if they are of good desert; if of bad, Lemures or Larvæ.” Mr.
Field refers to St. Chrys. 2 *Hom. on Lazarus*, vi. 235, 6 (Savile).
“Many of the simpler sort imagine that the souls of such as die violent
deaths are turned into demons, whereas the souls which really become
such are theirs who are yet living in their sins, not by change of
substance, but by imitating their evil mind.…Why did the devil introduce
this wicked doctrine? He tried to undermine the glory of the martyrs. I
mean, because they die violent deaths, he wishing to diffuse an evil
impression of them, did this. This, however, he could not do, but
another very grievous result he did accomplish. He induced, by these
doctrines, the sorcerers that minister to him to butcher the bodies of
many tender youths, in the hope that they would become demons, and in
return minister to them.” He proceeds to argue against the superstition
much as in the text here.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[188:1197](1100036.htm#fr_1196.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p47"></span>[Wisd. iii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[188:1198](1100036.htm#fr_1197.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p48"></span>[Luke xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[188:1199](1100036.htm#fr_1198.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p50"></span>[Acts vii.
59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[188:1200](1100036.htm#fr_1199.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p51"></span>[Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[188:1201](1100036.htm#fr_1200.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p52"></span>[Gen. xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p52.1"></span>,
in <span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVIII-p52.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[188:1202](1100036.htm#fr_1201.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p53"></span>[Luke
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.XXVIII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[188:1203](1100036.htm#fr_1202.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p56"></span>[Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[188:1204](1100036.htm#fr_1203.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p58"></span>[Matt. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p58.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “from their borders.”\]

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[189:1205](1100036.htm#fr_1204.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p61"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p61.1"></span>κατ ναγωγν</span>. \[Comp. the “analogical”
sense of Scripture in the later Hermeneuties. But Origen and others had
already made the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p61.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p61.3"></span>ἀ</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p61.4"></span>ναγωγ</span> familiar and technical in the
usage of ecclesiastical Greek.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[189:1206](1100036.htm#fr_1205.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p61.5"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p62"></span>\[“demons.”\]

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[189:1207](1100036.htm#fr_1206.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p66"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p66.1"></span>σωματ</span>.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[189:1208](1100036.htm#fr_1207.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p68"></span>[Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.XXVIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[189:1209](1100036.htm#fr_1208.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p69"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p69.1"></span>ου σωψρονζει</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[190:1210](1100036.htm#fr_1209.md) <span
id="iii.XXVIII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVIII-p75"></span>Perhaps the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVIII-p75.1"></span>χπυςσεα χαλει`ων</span>, of which Erasmus
says, *“Conveniet uti, quoties officium aut munus longe impari munere
pensatur Admissus est in \*principis, sed excitit ex amicitia Christi.”*
Adag. 1, Cent. ii. [Prov. 1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.XXVIII-p75.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIX](1100037.md)
