[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100034)  [Next](1100036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXVII"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. VIII.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014)<span
id="iii.XXVII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p3"></span>*“And when Jesus was come into Peter’s
house, He saw his wife’s mother laid and sick of a fever:* <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141) *and He touched her hand, and the
fever left her, and she arose and ministered unto Him.”* <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p6.1"></span>But</span> Mark adds also,
“immediately,” <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143) meaning to
declare the time as well; but this evangelist hath set down only the
miracle, without signifying besides the time. And whereas the others
say, that she that lay ill did also entreat Him, this too he hath passed
over in silence. But this comes not of any dissonance, but the one of
brevity, the other of exact narrative. But for what intent did He go
into Peter’s house? As it seems to me, to take food. This at least is
declared when it is said,

<span id="iii.XXVII-p8"></span>“She arose and ministered unto
Him.” <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p10"></span>For He used to visit His disciples (as
Matthew likewise, when He had called him), so honoring them and making
them more zealous.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p11"></span>But do thou mark, I pray thee, herein
also Peter’s reverence towards Him. For though he had his wife’s mother
at home lying ill, and very sick of a fever, he drew Him not into his
house, but waited first for the teaching to be finished, then for all
the others to be healed; and then when He had come in, besought Him.
Thus from the beginning was he instructed to prefer the things of all
others to his own.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p12"></span>Therefore neither doth he himself bring
Him in, but He entered of His own accord (after the centurion had said,
“I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof” <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) ): to show how much favor He
bestowed on His disciple. And yet consider of <span id="page_181">p.
181</span> <span id="iii.XXVII-Page_181"></span> what sort were the
houses of these fishermen; but for all that, He disdained not to enter
into their mean huts, teaching thee by all means to trample under foot
human pride.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p14"></span>And sometimes He heals by words only,
sometimes He even stretches forth His hand, sometimes He doeth both
these things, to bring into sight His way of healing. For it was not His
will always to work miracles in the more surpassing manner: it being
needful for Him to be concealed awhile, and especially as concerned His
disciples; since they out of their great delight would have proclaimed
everything. And this was evident from the fact, that even after coming
to the mount, it was needful to charge them that they should tell no
man.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p15"></span>Having therefore touched her body, He
not only quenched the fever, but also gave her back perfect health.
Thus, the disease being an ordinary one, He displayed His power by the
manner of healing; a thing which no physician’s art could have wrought.
For ye know that even after the departing of fevers, the patients yet
need much time to return to their former health. But then all took place
at once.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p16"></span>And not in this case only, but also in
that of the sea. For neither there did He quiet the winds only and the
storm, but He also stayed at once the swelling of the waves; and this
also was a strange thing. For even if the tempest should cease, the
waves continue to swell for a long time.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p17"></span>But with Christ it was not so, but all
at once was ended: and so it befell this woman also. Wherefore also the
evangelist, to declare this, said, “She arose and ministered unto
Him;” <span id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) which was a sign both
of Christ’s power, and of the disposition of the woman, which she showed
towards Christ.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p19"></span>And another thing together with these we
may hence observe, that Christ grants the healing of some to the faith
even of others. Since in this case too, others besought Him, as also in
the instance of the centurion’s servant. And this grant He makes, when
there is no unbelief in him that is to be healed, but either through
disease he cannot come unto Him, or through ignorance imagines nothing
great of Him, or because of His immature age.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p20"></span>2. “When the even was come, they brought
unto Him many that were possessed with devils: and He cast out the
spirits from them with a word, and healed all that were sick: that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Esaias, that He took
our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.” <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p22"></span>Seest thou the multitude, by this time
growing in faith? For not even when the time pressed could they endure
to depart, nor did they account it unseasonable to bring their sick to
Him at eventide.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p23"></span>But mark, I pray thee, how great a
multitude of persons healed the evangelists pass quickly over, not
mentioning one by one, and giving us an account of them, but in one word
traversing an unspeakable sea of miracles. Then lest the greatness of
the wonder should drive us again to unbelief, that even so great a
people and their various diseases should be delivered and healed by Him
in one moment of time, He brings in the prophet also to bear witness to
what is going on: indicating the abundance of the proof we have, in
every case, out of the Scriptures; such, that from the miracles
themselves we have no more; and He saith, that Esaias also spake of
these things; “He took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.” <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) He said not, “He did them away,”
but “He took and bare them;” which seems to me to be spoken rather of
sins, by the prophet, in harmony with John, where he saith, “Behold the
Lamb of God, that beareth the sin of the world.” <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p26"></span>How then doth the evangelist here apply
it to diseases? Either as rehearsing the passage in the historical
sense, <span id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) or to show that most
of our diseases arise from sins of the soul. For if the sum of all,
death itself, hath its root and foundation from sin, much more the
majority of our diseases also: since our very capability of suffering
did itself originate there.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p28"></span>3. “Now when Jesus saw great multitudes
about Him, He gave commandment to depart unto the other side.” <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p30"></span>Seest thou again His freedom from
ostentation? in that as the others say, “He charged the devils not to
say it was He,” <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) so this
writer saith, He repels the multitudes from Him. Now in so doing, He was
at once both training us to be moderate, <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) and at the same time allaying the
envy of the Jews, and teaching us to do nothing for display. For He was
not, we know, a healer to bodies only, <span id="page_182">p. 182</span>
<span id="iii.XXVII-Page_182"></span> but a curer also of the soul, and
a teacher of self-restraint; by both disclosing Himself, both by putting
away their diseases, and by doing nought for display. Because they
indeed were cleaving unto Him, loving Him, and marvelling at Him, and
desiring to look upon Him. For who would depart from one who was doing
such miracles? Who would not long, were it only to see the face, and the
mouth that was uttering such words?

<span id="iii.XXVII-p33"></span>For not by any means in working wonders
only was He wonderful, but even when merely showing Himself, He was full
of great grace; and to declare this the prophet said, “Fair <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) in beauty beyond the children of
men.” <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) And if Esaias saith,
“He hath no form nor comeliness,” <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) he affirms it either in comparison
of the glory of His Godhead, which surpasses all utterance and
description; or as declaring what took place at His passion, and the
dishonor which He underwent at the season of the cross, and the mean
estate which throughout His life He exemplified in all respects.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p37"></span>Further: He did not first give
“commandment to depart unto the other side,” nor until He had healed
them. For surely they could not have borne it. As therefore on the
mountain they not only continued with Him while exhorting them, but also
when it was silence followed Him; so here too, not in His miracles only
did they wait on Him, but also when He had ceased again, from His very
countenance receiving no small benefit. For if Moses had his face made
glorious, and Stephen like that of an angel; consider thou our common
Lord, what manner of person it was likely He would appear at such a
time.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p38"></span>Many now perchance have fallen into a
passionate desire of seeing that form; but if we are willing we shall
behold one far better than that. For if we can pass through our present
life with Christian boldness, <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157)
we shall receive Him in the clouds, meeting Him in an immortal and
incorruptible body.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p40"></span>But observe how He doth not simply drive
them away, lest He should hurt them. For He did not say, “withdraw,” but
“gave commandment to depart to the other side,” giving them to expect
that He would surely come thither.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p41"></span>4. And the multitudes for their part
evinced this great love, and were following with much affection; but
some one person, a slave of wealth, and possessed with much arrogance,
approaches Him, and saith,

<span id="iii.XXVII-p42"></span>“Master, I will follow Thee
whithersoever Thou goest.” <span id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p44"></span>Seest thou how great his arrogance? For
as not deigning to be numbered with the multitude, and indicating that
he is above the common sort, so he comes near. Because such is the
Jewish character; full of unseasonable confidence. So too another
afterwards, when all men were keeping silence, of his own accord springs
up, and saith, “Which is the first commandment?” <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p46"></span>Yet nevertheless the Lord rebuked not
his unseasonable confidence, teaching us to bear even with such as
these. Therefore He doth not openly convict them who are devising
mischief, but replies to their secret thought, leaving it to themselves
only to know that they are convicted, and doubly doing them good, first
by showing that He knows what is in their conscience, next by granting
unto them concealment after this manifestation, and allowing them to
recover themselves again, if they will: which thing He doth in the case
of this man also.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p47"></span>For he, seeing the many signs, and many
drawn after Him, thought to make a gain out of such miracles; wherefore
also he was forward to follow Him. And whence is this manifest? From the
answer which Christ makes, meeting not the question, as it stands
verbally, but the temper shown in its meaning. For, “What?” saith He,
“dost thou look to gather wealth by following me? Seest thou not then
that I have not even a lodging, not even so much as the birds have?”

<span id="iii.XXVII-p48"></span>For “the foxes,” saith He, “have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where
to lay His head.” <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p50"></span>Now these were not the words of one
turning Himself away, but of one who while putting to the proof his evil
disposition, yet permitted him (if he were willing with such a prospect)
to follow Him. And to convince thee of his wickedness, when he had heard
these things, and had been proved, he did not say, “I am ready to follow
Thee.”

<span id="iii.XXVII-p51"></span>5. And in many other places also Christ
is clearly doing this; He doth not openly convict, but by His answer He
manifests the purpose of them that are coming unto Him. Thus to him
again that said, “Good Master,” and had thought by such flattery to gain
His favor, according to his purpose He made answer, saying, “Why callest
thou me good? There is none good but one, that is, God.” <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161)

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span id="iii.XXVII-Page_183"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p53"></span>And when they said unto Him, “Behold,
Thy mother and Thy brethren seek Thee;” <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) forasmuch as these were under the
influence of some human infirmity, not desiring to hear something
profitable, but to make a display of their relationship to Him, and
therein to be vainglorious; hear what He saith: “Who is my mother, and
who are my brethren?”

<span id="iii.XXVII-p55"></span>And again to His brethren themselves,
saying unto Him, “Show thyself to the world,” <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) and wishing thence to feed their
vainglory, He said, “Your time” (so He speaks) “is always ready, but my
time is not yet come.”

<span id="iii.XXVII-p57"></span>And in the opposite cases too He doth
so; as in that of Nathanael, saying, “Behold an Israelite indeed, in
whom is no guile.” <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) And again,
“Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and see.” <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) For neither in this did He reply to
the words, but to the intention of him that sent them. And with the
people again in like manner, He addresses His discourse unto their
conscience, saying, “What went ye out into the wilderness to see?” <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) That is because they were probably
feeling about John, as though he had been a sort of easy and wavering
person; to correct this their suspicion, He saith, “What went ye out
into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?” or, “a man
clothed with soft raiment?” by both these figures declaring, that he was
neither of himself a waverer, nor would be softened by any luxury. Thus
then in the present case also He makes His answer to their meaning.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p61"></span>And see how in this also He shows forth
great moderation: in that He said not, “I have it indeed, but despise
it,” but “I have it not.” Seest thou what exact care goes along with His
condescension? Even as when He eats and drinks, when He seems to be
acting in an opposite way to John, this too He doeth for the sake of the
Jews’ salvation, or rather for that of the whole world, at once both
stopping the mouths of the heretics, <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) and desiring to win also more
abundantly those of that day to Himself.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p63"></span>6. But a certain other one, we read,
said unto Him,

<span id="iii.XXVII-p64"></span>“Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my
father.” <span id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168)

<span id="iii.XXVII-p66"></span>Didst thou mark the difference? how one
impudently saith, “I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest;” but
this other, although asking a thing of sacred duty, <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) saith, “Suffer me.” Yet He suffered
him not, but saith, “Let the dead bury their dead, but do thou follow
me.” For in every case He had regard to the intention. And wherefore did
He not suffer him? one may ask. Because, on the one hand, there were
those that would fulfill that duty, and the dead was not going to remain
unburied; on the other, it was not fit for this man to be taken away
from the weightier matters. But by saying, “their own dead,” He implies
that this is not one of His dead. And that because he that was dead,
was, at least as I suppose, of the unbelievers.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p68"></span>Now if thou admire the young man, that
for a matter so necessary he besought Jesus, and did not go away of his
own accord; much rather do thou admire him for staying also when
forbidden.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p69"></span>Was it not then, one may say, extreme
ingratitude, not to be present at the burial of his father? If indeed he
did so out of negligence, it was ingratitude, but if in order not to
interrupt a more needful work, his departing would most surely have been
of extreme inconsideration. For Jesus forbad him, not as commanding to
think lightly of the honor due to our parents, but signifying that
nothing ought to be to us more urgent than the things of Heaven, and
that we ought with all diligence to cleave to these, and not to put them
off for ever so little, though our engagements be exceeding
indispensable and pressing. For what can be more needful than to bury a
father? what more easy? since it would not even consume any long time.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p70"></span>But if one ought not to spend even as
much time as is required for a father’s burial, nor is it safe to be
parted even so long from our spiritual concerns; consider what we
deserve, who all our time stand off from the things that pertain to
Christ, and prefer things very ordinary to such as are needful, and are
remiss, when there is nothing to press on us?

<span id="iii.XXVII-p71"></span>And herein too we should admire the
instructiveness <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) of His
teaching, that He nailed him fast to His word, and with this freed him
from those endless evils, such as lamentations, and mournings, and the
things that follow thereafter. For after the burial he must of necessity
proceed to inquire about the will, then about the distribution of the
inheritance, and all the other things that follow thereupon; and thus
waves after waves coming in succession upon him, would bear him away
very far from the harbor of truth. For this cause He draws him, and
fastens him to Himself.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span id="iii.XXVII-Page_184"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p73"></span>But if thou still marvellest, and art
perplexed, that he was not permitted to be present at his father’s
burial; consider that many suffer not the sick, if it be a father that
is dead, or a mother, or a child, or any other of their kinsmen, to know
it, nor to follow him to the tomb; and we do not for this charge them
with cruelty nor inhumanity: and very reasonably. For, on the contrary,
it were cruelty to bring out to the funeral solemnity men in such a
state.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p74"></span>But if to mourn and be afflicted in mind
for them that are of our kindred is evil, much more our being withdrawn
from spiritual discourses. For this same cause He said elsewhere also,
“No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for
the kingdom of Heaven.” <span id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) And
surely it is far better to proclaim the kingdom, and draw back others
from death, than to bury the dead body, that is nothing advantaged
thereby; and especially, when there are some to fulfill all these
duties.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p76"></span>7. Nothing else then do we learn hereby,
but that we must not wantonly lose any, no not the smallest time, though
there be ten thousand things to press on us; but to set what is
spiritual before all, even the most indispensable matters, and to know
both what is life, and what is death. Since many even of them that seem
to live are nothing better than dead men, living as they do in
wickedness; or rather these are worse than the dead; “For he that is
dead,” it is said, “is freed from sin,” <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172) but this man is a slave to sin. For
tell me not of this, that he is not eaten of worms, nor lies in a
coffin, nor hath closed his eyes, nor is bound in graveclothes. Nay, for
these things he undergoes more grievously than the dead, no worms
devouring him, but the passions of his soul tearing him to pieces more
fiercely than wild beasts.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p78"></span>And if his eyes be open, this too again
is far worse than having closed them. For those of the dead see no evil
thing, but this man is gathering unto himself diseases without number,
while his eyes are open. And whereas the other lies in a coffin, unmoved
by anything, this one is buried in the tomb of his innumerable
distempers.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p79"></span>But thou seest not his body in a state
of decay. And what of that? Since before his body, his soul is corrupted
and destroyed, and undergoes greater rottenness. For the other stinketh
a few <span id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173) days, but this for the
whole of his life exhales evil odors, having a mouth more foul than
sewers.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p81"></span>And so the one differs from the other,
by just so much as this, that the dead indeed undergoes that decay only
which comes of nature, but this man together with that, brings in also
that rottenness which is from intemperance, devising each day unnumbered
causes of corruption.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p82"></span>But is he borne on horseback? And what
of that? Why, so is the other on a couch. And what is very hard, while
the other is seen by no one in his dissolution and decay, but hath his
coffin for a veil, this man is going about everywhere with his evil
savor, bearing about a dead soul in his body as in a tomb.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p83"></span>And if one could but once see a man’s
soul who is living in luxury and vice, thou wouldest perceive that it is
far better to lie bound in a grave than to be rivetted by the chains of
our sins; and to have a stone laid over thee, than that heavy
cover <span id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) of insensibility.
Wherefore above all things it behooves the friends of these dead men,
seeing that they are past feeling, to come near to Jesus in their
behalf, as Mary then did in the case of Lazarus. Though he “stinketh,”
though he be “dead four days,” do not despair, but approach, and remove
the stone first. Yea, for then thou shalt see him lying as in a tomb,
and bound in his grave clothes.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p85"></span>And if ye will, let it be some one of
them that are great and distinguished, whom we bring before you. Nay,
fear not, for I will state the example without a name: or rather, though
I should mention the name, not even so need there be any fear: for who
ever fears a dead man? seeing that whatever one may do, he continues
dead, and the dead cannot injure the living either little or much.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p86"></span>Let us then behold their head bound up.
For indeed, when they are for ever drunken, even as the dead by their
many wrappers and grave-clothes, so are all their organs of sense closed
and bound up. And if thou wilt look at their hands too, thou shalt see
these again bound to their belly, like those of the dead, and fastened
about not with grave-clothes, but what is far more grievous, with the
bands of covetousness: obtaining as they do no leave from her to be
stretched out for alms-giving, or for any other of such like good deeds;
rather she renders them more useless than those of the dead. Wouldest
thou also see their feet bound together? See them again fastened about
with cares, and for this cause never able to run unto the house of God.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span id="iii.XXVII-Page_185"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p87"></span>Hast thou seen the dead? behold also the
embalmer. Who then is the embalmer of these? The devil, who carefully
fastens them about, and suffers not the man any longer to appear a man,
but a dry stock. For where there is no eye, nor hands, nor feet, nor any
other such thing, how can such an one appear a man? Even so may we see
their soul also swaddled up, and rather an image <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175) than a soul.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p89"></span>Forasmuch then as they are in a sort of
senseless state, being turned to dead men, let us in their behalf draw
nigh unto Jesus, let us entreat Him to raise them up, let us take away
the stone, let us loosen the grave clothes. For if thou take away the
stone, that is, their insensibility to their own miseries, thou wilt
quickly be able to bring them also out of the tomb; and having brought
them out, thou wilt more easily rid them of their bonds. Then shall
Christ know thee, when thou art risen, when unbound; then will He call
thee even unto His own supper. <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) As many therefore of you as are
friends of Christ, as many as are disciples, as many as love him that is
gone, draw near unto Jesus, and pray. For even though his ill savor
abound and be ever so intense, nevertheless not even so should we, his
friends, forsake him, but so much the rather draw near; even as the
sisters of Lazarus then did; neither should we leave interceding,
beseeching, entreating, until we have received him alive.

<span id="iii.XXVII-p91"></span>For if we thus order our own affairs,
and those of our neighbors, we shall also attain speedily unto the life
to come; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love to man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[180:1142](1100035.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p4"></span>\[R.V., “lying sick of a fever.”\]

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[180:1143](1100035.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p5"></span>A.V., “unto them.” \[The Oxford edition
has “rec. vers.” here. But the word “received” is now applied, in
matters of text, only to the editions of Stephens and Elzevir and the
readings they contain. The reference is, of course, to the authorized
version, and that version in [Matt. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXVII-p5.1"></span>
follows the received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[180:1144](1100035.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p7"></span>[Mark
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#031), [Luke
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#039)<span id="iii.XXVII-p7.1"></span>.
\[Mark’s favorite term, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p7.2"></span>εθς</span>, is rendered “straightway” in the
R.V., *passim*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[180:1145](1100035.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p9"></span>[Matt. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[180:1146](1100035.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p13"></span>[Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[181:1147](1100035.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p18"></span>[Matt. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[181:1148](1100035.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p21"></span>[Matt.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span id="iii.XXVII-p21.1"></span>.
\[R.V. “our diseases.”\]

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[181:1149](1100035.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p24"></span>[Isa. liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXVII-p24.1"></span>.
The Evangelist seems to quote the Hebrew, not the <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVII-p24.2"></span>LXX</span>. \[The
explanation given in the Homily agrees with the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p24.3"></span>LXX</span>., “he bare our sins and suffered
pain (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p24.4"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p24.5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p24.6"></span>δυνται</span></span>) on our behalf.” Hebrew
has “sorrows” instead of “sicknesses” or “diseases.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[181:1150](1100035.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p24.7"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p25"></span>[John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="iii.XXVII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[181:1151](1100035.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p27"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p27.1"></span>κατ στοραν τν μαρτυραν ναγινσκων</span>,
“reading the text in that sense, to which the actual knowledge of the
facts concerning Christ, apart from what faith teaches, might guide a
man.” See Suicer in v. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p27.2"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p27.3"></span>στορα</span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[181:1152](1100035.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p29"></span>[Matt. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[181:1153](1100035.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p31"></span>[Mark
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#034), [Luke
4:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#041)<span
id="iii.XXVII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[181:1154](1100035.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p32"></span>*i.e*., “moderate, as receivers, in what
we expect from Him: and averse to all display, when we give in His
Name.”

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[182:1155](1100035.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p34"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p34.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p34.2"></span>ραο</span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[182:1156](1100035.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p35"></span>[Ps. xlv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXVII-p35.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVII-p35.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[182:1157](1100035.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p36"></span>[Isa. liii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXVII-p36.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVII-p36.2"></span>LXX</span>. \[So the
Hebrew.\]

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[182:1158](1100035.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p39"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p39.1"></span>μετ παησα</span>.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[182:1159](1100035.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p43"></span>[Matt. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXVII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[182:1160](1100035.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p45"></span>[Matt.
22:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#036), [Luke
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)<span
id="iii.XXVII-p45.1"></span>. \[The passage in Luke tells of an entirely
different incident. The citation from Matthew is not exact, though
“first” occurs in the answer of our Lord.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[182:1161](1100035.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p49"></span>[Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXVII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[182:1162](1100035.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p52"></span>[Matt.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017), [Luke
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXVII-p52.1"></span>.
\[The citation agrees more exactly with [Mark x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXVII-p52.2"></span>.
In Matthew, according to the best <span class="c41"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p52.3"></span>mss</span>. authorities, and also the Latin
versions and fathers, another form of the answer occurs. Even in Homily
LXIII., where the incident is commented upon, Chrysostom does not
directly attribute this language, as given above, to Matthew’s
Gospel.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[183:1163](1100035.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p54"></span>[Matt.
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span id="iii.XXVII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[183:1164](1100035.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p56"></span>[John
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXVII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[183:1165](1100035.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p58"></span>[John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="iii.XXVII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[183:1166](1100035.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p59"></span>[Matt. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXVII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[183:1167](1100035.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p60"></span>[Matt. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXVII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[183:1168](1100035.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p62"></span>*i. e*., of those heretics who
“commanded to abstain from meats,” as though possessed with some evil
principle: the Manichæan and Marcionite schools. Comp. St. Chrys. on [1
Tim. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span
id="iii.XXVII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[183:1169](1100035.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p65"></span>[Matt. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#021)<span id="iii.XXVII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[183:1170](1100035.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p67"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p67.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p67.2"></span>σιον</span>.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[183:1171](1100035.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p72"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p72.1"></span>φιλοσοφαν</span> .

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[184:1172](1100035.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p75"></span>[Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span id="iii.XXVII-p75.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVII-p75.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVII-p75.3"></span>ἐ</span></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVII-p75.4"></span>ν τ βασιλε</span>. \[The
citation is peculiar: (1) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p75.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p75.6"></span>ν</span> is not found in any of our <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XXVII-p75.7"></span>mss</span>. of the New
Testament, the received text is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p75.8"></span>ε τν βασιλεαν</span>, while the dative alone
is better supported. (2) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p75.9"></span>τν ορανν</span> is substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVII-p75.10"></span>το θεο</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXVII-p75.11"></span>;</span> the former
occurring in Matthew only in connection with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p75.12"></span>βασιλεα</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[184:1173](1100035.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p77"></span>[Rom. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXVII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[184:1174](1100035.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p80"></span>\[More exactly, “ten days.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[184:1175](1100035.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p84"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p84.1"></span>πμα</span>, the lid of a coffer of any kind:
here of a sarcophagus.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[185:1176](1100035.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p88"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXVII-p88.1"></span>εδωλον</span>. The classical use of this
word is well known: see *e.g.* Odyss. xi. 602. “A shadow or phantom: not
a true substantial soul.”

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[185:1177](1100035.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="iii.XXVII-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXVII-p90"></span>Alluding to [John xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXVII-p90.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVIII](1100036)
