[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100077)  [Next](1100079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXX"></span> <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="iii.LXX-Page_422"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXX-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXIII.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014)<span
id="iii.LXX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p3"></span>*“Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretense make long
prayers: therefore ye shall receive greater damnation.”* <span
id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675)

<span id="iii.LXX-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXX-p5.1"></span>After</span> this, next He derides them for
gluttony: and the grievous thing was, that not from rich men’s goods,
but from the poor they indulged their own belly, and aggravated their
poverty, which they should have relieved. For neither did they merely
eat, but devoured.

<span id="iii.LXX-p6"></span>Moreover also the manner of their
overreaching was yet more grievous, “for a pretense making long
prayers.”

<span id="iii.LXX-p7"></span>For every one is worthy of vengeance who
doeth any evil thing; but he that is deriving even the reason for so
doing from godliness, and is using this cloke for his wickedness, is
justly liable to a far more grievous punishment. And wherefore did He
not depose them? Because the time suffered it not as yet. So therefore
He lets them alone for a time, but by His sayings, He secures that the
people be not deceived, lest, through the dignity of those men, they be
drawn on to the same emulation.

<span id="iii.LXX-p8"></span>For as He had said, “Whatsoever they bid
you do, that do;” He shows how many things they do amiss, lest from
thence He should be supposed amongst the unwise to commit all to them.

<span id="iii.LXX-p9"></span>“Woe unto you, for ye shut up the kingdom
against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in.” <span id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676)
But if to profit no one be a charge against a man, even to hurt and
hinder, what plea hath that? But what means, “them that are entering
in?” Them that are fit for it. For when they were to lay injunctions on
others, they used to make the burdens intolerable, but when they
themselves were to do any of the things required, on the contrary, so
far from doing anything, they went much beyond this in wickedness, they
even used to corrupt others. These are they that are called pests, <span
id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677) who make their employment the ruin
of others, standing right contrary to teachers. For if it be the part of
a teacher to save that which is perishing, to destroy that which is on
the point of being saved is that of a destroyer.

<span id="iii.LXX-p12"></span>After this, again another charge: “Ye
compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make
him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves;” <span
id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678) that is, not even the fact that
hardly ye have taken him, and with endless toils, induces you to be
sparing towards him, although of the things we have hardly acquired, we
are more sparing, but you not even this renders more gentle.

<span id="iii.LXX-p14"></span>Here He lays to their charge two things;
one, that they are unprofitable for the salvation of the many, and need
much toil in order to win over even one; another, that they were remiss
in the preservation of him whom they had gained, or rather that they
were not only careless, but even traitors, by their wickedness in their
life corrupting him, and making him worse. For when the disciple sees
his teachers to be such as these, he becomes worse than they. For he
stops not at his teacher’s wickedness; but as when his teacher is
virtuous, he imitates him, so when he is bad, he even goes beyond him,
by reason of our proneness to what is evil.

<span id="iii.LXX-p15"></span>And He calls him “a child of hell,” that
is, a very hell. And He said “twofold more than you,” that He might both
alarm those, and make these feel the more severely, because they are
teachers of wickedness. And not this only, but because they labor to
instill into their disciples a greater wickedness, hardening them to a
much greater depravity than they have, and this is above all a mark of a
depraved soul.

<span id="iii.LXX-p16"></span>Then He derides them for folly also,
because they bade them disregard the greater commandments. And yet
before He had said the opposite, that “they bind heavy burdens, and
grievous to be borne.” But these things too they did again and were
doing everything for the corruption of those <span id="page_423">p.
423</span> <span id="iii.LXX-Page_423"></span> who were subject to them,
in little things requiring strictness, and despising the great.

<span id="iii.LXX-p17"></span>“For ye pay tithe,” He saith, “of mint and
anise, and have omitted <span id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679) the
weightier matters of the law, judgment, and mercy, and faith. These
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the others undone.” <span
id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680)

<span id="iii.LXX-p20"></span>Here then He naturally saith it, where it
is tithe and almsgiving, for what doth it hurt to give alms? But not to
keep the law; for neither doth it say thus. Therefore here indeed He
saith, “These ought ye to have done;” but where He is speaking about
clean and unclean, He no longer adds this, but makes a distinction, and
shows that the inward purity is necessarily followed by the outward, but
the converse is no longer so.

<span id="iii.LXX-p21"></span>For where there is a plea of love to man,
He passes it over lightly, for this very reason, and because it was not
yet time expressly and plainly to revoke the things of the law. But
where it is an observance of bodily purification, He overthrows it more
plainly.

<span id="iii.LXX-p22"></span>So, therefore, while with respect to alms
He saith, “These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the others
undone,” touching purifications He speaks not on this wise, but what?
“Ye make clean,” He saith, “the outside of the cup and the platter, but
within they are full of extortion, and injustice. Cleanse that which is
within the cup, that the outside may be clean also.” <span
id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681) And He took it from a thing
confessed and manifest, from a cup and platter.

<span id="iii.LXX-p24"></span>2. Then, to show that there is no harm
arising from despising bodily cleansings, but very great vengeance from
not regarding the purifications of the soul, which is virtue, He called
these “a gnat,” for they are small and nothing, but those other a camel,
for they were beyond what men could bear. Wherefore also He saith,
“Straining at the gnat, and swallowing the camel.” <span
id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682) For indeed the one were enacted for
the sake of the other, I mean of mercy and judgment; so that not even
then did they profit being done alone. For whereas the little things
were mentioned for the sake of the great, and after that these last were
neglected, and labor was spent on those alone, nothing was gained even
then by this. For the greater followed not the lesser, but the lesser
were sure to follow these greater.

<span id="iii.LXX-p26"></span>But these things He saith to show, that
even before grace was come, these were not among the principal things,
or amongst those upon which men should spend their labor, but the
matters required were different. But if before the grace they were so,
much more when high commandments had come, were these things
unprofitable, and it was not meet to practise them at all.

<span id="iii.LXX-p27"></span>In every case then is vice a grievous
thing, but especially when it does not so much as think it needs
amendment; and it is yet more grievous, when it thinks itself sufficient
even to amend others; to express which Christ calls them “blind guides.”
For if for a blind man not to think he needs a guide be extreme misery
and wretchedness; when he wishes himself to guide others, see to what a
gulf it leads.

<span id="iii.LXX-p28"></span>But these things He said, by all
intimating their mad desire of glory, and their exceeding frenzy
concerning this pest. For this became a cause to them of all their
evils, namely, that they did all things for display. This both led them
away from the faith, and caused them to neglect what really is virtue,
and induced them to busy themselves about bodily purifyings only,
neglecting the purifications of the soul. So therefore to lead them into
what really is virtue, and to the purifyings of the soul, He makes
mention of mercy, and judgment, and faith. For these are the things that
comprise our life, these are what purify the soul, justice, love to man,
truth; the one inclining us to pardon <span
id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683) and not suffering us to be
excessively severe and unforgiving to them that sin (for then shall we
gain doubly, both becoming kind to man, and hence meeting also ourselves
with much kindness from the God of all), and causing us both to
sympathize with them that are despitefully entreated, and to assist
them; the other not suffering them to be deceitful, and crafty.

<span id="iii.LXX-p30"></span>But neither when He saith, “These ought ye
to have done, and not to leave the others undone,” doth He say it as
introducing a legal observance; away with the thought; <span
id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684) neither with regard to the platter
and the cup, when He said, “Cleanse that which is within the cup and
platter, that the outside of them may be clean also,” doth He bring us
unto the old regard for little things, but on the contrary indeed, He
doth all things to show it to be superfluous. For He said not, Cleanse
the outside of them also, but that which is within, and the outside is
sure to follow.

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span id="iii.LXX-Page_424"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p32"></span>And besides, neither is it concerning a
cup and platter he is speaking, but of soul and body, by the outside
meaning the body, by the inside the soul. But if with regard to the
platter there be need of that which is within much more with regard to
thee.

<span id="iii.LXX-p33"></span>But ye do the contrary, saith He,
observing things trifling and external, ye neglect what are great and
inward: whence very great mischief arises, for that thinking ye have
duly performed all, ye despise the other things; and despising them, ye
do not so much as strive or attempt to perform them.

<span id="iii.LXX-p34"></span>After this, He again derides them for
vainglory, calling them “whited sepulchers,” <span
id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685) and unto all adding, “ye
hypocrites;” which thing is the cause of all their evils, and the origin
of their ruin. And He did not merely call them whited sepulchers, but
said, that they were full of uncleanness and hypocrisy. And these things
He spake, indicating the cause wherefore they did not believe, because
they were full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

<span id="iii.LXX-p36"></span>But these things not Christ only, but the
prophets also constantly lay to their charge, that they spoil, that
their rulers judge not according to the rule of justice, and every where
you may find the sacrifices indeed refused, but these things required.
So that there is nothing strange, nothing new, neither in the lawgiving,
nor in the accusation, nay not even in the comparison of the sepulchre.
For the prophet makes mention thereof, neither did he call them merely a
sepulchre, “but their throat an open sepulchre.” <span
id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686)

<span id="iii.LXX-p38"></span>Such are many men now also, decking
themselves indeed outwardly, but full of iniquity within. For now too
there is many a mode, and many a care for outward purifications, but of
those in the soul not so much as one. But if indeed any one should tear
open each man’s conscience, many worms and much corruption would he
find, and an ill savor beyond utterance; unreasonable and wicked lusts I
mean, which are more unclean than worms.

<span id="iii.LXX-p39"></span>3. But that “they” should be such persons
is not “so” dreadful a thing (although it be dreadful), but that “you,”
that have been counted worthy to become temples of God, should of a
sudden have become sepulchers, having as much ill savor, this is extreme
wretchedness. He in whom Christ dwells, and the Holy Spirit hath worked,
and such great mysteries, that this man should be a sepulchre, what
wretchedness is this? What mournings and lamentations doth this call
for, when the members of Christ have become a tomb of uncleanness?
Consider how thou wast born, of what things thou hast been counted
worthy, what manner of garment thou hast received, how thou wast built a
temple without a breach! how fair! not adorned with gold, neither with
pearls, but with the spirit that is more precious than these.

<span id="iii.LXX-p40"></span>Consider that no sepulchre is made in a
city, so then neither shalt thou be able to appear in the city above.
For if here this is forbidden, much more there. Or rather even here thou
art an object of scorn to all, bearing about a dead soul, and not to be
scorned only, but also to be shunned. For tell me, if any one were to go
round, bearing about a dead body, would not all have rushed away? would
not all have fled? Think this now likewise. For thou goest about,
bearing a spectacle far more grievous than this, a soul deadened by
sins, a soul paralyzed.

<span id="iii.LXX-p41"></span>Who now will pity such a one? For when
thou dost not pity thine own soul, how shall another pity him that is so
cruel, such an enemy to himself? <span
id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687) If any one, where thou didst sleep
and eat, had buried a dead body, what wouldest thou not have done? but
thou art burying a dead soul, not where thou dinest, nor where thou
sleepest, but in the members of Christ: and art thou not afraid lest a
thousand lightnings and thunderbolts be hurled from above upon thine
head?

<span id="iii.LXX-p43"></span>And how dost thou even dare to set foot in
the churches of God, and in holy temples, having within thee the savor
of so much abomination? For if one bearing a dead body into the king’s
courts and burying it would have suffered the utmost punishment, thou
setting thy foot in the sacred courts, and filling the house with so
much ill savor, consider what a punishment thou wilt undergo.

<span id="iii.LXX-p44"></span>Imitate that harlot who anointed with
ointment the feet of Christ, and filled the whole house with the odor,
the opposite to which thou doest to His house! For what though thou be
not sensible of the ill savor? For this most of all is the grievous part
of the disease; wherefore also thou art incurably diseased, and more
grievously than they that are maimed in their bodies, and become fetid.
For that disease indeed is both felt by the sick and is without any
blame, nay even is deserving of pity; but this of hatred and punishment.

<span id="iii.LXX-p45"></span>Since then both in this respect it is more
grievous, and from the sick not being sensi <span id="page_425">p.
425</span> <span id="iii.LXX-Page_425"></span> ble of it as he ought to
be; come, give thyself to my words, that I may teach thee plainly the
mischief of it.

<span id="iii.LXX-p46"></span>But first listen to what thou sayest in
the Psalm, “Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as incense.” <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688) When then not incense, but a
stinking smoke arises from thee, and from thy deeds, what punishment
dost thou not deserve to undergo?

<span id="iii.LXX-p48"></span>What then is the stinking smoke? Many come
in gazing about at the beauty of women; others curious about the
blooming youth of boys. After this, dost thou not marvel, how bolts are
not launched, and all things are not plucked up from their foundations?
For worthy both of thunderbolts and hell are the things that are done;
but God, who is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forbears awhile His
wrath, calling thee to repentance and amendment.

<span id="iii.LXX-p49"></span>What doest thou, O man? Art thou curiously
looking after women’s beauty, and dost thou not shudder at thus doing
despite unto the temple of God? Doth the church seem to thee a brothel,
and less honorable than the market-place. For in a market-place indeed
thou art afraid and ashamed to appear to be looking after any woman, but
in God’s temple, when God Himself is discoursing unto thee, and
threatening about these things, thou art committing whoredom and
adultery at the very time in which thou art being told not to do this.
And dost thou not shudder, nor stand amazed?

<span id="iii.LXX-p50"></span>These things do the spectacles of
wantonness teach you, the pest that is so hard to put down, the
deleterious sorceries, the grievous snares of the thoughtless, the
pleasurable destruction of the unchaste.

<span id="iii.LXX-p51"></span>Therefore the prophet also blaming thee,
said, “Thine eyes are not good, neither is thine heart.” <span
id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689)

<span id="iii.LXX-p53"></span>It were better for such men to be blind;
it were better to be diseased, than to abuse thine eyes for these
purposes.

<span id="iii.LXX-p54"></span>It were meet indeed that ye had within you
the wall to part you from the women; but since ye are not so minded, our
fathers thought it necessary by these boards <span
id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690) to wall you off; since I hear from
the elder ones, that of old there were not so much as these partitions;
“For in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female.” <span
id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691) And in the apostle’s time also both
men and women were together. Because the men were men, and the women
women, but now altogether the contrary; the women have urged themselves
into the manners of courtezans, but the men are in no better state than
frantic horses.

<span id="iii.LXX-p57"></span>Heard ye not, that the men and women were
gathered together in the upper room, and that congregation was worthy of
the heavens? And very reasonably. For even women then practised much
self-denial, and the men gravity and chastity. Hear, for instance, the
seller of purple saying, “If ye have judged me to be faithful to the
Lord, come in, and abide with me.” <span
id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692) Hear the women, who went about with
the apostles, having taken unto themselves manly courage, Priscilla,
Persis, and the rest; from whom our present women are as far removed as
our men from their men.

<span id="iii.LXX-p59"></span>4. For then indeed even travelling into
far countries women brought not on themselves evil report; but now even
though brought up in a chamber, they hardly escape this suspicion. But
these things arise from their decking of themselves, and their luxury.
Then the business of those women was to spread the word; but now to
appear beauteous, and fair, and comely in countenance. This is glory to
them, this salvation; but of lofty and great works they do not even
dream.

<span id="iii.LXX-p60"></span>What woman exerts herself to make her
husband better? what man hath taken to himself this care to amend his
wife? There is not one: but the woman’s whole study is upon the care of
ornaments of gold, and raiment, and the other adornments of the person,
and how to increase their substance; but the man’s both this, and others
more than this, all however worldly.

<span id="iii.LXX-p61"></span>Who, when about to marry, inquires about
the disposition and nurture of the damsel? No one; but straightway about
money, and possessions, and measures of property of various and
different kinds; like as if he were about to buy something, or to settle
some common contract.

<span id="iii.LXX-p62"></span>Therefore they do even so call marriage.
For I have heard many say, such a man has contracted with such a woman,
that is, has married. And they offer insult to the gifts of God, and as
though buying and selling, so do they marry, and are given in marriage.

<span id="iii.LXX-p63"></span>And writings there are, requiring greater
security than those about buying and selling. Learn how those of old
married, and imitate them. How then did they marry? They inquired about
ways of life, and morals, and virtue of the soul. Therefore they had no
need of writings, nor of security by parch <span id="page_426">p.
426</span> <span id="iii.LXX-Page_426"></span> ment and ink; for the
bride’s disposition sufficed them in the place of all.

<span id="iii.LXX-p64"></span>I therefore entreat you likewise not to
seek after wealth and affluence, but a good disposition, and gentleness.
Seek for a pious and self-denying damsel, and these will be to thee
better than countless treasures. If thou seek the things of God, these
others will come also; but if thou pass by those, and hasten unto these,
neither will these follow.

<span id="iii.LXX-p65"></span>But such a man, one will say, became rich
by his wife! Art thou not ashamed of bringing forward such examples? I
had ten thousand times sooner become a poor man, as I have heard many
say, than gain wealth from a wife. For what can be more unpleasing than
that wealth? What more painful than the abundance? What more shameful
than to be notorious from thence, and for it to be said by all, such a
man became rich by a wife? For the domestic discomforts I pass by, all
that must needs result from hence, the wife’s pride, the servility, the
strifes, the reproaches of the servants. “The beggar,” “the ragged one,”
“the base one, and sprung of base.” “Why, what had he when he came in?”
“Do not all things belong to our mistress?” But thou dost not care at
all about these sayings, for neither art thou a freeman. Since the
parasites likewise hear worse things than these, and are not pained
wherefore neither are these, but rather pride themselves in their
disgrace; and when we tell them of these things, “Let me have,” saith
one of them, “something pleasant and sweet, and let it choke me.” Alas!
the devil, what proverbs hath he brought into the world, of power to
overturn the whole life of such persons. See at least this self-same
devilish and pernicious saying; of how much ruin it is full. For it
means nothing else than these words, Have thou no regard to what is
honorable; have thou no regard to what is just; let all those things be
cast aside, seek one thing alone, pleasure. Though the thing stifle
thee, let it be thy choice; though all that meet thee spurn thee, though
they smear thy face with mire, though they drive thee away as a dog,
bear all. And what else would swine say, if they had a voice? What else
would filthy dogs? But perhaps not even they would have said such
things, as the devil hath persuaded men to rave.

<span id="iii.LXX-p66"></span>Wherefore I entreat you, being conscious
of the senselessness of such words as these, to flee such proverbs, and
to choose out those in the Scriptures that are contrary to them.

<span id="iii.LXX-p67"></span>But what are these? “Go not,” it is said,
“after thy lusts, and refrain thyself from thine appetites.” <span
id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693) And, touching an harlot again, it
is said in opposition to this proverb, “Give not heed to a bad woman:
for honey droppeth from the lips of a woman that is an harlot, which,
for a season, is luscious unto thy throat; but afterwards thou shalt
find it more bitter than gall, and sharper than a two-edged
sword.” <span id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) Unto these last then
let us listen, not unto those. For hence indeed spring our mean, hence
our slavish thoughts, hence men become brutes, because in everything
they will follow after pleasure according to this proverb, which, even
without arguments of ours, is of itself ridiculous. For after one is
choked, what is the gain of sweetness?

<span id="iii.LXX-p70"></span>Cease, therefore, to set up such great
absurdity, and to kindle hell and unquenchable fire; and let us look
steadfastly (at length though late) as we ought, unto the things to
come, having put away the film on our eyes, that we may both pass the
present life honestly, and with much reverence and godly fear, and
attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[422:2676](1100078.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="iii.LXX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p4"></span>\[This verse is omitted in the best
authorities, and its position varies in the later <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.LXX-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. and versions
which give it. In this Homily it is placed before our [Matt.
23.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXX-p4.2"></span>.
It is well attested in [Mark 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#040),
[Luke 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#047)<span
id="iii.LXX-p4.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[422:2677](1100078.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="iii.LXX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p10"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXX-p10.1"></span>.
\[See note 1. “Of heaven” is omitted here, but in none of our New
Testament authorities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[422:2678](1100078.htm#fr_2677) <span
id="iii.LXX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p11"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXX-p11.1"></span>λοιμο</span>.

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[422:2679](1100078.htm#fr_2678) <span
id="iii.LXX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p13"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXX-p13.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “a son of hell,” with the margin, “Greek, Gehenna.”\]

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[423:2680](1100078.htm#fr_2679) <span
id="iii.LXX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p18"></span>\[R.V., “have left undone.”\]

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[423:2681](1100078.htm#fr_2680) <span
id="iii.LXX-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p19"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXX-p19.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “to have left the others undone.” “And cummin” is omitted.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[423:2682](1100078.htm#fr_2681) <span
id="iii.LXX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p23"></span>[Matt.
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#026)<span id="iii.LXX-p23.1"></span>.
\[The minor textual variations appear in the above English rendering.\]

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[423:2683](1100078.htm#fr_2682) <span
id="iii.LXX-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p25"></span>\[[Matt. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span id="iii.LXX-p25.1"></span>.
R.V., correctly, “strain out the gnat,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[423:2684](1100078.htm#fr_2683) <span
id="iii.LXX-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p29"></span>\[The Oxford edition has “candor,”
probably a misprint, since the Greek term is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXX-p29.1"></span><span
id="iii.LXX-p29.2"></span>συγγνμην</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[423:2685](1100078.htm#fr_2684) <span
id="iii.LXX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p31"></span>\[The clause, “for this we showed before,”
is omitted by the translator.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[424:2686](1100078.htm#fr_2685) <span
id="iii.LXX-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p35"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027)<span id="iii.LXX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[424:2687](1100078.htm#fr_2686) <span
id="iii.LXX-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p37"></span>[Ps. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[424:2688](1100078.htm#fr_2687) <span
id="iii.LXX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p42"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXX-p42.1"></span>πολμιον ντα αυτ κα χθρν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[425:2689](1100078.htm#fr_2688) <span
id="iii.LXX-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p47"></span>[Ps. cxli.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXX-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[425:2690](1100078.htm#fr_2689) <span
id="iii.LXX-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p52"></span>[Jer. xxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#017)<span id="iii.LXX-p52.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXX-p52.2"></span>LXX</span> .

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[425:2691](1100078.htm#fr_2690) <span
id="iii.LXX-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p55"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXX-p55.1"></span>σνισι</span>.

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[425:2692](1100078.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="iii.LXX-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p56"></span>[Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXX-p56.1"></span>.
\[The passage is inexactly cited, the form being altered to correspond
with the previous part of the verse. Comp. R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[425:2693](1100078.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="iii.LXX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p58"></span>[Acts xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXX-p58.1"></span>.
\[Two <span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXX-p58.2"></span>mss</span>. have
a reading more exactly agreeing with the New Testament text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[426:2694](1100078.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="iii.LXX-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p68"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
18.30](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXX-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[426:2695](1100078.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="iii.LXX-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXX-p69"></span>[Prov. v.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXX-p69.1"></span>,
LXX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXI](1100079)
