[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100076)  [Next](1100078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXIX"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXIII.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001)<span
id="iii.LXIX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p3"></span>*“Then spake Jesus to the multitudes and
to His disciples, saying, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’
seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid you do, that do;* <span
id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) *but do not after their works.”*

<span id="iii.LXIX-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p5.1"></span>Then</span>. When? When He had said these
things, when He had stopped their mouths; when He had brought them that
they should no more dare to tempt Him; when He had shown their state
incurable.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p6"></span>And since He had made mention of “the
Lord” and “my Lord,” <span id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) He
recurs again to the law. And yet the law said nothing of this kind, but,
“The Lord thy God is one Lord.” <span
id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656) But Scripture calls the whole Old
Testament the law.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p9"></span>But these things He saith, showing by all
things His full agreement with Him that begat Him. For if He were
opposed, He would have said the opposite about the law; but now He
commands so great reverence to be shown towards it, that, even when they
that teach it are depraved, He charges them to hold to it.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p10"></span>But here He is discoursing about their
life <span id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span
id="iii.LXIX-Page_418"></span> and morals, since this was chiefly the
cause of their unbelief, their depraved life, and the love of glory. To
amend therefore His hearers; that which in the first place most
contributes to salvation, not to despise our teachers, neither to rise
up against our priests, this doth He command with superabundant
earnestness. But He does not only command it, but also Himself doth it.
For though they were depraved, He doth not depose them from their
dignity; to them rendering their condemnation heavier, and to His
disciples leaving no cloke for disobedience.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p11"></span>I mean, that lest any one should say,
that because my teacher is bad, therefore am I become more remiss, He
takes away even this pretext. So much at any rate did He establish their
authority, although they were wicked men, as even after so heavy an
accusation to say, “All whatsoever they command you to do, do.” For they
speak not their own words, but God’s, what He appointed for laws by
Moses. And mark how much honor He showed towards Moses, again showing
His agreement with the Old Testament; since indeed even by this doth He
make them objects of reverence. “For they sit,” He saith, “on Moses’
seat.” For because He was not able to make them out worthy of credit by
their life, He doth it from the grounds that were open to Him, from
their seat, and their succession from him. But when thou hearest all, do
not understand all the law, as, for instance, the ordinances about
meats, those about sacrifices, and the like; for how was He to say so of
these things, which He had taken away beforehand? but He meant all
things that correct the moral principle, and amend the disposition, and
agree with the laws of the New Testament, and suffer them not any more
to be under the yoke of the law.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p12"></span>Wherefore then doth He give these things
divine authority, not from the law of grace, but from Moses? Because it
was not yet time, before the crucifixion, for these things to be plainly
declared.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p13"></span>But to me He seems, in addition to what
has been said, to be providing for another object, in saying these
things. For since He was on the point of accusing them, that He might
not seem in the sight of the foolish to set His heart on this authority
of theirs, or for enmity to be doing these things, first He removed this
thought, and having set himself clear from suspicion, then begins His
accusation. And for what intent doth He convict them, and run out into a
long discourse against them? To set the multitude on their guard, so
that they might not fall into the same sins. For neither is dissuading
like pointing out those that have offended; much as recommending what is
right, is not like bringing forward those that have done well. For this
cause also He is beforehand in saying, “Do not after their works.” For,
lest they should suppose, because of their listening to them, they ought
also to imitate them, He uses this means of correction, and makes what
seems to be their dignity a charge against them. For what can be more
wretched than a teacher, when the preservation of his disciples is, not
to give heed to his life? So that what seemeth to be their dignity is a
most heavy charge against them, when they are shown to live such a life,
as they that imitate are ruined.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p14"></span>For this cause He also falls upon His
accusations against them, but not for this only, but that He might show,
that both their former unbelief wherewith they had not believed, and the
crucifixion after this, which they dared to perpetrate, were not a
charge against Him who was crucified and disbelieved, but against their
perverseness.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p15"></span>But see whence He begins, and whence He
aggravates His blame of them. “For they say,” He saith, “and do not.”
For every one is worthy of blame in transgressing the law, but
especially he that bears the authority of teaching, for doubly and
triply doth he deserve to be condemned. For one cause, because he
transgresses; for another, that as he ought to amend others, and then
halteth, he is worthy of a double punishment, because of his dignity;
and in the third place, that he even corrupts the more, as committing
such transgression in a teacher’s place.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p16"></span>And together with these He mentions also
another charge against them, that they are harsh to those accountable to
them.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p17"></span>“For they bind heavy burdens, and
grievous to be borne, and lay them on men’s shoulders, but they will not
move them with their finger.” <span id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657)
He mentions here a twofold wickedness, their requiring great and extreme
strictness of life, without any indulgence, from those over whom they
rule, and their allowing to themselves great security; the opposite to
which the truly good ruler ought to hold; in what concerns himself, to
be an unpardoning and severe judge, but in the matters of those whom he
rules, to be gentle and ready to make allowances; the contrary to which
was the conduct of these men.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p19"></span>2. For such are all they who practise
self restraint in mere words, unpardoning and grievous to bear as having
no experience of <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="iii.LXIX-Page_419"></span> the difficulty in actions. And this
itself too is no small fault, and in no ordinary way increases the
former charge.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p20"></span>But do thou mark, I pray thee, how He
aggravates this accusation also. For He did not say, “they cannot,” but,
“they will not.” And He did not say, “to bear,” but, “to move with a
finger,” that is, not even to come near them, nor to touch them.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p21"></span>But wherein are they earnest, and
vigorous? In the things forbidden. For, “all their works they do,” He
saith, “to be seen of men.” <span id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658)
These things He saith, accusing them in respect of vainglory, which kind
of thing was their ruin. For the things before were signs of harshness
and remissness, but these of the mad desire of glory. This drew them off
from God, this caused them to strive before other spectators, and ruined
them. For whatever kind of spectators any one may have, since it hath
become his study to please these, such also are the contests he
exhibits. And he that wrestles among the noble, such also are the
conflicts he takes in hand, but he among the cold and supine, himself
also becomes more remiss. For instance, hath any one a beholder that
delights in ridicule? he himself too becomes a mover of ridicule, that
he may delight the spectator: hath another one who is earnest minded,
and practises self-government? he endeavors himself to be such as he is,
since such is the disposition of him who praises him.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p23"></span>But see again that here too the charge is
with aggravation. For neither is it that they do some things in this
way, some in another way, but all things absolutely this way.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p24"></span>Then, having blamed them for vainglory,
He shows that it is not even about great and necessary things they are
vainglorious (for neither had they these, but were destitute of good
works), but for things without warmth or worth, and such as were certain
proofs of their baseness, the phylacteries, the borders; of their
garments. “For they make broad their phylacteries,” He saith, “and
enlarge the borders of their garments.” <span
id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659)

<span id="iii.LXIX-p26"></span>And what are these phylacteries, and
these borders? Since they were continually forgetting God’s benefits, He
commanded His marvellous works to be inscribed on little tablets, and
that these should be suspended from their hands (wherefore also He said,
“They shall be immoveable in thine eyes”), <span
id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) which they called phylacteries; as
many of our women now wear Gospels hung from their necks. And in order
that by another thing again they may be reminded, like as many often do,
binding round their finger with a piece of linen or a thread, as being
likely to forget, this God enjoined them as children to do, “to sew a
ribbon of blue on their garments, upon the fringe that hung round their
feet, that they might look at it, and remember the commandments;” <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) and they were called “borders.”

<span id="iii.LXIX-p29"></span>In these things then they were diligent,
making wide the strips of the tablets, and enlarging the borders of
their garments; which was a sign of the most extreme vanity. For
wherefore art thou vainglorious, and dost make these wide? what, is this
thy good work? what doth it profit thee at all, if thou gain not the
good results from them. For God seeks not the enlarging of these and
making them wide, but our remembering His benefits. But if for
almsgiving and prayer, although they be attended with labor, and be good
deeds on our parts, we must not seek vainglory, how dost thou, O Jew,
pride thyself in these things, which most of all convict thy remissness.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p30"></span>But they not in these only, but in other
little things, suffered from this disease.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p31"></span>For, “they love,” He saith, “the
uppermost rooms <span id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) at feasts,
and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and
to be called of men, Rabbi.” <span id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663)
For these things, although one may think them small, yet are they a
cause of great evils. These things have overthrown both cities and
churches.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p34"></span>And it comes upon me now even to weep,
when I hear of the first seats, and the greetings, and consider how many
ills were hence engendered to the churches of God, which it is not
necessary to publish to you now; nay rather as many as are aged men do
not even need to learn these things from us. <span
id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664)

<span id="iii.LXIX-p36"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, how vainglory
prevailed; when they were commanded not to be vainglorious, even in the
synagogues, where they had entered to discipline others.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p37"></span>For to have this feeling at feasts, to
howsoever great a degree, doth not seem to be so dreadful a thing;
although even there the teachers ought to be held in reverence, and not
in the church only, but everywhere. And like as a man, wherever he may
appear, is manifestly distinguished from the brutes; so also ought the
teacher, both speaking and <span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="iii.LXIX-Page_420"></span> holding his peace, and dining, and doing
whatever it may be, to be distinguished as well by his gait, as by his
look, and by his garb, and by all things generally. But they were on
every account objects of ridicule, and in every respect disgraced
themselves, making it their study to follow what they ought to flee. For
they love them, it is said; but if the loving them be a matter of blame,
what a thing must the doing them be; and to hunt and strive after them,
how great an evil.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p38"></span>3. The other things then He carried no
further than to accuse them, as being small and trifling, and as though
His disciples needed not at all to be corrected about these matters; but
what was a cause of all the evils, even ambition, and the violent
seizing of the teacher’s chair, this He brings forward, and corrects
with diligence, touching this vehemently and earnestly charging them.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p39"></span>For what saith He? “But be not ye called
Rabbi.” Then follows the cause also; “For one is your master, and all ye
are brethren;” <span id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665) and one hath
nothing more than another, in respect of his knowing nothing from
himself. Wherefore Paul also saith, “For who is Paul, and who is
Apollos, but ministers?” <span id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666) He
said not masters. And again, “Call not, father,” <span
id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667) not that they should not call, but
they may know whom they ought to call Father, in the highest sense. For
like as the master is not a master principally; so neither is the
father. For He is cause of all, both of the masters, and of the fathers.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p43"></span>And again He adds, “Neither be ye called
guides, for one is your guide, even Christ;” <span
id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668) and He said not, I. For like as
above He said, “What think ye of Christ?” <span
id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669) and He said not, “of me,” so here
too.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p46"></span>But I should be glad to ask here, what
they would say, who are repeatedly applying the term one, one, to the
Father alone, to the rejection of the Only-begotten. Is the Father
guide? All would declare it, and none would gainsay it. And yet “one,”
He saith, “is your guide, even Christ.” For like as Christ, being called
the one guide, casts not out the Father from being guide; even so the
Father, being called Master, doth not cast out the Son from being
Master. For the expression, one, one, is spoken in contradistinction to
men, and the rest of the creation.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p47"></span>Having warned them therefore against this
grievous pest, and amended them, He instructs also how they may escape
it; by humility. Wherefore He adds also, “He that is greatest among you
shall be your servant. For whosoever shall exalt himself shall be
abased, and whosoever shall abase himself shall be exalted.” <span
id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670)

<span id="iii.LXIX-p49"></span>For nothing is equal to the practice of
modesty, wherefore He is continually reminding them of this virtue, both
when He brought the children into the midst, and now. And, when on the
mount, beginning the beatitudes, He began from hence. And in this place,
He plucks it up by the roots hereby, saying, “He that abaseth himself
shall be exalted.”

<span id="iii.LXIX-p50"></span>Seest thou how He draws off the hearer
right over to the contrary thing. For not only doth He forbid him to set
his heart upon the first place, but requires him to follow after the
last. For so shalt thou obtain thy desire, He saith. Wherefore he that
pursues his desire for the first, must follow after the last place. “For
he that abaseth himself shall be exalted.”

<span id="iii.LXIX-p51"></span>And where shall we find this humility?
Will ye that we go again to the city of virtue, the tents of the holy
men, the mountains, I mean, and the groves? For there too shall we see
this height of humility.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p52"></span>For men, some illustrious from their rank
in the world, some from their wealth, in every way put themselves down,
by their vesture, by their dwelling, by those to whom they minister;
and, as in written characters, they throughout all things inscribe
humility.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p53"></span>And the things that are incentives of
arrogance, as to dress well, and to build houses splendidly, and to have
many servants, things which often drive men even against their will to
arrogance; these are all taken away. For they themselves light their
fire, they themselves cleave the logs, themselves cook, themselves
minister to those that come there.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p54"></span>No one can be heard insulting there, nor
seen insulted, nor commanded, nor giving commands; but all are devoted
to those that are waited on, and every one washes the strangers’ feet,
and there is much contention about this. And he doeth it, not inquiring
who it is, neither if he be a slave, nor if he be free; but in the case
of every one fulfills this service. No man there is great nor mean. What
then? Is there confusion? Far from it, but the highest order. For if any
one be mean, he that is great seeth not this, but hath accounted himself
again to be inferior even to him, and so becomes great.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p55"></span>There is one table for all, both for them
that are served, and for them that serve; the <span id="page_421">p.
421</span> <span id="iii.LXIX-Page_421"></span> same food, the same
clothes, the same dwellings, the same manner of life. He is great there,
who eagerly seizes the mean task. There is not mine and thine, but this
expression is exterminated, that is a cause of countless wars.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p56"></span>4. And why dost thou marvel, if there be
one manner of life and table and dress for all, since indeed there is
even one soul to all, not in substance only (for this is with all men
also), but in love? how then should it ever be lifted up itself against
itself? There is no wealth and poverty there, honor and dishonor; how
then should haughtiness and arrogance find an entrance? For they are
indeed little and great in respect of their virtue; but, as I have said,
no one seeth this. He that is little, feels not pain, as despised; for
neither is there any one to despise him; and should any one spurn him,
this above all are they taught, to be despised, to be spurned, to be set
at nought, in word and in deed. And with the poor and maimed do they
associate, and their tables are full of these guests; so that for this
are they worthy of the heavens. And one tends the wounds of the
mutilated, another leads the blind by the hand, a third bears him that
is lamed of his leg.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p57"></span>There is no multitude of flatterers or
parasites there; or rather they know not even what flattery is; whence
then could they be lifted up at any time? For there is great equality
amongst them, wherefore also there is much facility for virtue.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p58"></span>For by these are they of an inferior sort
better instructed, than if they were compelled to give up the first
place to them.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p59"></span>For like as the impetuous man derives
instruction from him that is smitten, and submits to it; so the
ambitious from him that claims not glory, but despises it. This they do
there abundantly, and as the strife is great with us to obtain the first
place, so great is it with them not to obtain it, but utterly to refuse
it; and great is their earnest desire who shall have the advantage in
honoring, not in being honored.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p60"></span>And besides, even their very employments
persuade them to practise moderation, and not to be high-swollen. For
who, I pray thee, digging in the earth, and watering, and planting, or
making baskets, or weaving sackcloth, or practising any other handy
works, will ever be proud? Who dwelling in poverty and wrestling with
hunger, will ever be sick of this disease? There is not one. Therefore
humility is easy to them. And like as here, it is a hard thing to be
lowly minded, for the multitude of them who applaud and admire us, so
there it is exceedingly easy.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p61"></span>And that man gives heed only to the
wilderness, and sees birds flying, and trees waving, and a breeze
blowing, and streams rushing through glens. Whence then should he be
lifted up who dwells in solitude so great?

<span id="iii.LXIX-p62"></span>Not however that therefore we have from
this an excuse, in that we are proud when living in the midst of men.
For surely Abraham, when amidst Canaanites, said, “I am but dust and
ashes;” <span id="fr_2671"></span>[2672](#fn_2671) and David, when in
the midst of camps, <span id="fr_2672"></span>[2673](#fn_2672) “I am a
worm, and no man;” <span id="fr_2673"></span>[2674](#fn_2673) and the
apostle, in the midst of the world, “I am not meet to be called an
apostle.” <span id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674) What comfort shall
we have then; what plea, when even, having such great examples, we do
not practise moderation? For even as they are worthy of countless
crowns, having been the first that went the way of virtue, even so are
we deserving of countless punishments, who not even after those that are
departed, and are set before us in books, no nor even after these that
are living, and held in admiration through their deeds, are drawn on to
the like emulation.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p67"></span>For what couldest thou say, for not being
amended? Art thou ignorant of letters, and hast not looked into the
Scriptures that thou mightest learn the virtues of them of old? To say
the truth, this is itself blameworthy, when the church is constantly
standing open, not to enter in, and partake of those sacred streams.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p68"></span>However, although thou know not the
departed by the Scriptures, these living men thou oughtest to see. But
is there no one to lead thee? Come to me, and I will show thee the
places of refuge of these holy men; come and learn thou of them
something useful. Shining lamps are these in every part of the earth; as
walls are they set about the cities. For this cause have they occupied
the deserts, that they may instruct thee to despise the tumults in the
midst of the world.

<span id="iii.LXIX-p69"></span>For they, as being strong, are able even
in the midst of the raging of the waters to enjoy a calm; but thou, who
art leaky on every side, hast need of tranquility, and to take breath a
little, after the successive waves. Go then there continually, that,
having purged away the abiding stain by their prayers and admonitions,
thou mayest both pass in the best manner the present life, and attain
unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, be unto the Father, together
with the Holy Ghost, glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[417:2655](1100077.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p4"></span>\[The Greek text in this clause differs
somewhat both from the received and from that followed in the R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[417:2656](1100077.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p7"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p7.1"></span>κυρου κα κυρου</span>, referring to the two
uses of the word in the Old Testament passage cited in [Matt. xxii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044)<span id="iii.LXIX-p7.2"></span>,
but not in precise terms.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[417:2657](1100077.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p8"></span>[Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[418:2658](1100077.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p18"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXIX-p18.1"></span>.
\[“For,” as in rec. text.\]

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[419:2659](1100077.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p22"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXIX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[419:2660](1100077.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p25"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXIX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[419:2661](1100077.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p27"></span>[Deut. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXIX-p27.1"></span>; so
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXIX-p27.2"></span>LXX</span>. A.V. “as
frontlets between.”

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[419:2662](1100077.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p28"></span>[Num.
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#039)<span id="iii.LXIX-p28.1"></span>.
\[The passage is freely given from the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p28.2"></span>LXX</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[419:2663](1100077.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p32"></span>\[R.V., “the chief place.”\]

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[419:2664](1100077.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p33"></span>\[With the oldest New Testament <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.LXIX-p33.1"></span>mss</span>. the word
“Rabbi” is not repeated.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[419:2665](1100077.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p35"></span>This passage has afforded grounds for a
conjecture as to the date of the Homily, but the language is too general
to prove anything; see Montfaucon’s Preface.

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[420:2666](1100077.htm#fr_2665) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p40"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXIX-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[420:2667](1100077.htm#fr_2666) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p41"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXIX-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[420:2668](1100077.htm#fr_2667) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p42"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXIX-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[420:2669](1100077.htm#fr_2668) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p44"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#010)<span id="iii.LXIX-p44.1"></span>.
\[The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p44.2"></span>καθηγητς</span> is rendered “Master” in our
English versions, but “guide” is more literal; “the Christ” (R.V.), is
preferable, especially in view of the context here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[420:2670](1100077.htm#fr_2669) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p45"></span>[Matt. xxii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span id="iii.LXIX-p45.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “the Christ.”\]

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[420:2671](1100077.htm#fr_2670) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p48"></span>[Matt.
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXIX-p48.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “humbled,” and “humble.” The A.V. here uses both “abase” and
“humble.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2671"></span>[421:2672](1100077.htm#fr_2671) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p63"></span>[Gen. xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)<span id="iii.LXIX-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2672"></span>[421:2673](1100077.htm#fr_2672) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p64"></span>Or, “courts.” \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p64.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIX-p64.2"></span>στρατοπδοι</span></span>; in earlier Greek
“camps,” but in Byzantine Greek applied to the suite of the
Emperor.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2673"></span>[421:2674](1100077.htm#fr_2673) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p65"></span>[Ps. xxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXIX-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[421:2675](1100077.htm#fr_2674) <span
id="iii.LXIX-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIX-p66"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXIX-p66.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXX](1100078)
