[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100061)  [Next](1100063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LIV"></span> <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="iii.LIV-Page_331"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LIV-p1.1"></span>Homily LVI.</span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LIV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XVI.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)<span
id="iii.LIV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p3"></span>“Verily, verily, I say unto you, There are
some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, until they
see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.”

<span id="iii.LIV-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LIV-p4.1"></span>Thus</span>, inasmuch as He had discoursed much
of dangers and death, and of His own passion, and of the slaughter of
the disciples, and had laid on them those severe injunctions; and these
were in the present life and at hand, but the good things in hope and
expectation:—for example, “They save their life who lose it;” “He is
coming in the glory of His Father;” “He renders His rewards:”—He willing
to assure their very sight, and to show what kind of glory that is
wherewith He is to come, so far as it was possible for them to learn it;
even in their present life He shows and reveals this; that they should
not grieve any more, either over their own death, or over that of their
Lord, and especially Peter in His sorrow.

<span id="iii.LIV-p5"></span>And see what He doth. Having discoursed of
hell, <span id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) and of the kingdom (for
as well by saying, “He that findeth his life shall lose it, and
whosoever will lose it for my sake, shall find it;” <span
id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) as by saying, “He shall reward
every man according to his works,” <span
id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162) He had manifested both of these):
having, I say, spoken of both, the kingdom indeed He shows in the
vision, but hell not yet.

<span id="iii.LIV-p9"></span>Why so? Because had they been another kind
of people, of a grosser sort, this too would have been necessary; but
since they are approved and considerate, He leads them on the gentler
way. But not therefore only doth He make this disclosure, but because to
Himself also it was far more suitable.

<span id="iii.LIV-p10"></span>Not however that He passes over this
subject either, but in some places He almost brings even before our eyes
the very realities of hell; as when He introduces the picture of
Lazarus, and mentions him that exacted the hundred pence, and him that
was clad in the filthy garments, and others not a few.

<span id="iii.LIV-p11"></span>2. “And after six days He taketh with Him
Peter and James and John.” <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163)

<span id="iii.LIV-p13"></span>Now another says, “after eight,” <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) not contradicting this writer, but
most fully agreeing with him. For the one expressed both the very day on
which He spake, and that on which He led them up; but the other, the
days between them only.

<span id="iii.LIV-p15"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, the severe
goodness of Matthew, not concealing those who were preferred to himself.
This John also often doth, recording the peculiar praises of Peter with
great sincerity. For the choir of these holy men was everywhere pure
from envy and vainglory.

<span id="iii.LIV-p16"></span>Having taken therefore the leaders, “He
bringeth them up into a high mountain apart, and was transfigured before
them: and His face did shine as the sun, and His raiment was <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) white as the light. And there
appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with Him.” <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166)

<span id="iii.LIV-p19"></span>Wherefore doth He take with Him these
only? Because these were superior to the rest. And Peter indeed showed
his superiority by exceedingly loving Him; but John by being exceedingly
loved of Him; and James again by his answer which he answered with his
brother, saying, “We are able to drink the cup;” <span
id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) nor yet by his answer only, but
also by his works; both by the rest of them, and by fulfilling, what he
said. For so earnest was he, and grievous to the Jews, that Herod
himself supposed that he had bestowed herein a very great favor on the
Jews, I mean in slaying him.

<span id="iii.LIV-p21"></span>But wherefore doth He not lead them up
straightway? To spare the other disciples any feeling of human weakness:
for which cause He omits also the names of them that are to go up. And
this, because the rest would have desired exceedingly to have followed,
being to see a pattern of that glory; and would have been pained, as
overlooked. For though it was somewhat in a corporeal way that He made
the disclosure, yet nevertheless the thing had much in it to be desired.

<span id="iii.LIV-p22"></span>Wherefore then doth He at all foretell it?
That they might be readier to seize the high meaning, by His foretelling
it; and being filled with the more vehement desire in that round of
days, might so be present with their mind quite awake and full of care.

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span id="iii.LIV-Page_332"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p23"></span>3. But wherefore doth He also bring
forward Moses and Elias? One might mention many reasons. And first of
all this: because the multitudes said He was, some Elias, some Jeremias,
some one of the old prophets, He brings the leaders of His choir, that
they might see the difference even hereby between the servants and the
Lord; and that Peter was rightly commended for confessing Him Son of
God.

<span id="iii.LIV-p24"></span>But besides that, one may mention another
reason also: that because men were continually accusing Him of
transgressing the law, and accounting Him to be a blasphemer, as
appropriating to Himself a glory which belonged not to Him, even the
Father’s, and were saying, “This Man is not of God, because He keepeth
not the Sabbath day;” <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) and
again, “For a good work we stone Thee not, but for blasphemy, and
because that Thou, being a man, makest Thyself God:” <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) that both the charges might be
shown to spring from envy, and He be proved not liable to either; and
that neither is His conduct a transgression of the law, nor His calling
Himself equal to the Father an appropriation of glory not His own; He
brings forward them who had shone out in each of these respects: Moses,
because he gave the law, and the Jews might infer that he would not have
overlooked its being trampled on, as they supposed, nor have shown
respect to the transgressor of it, and the enemy of its founder: Elias
too for his part was jealous for the glory of God, and were any man an
adversary of God, and calling himself God, making himself equal to the
Father, while he was not what he said, and had no right to do so; he was
not the person to stand by, and hearken unto him.

<span id="iii.LIV-p27"></span>And one may mention another reason also,
with those which have been spoken of. Of what kind then is it? To inform
them that He hath power both of death and life, is ruler both above and
beneath. For this cause He brings forward both him that had died, and
him that never yet suffered this.

<span id="iii.LIV-p28"></span>But the fifth motive, (for it is a fifth,
besides those that have been mentioned), even the evangelist himself
hath revealed. Now what was this? To show the glory of the cross, and to
console Peter and the others in their dread of the passion, and to raise
up their minds. Since having come, they by no means held their peace,
but “spake,” it is said, “of the glory <span
id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170) which He was to accomplish at
Jerusalem; <span id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171) ” that is, of the
passion, and the cross; for so they call it always.

<span id="iii.LIV-p31"></span>And not thus only did He cheer them, but
also by the excellency itself of the men, being such as He was
especially requiring from themselves. I mean, that having said, “If any
man will come after me, let him take up his cross, and follow me;” them
that had died ten thousand times for God’s decrees, and the people
entrusted to them, these persons He sets before them. Because each of
these, having lost his life, found it. For each of them both spake
boldly unto tyrants, the one to the Egyptian, the other to Ahab; and in
behalf of heartless and disobedient men; and by the very persons who
were saved by them, they were brought into extreme danger; and each of
them wishing to withdraw men from idolatry; and each being unlearned;
for the one was of a “slow tongue,” <span
id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) and dull of speech, and the other
for his part also somewhat of the rudest in his bearing: and of
voluntary poverty both were very strict observers; for neither had Moses
made any gain, nor had Elias aught more than his sheepskin; and this
under the old law, and when they had not received so great a gift of
miracles. For what if Moses clave a sea? yet Peter walked on the water,
and was able to remove mountains, and used to work cures of all manner
of bodily diseases, and to drive away savage demons, and by the shadow
of his body to work those wonderful and great prodigies; and changed the
whole world. And if Elias too raised a dead man, yet these raised ten
thousand; and this before the spirit was as yet vouchsafed to them. He
brings them forward accordingly for this cause also. For He would have
them emulate their winning ways toward the people, and their presence of
mind and inflexibility; and that they should be meek like Moses, and
jealous for God like Elias, and full of tender care, as they were. For
the one endured a famine of three years for the Jewish people; and the
other said, “If thou wilt forgive them their sin, forgive; else blot me
too out of the book, which thou hast written.” <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) Now of all this He was reminding
them by the vision.

<span id="iii.LIV-p34"></span>For He brought those in glory too, not
that these should stay where they were, but that they might even surpass
their limitary lines. For example, when they said, “Should we command
fire to come down from heaven,” and made mention of Elias as having done
so, He saith, “Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of;” <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174) training them to forbearance by the
superiority in their gift.

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span id="iii.LIV-Page_333"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p36"></span>And let none suppose us to condemn Elias
as imperfect; we say not this; for indeed he was exceedingly perfect,
but in his own times, when the mind of men was in some degree childish,
and they needed this kind of schooling. Since Moses too was in this
respect perfect; nevertheless these have more required of them than he.
For “except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
Heaven.” <span id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175) For not into Egypt
did they enter, but into the whole world, worse disposed than the
Egyptians; neither were they to speak with Pharaoh, but to fight hand to
hand with the devil, the very prince of wickedness. Yea, and their
appointed struggle was, both to bind him, and to spoil all his goods;
and this they did cleaving not the sea, but an abyss of ungodliness,
through the rod of Jesse,—an abyss having waves far more grievous. See
at any rate how many things there were to put the men in fear; death,
poverty, dishonor, their innumerable sufferings; and at these things
they trembled more than the Jews of old at that sea. But nevertheless
against all these things He persuaded them boldly to venture, and to
pass as along dry ground with all security.

<span id="iii.LIV-p38"></span>To train them therefore for all this, He
brought forward those who shone forth under the old law.

<span id="iii.LIV-p39"></span>4. What then saith the ardent Peter? “It
is good for us to be here.” <span id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176)
For because he had heard that Christ was to go to Jerusalem and to
suffer, being in fear still and trembling for Him, even after His
reproof, he durst not indeed approach and say the same thing again, “Be
it far from thee; <span id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177) but from
that fear obscurely intimates the same again in other words. That is,
when he saw a mountain, and so great retirement and solitude, his
thought was, “He hath great security here, even from the place; and not
only from the place, but also from His going away no more unto
Jerusalem.” For he would have Him be there continually: wherefore also
he speaks of “tabernacles.” For “if this may be,” saith he, “we shall
not go up to Jerusalem; and if we go not up, He will not die, for there
He said the scribes would set upon Him.”

<span id="iii.LIV-p42"></span>But thus indeed he durst not speak; but
desiring however to order things so, he said undoubtingly, “It is good
for us to be here,” where Moses also is present, and Elias; Elias who
brought down fire on the mountain, and Moses who entered into the thick
darkness, and talked with God; and no one will even know where we are.

<span id="iii.LIV-p43"></span>Seest thou the ardent lover of Christ? For
look not now at this, that the manner of his exhortation was not well
weighed, but see how ardent he was, how burning his affection to Christ.
For in proof that not so much out of fear for himself he said these
things, hear what he saith, when Christ was declaring beforehand His
future death, and the assault upon Him: “I will lay down my life for Thy
sake. <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) Though I should die
with Thee, yet will I not deny Thee. <span
id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179)

<span id="iii.LIV-p46"></span>And see how even in the very midst of the
actual dangers he counselled amiss <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) for himself. We know that when so
great a multitude encompassed them, so far from flying, he even drew the
sword, and cut off the ear of the high priest’s servant. To such a
degree did he disregard his own interest, and fear for his Master. Then
because he had spoken as affirming a fact, he checks himself, and
thinking, what if he should be again reproved, he saith, “If Thou wilt,
let us make <span id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181) here three
tabernacles, one for Thee and one for Moses, and one for Elias.”

<span id="iii.LIV-p49"></span>What sayest thou, O Peter? didst thou not
a little while since distinguish Him from the servants? Art thou again
numbering Him with the servants? Seest thou how exceedingly imperfect
they were before the crucifixion? For although the Father had revealed
it to him, yet he did not always retain the revelation, but was troubled
by his alarm; not this only, which I have mentioned, but another also,
arising from that sight. In fact, the other evangelists, to declare
this, and to indicate that the confusion of his mind, with which he
spake these things, arose from that alarm, said as follows; mark, “He
wist not what to say, for they were sore afraid;” <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) but Luke after his saying, “Let us
make three tabernacles,” added, “not knowing what he said.” <span
id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183) Then to show that he was holden
with great fear, both he and the rest, he saith, “They were heavy with
sleep, and when they were awake they saw His glory;” <span
id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184) meaning by deep sleep here, the
deep stupor engendered in them by that vision. For as eyes are darkened
by an excessive splendor, so at that time also did they feel. For it was
not, I suppose, night, but day; and the exceeding greatness of the light
weighed down the infirmity of their eyes.

<span id="iii.LIV-p53"></span>5. What then? He Himself speaks <span
id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span id="iii.LIV-Page_334"></span> nothing,
nor Moses, nor Elias, but He that is greater than all, and more worthy
of belief, the Father, uttereth a voice out of the cloud.

<span id="iii.LIV-p54"></span>Wherefore out of the cloud? Thus doth God
ever appear. “For a cloud and darkness are round about Him;” <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) and, “He sitteth on a light
cloud;” <span id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) and again, “Who
maketh clouds His chariot;” <span id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187)
and, “A cloud received Him out of their sight;” <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) and, “As the Son of Man coming in
the clouds.” <span id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189)

<span id="iii.LIV-p60"></span>In order then that they might believe that
the voice proceeds from God, it comes from thence.

<span id="iii.LIV-p61"></span>And the cloud was bright. For “while he
yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them; and, behold, a
voice out of the cloud, which said, This is My beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; hear ye Him.” <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190)

<span id="iii.LIV-p63"></span>For as, when He threatens, He shows a dark
cloud;—as on Mount Sinai; for “Moses,” it is said, “entered into the
cloud, and into the thick darkness; and as a vapor, so went up the
smoke;” <span id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) and the prophet said,
when speaking of His threatening, “Dark water in clouds of the
air;” <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) —so here, because it
was His desire not to alarm, but to teach, it is a bright cloud.

<span id="iii.LIV-p66"></span>And whereas Peter had said “Let us make
three tabernacles,” He showed a tabernacle not made with hands.
Wherefore in that case it was smoke, and vapor of a furnace; but in
this, light unspeakable and a voice.

<span id="iii.LIV-p67"></span>Then, to signify that not merely
concerning some one of the three was it spoken, but concerning Christ
only; when the voice was uttered, they were taken away. For by no means,
had it been spoken merely concerning any one of them, would this man
have remained alone, the two being severed from Him.

<span id="iii.LIV-p68"></span>Why then did not the cloud likewise
receive Christ alone, but all of them together? If it had received
Christ alone, He would have been thought to have Himself uttered the
voice. Wherefore also the evangelist, making sure this same point,
saith, that the voice was from the cloud, that is, from God.

<span id="iii.LIV-p69"></span>And what saith the voice? “This is my
beloved Son.” Now if He is beloved, fear not thou, O Peter. For thou
oughtest indeed to know His power already, and to be fully assured
touching His resurrection; but since thou knowest not, at least from the
voice of the Father take courage. For if God be mighty, as surely He is
mighty, very evidently the Son is so likewise. Be not afraid then of
those fearful things.

<span id="iii.LIV-p70"></span>But if as yet thou receive it not,
consider at least that other fact, that He is both a Son, and is
beloved. For “This,” it is said, “is My beloved Son.” Now if He is
beloved, fear not. For no one gives up one whom he loves. Be not thou
therefore confounded; though thou lovest Him beyond measure, thou lovest
Him not as much as He that begat Him.

<span id="iii.LIV-p71"></span>“In whom I am well pleased.” For not
because He begat Him only, doth He love Him, but because He is also
equal to Him in all respects, and of one mind with Him. So that the
charm of love is twofold, or rather even threefold, because He is the
Son, because He is beloved, because in Him He is well pleased.

<span id="iii.LIV-p72"></span>But what means, “In whom I am well
pleased?” As though He had said, “In whom I am refreshed, in whom I take
delight;” because He is in all respects perfectly equal with Himself,
and there is but one will in Him and in the Father, and though He
continue a Son, He is in all respects one with the Father.

<span id="iii.LIV-p73"></span>“Hear ye Him.” So that although He choose
to be crucified, you are not to oppose Him.

<span id="iii.LIV-p74"></span>6. “And when they heard it, they fell on
their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them, and
said, Arise, and be not afraid. And when they lifted up their eyes, they
saw no man, save Jesus only.” <span id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193)

<span id="iii.LIV-p76"></span>How was it that, when they heard these
words, they were dismayed? And yet before this also a like voice was
uttered at Jordan, and a multitude was present, and no one felt anything
of the kind; and afterwards again, when also they said, “It
thundered,” <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194) yet neither at
that time did they experience anything like this. How then did they fall
down in the mount? Because there was solitude, and height, and great
quietness, and a transfiguration full of awe, and a pure light, and a
cloud stretched out; all which things put them in great alarm. And the
amazement came thick on every side, and they fell down both in fear at
once and in adoration.

<span id="iii.LIV-p78"></span>But that the fear abiding so long might
not drive out their recollection, presently He puts an end to their
alarm, and is seen Himself alone, and commands them to tell no man this,
until He is risen from the dead.

<span id="iii.LIV-p79"></span>For “as they came down from the mount, He
charged them to tell the vision to no man, until He were risen from the
dead.” <span id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) what they were about.

<span id="iii.LIV-p81"></span>7. Nothing then is more blessed than the
apostles, and especially the three, who even in the cloud were counted
worthy to be under the same roof with the Lord.

<span id="iii.LIV-p82"></span>But if we will, we also shall behold
Christ, not as they then on the mount, but in far greater brightness.
For not thus shall He come hereafter. For whereas then, to spare His
disciples, He discovered so much only of His brightness as they were
able to bear; hereafter He shall come in the very glory of the Father,
not with Moses and Elias only, but with the infinite host of the angels,
with the archangels, with the cherubim, with those infinite tribes, not
having a cloud over His head, but even heaven itself being folded up.

<span id="iii.LIV-p83"></span>For as it is with the judges; when they
judge publicly, the attendants drawing back the curtains show them to
all; even so then likewise all men shall see Him sitting, and all the
human race shall stand by, and He will make answers to them by Himself;
and to some He will say, “Come, ye blessed of my Father; for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat;” <span
id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) to others, “Well done, thou good
and faithful servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will
set thee over many things.” <span id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197)

<span id="iii.LIV-p86"></span>And again passing an opposite sentence, to
some He will answer, “Depart into the everlasting fire, that is prepared
for the devil and his angels,” <span
id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) and to others, “O thou wicked and
slothful servants.” <span id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199) And some
He will “cut asunder,” and “deliver to the tormentors;” but others He
will command to “be bound hand and foot, and cast into outer
darkness.” <span id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) And after the axe
the furnace will follow; and all out of the net, that is cast away, will
fall therein.

<span id="iii.LIV-p90"></span>“Then shall the righteous shine forth as
the sun;” <span id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) or rather more than
the sun. But so much is said, not because their light is to be so much
and no more, but since we know no other star brighter than this, He
chose by the known example to set forth the future brightness of the
saints.

<span id="iii.LIV-p92"></span>Since on the mount too, when He says, “He
did shine as the sun,” for the same cause did He so speak. For that the
comparison did not come up to His light, the apostles showed by falling
down. For had the brightness not been unalloyed, but comparable to the
sun; they would not have fallen, but would easily have borne it.

<span id="iii.LIV-p93"></span>The righteous therefore will shine as the
sun, and more than the sun in that time; but the sinners shall suffer
all extremities. Then will there be no need of records, proofs,
witnesses. For He who judges is Himself all, both witness, and proof,
and judge. For He knows all things exactly; “For all things are naked
and opened unto His eyes.” <span id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202)

<span id="iii.LIV-p95"></span>No man will there appear rich or poor,
mighty or weak, wise or unwise, bond or free; but these masks will be
dashed in pieces, and the inquiry will be into their works only. For if
in our courts, when any one is tried for usurpation, or murder, whatever
he may be, whether governor, or consul, or what you will, all these
dignities fleet away, and he that is convicted suffers the utmost
penalty; much more will it be so there.

<span id="iii.LIV-p96"></span>8. Therefore that this may not be so, let
us lay aside our filthy garments, let us put on the armor of light, and
the glory of God will wrap us around. For what is even grievous in the
injunctions? or what is there not easy? Hear, for instance, the prophet
speaking, and then thou shalt know the easiness thereof. “Neither though
thou bow as a collar thy neck, and strew beneath thee sackcloth and
ashes, not even so shalt thou call a fast acceptable; but loose every
bond of iniquity, unloose the twisted knots of oppressive
bargains.” <span id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203)

<span id="iii.LIV-p98"></span>See a prophet’s wisdom, how stating first
whatever was irksome, and removing it, he exhorts them to obtain
salvation by the duties that are easy; signifying, that God needs not
toils, but obedience.

<span id="iii.LIV-p99"></span>Then implying that virtue is easy, but
vice grievous and galling, he makes it out by the <span id="page_335">p.
335</span> <span id="iii.LIV-Page_335"></span> bare names; “For,” saith
he, “vice is a bond,” and “a twisted knot,” but virtue is a
disengagement and release from all these.

<span id="iii.LIV-p100"></span>“Tear in sunder every unjust compact;”
thus calling men’s bills about the interest due to them, and the sums
they have lent.

<span id="iii.LIV-p101"></span>“Set at liberty them that are bruised;”
them that are afflicted. For such a being is the debtor; when he sees
his creditor, his mind is broken, and he fears him more than a wild
beast.

<span id="iii.LIV-p102"></span>“Bring in the poor that are cast out to
thy house; if thou seest one naked, clothe him, and them that belong to
thy seed thou shalt not overlook.” <span
id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204)

<span id="iii.LIV-p104"></span>Now in our late discourse which we made
unto you when declaring the rewards, we showed the wealth arising from
these acts; but now let us see if any of the injunctions be grievous,
and transcending our nature. Nay, nothing of the kind shall we discover,
but quite the contrary; that while these courses are very easy, those of
vice are full of labor. For what is more vexatious than to be lending,
and taking thought about usuries and bargains, and demanding sureties,
and fearing and trembling about securities, about the principal, about
the writings, about the interest, about the bondsmen?

<span id="iii.LIV-p105"></span>For such is the nature of worldly things;
yea, nothing is so unsound and suspicious as that which is accounted
security, and contrived for that purpose; but to show mercy is easy, and
delivers from all anxiety.

<span id="iii.LIV-p106"></span>Let us not then traffic in other men’s
calamities, nor make a trade of our benevolence. And I know indeed that
many hear these words with displeasure; but what is the profit of
silence? For though I should hold my peace, and give no trouble by my
words, I could not by this silence deliver you from your punishment;
rather it has altogether the opposite result; the penalty is enhanced,
and not to you only, but to me also, doth such a silence procure
punishment. What then signify our gracious words, when in our works they
help us not, but rather do harm? What is the good of delighting men in
word, while we vex them in deed, bringing pleasure to the ears, and
punishment to the soul? Wherefore I must needs make you sorry here, that
we may not suffer punishment there.

<span id="iii.LIV-p107"></span>9. For indeed a dreadful disease,
beloved, dreadful and needing much attendance, hath fallen on the
church. Those, namely, who are enjoined not even by honest labors to lay
up treasures, but to open their houses to the needy, make a profit of
other men’s poverty, devising a specious robbery, a plausible
covetousness.

<span id="iii.LIV-p108"></span>For tell me not of the laws that are
without; since even the publican fulfills the law that is without, but
nevertheless is punished: which will be the case with us also, unless we
refrain from oppressing the poor, and from using their need and
necessity as an occasion for shameless trafficking.

<span id="iii.LIV-p109"></span>For to this intent thou hast wealth, to
relieve poverty, not to make a gain of poverty; but thou with show of
relief makest the calamity greater, and sellest benevolence for money.
Sell it, I forbid thee not, but for a heavenly kingdom. Receive not a
small price for so good a deed, thy monthly one in the hundred, <span
id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) but that immortal life. Why art
thou beggarly, and poor, and mean, selling thy great things for a
little, even for goods that perish, when it should be for an everlasting
kingdom? Why dost thou leave God, and get human gains? Why dost thou
pass by the wealthy one, and trouble him that hath not? and leaving the
sure paymaster make thy bargain with the unthankful? The other longs to
repay, but this even grudges in the act of repaying. This hardly repays
a hundredth part, but the other “an hundredfold and eternal life.” This
with insults and revilings, but the other with praises and auspicious
words. This stirs up envy against thee, but the other even weaves for
thee crowns. This hardly here, but the other both there and here.

<span id="iii.LIV-p111"></span>Surely then is it not the utmost
senselessness, not so much as to know how to gain? How many have lost
their very principal for the interest’s sake? How many have fallen into
perils for usurious gains. How many have involved both themselves and
others in extreme poverty through their unspeakable covetousness!

<span id="iii.LIV-p112"></span>For tell me not this, that he is pleased
to receive, and is thankful for the loan. Why, this is a result of thy
cruelty. Since Abraham too, <span id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206)
contriving how his plan might take with the barbarians, did himself give
up his wife to them; not however willingly, but through fear of Pharaoh.
So also the poor man, because thou countest him not even worth so much
money, is actually compelled to be thankful for cruelty.

<span id="iii.LIV-p114"></span>And it seems to me as though, shouldest
thou deliver him from dangers, thou wouldest exact of him a payment for
this deliverance. “Away,” saith he; “let it not be.” What sayest thou?
Delivering him from the greater evil, thou art unwilling to exact money,
and <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="iii.LIV-Page_336"></span> for the lesser dost thou display so much
inhumanity?

<span id="iii.LIV-p115"></span>Seest thou not how great a punishment is
appointed for the deed? hearest thou not that even in the old law this
is forbidden? <span id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) But what is the
plea of the many? “When I have received the interest, I give to the
poor;” one tells me. Speak reverently, O man; God desires not such
sacrifices. Deal not subtilly with the law. Better not give to a poor
man, than give from that source; for the money that hath been collected
by honest labors, thou often makest to become unlawful because of that
wicked increase; as if one should compel a fair womb to give birth to
scorpions.

<span id="iii.LIV-p117"></span>And why do I speak of God’s law? Do not
even ye call it “filth”? But if ye, the gainers, give your voice so,
consider what suffrage God will pass upon you.

<span id="iii.LIV-p118"></span>And if thou wilt ask the Gentile
lawgivers too, thou wilt be told that even by them this thing is deemed
a proof of the most utter shamelessness. Those, for example, who are in
offices of honor, and belong to the great council, which they call the
senate, may not legally disgrace themselves with such gains; there being
a law among them which prohibits the same. <span
id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208)

<span id="iii.LIV-p120"></span>How then is it not a horrible thing, if
thou ascribe not even so much honor to the polity of Heaven, as the
legislators to the council of the Romans; but Heaven is to obtain less
than earth, and thou art not ashamed even of the very folly of the
thing? For what could be more foolish than this, unless one without
land, rain, or plough, were to insist upon sowing? <span
id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) Tares therefore, to be committed to
the fire, do they reap, who have devised this evil husbandry.

<span id="iii.LIV-p122"></span>Why, are there not many honest trades? in
the fields, the flocks, the herds, the breeding of cattle, in
handicrafts, in care of property? Why rave and be frantic, cultivating
thorns for no good? What if the fruits of the earth are subject to
mischance; hail, and blight, and excessive rain? yet not to such an
extent as are money dealings. For in whatsoever cases of that sort
occur, the damage of course concerns the produce, but the principal
remains, I mean, the land. But herein many often have suffered shipwreck
in their principal; and before the loss too they are in continual
dejection. For never doth the money-lender enjoy his possessions, nor
find pleasure in them; but when the interest is brought, he rejoices not
that he hath received gain, but is grieved that the interest hath not
yet come up to the principal. And before this evil offspring is brought
forth complete, he compels it also to bring forth, <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) making the interest principal, and
forcing it to bring forth its untimely and abortive brood of vipers. For
of this nature are the gains of usury; more than those wild creatures do
they devour and tear the souls of the wretched. <span
id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) This “is the bond of iniquity:”
this “the twisted knot of oppressive bargains.”

<span id="iii.LIV-p125"></span>Yea, “I give,” he seems to say, “not for
thee to receive, but that thou mayest repay more.” And whereas God
commands not even to receive what is given (for “give,” saith He, “to
them from whom ye look not to receive”), <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) thou requirest even more than is
given, and what thou gavest not, this as a debt, thou constrainest the
receiver to pay.

<span id="iii.LIV-p127"></span>And thou indeed supposest thy substance
to be increased hereby, but instead of substance thou art kindling the
unquenchable fire.

<span id="iii.LIV-p128"></span>That this therefore may not be, let us
cut out the evil womb of usurious gains, let us deaden these lawless
travailings, let us dry up this place of pernicious teeming, and let us
pursue the true and great gains only. “But what are these?” Hear Paul
saying “Godliness with contentment is great gain.” <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213)

<span id="iii.LIV-p130"></span>Therefore in this wealth alone let us be
rich, that we may both here enjoy security, and attain unto the good
things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
now and always, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[331:2161](1100062.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="iii.LIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p6"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p6.1"></span>γεννη</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[331:2162](1100062.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="iii.LIV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p7"></span>[Matt. xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025)<span id="iii.LIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[331:2163](1100062.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="iii.LIV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p8"></span>[Matt. xvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027)<span id="iii.LIV-p8.1"></span>.
\[<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p8.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p8.3"></span>τν πρξιν
ατο</span></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[331:2164](1100062.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="iii.LIV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p12"></span>[Matt. xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span id="iii.LIV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[331:2165](1100062.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="iii.LIV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p14"></span>[Luke ix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028)<span id="iii.LIV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[331:2166](1100062.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="iii.LIV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p17"></span>\[R.V. “his garments became,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[331:2167](1100062.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="iii.LIV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p18"></span>[Matt.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003)<span id="iii.LIV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[331:2168](1100062.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="iii.LIV-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p20"></span>[Matt.
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)<span id="iii.LIV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[332:2169](1100062.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="iii.LIV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p25"></span>[John ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span id="iii.LIV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[332:2170](1100062.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="iii.LIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p26"></span>[John x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033)<span id="iii.LIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[332:2171](1100062.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="iii.LIV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p29"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p29.1"></span>δξαν</span>: in our copies of St. Luke <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p29.2"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p29.3"></span>ξοδον</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p29.4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p29.5"></span>,</span></span> but St. Chrysostom’s reading
is that of a good many <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LIV-p29.6"></span>mss</span>. \[None of the recent critical
editions of the New Testament refer to any Greek <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LIV-p29.7"></span>mss</span>., uncial or cursive, with this
reading. Chrysostom alludes to it again in Homily LVIII. 1.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[332:2172](1100062.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="iii.LIV-p29.8"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p30"></span>[Luke ix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031)<span id="iii.LIV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[332:2173](1100062.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="iii.LIV-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p32"></span>[Exod. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)<span id="iii.LIV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[332:2174](1100062.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="iii.LIV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p33"></span>[Exod. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="iii.LIV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[332:2175](1100062.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="iii.LIV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p35"></span>[Luke
9:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="iii.LIV-p35.1"></span>.
\[The latter clause is omitted in the R.V. text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[333:2176](1100062.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="iii.LIV-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p37"></span>[Matt. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span id="iii.LIV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[333:2177](1100062.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="iii.LIV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p40"></span>[Matt. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004)<span id="iii.LIV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[333:2178](1100062.htm#fr_2177) <span
id="iii.LIV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p41"></span>[Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="iii.LIV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[333:2179](1100062.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="iii.LIV-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p44"></span>[John xiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)<span id="iii.LIV-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[333:2180](1100062.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="iii.LIV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p45"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#035)<span id="iii.LIV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[333:2181](1100062.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="iii.LIV-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p47"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p47.1"></span>παρεβολευετο</span>. Comp. [Philip. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#030)<span id="iii.LIV-p47.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[333:2182](1100062.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="iii.LIV-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p48"></span>\[R.V., “I will make” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p48.1"></span>ποισω</span>) with the
earliest <span class="c20"><span id="iii.LIV-p48.2"></span>mss</span>.
Mark and Luke: “Let us make.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[333:2183](1100062.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="iii.LIV-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p50"></span>[Mark ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#006)<span id="iii.LIV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[333:2184](1100062.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="iii.LIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p51"></span>[Luke ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#033)<span id="iii.LIV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[333:2185](1100062.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="iii.LIV-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p52"></span>[Luke ix.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#032)<span id="iii.LIV-p52.1"></span>.
\[R.V., margin, “having remained awake.”\]

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[334:2186](1100062.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="iii.LIV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p55"></span>[Ps. xcvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002)<span id="iii.LIV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[334:2187](1100062.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="iii.LIV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p56"></span>[Is. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span id="iii.LIV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[334:2188](1100062.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="iii.LIV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p57"></span>[Ps. civ.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)<span id="iii.LIV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[334:2189](1100062.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="iii.LIV-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p58"></span>[Acts i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)<span id="iii.LIV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[334:2190](1100062.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="iii.LIV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p59"></span>[Dan. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)<span id="iii.LIV-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[334:2191](1100062.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="iii.LIV-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p62"></span>[Matt. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="iii.LIV-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[334:2192](1100062.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="iii.LIV-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p64"></span>[Exod.
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#021), [Exod.
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)<span id="iii.LIV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[334:2193](1100062.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="iii.LIV-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p65"></span>[Ps. xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)<span id="iii.LIV-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[334:2194](1100062.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="iii.LIV-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p75"></span>[Matt. xvii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#006)<span id="iii.LIV-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[334:2195](1100062.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="iii.LIV-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p77"></span>[John
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)<span id="iii.LIV-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[334:2196](1100062.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="iii.LIV-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p80"></span>[Matt. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#009)<span id="iii.LIV-p80.1"></span>.
\[In the last clause “the Son of Man” is omitted, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p80.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p80.3"></span>ἀ</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p80.4"></span>ναστ</span> is substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p80.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p80.6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p80.7"></span>γερθ</span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p80.8"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p80.9"></span>μεσολαβοντο</span></span> .

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[334:2197](1100062.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="iii.LIV-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p84"></span>[Matt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span id="iii.LIV-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[334:2198](1100062.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="iii.LIV-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p85"></span>[Matt. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023)<span id="iii.LIV-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[334:2199](1100062.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="iii.LIV-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p87"></span>[Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="iii.LIV-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[334:2200](1100062.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="iii.LIV-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p88"></span>[Matt. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026)<span id="iii.LIV-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[334:2201](1100062.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="iii.LIV-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p89"></span>[Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span id="iii.LIV-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[334:2202](1100062.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="iii.LIV-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p91"></span>[Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span id="iii.LIV-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[334:2203](1100062.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="iii.LIV-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p94"></span>[Heb. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="iii.LIV-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[334:2204](1100062.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="iii.LIV-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p97"></span>[Is. lviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)<span id="iii.LIV-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[335:2205](1100062.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="iii.LIV-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p103"></span>[Is. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span id="iii.LIV-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[335:2206](1100062.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="iii.LIV-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p110"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p110.1"></span>Τκο κατοστιαο</span>, *centesima usura*, 1
per cent, per month.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[335:2207](1100062.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="iii.LIV-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p113"></span>[Gen. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#011)<span id="iii.LIV-p113.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[336:2208](1100062.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="iii.LIV-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p116"></span>[Exod.
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025), [Lev.
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036), [Deut.
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#019)<span
id="iii.LIV-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[336:2209](1100062.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="iii.LIV-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p119"></span>See Bingham, *Antiq*. vi. ii. 6, who
refers to a Law of Honorius, A.D. 397. *Cod. Theod.* lib. 2, tit. 33,
*de usuris*, leg. 3; and Gibbon, c. 44; who quotes several of the
Fathers to prove that all lending with interest was forbidden; but most
or all of them seem to be speaking of exorbitant interest, or of lending
to the poor.

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[336:2210](1100062.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="iii.LIV-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p121"></span>So St. Basil, as quoted below. “The
husbandman having reaped the ear, seeks not again the seed under the
root. But thou having the fruits, still givest not up that of which they
grew. Thou plantest without land, thou reapest without seed.”

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[336:2211](1100062.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="iii.LIV-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p123"></span>St. Basil, *Hom. in Ps*. 14 (15), c. 3.
“Interest upon interest, a bad offspring of bad parents. These may be
well called *a generation of vipers*, I mean what our usuries bring
forth. Vipers, they say, are yeaned, eating through their mother’s womb:
and these usurious gains devour the debtors’ houses, and so have their
birth.”

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[336:2212](1100062.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="iii.LIV-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p124"></span>There is here and afterwards a play upon
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p124.1"></span>τκο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LIV-p124.2"></span>,</span> gain, as a derivative of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LIV-p124.3"></span>τκτειν</span>, *to bring
forth*, which can hardly be expressed in English.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[336:2213](1100062.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="iii.LIV-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p126"></span>[Luke vi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035)<span id="iii.LIV-p126.1"></span>.
\[Cited very freely.\]

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[336:2214](1100062.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="iii.LIV-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LIV-p129"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006)<span id="iii.LIV-p129.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LV](1100063)
