[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100040)  [Next](1100042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXXIII"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. X.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.XXXIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p3"></span>“Behold, I send you forth as sheep in
the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p4.1"></span>Having</span> made them feel confident about
their necessary food, and opened unto them all men’s houses, and having
invested their entrance with an appearance to attract veneration,
charging them not to come in as wanderers, and beggars, but as much more
venerable than those who received them (for this He signifies by His
saying, “the workman is worthy of his hire;” and by His commanding them
to inquire, who was worthy, and there to remain, and enjoining them to
salute such as receive them; and by His threatening such as receive them
not with those incurable evils): having I say, in this way cast out
their anxiety, and armed them with the display of miracles, and made
them as it were all iron and adamant, by delivering them from all
worldly things, and enfranchising them from all temporal care: He speaks
in what follows of the evils also that were to befall them; not only
those that were to happen soon after, but those too that were to be in
long course of time; from the first, even long beforehand, preparing
them for the war against the devil. Yea, and many advantages were hence
secured; and first, that they learnt the power of His foreknowledge;
secondly, that no one should suspect, that through weakness of their
Master came these evils upon them; thirdly, that such as undergo these
things should not be dismayed by their falling out unexpectedly, and
against hope; fourthly, that they might not at the very time of the
cross be troubled on hearing these things. For indeed, they were just so
affected at that time; when also He upbraided them, saying, “Because I
have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your hearts; and
none of you asketh me, whither goest Thou?” <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) And yet He had said nothing as yet
touching Himself, as that He should be bound, and scourged, and put to
death, that He might not hereby also confound their minds; but for the
present He announces before what should happen to themselves.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p6"></span>Then, that they might learn that this
system of war is new, and the manner of the array unwonted; as He sends
them bare, and with one coat, and unshod, and without staff, and without
girdle or scrip, and bids them be maintained by such as receive them; so
neither here did He stay His speech, but to <span id="page_215">p.
215</span> <span id="iii.XXXIII-Page_215"></span> signify His
unspeakable power, He saith, “Even thus setting out, exhibit the
gentleness of “sheep,” and this, though ye are to go unto “wolves;” and
not simply unto wolves, but “into the midst of wolves.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p7"></span>And He bids them have not only
gentleness as sheep, but also the harmlessness of the dove. “For thus
shall I best show forth my might, when sheep get the better of wolves,
and being in the midst of wolves, and receiving a thousand bites, so far
from being consumed, do even work a change on them a thing far greater
and more marvellous than killing them, to alter their spirit, and to
reform their mind; and this, being only twelve, while the whole world is
filled with the wolves.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p8"></span>Let us then be ashamed, who do the
contrary, who set like wolves upon our enemies. For so long as we are
sheep, we conquer: though ten thousand wolves prowl around, we overcome
and prevail. But if we become wolves, we are worsted, for the help of
our Shepherd departs from us: for He feeds not wolves, but sheep: and He
forsakes thee, and retires, for neither dost thou allow His might to be
shown. Because, as He accounts the whole triumph His own, if thou being
ill used, show forth gentleness; so if thou follow it up and give blows,
thou obscurest His victory.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p9"></span>2. But do thou consider, I pray thee,
who they are that hear these injunctions, so hard and laborious: the
timid and ignorant; the unlettered and uninstructed; such as are in
every respect obscure, who have never been trained up in the Gentile
laws, who do not readily present themselves in the public places; the
fishermen, the publicans, men full of innumerable deficiencies. For if
these things were enough to confound even the lofty and great, how were
they not enough to cast down and dismay them that were in all respects
untried, and had never entertained any noble imagination? But they did
not cast them down.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p10"></span>“And very naturally,” some one may
perhaps say; “because He gave them power to cleanse lepers, to drive out
devils.” I would answer as follows: Nay, this very thing was enough
especially to perplex them, that for all their raising the dead, they
were to undergo these intolerable evils, both judgments, and executions,
and the wars which all would wage on them, and the common hatred of the
world; and that such terrors await them, while themselves are working
miracles.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p11"></span>3. What then is their consolation for
all these things? The power of Him that sends them. Wherefore also He
puts this before all, saying, “Behold, I send you.” This suffices for
your encouragement, this for confidence, and fearing none of your
assailants.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p12"></span>Seest thou authority? seest thou
prerogative? seest thou invincible might? Now His meaning is like this:
“Be not troubled” (so He speaks), “that sending you among wolves, I
command you to be like sheep and like doves. For I might indeed have
done the contrary, and have suffered you to undergo nothing terrible,
nor as sheep to be exposed to wolves; I might have rendered you more
formidable than lions; but it is expedient that so it should be. This
makes you also more glorious; this proclaims also my power.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p13"></span>This He said also unto Paul: “My grace
is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.” <span id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406) “It is I, now mark
it, who have caused you so to be.” For in saying, “I send you forth as
sheep,” He intimates this. “Do not therefore despond, for I know, I know
certainly, that in this way more than any other ye will be invincible to
all.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p15"></span>After this, that they may contribute
something on their own part also, and that all might not seem to be of
His grace, nor they supposed to be crowned at random, and vainly, He
saith, “Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.” “But
what,” it might be said, “will our wisdom avail in so great dangers?
nay, how shall we be able to have wisdom at all, when so many waves are
drenching us all over? For let a sheep be ever so wise, when it is in
the midst of wolves, and so many wolves, what will it be able to do? Let
the dove be ever so harmless, what will it profit, when so many hawks
are assailing it?” In the brutes indeed, not at all: but in you as much
as possible.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p16"></span>But let us see what manner of wisdom He
here requires. That of the serpent, He saith. For even as that animal
gives up everything, and if its very body must be cut off, doth not very
earnestly defend it, so that it may save its head; in like manner do
thou also, saith He, give up every thing but the faith; though goods,
body, life itself, must be yielded. For that is the head and the root;
and if that be preserved, though thou lose all, thou wilt recover all
with so much the more splendor. <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p18"></span>On this account then He neither
commanded to be merely a simple and single-hearted sort of person, nor
merely wise; but hath mixed up both these, so that they may become
virtue; taking in the wisdom of the <span id="page_216">p. 216</span>
<span id="iii.XXXIII-Page_216"></span> serpent that we may not be
wounded in our vitals; and the harmlessness of the dove, that we may not
retaliate on our wrongdoers, nor avenge ourselves on them that lay
snares; since wisdom again is useless, except this be added. Now what, I
ask, could be more strict than these injunctions? Why, was it not enough
to suffer wrong? Nay, saith He, but I do not permit thee so much as to
be indignant. For this is “the dove.” As though one should cast a reed
into fire, and command it not to be burnt by the fire, but to quench it.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p19"></span>However, let us not be troubled; nay,
for these things have come to pass, and have had an accomplishment, and
have been shown in very deed, and men became wise as serpents, and
harmless as doves; not being of another nature, but of the same with us.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p20"></span>Let not then any one account His
injunctions impracticable. For He beyond all others knows the nature of
things; He knows that fierceness is not quenched by fierceness, but by
gentleness. And if in men’s actual deeds too thou wouldest see this
result, read the book of the Acts of the Apostles, and thou wilt see how
often, when the people of the Jews had risen up against them and were
sharpening their teeth, these men, imitating the dove, and answering
with suitable meekness, did away with their wrath, quenched their
madness, broke their impetuosity. As when they said, “Did not we
straitly command you, that ye should not speak in this name?” <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) although able to work any number of
miracles, they neither said nor did anything harsh, but answered for
themselves with all meekness, saying, “Whether it be right to hearken
unto you more than unto God, judge ye.” <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p23"></span>Hast thou seen the harmlessness of the
dove? Behold the wisdom of the serpent. “For we cannot but speak the
things, which we know and have heard.” <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) Seest thou how we must be perfect
on all points, so as neither to be abased by dangers, nor provoked by
anger?

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p25"></span>4. Therefore He said also, <span
id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p27"></span>“Beware of men, for they shall deliver
you up to councils, and they shall scourge you in their synagogues: and
ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony to them and the Gentiles.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p28"></span>Thus again is He preparing them to be
vigilant, in every case assigning to them the sufferance of wrong, and
permitting the infliction of it to others; to teach thee that the
victory is in suffering evil, and that His glorious trophies are thereby
set up. For He said not at all, “Fight ye also, and resist them that
would vex you,” but only, “Ye shall suffer the utmost ills.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p29"></span>O how great is the power of Him that
speaks! How great the self-command of them that hear! For indeed we have
great cause to marvel, how they did not straightway dart away from Him
on hearing these things, apt as they were to be startled at every sound,
and such as had never gone further than that lake, around which they
used to fish; and how they did not reflect, and say to themselves, “And
whither after all this are we to flee? The courts of justice against us,
the kings against us, the governors, the synagogues of the Jews, the
nations of the Gentiles, the rulers, and the ruled.” (For hereby He not
only forewarned them of Palestine, and the ills therein, but discovered
also the wars throughout the world, saying, “Ye shall be brought before
kings and governors;” signifying that to the Gentiles also He was
afterwards to send them as heralds.) “Thou hast made the world our
enemy, Thou hast armed against us all them that dwell on the earth,
peoples, tyrants, kings.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p30"></span>And what follows again is much more
fearful, since men are to become on our account murderers of brothers,
of children, of fathers.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p31"></span>“For the brother,” saith He, “shall
deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child; and children
shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to
death.” <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p33"></span>“How, then,” one might say, “will the
rest of men believe, when they see on our account, children slain by
their fathers, and brethren by brethren, and all things filled with
abominations?” What? will not men, as though we were destructive demons,
will they not, as though we were devoted, and pests of the world, drive
us out from every quarter, seeing the earth filled with blood of
kinsmen, and with so many murderers? Surely fair is the peace (is it
not?) which we are to bring into men’s houses and give them, while we
are filling those houses with so many slaughters. Why, had we been some
great number of us, instead of twelve; had we been, instead of
“unlearned and ignorant,” wise, and skilled in rhetoric, and mighty in
speech; nay more, had we been even kings, and in possession of armies
and abundance of wealth; how could we have persuaded any, while kindling
up civil wars, yea, and other wars far worse than they? Why, though we
were to despise our own safety, which of all other men will give heed to
us?”

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span id="iii.XXXIII-Page_217"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p34"></span>But none of these things did they
either think or say, neither did they require any account of His
injunctions, but simply yielded and obeyed. And this came not from their
own virtue only, but also of the wisdom of their Teacher. For see how to
each of the fearful things He annexed an encouragement; as in the case
of such as received them not, He said, “It shall be more tolerable for
the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that
city;” so here again, when He had said, “Ye shall be brought before
governors and kings,” He added, “for my sake, for a testimony to them,
and the Gentiles.” And this is no small consolation, that they are
suffering these things both for Christ, and for the Gentiles’
conviction. Thus God, though no one regard, is found to be everywhere
doing His own works. Now these things were a comfort to them, not that
they desired the punishment of other men, but that they might have
ground of confidence, as sure to have Him everywhere present with them,
who had both foretold and foreknown these things; and because not as
wicked men, and as pests, were they to suffer all this.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p35"></span>And together with these, He adds
another, and that no small consolation for them, saying,

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p36"></span>“But when they deliver you up, take no
thought <span id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) how or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak. For
it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in
you.” <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p39"></span>For lest they should say, “How shall we
be able to persuade men, when such things are taking place?” He bids
them be confident as to their defense also. And elsewhere indeed He
saith, “I will give you a mouth and wisdom;” <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) but here, “It is the Spirit of your
Father that speaketh in you,” advancing them unto the dignity of the
prophets. Therefore, when He had spoken of the power that was given,
then He added also the terrors, the murders, and the slaughters.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p41"></span>“For the brother shall deliver up the
brother,” saith He, “to death, and the father the child, and the
children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put
to death.” <span id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p43"></span>And not even at this did He stop, but
added also what was greatly more fearful, and enough to shiver a rock to
pieces: “And ye shall be hated of all men.” And here again the
consolation is at the doors, for, “For my name’s sake,” saith He, “ye
shall suffer these things.” And with this again another, “But he that
endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p45"></span>And these things in another point of
view likewise were sufficient to rouse up their spirits; since at any
rate the power of their gospel was to blaze up so high, as that nature
should be despised, and kindred rejected, and the Word preferred to all,
chasing all mightily away. For if no tyranny of nature is strong enough
to withstand your sayings, but it is dissolved and trodden under foot,
what else shall be able to get the better of you? Not, however, that
your life will be in security, because these things shall be; but rather
ye will have for your common enemies and foes them that dwell in the
whole world.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p46"></span>5. Where now is Plato? Where
Pythagoras? Where the long chain <span
id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) of the Stoics? For the first, after
having enjoyed great honor, was so practically refuted, as even to be
sold out of the country, <span id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) and
to succeed in none of his objects, no, not go much as in respect of one
tyrant: yea, he betrayed his disciples, and ended his life miserably.
And the Cynics, mere pollutions as they were, have all passed by like a
dream and a shadow. And yet assuredly no such thing ever befell them,
but rather they were accounted glorious for their heathen philosophy,
and the Athenians made a public monument of the epistles of Plato, sent
them by Dion; and they passed all their time at ease, and abounded in
wealth not a little. Thus, for instance, Aristippus was used to purchase
costly harlots; and another made a will, leaving no common inheritance;
and another, when his disciples had laid themselves down like a bridge,
walked on them; and he of Sinope, they say, even behaved himself
unseemly in the market place.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p49"></span>Yea, these are their honorable things.
But there is no such thing here, but a strict temperance, and a perfect
decency, and a war against the whole world in behalf of truth and
godliness, and to be slain every day, and not until hereafter their
glorious trophies.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p50"></span>But there are some also, one may say,
skilled in war amongst them; as Themistocles, Pericles. But these things
too are children’s toys, compared with the acts of the fishermen. For
what canst thou say? That he persuaded the Athenians to embark in their
ships, when Xerxes was marching upon Greece? Why in this case, when it
is not Xerxes marching, but the devil with the whole world, and his evil
spirits innumerable <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="iii.XXXIII-Page_218"></span> assailing these twelve men, not at one
crisis only, but throughout their whole life, they prevailed and
vanquished; and what was truly marvellous, not by slaying their
adversaries, but by converting and reforming them.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p51"></span>For this especially you should observe
throughout, that they slew not, nor destroyed such as were plotting
against them, but having found them as bad as devils, they made them
rivals of angels, enfranchising human nature from this evil tyranny,
while as to those execrable demons that were confounding all things,
they drave them out of the midst of markets, and houses, or rather even
from the very wilderness. And to this the choirs of the monks bear
witness, whom they have planted everywhere, clearing out not the
habitable only, but even the uninhabitable land. And what is yet more
marvellous, they did not this in fair conflict, but in the enduring of
evil they accomplished it all. Since men actually had them in the midst,
twelve unlearned persons, binding, scourging, dragging them about, and
were not able to stop their mouths; but as it is impossible to bind the
sunbeam, so also their tongue. And the reason was, “it was not they”
themselves “that spake,” but the power of the Spirit. Thus for instance
did Paul overcome Agrippa, and Nero, who surpassed all men in
wickedness. “For the Lord,” saith he, “stood with me, and strengthened
me, and delivered me out of the mouth of the lion.” <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p53"></span>But do thou also admire them, how when
it was said to them, “Take no thought,” they yet believed, and accepted
it, and none of the terrors amazed them. And if thou say, He gave them
encouragement enough, by saying, “It shall be the Spirit of your Father
that shall speak;” even for this am I most amazed at them, that they
doubted not, nor sought deliverance from their perils; and this, when
not for two or three years were they to suffer these things, but all
their life long. For the saying, “He that endureth to the end, the same
shall be saved,” is an intimation of this.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p54"></span>For His will is, that not His part only
should be contributed, but that the good deeds should be also done of
them. Mark, for instance, how from the first, part is His, part His
disciples’. Thus, to do miracles is His, but to provide nothing is
theirs. Again, to open all men’s houses, was of the grace from above;
but to require no more than was needful, of their own self-denial. “For
the workman is worthy of his hire.” Their bestowing peace was of the
gift of God, their inquiring for the worthy, and not entering in without
distinction unto all, of their own self command. Again, to punish such
as received them not was His, but to retire with gentleness from them,
without reviling or insulting them, was of the apostles’ meekness. To
give the Spirit, and cause them not to take thought, was of Him that
sent them, but to become like sheep and doves, and to bear all things
nobly, was of their calmness and prudence. To be hated and not to
despond, and to endure, was their own; to save them that endured, was of
Him who sent them.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p55"></span>Wherefore also He said, “He that
endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.” That is, because the more
part are wont at the beginning indeed to be vehement, but afterwards to
faint, therefore saith He, “I require the end.” For what is the use of
seeds, flourishing indeed at first, but a little after fading away?
Therefore it is continued patience that He requires of them. I mean,
lest any say, He wrought the whole Himself, and it was no wonder that
they should prove such, suffering as they did nothing intolerable;
therefore He saith unto them, “There is need also of patience on your
part. For though I should rescue you from the first dangers, I am
reserving you for others more grievous, and after these again others
will succeed; and ye shall not cease to have snares laid for you, so
long as ye have breath.” For this He intimated in saying, “But he that
endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.”

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p56"></span>For this cause then, though He said,
“Take no thought what ye shall speak;” yet elsewhere He saith, “Be ready
to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that
is in you.” <span id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) That is, as long
as the contest is among friends, He commands us also to take thought;
but when there is a terrible tribunal, and frantic assemblies, and
terrors on all sides, He bestows the influence from Himself, that they
may take courage and speak out, and not be discouraged, nor betray the
righteous cause.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p58"></span>For in truth it was a very great thing,
for a man occupied about lakes, and skins, and receipt of custom, when
tyrants were on their thrones, and satraps, and guards standing by them,
and the swords drawn, and all standing on their side; to enter in alone,
bound, hanging down his head, and yet be able to open his mouth. For
indeed they allowed them neither speech nor defense with respect to
their doctrines, but set about torturing them to death, as common pests
of the world. <span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="iii.XXXIII-Page_219"></span> For “They,” it is said, “that have
turned the world upside down, are come hither also;” and again, “They
preach things contrary to the decrees of Cæsar, saying that Jesus Christ
is king.” <span id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) And everywhere the
courts of justice were preoccupied by such suspicions, and much
influence from above was needed, for their showing both the truth of the
doctrine they preached, and that they are not violating the common laws;
so that they should neither, while earnest to speak of the doctrine,
fall under suspicion of overturning the laws; nor again, while earnest
to show that they were not overturning the common government, corrupt
the perfection of their doctrines: all which thou wilt see accomplished
with all due consideration, both in Peter and in Paul, and in all the
rest. Yea, and as rebels and innovators, and revolutionists, they were
accused all over the world; yet nevertheless they both repelled this
impression, and invested themselves with the contrary, all men
celebrating them as saviors, and guardians, and benefactors. And all
this they achieved by their much patience. Wherefore also Paul said, “I
die daily;” <span id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) and he continued
to “stand in jeopardy” unto the end.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p61"></span>6. What then must we deserve, having
such high patterns, and in peace giving way to effeminacy, and
remissness? With none to make war (it is too evident) we are slain; we
faint when no man pursues, in peace we are required to be saved, and
even for this we are not sufficient. And they indeed, when the world was
on fire, and the pile was being kindled over the whole earth, entering,
snatched from within, out of the midst of the flame, such as were
burning; but thou art not able so much as to preserve thyself.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p62"></span>What confidence then will there be for
us? What favor? There are no stripes, no prisons, no rulers, no
synagogues, nor aught else of that kind to set upon us; yea, quite on
the contrary we rule and prevail. For both kings are godly, and there
are many honors for Christians, and precedences, and distinctions, and
immunities, and not even so do we prevail. And whereas they being daily
led to execution, both teachers and disciples, and bearing innumerable
stripes, and continual brandings, were in greater luxury than such as
abide in Paradise; we who have endured no such thing, not even in a
dream, are softer than any wax. “But they,” it will be said, “wrought
miracles.” Did this then keep them from the scourge? did it free them
from persecution? Nay, for this is the strange thing, that they suffered
such things often even at the hands of them whom they benefited, and not
even so were they confounded, receiving only evil for good. But thou if
thou bestow on any one any little benefit, and then be requited with
anything unpleasant, art confounded, art troubled, and repentest of that
which thou hast done.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p63"></span>If now it should happen, as I pray it
may not happen nor at any time fall out, that there be a war against
churches, and a persecution, imagine how great will be the ridicule, how
sore the reproaches. And very naturally; for when no one exercises
himself in the wrestling school, how shall he be distinguished in the
contests? What champion, not being used to the trainer, will be able,
when summoned by the Olympic contests, to show forth anything great and
noble against his antagonist? Ought we not every day to wrestle and
fight and run? See ye not them that are called Pentathli, when they have
no antagonists, how they fill a sack with much sand, and hanging it up
try their full strength thereupon? And they that are still younger,
practise the fight against their enemies upon the persons of their
companions.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p64"></span>These do thou also emulate, and
practise the wrestlings of self denial. For indeed there are many that
provoke to anger, and incite to lust, and kindle a great flame. Stand
therefore against thy passions, bear nobly the mental pangs, that thou
mayest endure also those of the body.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p65"></span>7. For so the blessed Job, if he had
not exercised himself well before his conflicts, would not have shone so
brightly in the same. Unless he had practised freedom from all
despondency, he would have uttered some rash word, when his children
died. But as it was he stood against all the assaults, against ruin of
fortune, and destruction of so great affluence: against loss of
children, against his wife’s commiseration, against plagues in body,
against reproaches of friends, against revilings of servants.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p66"></span>And if thou wouldest see his ways of
exercise also, hear him saying, how he used to despise wealth: “If I did
but rejoice,” saith he, “because my wealth was great: if I set gold up
for a heap, if I put my trust in a precious stone.” <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424) Therefore neither was he confounded
at their being taken away, since he desired them not when present.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p68"></span>Hear how he also managed what related
to his children, not giving way to undue softness, as we do, but
requiring of them all circumspection. For he who offered sacrifice <span
id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span id="iii.XXXIII-Page_220"></span> even
for their secret sins, imagine how strict a judge he was of such as were
manifest. <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p70"></span>And if thou wouldest also hear of his
strivings after continence, hearken to him when he saith, “I made a
covenant with mine eyes, that I should not think upon a maid.” <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426) For this cause his wife did not
break his spirit, for he loved her even before this, not however
immoderately, but as is due to a wife.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p72"></span>Wherefore I am led even to marvel,
whence it came into the devil’s thought to stir up the contest, knowing
as he did of his previous training. Whence then did it occur to him? The
monster is wicked, and never despairs: and this turns out to us a very
great condemnation that he indeed never gives up the hope of our
destruction, but we despair of our own salvation.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p73"></span>But for bodily mutilation and
indignity, mark how he practised himself. Why, inasmuch as he himself
had never undergone any such thing, but had continued to live in wealth
and luxury, and in all other splendor, he used to divine other men’s
calamities, one by one. And this he declared, when he said, “For the
thing which I greatly feared is come upon me; and that which I was
afraid of is come unto me.” <span id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427)
And again, “But I wept for every helpless man, and groaned when I saw a
man in distress.” <span id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p76"></span>So because of this, nothing of what
happened confounded him, none of those great and intolerable ills. For I
bid thee not look at the ruin of his substance, nor at the loss of his
children, nor at that incurable plague, nor at his wife’s device against
him; but at those things which are far more grievous than these.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p77"></span>“And what,” saith one, “did Job suffer
more grievous than these? for from his history there is nothing more
than these for us to learn.” Because we are asleep, we do not learn,
since he surely that is anxious, and searches well for the pearl, will
know of many more particulars than these. For the more grievous, and apt
to infuse greater perplexity, were different.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p78"></span>And first, his knowing nothing certain
about the kingdom of heaven, and the resurrection; which indeed he also
spoke of, lamenting. “For I shall not live alway, that I should suffer
long.” <span id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429) Next, his being
conscious to himself of many good works. Thirdly, his being conscious of
no evil thing. Fourthly, his supposing that at God’s hands he was
undergoing it; or if at the devil’s, this again was enough to offend
him. Fifthly, his hearing his friends accusing him of wickedness, “For
thou hast not been scourged,” say they, “according to what thy sins
deserve.” <span id="fr_1430"></span>[1431](#fn_1430) Sixthly, his seeing
such as lived in wickedness prospering, and exulting over him.
Seventhly, not having any other to whom he might look as even having
ever suffered such things.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p81"></span>8. And if thou wouldest learn how great
these things are, consider our present state. For if now, when we are
looking for a kingdom, and hoping for a resurrection, and for the
unutterable blessings, and are conscious to ourselves of countless evil
deeds, and when we have so many examples, and are partakers of so high a
philosophy; should any persons lose a little gold, and this often, after
having taken it by violence, they deem life not to be lived in, having
no wife to lay sore on them, nor bereaved of children, nor reproached by
friends, nor insulted by servants, but rather having many to comfort
them, some by words, some by deeds; of how noble crowns must not he be
worthy, who seeing what he had gotten together by honest labor, snatched
away from him for nought and at random, and after all that, undergoing
temptations without number, like sleet, yet throughout all abides
unmoved, and offers to the Lord his due thanksgiving for it all?

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p82"></span>Why, though no one had spoken any of
the other taunts, yet his wife’s words alone were sufficient utterly to
shake a very rock. Look, for example, at her craft. No mention of money,
none of camels, and flocks, and herds, (for she was conscious of her
husband’s self command with regard to these), but of what was harder to
bear than all these, I mean, their children; and she deepens the
tragedy, and adds to it her own influence.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p83"></span>Now if when men were in wealth, and
suffering no distress, in many things and oft have women prevailed on
them: imagine how courageous was that soul, which repulsed her,
assaulting him with such powerful weapons, and which trod under foot the
two most tyrannical passions, desire and pity. And yet many having
conquered desire, have yielded to pity. That noble Joseph, for instance,
held in subjection the most tyrannical of pleasures, and repulsed that
strange woman, plying him as she did with innumerable devices; but his
tears he contained not, but when he saw his brethren that had wronged
him, he was all on fire with that passion, and quickly cast off the
mask, and discovered the part he had been playing. <span
id="fr_1431"></span>[1432](#fn_1431) But when first of all she is his
wife, and when her words are piteous, and the moment favorable for her,
<span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span id="iii.XXXIII-Page_221"></span>
as well as his wounds and his stripes, and those countless waves of
calamities; how can one otherwise than rightly pronounce the soul
impassive to so great a storm to be firmer than any adamant?

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p85"></span>Allow me freely to say, that the very
apostles, if not inferior to this blessed man, are at least not greater
than he was. For they indeed were comforted by the suffering for Christ;
and this medicine was so sufficient daily to relieve them, that the Lord
puts it everywhere, saying, “for me, for my sake,” and, “If they call
me, the master of the house, Beelzebub.” <span
id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432) But he was destitute of this
encouragement, and of that from miracles, and of that from grace; for
neither had he so great power of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p87"></span>And what is yet greater, nourished in
much delicacy, not from amongst fishermen, and publicans, and such as
lived frugally, but after enjoyment of so much honor, he suffered all
that he did suffer. And what seemed hardest to bear in the case of the
apostles, this same he also underwent, being hated of friends, of
servants, of enemies, of them who had received kindness of him: and the
sacred anchor, the harbor without waves, namely, that which was said to
the apostles, “for my sake,” of this he had no sight.

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p88"></span>I admire again the three children, for
that they dared the furnace, that they stood up against a tyrant. But
hear what they say, “We serve not thy Gods, nor worship the image which
thou hast set up.” <span id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433) A thing
which was the greatest encouragement to them, to know of a certainty
that for God they are suffering all whatsoever they suffer. But this man
knew not that it was all conflicts, and a wrestling; for had he known
it, he would not have felt what was happening. At any rate, when he
heard, “Thinkest thou that I have uttered to thee mine oracles for
nought, or that thou mightest be proved righteous?” <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434) consider how straightway, at a bare
word, he breathed again, how he made himself of no account, how he
accounted himself not so much as to have suffered what he had suffered,
thus saying, “Why do I plead any more, being admonished and reproved of
the Lord, hearing such things, I being nothing?” <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435) And again, “I have heard of Thee
before, as far as hearing of the ear; but now mine eye hath seen Thee;
wherefore I have made myself vile, and have melted away; and I accounted
myself earth and ashes.” <span id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436)

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p93"></span>This fortitude then, this moderation,
of him that was before law and grace, let us also emulate, who are after
law and grace; that we may also be able to share with him the eternal
tabernacles; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the victory
forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[214:1406](1100041.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p5"></span>[John
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#006),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[215:1407](1100041.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p14"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[215:1408](1100041.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p17.1"></span>περιφανεα</span> .

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[216:1409](1100041.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p21"></span>[Acts v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[216:1410](1100041.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p22"></span>[Acts iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[216:1411](1100041.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p24"></span>[Acts iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[216:1412](1100041.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p26"></span>[Matt.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)<span
id="iii.XXXIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[216:1413](1100041.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p32"></span>[Matt. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[217:1414](1100041.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p37"></span>\[R.V., “be not anxious.”\]

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[217:1415](1100041.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p38"></span>[Matt.
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020)<span
id="iii.XXXIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[217:1416](1100041.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p40"></span>[Luke xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[217:1417](1100041.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p42"></span>[Matt. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[217:1418](1100041.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p44"></span>[Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span
id="iii.XXXIII-p44.1"></span>….

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[217:1419](1100041.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p47"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p47.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p47.2"></span>ρμαθο</span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[217:1420](1100041.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p48"></span>For the story of Plato’s slavery, see
Diogen. Laertius, lib. 3; St. Chrys. in 1 Cor. Hom. IV. sec. 9; and
Plutarch (as there quoted) in his Life of Dion; as to its authenticity,
see Mitford’s Greece, iv. c. 31, sec. 8.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[218:1421](1100041.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p52"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[218:1422](1100041.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p57"></span>[1 Peter iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[219:1423](1100041.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p59"></span>[Acts
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[219:1424](1100041.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p60"></span>[1 Cor.
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#030)<span
id="iii.XXXIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[219:1425](1100041.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p67"></span>[Job
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#025),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024)<span
id="iii.XXXIII-p67.1"></span>, <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p67.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[220:1426](1100041.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p69"></span>[Job i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[220:1427](1100041.htm#fr_1426) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p71"></span>[Job xxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[220:1428](1100041.htm#fr_1427) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p74"></span>[Job iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[220:1429](1100041.htm#fr_1428) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p75"></span>[Job xxx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[220:1430](1100041.htm#fr_1429) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p79"></span>[Job vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p79.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXIII-p79.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[220:1431](1100041.htm#fr_1430) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p79.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p80"></span>[Job xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[220:1432](1100041.htm#fr_1431) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p84"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIII-p84.1"></span>δρμα</span>.

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[221:1433](1100041.htm#fr_1432) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p86"></span>[Matt. x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[221:1434](1100041.htm#fr_1433) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p89"></span>[Dan. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[221:1435](1100041.htm#fr_1434) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p90"></span>[Job xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p90.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXIII-p90.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[221:1436](1100041.htm#fr_1435) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p90.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p91"></span>[Job xl.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p91.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXIII-p91.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[221:1437](1100041.htm#fr_1436) <span
id="iii.XXXIII-p91.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIII-p92"></span>[Job
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXIII-p92.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXIII-p92.2"></span>LXX</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXIV](1100042)
