[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100012)  [Next](1100014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="V_1"></span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="V_1-Page_29"></span>

<span id="V_1-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="V_1-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="V_1-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="V_1-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023.md)<span id="V_1-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="V_1-p3"></span>“Now all this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Behold, a
Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall
call His name Emmanuel.”

<span id="V_1-p4"></span>I <span class="c20"><span
id="V_1-p4.1"></span>Hear</span> many say, “While we are here, and
enjoying the privilege of hearing, we are awed, but when we are gone
out, we become altered men again, and the flame of zeal is quenched.”
What then may be done, that this may not come to pass? Let us observe
whence it arises. Whence then doth so great a change in us arise? From
the unbecoming employment of our time, and from the company of evil men.
For we ought not as soon as we retire from the Communion, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) to plunge into business unsuited to
the Communion, but as soon as ever we get home, to take our Bible into
our hands, and call our wife and children to join us in putting together
what we have heard, and then, not before, engage in the business of
life. <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md)

<span id="V_1-p7"></span>For if after the bath you would not choose to
hurry into the market place, lest by the business in the market you
should destroy the refreshment thence derived; much more ought we to act
on this principle after the Communion. But as it is, we do the contrary,
and in this very way throw away all. For while the profitable effect of
what hath been said to us is not yet well fixed, the great force of the
things that press upon us from without sweeps all entirely away.

<span id="V_1-p8"></span>That this then may not be the case, when you
retire from the Communion, you must account nothing more necessary than
that you should put together the things that have been said to you. Yes,
for it were the utmost folly for us, while we give up five and even six
days to the business of this life, not to bestow on things spiritual so
much as one day, or rather not so much as a small part of one day. See
ye not our own children, that whatever lessons are given them, those
they study throughout the whole day? This then let us do likewise, since
otherwise we shall derive no profit from coming here, drawing water
daily into a vessel with holes, and not bestowing on the retaining of
what we have heard even so much earnestness as we plainly show with
respect to gold and silver. For any one who has received a few pence
both puts them into a bag and sets a seal thereon; but we, having given
us oracles more precious than either gold or costly stones, and
receiving the treasures of the Spirit, do not put them away in the
storehouses of our soul, but thoughtlessly and at random suffer them to
escape from our minds. Who then will pity us after all this, plotting
against our own interests, and casting ourselves into so deep poverty?
Therefore, that this may not be so, let us write it down an unalterable
law for ourselves, for our wives, and for our children, to give up this
one day of the week entire to hearing, and to the recollection of the
things we have heard. For thus with greater aptness for learning shall
we approach what is next to be said; and to us the labor will be less,
and to you the profit greater, when, bearing in memory what hath been
lately spoken, ye hearken accordingly to what comes afterwards. For no
little doth this also contribute towards the understanding of what is
said, when ye know accurately the connexion of the thoughts, which we
are busy in weaving together for you. For since it is not possible to
set down all in one day, you must by continued remembrance make the
things laid before you on many days into a kind of chain, and so wrap it
about your soul: that the body of the Scriptures may appear entire.

<span id="V_1-p9"></span>Therefore let us not either to-day go on to the
subjects set before us, without first recalling what was lately said to
our memory. <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226.md)

<span id="V_1-p11"></span>2. But what are the things set before us
to-day? “Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying.” In a tone worthy of the
wonder, with all his might he <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="V_1-Page_30"></span> hath uttered his voice, saying, “Now all this
was done.” For when he saw the sea and the abyss of the love of God
towards man, and that actually come to pass which never had been looked
for, and nature’s laws broken, and reconciliations made, Him who is
above all come down to him that is lower than all, and “the middle walls
of partition broken,” <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md) and the
impediments removed, and many more things than these done besides; in
one word he hath put before us the miracle, saying, “Now all this was
done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord.” For,
“think not,” saith he, “that these things are now determined upon; they
were prefigured of old.” Which same thing, Paul also everywhere labors
to prove.

<span id="V_1-p13"></span>And the angel proceeds to refer Joseph to
Isaiah; in order that even if he should, when awakened, forget his own
words, as newly spoken, he might by being reminded of those of the
prophet, with which he had been nourished up continually, retain
likewise the substance of what he had said. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) And to the woman he mentioned none of
these things, as being a damsel and unskilled in them, but to the
husband, as being a righteous man and one who studied the prophets, from
them he reasons. And before this he saith, “Mary, thy wife;” but now,
when he hath brought the prophet before him, he then trusts him with the
name of virginity; for Joseph would not have continued thus unshaken,
when he heard from him of a virgin, unless <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) he had first heard it also from
Isaiah. For indeed it was nothing novel that he was to hear out of the
prophets, <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) but what was familiar
to him, and had been for a long time the subject of his meditations. For
this cause the angel, to make what he said easy to be received, brings
in Isaiah. And neither here doth he stop, but connects the discourse
with God. For he doth not call the saying Isaiah’s, but that of the God
of all things. For this cause he said not, “that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of Isaiah,” but “which was spoken of the Lord.” For the
mouth indeed was Isaiah’s, but the oracle was wafted from above.

<span id="V_1-p17"></span>3. What then saith this oracle? “Behold, a
virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall
call His name Emmanuel.”

<span id="V_1-p18"></span>How was it then, one may say, that His name
was not called Emmanuel, but Jesus Christ? Because he said not, “thou
shalt call,” but “they shall call,” that is, the multitude, and the
issue of events. For here he puts the event as a name: and this is
customary in Scripture, to substitute the events that take place for
names.

<span id="V_1-p19"></span>Therefore, to say, “they shall call” Him
“Emmanuel,” means nothing else than that they shall see God amongst men.
For He hath indeed always been amongst men, but never so manifestly.

<span id="V_1-p20"></span>But if Jews are obstinate, we will ask the,
when was the child called, “Make speed to the spoil, hasten the prey?”
Why, they could not say. How is it then that the prophet said, “Call his
name Maher-shalal-hash-baz?” <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md)
Because, when he was born, there was a taking and dividing of spoils,
therefore the event that took place in his time is put as his name. And
the city, too, it is said, shall be called “the city of righteousness,
the faithful city Sion.” <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) And yet
we nowhere find that the city was called “righteousness,” but it
continued to be called Jerusalem. However, inasmuch as this came to pass
in fact, when the city underwent a change for the better, on that
account he saith it is so called. For when any event happens which marks
out him who brings it to pass, or who is benefited by it, more clearly
than his name, the Scripture <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md)
speaks of the truth of the event as being a name to him.

<span id="V_1-p24"></span>4. But if, when their mouths are stopped on
this point, they should seek another, namely, what is said touching
Mary’s virginity, and should object to us other translators, <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) saying, that they used not the term
“virgin,” but “young woman;” in the first place we will say this, that
the Seventy were justly entitled to confidence above all the others. For
these made their translation after Christ’s coming, continuing to be
Jews, and may justly be suspected as having spoken rather in enmity, and
as darkening the prophecies on purpose; but the Seventy, as having
entered upon this work an hundred years or more before the coming of
Christ, stand clear from all such suspicion, and on account <span
id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span id="V_1-Page_31"></span> of the date,
and of their number, and of their agreement, <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) would have a better right to be
trusted.

<span id="V_1-p27"></span>But even if they bring in the testimony of
those others, yet so the tokens of victory would be with us. Because the
Scripture is wont to put the word “youth,” for “virginity;” and this
with respect not to women only, but also to men. For it is said, “young
men and maidens, old men with younger ones.” <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) And again, speaking of the damsel who
is attacked, it saith, “if the young woman cry out,” <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md) meaning the virgin.

<span id="V_1-p30"></span>And what goes before also establishes this
interpretation. For he doth not merely say, “Behold, the Virgin shall be
with child,” but having first said, “Behold, the Lord Himself shall give
you a sign,” then he subjoins, “Behold, the Virgin shall be with
child.” <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) Whereas, if she that was
to give birth was not a virgin, but this happened in the way of
marriage, what sort of sign would the event be? For that which is a sign
must of course be beyond the course of common events, it must be strange
and extraordinary; else how could it be a sign?

<span id="V_1-p32"></span>5. “Then Joseph, being raised from sleep, did
as the angel of the Lord had bidden him.” Seest thou obedience, and a
submissive mind? Seest thou a soul truly wakened, and in all things
incorruptible? For neither when he suspected something painful or amiss
could he endure to keep the Virgin with him; nor yet, after he was freed
from this suspicion, could he bear to cast her out, but he rather keeps
her with him, and ministers to the whole Dispensation.

<span id="V_1-p33"></span>“And took unto him Mary his wife.” Seest thou
how continually the evangelist uses this word, not willing that that
mystery should be disclosed as yet, and annihilating that evil
suspicion?

<span id="V_1-p34"></span>And when he had taken her, “he knew her not,
till she had brought forth her first-born Son.” <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) He hath here used the word “till,” not
that thou shouldest suspect that afterwards he did know her, but to
inform thee that before the birth the Virgin was wholly untouched by
man. But why then, it may be said, hath he used the word, “till”?
Because it is usual in Scripture often to do this, and to use this
expression without reference to limited times. For so with respect to
the ark likewise, it is said, “The raven returned not till the earth was
dried up.” <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) And yet it did not
return even after that time. And when discoursing also of God, the
Scripture saith, “From age until age Thou art,” <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) not as fixing limits in this case. And
again when it is preaching the Gospel beforehand, and saying, “In his
days shall righteousness flourish, and abundance of peace, till the moon
be taken away,” <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) it doth not set
a limit to this fair part of creation. So then here likewise, it uses
the word “till,” to make certain what was before the birth, but as to
what follows, it leaves thee to make the inference. Thus, what it was
necessary for thee to learn of Him, this He Himself hath said; that the
Virgin was untouched by man until the birth; but that which both was
seen to be a consequence of the former statement, and was acknowledged,
this in its turn he leaves for thee to perceive; namely, that not even
after this, she having so become a mother, and having been counted
worthy of a new sort of travail, and a child-bearing so strange, could
that righteous man ever have endured to know her. For if he had known
her, and had kept her in the place of a wife, how is it that our
Lord <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md) commits her, as
unprotected, and having no one, to His disciple, and commands him to
take her to his own home?

<span id="V_1-p40"></span>How then, one may say, are James and the
others called His brethren? In the same kind of way as Joseph himself
was supposed to be husband of Mary. For many were the veils provided,
that the birth, being such as it was, might be for a time screened.
Wherefore even John so called them, saying, “For neither did His
brethren believe in Him.” <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md)

<span id="V_1-p42"></span>6. Nevertheless they, who did not believe at
first, became afterwards admirable, and illustrious. At least when Paul
and they that were of his company were come up to Jerusalem about
decrees, <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) they went in
straightway unto James. For he was so admired as even to be the first to
be entrusted with the bishop’s office. And they say he gave himself up
to such great austerity, that even his members became all of them as
dead, and that from his continual praying, and his perpetual intercourse
with the ground, his forehead became so callous as to be in no better
state than a camel’s knees, simply by reason <span id="page_32">p.
32</span> <span id="V_1-Page_32"></span> of his striking it so against
the earth. <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md) This man gives
directions to Paul himself, when he was after this come up again to
Jerusalem, saying, <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) “Thou seest,
brother, how many thousands there are of them that are come together.”
So great was his understanding and his zeal, or rather so great the
power of Christ. For they that mock Him when living, after His death are
so filled with awe, as even to die for Him with exceeding readiness.
Such things most of all show the power of His resurrection. For this,
you see, was the reason of the more glorious things being kept till
afterwards, viz. that this proof might become indisputable. For seeing
that even those who are admired amongst us in their life, when they are
gone, are apt to be forgotten by us; how was it that they, who made
light of this Man living, afterwards thought Him to be God, if He was
but one of the many? How was it that they consented even to be slain for
His sake, unless they received His resurrection on clear proof?

<span id="V_1-p46"></span>7. And these things we tell you, that ye may
not hear only, but imitate also his manly severity, <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md) his plainness of speech, his
righteousness in all things; that no one may despair of himself, though
hitherto he have been careless, that he may set his hopes on nothing
else, after God’s mercy, but on his own virtue. For if these were
nothing the better for such a kindred, though they were of the same
house and lineage with Christ, until they gave proof of virtue; what
favor can we possibly receive, when we plead righteous kinsmen and
brethren, unless we be exceeding dutiful, <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249.md) and have lived in virtue? As the
prophet too said, intimating the selfsame thing, “A brother redeemeth
not, shall a man redeem?” <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md) No,
not although it were <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251.md) Moses,
Samuel, Jeremiah. Hear, for example, what God saith unto this last,
“Pray not thou for this people, for I will not hear thee.” <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md) And why marvellest thou if I hear not
thee? “Though Moses himself and Samuel stood before me,” <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md) I would not receive their supplication
for these men.” Yea, if it be Ezekiel who entreats, he will be told,
“Though Noah stand forth, and Job, and Daniel, they shall deliver
neither sons nor daughters.” <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md)
Though the patriarch Abraham be supplicating for them that are most
incurably diseased, and change not, God will leave him and go His
way, <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md) that he may not receive his
cry in their behalf. Though again it be Samuel who is doing this, He
saith unto him, “Mourn not thou for Saul.” <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md) Though for his own sister one entreat,
when it is not fitting, he again shall have the same sort of answer as
Moses, “If her father had but spit in her face.” <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md)

<span id="V_1-p57"></span>Let us not then be looking open-mouthed
towards others. For it is true, the prayers of the saints have the
greatest power; on condition however of our repentance and amendment.
Since even Moses, who had rescued his own brother and six hundred
thousand men from the wrath that was then coming upon them from God, had
no power to deliver his sister; <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md)
and yet the sin was not equal; for whereas she had done despite but to
Moses, in that other case it was plain impiety, what they ventured on.
But this difficulty I leave for you; while that which is yet harder, I
will try to explain.

<span id="V_1-p59"></span>For why should we speak of his sister? since
he who stood forth the advocate of so great a people had not power to
prevail for himself, but after his countless toils, and sufferings, and
his assiduity for forty years, was prohibited from setting foot on that
land, touching which there had been so many declarations and promises.
What then was the cause? To grant this favor would not be profitable,
but would, on the contrary, bring with it much harm, and would be sure
to prove a stumbling-block to many of the Jews. For if when they were
merely delivered from Egypt, they forsook God, and sought after Moses,
and imputed all to him; had they seen him also lead them into the land
of promise, to what extent of impiety might they not have been cast
away? And for this reason also, let me add, neither was his tomb made
known.

<span id="V_1-p60"></span>And Samuel again was not able to save Saul
from the wrath from above, yet he oftentimes preserved the Israelites.
And Jeremiah prevailed not for the Jews, but some one else he did haply
cover from evil by his prophecy. <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259.md)
And Daniel saved the barbarians from slaughter, <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260.md) but he did not deliver the Jews from
their captivity.

<span id="V_1-p63"></span>And in the Gospels too we shall see both these
events come to pass, not in the case of different persons, but of the
same; and the same man now prevailing for himself and now given up. For
he who owed the ten thousand talents, though he had delivered himself
from the danger by entreaty, yet again he prevailed not, <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md) and another on the contrary, <span
id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span id="V_1-Page_33"></span> who had before
thrown himself away, afterwards had power to help himself in the
greatest degree. <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md) But who is
this? He that devoured his Father’s substance.

<span id="V_1-p66"></span>So that on the one hand, if we be careless, we
shall not be able to obtain salvation, no not even by the help of
others; if, on the other hand, we be watchful, we shall be able to do
this by ourselves, and by ourselves rather than by others. Yes; for God
is more willing to give His grace to us, than to others for us; that we
by endeavoring ourselves to do away His wrath, may both enjoy confidence
towards Him, and become better men. Thus He had pity on the Canaanitish
woman, thus He saved the harlot, thus the thief, when there was none to
be mediator nor advocate.

<span id="V_1-p67"></span>8. And this I say, not that we may omit
supplicating the saints, but to hinder our being careless, and
entrusting our concerns to others only, while we fall back and slumber
ourselves. For so when He said, “make to yourselves friends,” <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md) he did not stop at this only, but He
added, “of the unrighteous mammon;” that so again the good work may be
thine own; for it is nothing else but almsgiving which He hath here
signified. And, what is marvellous, neither doth He make a strict
account with us, if we withdraw ourselves from injustice. For what He
saith is like this: “Hast thou gained ill? spend well. Hast thou
gathered by unrighteousness? scatter abroad in righteousness.” And yet,
what manner of virtue is this, to give out of such gains? God, however,
being full of love to man, condescends even to this and if we thus do,
promises us many good things. But we are so past all feeling, as not to
give even of our unjust gain, but while plundering without end, if we
contribute the smallest part, we think we have fulfilled all. Hast thou
not heard Paul saying, “He which soweth sparingly, shall reap also
sparingly”? <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md) Wherefore then dost
thou spare? What, is the act an outlay? is it an expense? Nay, it is
gain and good merchandise. Where there is merchandise, there is also
increase; where there is sowing, there is also reaping. But thou, if
thou hadst to till a rich and deep soil, and capable of receiving much
seed, wouldest both spend what thou hadst, and wouldest borrow of other
men, accounting parsimony in such cases to be loss; but, when it is
Heaven which thou art to cultivate, which is exposed to no variation of
weather, and will surely repay thine outlay with abundant increase, thou
art slow and backward, and considerest not that it is possible by
sparing to lose, and by not sparing to gain.

<span id="V_1-p70"></span>9. Disperse therefore, that thou mayest not
lose; keep not, that thou mayest keep; lay out, that thou mayest save;
spend, that thou mayest gain. If thy treasures are to be hoarded, do not
thou hoard them, for thou wilt surely cast them away; but entrust them
to God, for thence no man makes spoil of them. Do not thou traffic, for
thou knowest not at all how to gain; but lend unto Him who gives an
interest greater than the principal. Lend, where is no envy, no
accusation, nor evil design, nor fear. Lend unto Him who wants nothing,
yet hath need for thy sake; who feeds all men, yet is an hungered, that
thou mayest not suffer famine; who is poor, that thou mayest be rich.
Lend there, where thy return cannot be death, but life instead of death.
For this usury is the harbinger of a kingdom, that, of hell; the one
coming of covetousness, the other of self-denial; the one of cruelty,
the other of humanity. What excuse then will be ours, when having the
power to receive more, and that with security, and in due season, and in
great freedom, without either reproaches, or fears, or dangers, we let
go these gains, and follow after that other sort, base and vile as they
are, insecure and perishable, and greatly aggravating the furnace for
us? For nothing, nothing is baser than the usury of this world, nothing
more cruel. Why, other persons’ calamities are such a man’s traffic; he
makes himself gain of the distress of another, and demands wages for
kindness, as though he were afraid to seem merciful, and under the cloak
of kindness he digs the pitfall deeper, by the act of help galling a
man’s poverty, and in the act of stretching out the hand thrusting him
down, and when receiving him as in harbor, involving him in shipwreck,
as on a rock, or shoal, or reef.

<span id="V_1-p71"></span>“But what dost thou require?” saith one; “that
I should give another for his use that money which I have got together,
and which is to me useful, and demand no recompense?” Far from it: I say
not this: yea, I earnestly desire that thou shouldest have a recompense;
not however a mean nor small one, but far greater; for in return for
gold, I would that thou shouldest receive Heaven for usury. Why then
shut thyself up in poverty, crawling about the earth, and demanding
little for great? Nay, this is the part of one who knows not how to be
rich. For when God in return for a little money is promising thee <span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="V_1-Page_34"></span> the good things
that are in Heaven, and thou sayest, “Give me not Heaven, but instead of
Heaven the gold that perisheth,” this is for one who wishes to continue
in poverty. Even as he surely who desires wealth and abundance will
choose things abiding rather than things perishing; the inexhaustible,
rather than such as waste away; much rather than little, the
incorruptible rather than the corruptible. For so the other sort too
will follow. For as he who seeks earth before Heaven, will surely lose
earth also, so he that prefers Heaven to earth, shall enjoy both in
great excellency. And that this may be the case with us, let us despise
all things here, and choose the good things to come. For thus shall we
obtain both the one and the other, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and might for ever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_224"></span>[29:225](1100013.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="V_1-p4.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p5"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p5.1"></span>τ συνξεω</span>, the technical term for a religious
service among Christians. It does not of itself imply a Eucharistic
service, as the above rendering seems to suggest. Indeed, the exordium
of this Homily points directly to a service in which the sermon was
prominent, making no allusion to the Lord’s Supper. For a wider use, see
the close of Homily LXXXVIII.—R.\]

<span id="fn_225"></span>[29:226](1100013.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="V_1-p5.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p6"></span>Comp. Herbert’s Country Parson, c. 10. “He
himself, or his wife, takes account of sermons, and how every one
profits, comparing this year with the last.”

<span id="fn_226"></span>[29:227](1100013.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="V_1-p9.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p10"></span>\[“Let us therefore remember again what was
lately said, and thus go on to what is set before us to-day.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_227"></span>[30:228](1100013.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="V_1-p11.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p12"></span>[Ephes. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md)<span id="V_1-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[30:229](1100013.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="V_1-p13.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p14"></span>\[The view here indicated, that this citation
was part of the angelic message, is not generally held (but see J. A.
Alexander *in loco*). It seems to me inconsistent with the last clause
of [Matt. 1.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023.md)<span
id="V_1-p14.1"></span>: “which is, being interpreted,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_229"></span>[30:230](1100013.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="V_1-p14.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p15"></span>\[“Unless,” is not found in the <span
class="c20"><span id="V_1-p15.1"></span>mss</span>., but inserted by the
editors as necessary to the sense.—R.\]

<span id="fn_230"></span>[30:231](1100013.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="V_1-p15.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p16"></span>\[“Prophet” is the correct rendering; the
plural in the Oxford version is probably due to a typographical
error.—R.\]

<span id="fn_231"></span>[30:232](1100013.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="V_1-p20.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p21"></span>[Isa. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003.md)<span id="V_1-p21.1"></span>.
\[Chrysostom does not use the Hebrew name here, but simply repeats a
part of the Greek phrase used to translate “Maher-shalal-hash-baz” in
the <span class="c20"><span id="V_1-p21.2"></span>LXX</span>., which he
had already given in the previous sentence: <span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p21.3"></span>Ταχω σκλευσον, ξω προνμευσον</span>. The R.V. *in
loco* does not accept the imperative rendering, but gives this marginal
explanation: “That is, *The spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth*.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_232"></span>[30:233](1100013.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="V_1-p21.4"></span>

<span id="V_1-p22"></span>[Isa. 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027.md)<span id="V_1-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[30:234](1100013.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="V_1-p22.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p23"></span>\[Supplied by translator; literally, “it
speaks.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_234"></span>[30:235](1100013.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="V_1-p24.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p25"></span>*i.e.*, Aquila who flourished A.D. 128,
Theodotion, A.D. 175, Symmachus, A.D. 201: who were all of them Jews or
Judaizing heretics. Cave, Hist. Lit. i. 32, 48, 64.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[31:236](1100013.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="V_1-p25.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p26"></span>\[This reference to the “agreement” of the
<span class="c20"><span id="V_1-p26.1"></span>LXX</span>. seems to
indicate an acceptance of the current tradition in regard to the
supernatural exactness of that version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_236"></span>[31:237](1100013.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="V_1-p27.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p28"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012.md)<span id="V_1-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[31:238](1100013.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="V_1-p28.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p29"></span>[Deut. xxii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#027.md)<span id="V_1-p29.1"></span>. In our
translation, “the betrothed damsel cried.” This place is cited by St.
Jerome on Matt. with reference to the same argument.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[31:239](1100013.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="V_1-p30.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p31"></span>[Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md)<span id="V_1-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[31:240](1100013.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="V_1-p34.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p35"></span>\[There is no indication here of any knowledge
of the reading found in the oldest authorities of every class (uncials,
cursives and versions): <span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p35.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p35.2"></span>τεκεν υν</span>, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="V_1-p35.3"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="V_1-p35.4"></span>τεκεν τν υν ατ τν
πρωττοκον</span>. The latter is the reading of all authorities in [Luke
ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007.md)<span
id="V_1-p35.5"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_240"></span>[31:241](1100013.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="V_1-p35.6"></span>

<span id="V_1-p36"></span>[Gen. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#007.md)<span id="V_1-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[31:242](1100013.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="V_1-p36.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p37"></span>[Ps. xc.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002.md)<span id="V_1-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[31:243](1100013.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="V_1-p37.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p38"></span>[Ps. lxxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007.md)<span id="V_1-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[31:244](1100013.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="V_1-p38.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p39"></span>[John xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027.md)<span id="V_1-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[31:245](1100013.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="V_1-p40.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p41"></span>[John vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005.md)<span id="V_1-p41.1"></span>. \[In
regard to the “brethren of our Lord,” there seems to be some confusion
in the statements of Chrysostom: Comp. Hom. LXXXVIII., on chap. xxvii.
55, 56. The digression here to the character of James seems intended to
divert from the historical discussion.—R.\]

<span id="fn_245"></span>[31:246](1100013.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="V_1-p42.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p43"></span>[Acts 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md),
[Acts 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004.md), [Acts
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018.md)<span id="V_1-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[32:247](1100013.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="V_1-p43.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p44"></span>See Hegesippus in St. Jerome de Viris
Illustr., c. 2.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[32:248](1100013.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="V_1-p44.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p45"></span>[Acts 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#022.md)<span id="V_1-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[32:249](1100013.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="V_1-p46.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p47"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p47.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p47.2"></span>νδρεαν</span>, “manliness.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_249"></span>[32:250](1100013.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="V_1-p47.3"></span>

<span id="V_1-p48"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p48.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p48.2"></span>πιεικε</span>.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[32:251](1100013.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="V_1-p48.3"></span>

<span id="V_1-p49"></span>[Ps. xlix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007.md)<span id="V_1-p49.1"></span>. \[This
is the rendering of the <span class="c20"><span
id="V_1-p49.2"></span>LXX</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_251"></span>[32:252](1100013.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="V_1-p49.3"></span>

<span id="V_1-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p50.1"></span>\[k</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p50.2"></span>ἂ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="V_1-p50.3"></span>ν</span> , “even if it were.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_252"></span>[32:253](1100013.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="V_1-p50.4"></span>

<span id="V_1-p51"></span>[Jer. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014.md)<span id="V_1-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[32:254](1100013.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="V_1-p51.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p52"></span>[Jer. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001.md)<span id="V_1-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[32:255](1100013.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="V_1-p52.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p53"></span>[Ezek.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016.md)<span id="V_1-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[32:256](1100013.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="V_1-p53.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p54"></span>[Gen. xviii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#033.md)<span id="V_1-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[32:257](1100013.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="V_1-p54.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p55"></span>[1 Sam. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md)<span id="V_1-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[32:258](1100013.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="V_1-p55.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p56"></span>[Num. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014.md)<span id="V_1-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[32:259](1100013.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="V_1-p57.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p58"></span>[Exod. 32:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#000.md),
[Num. 12:0](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#000.md)<span
id="V_1-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[32:260](1100013.htm#fr_259.md) <span
id="V_1-p60.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p61"></span>Alluding, perhaps, to [2 Maccab. xv.
13-16](../../../bib/apo/ma2015.htm#013.md)<span id="V_1-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[32:261](1100013.htm#fr_260.md) <span
id="V_1-p61.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p62"></span>[Dan. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024.md)<span id="V_1-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[32:262](1100013.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="V_1-p63.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p64"></span>[Matt. xviii.
26-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#026.md)<span id="V_1-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[33:263](1100013.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="V_1-p64.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p65"></span>[Luke xv.
13-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#013.md)<span id="V_1-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[33:264](1100013.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="V_1-p67.1"></span>

<span id="V_1-p68"></span>[Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md)<span id="V_1-p68.1"></span>. It
would seem from this that the saints whom we are to supplicate for their
help are those on earth, whom we may assist by our alms. And the
examples before tend to confirm this view.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[33:265](1100013.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="V_1-p68.2"></span>

<span id="V_1-p69"></span>2 Cor. xix. 6<span id="V_1-p69.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VI](1100014.md)
