[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100006)  [Next](1100008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>I. The Place of Chrysostom in the History of
Exegesis.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>The position held by Chrysostom in the
history of exegesis is remarkable. Owing to a peculiar combination of
circumstances he, more than any of the Fathers, was enabled to avoid the
errors alike of the allegorizing and dogmatic tendencies. The former
tendency was the prevalent one in the Christian Church in the
Ante-Nicene period; the latter, especially in the West, became dominant
during the Post-Nicene period, using for its own ends the earlier
erroneous theory. Chrysostom represents the Antiochian reaction against
the allegorizing method, while he ante-dates by a generation, at least,
the time when the ecclesiastical or dogmatic theory became overpowering
in its influence. This historical position must be recognized in
estimating his character as an exegete, as well as in accounting for his
eminence as an interpreter of Scripture. Modern scholarship with
comparative unanimity accords to him this eminence. It is true that one
is disposed to dissent from this judgment on first reading the Homilies
of Chrysostom. Trained in our modern exegetical methods the reader may
unconsciously compare the expositions of the Greek Father with those of
Luther and Calvin, if not with those of Meyer and Weiss. Such a
comparison is of course an anachronism. A study of other patristic
exegetes must lead to an endorsement of the prevalent opinion as to the
merits of Chrysostom as an expositor. An immense mass of homiletical
literature of which he was the author has been preserved, and of course
reveals very unequal results. Marks of carelessness, especially in
citation, abound; the habits of the “practical preacher” often leads to
long digressions, to elaboration of matters that at best hold only the
relation of a tangent to the truth of the text. Yet less than most <span
id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii-Page_xviii"></span>
pulpit orators does Chrysostom warp the interpretation itself to suit
his homiletical purpose. Occasionally vehement invective occurs when an
exegetical difficulty is encountered, and it is easy to suppose that
unconsciously the former has been used to cover up the latter. But there
are few evidences of lack of candor in the treatment of such
difficulties. It must be confessed that Chrysostom is not always true to
his own principles of interpretation, yet these instances of
inconsistency are usually due to a desire to enforce an ethical lesson
pertinent to the occasion, even though the application was scarcely
pertinent to the text. Owing to his ignorance of Hebrew, Chrysostom was
not properly equipped for the work of expounding the Old Testament. He
treats the LXX. as though it were of final authority, save in a few
instances where the variations of other Greek versions have occasioned
discussion. Frequently he makes use of verbal suggestions of the Greek
that have no warrant in the Hebrew text. Yet, where he is not thus
misled, his comments on the Old Testament present the same
characteristics as those on the New.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>The most marked peculiarity of
Chrysostom as an exegete is his comparative freedom from the
allegorizing tendency that prevailed in the early Christian centuries.
In contending with the Jews, the Christian apologists, from Justin
Martyr onward, had inevitably followed to some extent the methods of
their opponents. The Jewish schools of interpreters, both at Alexandria
and in Palestine, while somewhat antagonistic to each other, had in
common this allegorizing habit. Argument about the meaning of the Old
Testament necessarily fostered a similar tendency among Christian
writers. Moreover, the Christian authors of the second and third
centuries were not men of pre-eminent talent or acquirements. The
victory won by the church was ethical rather than intellectual. Then, as
now, profound piety, when not combined with accurate knowledge and
mental acumen, delighted in mystical fancies. Types could be invented
far more easily than texts could be investigated. At length this
tendency found in Origen an advocate who had the ability to formulate
its principles, and also the learning and industry necessary to
illustrate the method by copious comments of his own. *Facile princeps*
as a mystical interpreter, Origen’s influence is still felt, and in his
own age it was dominant in exegesis. It is true the dogmatic principle
was already gaining the mastery, yet both the Orthodox and their
opponents made use of allegory: the former combined the two tendencies,
the latter placed them in antagonism. Curiously enough the doctrinal
controversy that arose in consequence of some of Origen’s views was made
the occasion of an attack upon Chrysostom, and the kindness he showed to
certain Egyptian monks, who were followers of Origen, became the pretext
for those harsh measures which resulted in his banishment and
death. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Yet Chrysostom, in his
writings, shows no sympathy with the philosophic speculations of Origen,
and his method as an exegete is far removed from that implied in the
principles laid down by the latter. The great preacher never dishonors
the literal, or historical, sense of Scripture, and though he
occasionally refers to interpretations <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.3"></span>κατ ναγωγν</span>, using the phrase applied
by Origen to the mystical sense of passages, these are never exalted
above the plain meaning of the words of the text. No one living in the
age of Chrysostom could be a diligent student of the Bible and ignore
the labors of Origen. Despite his advocacy of the mystical theory and
his excessive speculative tendency he had done more for exegetical
theology than any of his predecessors. In these days we owe him too much
to forget these services. The wonder is that Chrysostom, familiar with
his writings, was so little influenced by the erroneous hermeneutical
principles he advocated and exemplified. The earnest practical purpose
of Chrysostom did much in preserving him from allegorizing, but his
training of Antioch under Diodorus, afterwards bishop of Tarsus, was
probably still more influential for good. Diodorus is reckoned the
leader of the so-called Antiochian school of exegetes. <span
id="page_xix">p. xix</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii-Page_xix"></span> He
was the first to oppose directly the false methods of Origen. It is true
“the Three Cappadocians,” Basil the Great, his brother Gregory of Nyssa,
and his friend Gregory of Nazianzen, had but a qualified admiration for
the exegetical results attained by Origen, though diligent in their use
of his writings. The conflicts of the period interfered, however, with
any decided hermeneutical advance; the dogmatic interest of the Arian
controversy still overshadowing all other theological movements.
Diodorus (†394) was president of a monastery in the vicinity of Antioch.
Under his guidance Chrysostom and his friend Basil pursued a
semi-monastic life of seclusion and study for nearly six years (ending
in A.D. 381). Theodore, who was afterwards bishop of Mopsuestia, and the
father of the Nestorian theology, was also his friend and
fellow-student. While Diodorus was not free from rationalizing
tendencies, he undoubtedly represents a healthy re-action toward the
historico-exegetical theory of interpretation. His writings and his
influence on his two most distinguished pupils, Chrysostom and Theodore,
plainly prove this. “The practical element in Diodorus, his method of
literal and common-sense interpretation of Holy Scripture, was inherited
chiefly by Chrysostom; the intellectual vein, his conceptions of the
relation between the Godhead and Manhood in Christ, his opinions
respecting the final restoration of mankind, which were almost
equivalent to a denial of eternal punishment, were reproduced mainly by
Theodore.” <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>While the influence of the Antiochian
school seems transient, it has achieved much in stating more clearly the
correct principles of interpretation; it has achieved still more in
preparing for his work the greatest preacher of the Greek church.
Avoiding to a great extent the extremes of both Origen and Diodorus,
Chrysostom as an interpreter is probably nearer to us than any Father of
the Eastern Church. A careful study of his Homilies must lead to that
conviction. “He set forth the verbal meaning with constant attention to
the course of thought, and connected therewith, in harmony with the form
which he had chosen, the religious and moral observations which were
founded directly on the text. Dogmatic and polemic digressions were not
necessarily excluded, but were never made the principal thing, and the
more or less frequently inserted allegorical additions appear rather as
rhetorical ornament and deference to custom than as something necessary
to the expositor.” <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>The doctrinal views of Chrysostom were
positive and usually well defined. He does not fail to oppose heretical
opinions. So great a preacher could not be without a theology. Yet, as
already intimated, the dogmatic principle of interpretation does not
dominate his exegesis to any great extent.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9"></span>It thus appears that, whatever may be
defects in his expositions, however faulty his comments may seem to us,
Chrysostom stands as the representative of more correct principles than
any of the early Fathers. That his eminence as a preacher is due to this
fact can scarcely be doubted. A new interest in his writings would serve
to emphasize the importance of adherence to the historico-exegetical
method of interpretation. Great pulpit orators do not need to indulge in
mystical fancies, nor does their true power arise from dogmatic warping
of the sense of Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xviii:1](1100007.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span>See <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>Stephens</span>, *Life of St. Chrysostom*,
pp. 286–326; <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>Schaff</span>, *History of the Christian
Church*, vol. III., pp. 702 et seq.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xix:2](1100007.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>Stephens</span> *St. Chrysostom*, p. 31;
comp. pp. 27–32, on Diodorus. On the Antiochian School, see <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>Schaff</span>, *Church
History*, III. pp. 935–7; <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p5.3"></span>Reuss</span> *History of the New Testament*,
II., pp. 542–6, American edition.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xix:3](1100007.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>Reuss</span>, *History New Testament*, p.
544, American edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II](1100008)
