[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100070)  [Next](1100072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXIII"></span> <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="iii.LXIII-Page_386"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span
id="iii.LXIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p3"></span>“And as they departed from Jericho, great
multitudes followed Him. And, behold, two blind men sitting by the
wayside, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have
mercy on us, O Lord, Thou Son of David.”

<span id="iii.LXIII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p4.1"></span>See</span> whence He passed unto Jerusalem,
and where He abode before this, with regard to which it seems to me
especially worthy of inquiry, wherefore He went not away even long
before this from thence unto Galilee, but through Samaria. But this we
will leave to them that are fond of learning. For if any one were
disposed to search the matter out carefully, he will find that John
intimates it well, and hath expressed the cause. <span
id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496)

<span id="iii.LXIII-p6"></span>But let us keep to the things set before
us, and let us listen to these blind men, who were better than many that
see. For neither having a guide, nor being able to see Him when come
near to them, nevertheless they strove to come unto Him, and began to
cry with a loud voice, and when rebuked for speaking, they cried the
more. For such is the nature of an enduring soul, by the very things
that hinder, it is borne up.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p7"></span>But Christ suffered them to be rebuked,
that their earnestness might the more appear, and that thou mightest
learn that worthily they enjoy the benefits of their cure. Therefore He
doth not so much as ask, “Do ye believe?” as He doth with many; for
their cry, and their coming unto Him, sufficed to make their faith
manifest.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p8"></span>Hence learn, O beloved, that though we be
very vile and outcast, but yet approach God with earnestness, even by
ourselves we shall be able to effect whatsoever we ask. See, for
instance, these men, how, having none of the apostles to plead with
them, but rather many to stop their mouths, they were able to pass over
the hindrances, and to come unto Jesus Himself. And yet the evangelist
bears witness to no confidence of life <span
id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497) in them, but earnestness sufficed
them instead of all.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p10"></span>These then let us also emulate. Though
God defer the gift, though there be many withdrawing us, let us not
desist from asking. For in this way most of all shall we win God to us.
See at least even here, how not poverty, not blindness, not their being
unheard, not their being rebuked by the multitude, not anything else,
impeded their exceeding earnestness. Such is the nature of a fervent and
toiling soul.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p11"></span>What then saith Christ? “He called them,
and said, What will ye that I should do unto you? They say unto Him,
Lord, that our eyes may be opened.” <span
id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498) Wherefore doth He ask them? Lest
any one should think that when they wish to receive one thing, He giveth
them another thing. For indeed it is usual with Him on every occasion,
first to make manifest and discover to all the virtue of those He is
healing, and then to apply the cure, for one reason, that He might lead
on the others likewise to emulation; and for another, that He might show
that they were enjoying the gift worthily. This, for instance, He did
with respect to the Canaanitish woman also, this too in the case of the
centurion, this again as to her that had the issue of blood, or rather
that marvellous woman even anticipated the Lord’s inquiry; but not so
did He pass her by, but even after the cure makes her manifest. Such
earnest care had He on every occasion to proclaim the good deeds of them
that come to Him, and to show them to be much greater than they
are, <span id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499) which He doth here also.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p14"></span>Then, when they said what they wished,
He had compassion on them, and touched them. For this alone is the cause
of their cure, for which also He came into the world. But nevertheless,
although it be mercy and grace, it seeks for the worthy.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p15"></span>But that they were worthy is manifest,
both from what they cried out, and from the fact that, when they had
received, they did not hasten away, as many do, being ungrateful after
the benefits. Nay, they were not like this, but were both persevering
before the <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="iii.LXIII-Page_387"></span> gift, and after the gift grateful, for
“they followed Him.”

<span id="iii.LXIII-p16"></span>“And when He drew nigh unto Jerusalem,
and was come to Bethphage, unto the Mount of Olives, He sent two of His
disciples, saying, Go into the village over against you, and ye shall
find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring them unto
me. And if any man say aught unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need
of them; and straightway he sendeth them. And this was done, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by Zechariah the prophet, Tell ye
the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh to thee, meek, and sitting
upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.” <span
id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500)

<span id="iii.LXIII-p18"></span>And yet He had often entered Jerusalem
before, but never with so much circumstance. What then is the cause? It
was the beginning then of the dispensation; and neither was He very well
known, nor the time of His passion near; wherefore He mixed with them
with less distinction, and more disguising Himself. For He would not
have been held in admiration, had He so appeared, and He would have
excited them to greater anger. But when He had both given them
sufficient proof of His power, and the cross was at the doors, He makes
Himself then more conspicuous, and doeth with greater circumstance all
the things that were likely to inflame them. For it was indeed possible
for this to have been done at the beginning also; but it was not
profitable nor expedient it should be so.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p19"></span>But do thou observe, I pray thee, how
many miracles are done, and how many prophecies are fulfilled. He said,
“Ye shall find an ass;” He foretold that no man should hinder them, but
that all, when they heard, should hold their peace.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p20"></span>But this is no small condemnation of the
Jews, if them that were never known to Him, neither had appeared before
Him, He persuades to give up their own property, and to say nothing
against it, and that by His disciples, while these, being present with
Him at the working of His miracles, were not persuaded.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p21"></span>2. And do not account what was done to
be a small thing. For who persuaded them, when their own property was
taken from them, and that, when they were perhaps poor men and
husbandmen, not to forbid it? Why say I not to forbid it? not to ask, or
even if they asked, to hold their peace, and give it up. For indeed both
things were alike marvellous, as well, if they said nothing, when their
beasts were dragged away, or if having spoken, and heard, “The Lord hath
need of them,” they yielded and withstood not, and this when they see
not Him, but His disciples.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p22"></span>By these things He teaches them, that it
was in His power to have entirely hindered the Jews also, even against
their will, when they were proceeding to attack Him, and to have made
them speechless, but He would not.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p23"></span>And another thing again together with
these doth He teach the disciples, to give whatever He should ask; and,
though he should require them to yield up their very life, to give even
this, and not to gainsay. For if even strangers gave up to Him, much
more ought they to strip themselves of all things.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p24"></span>And besides what we have said, He was
fulfilling also another prophecy, one which was twofold, one part in
words, and another in deeds. And that in deeds was, by the sitting on
the ass; and that by words, the prediction of Zacharias; because he had
said, that the King should sit on an ass. And He, having sat and having
fulfilled it, gave to the prophecy another beginning again, by what He
was doing typifying beforehand the things to come.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p25"></span>How and in what manner? He proclaimed
beforehand the calling of the unclean Gentiles, and that He should rest
upon them, and that they should yield to Him and follow Him, and
prophecy succeeded to prophecy.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p26"></span>But to me He seemeth not for this object
only to sit on the ass, but also as affording us a standard of
self-denial. For not only did He fulfill prophecies, nor did He only
plant the doctrines of the truth, but by these very things He was
correcting our practice for us, everywhere setting us rules of necessary
use, and by all means amending our life.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p27"></span>For this cause, I say, even when He was
to be born He sought not a splendid house, nor a mother rich and
distinguished, but a poor woman, and one that had a carpenter as her
betrothed husband; and is born in a shed, and laid in a manger: and
choosing His disciples, He chose not orators and wise men, not rich men
and nobly born, but poor men, and of poor families, and in every way
undistinguished; and providing His table, at one time He sets before
Himself barley loaves, and at another at the very moment commands the
disciples to buy at the market. And making His couch, He makes it of
grass, and putting on raiment, He clothes Himself in <span
id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span id="iii.LXIII-Page_388"></span> what
is cheap, and in no respect different from the common sort; and a house
He did not so much as possess. And if He had to go from place to place,
He did this travelling on foot, and so travelling, as even to grow
weary. And sitting, He requires no throne nor pillow, but sits on the
ground, sometimes in the mountain, and sometimes by the well, and not
merely by the well, but also alone, and talks with a Samaritan woman.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p28"></span>Again, setting measures of sorrow, when
He had need to mourn, He weeps moderately, everywhere setting us rules,
as I have said, and limits how far one ought to proceed, and not any
further. So for this intent now also, since it happens that some are
weak and have need of beasts to carry them, in this too He fixes a
measure, showing that one ought not to yoke horses or mules to be borne
by them, but to use an ass, and not to proceed further, and everywhere
to be limited by the want.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p29"></span>But let us look also at the prophecy,
that by words, that by acts. What then is the prophecy? “Behold, thy
King cometh to thee, meek, and riding on an ass, and a young
colt;” <span id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501) not driving chariots,
like the rest of the kings, not demanding tributes, not thrusting men
off, and leading about guards, but displaying His great meekness even
hereby.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p31"></span>Ask then the Jew, what King came to
Jerusalem borne on an ass? Nay, he could not mention, but this alone.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p32"></span>But He did these things, as I said,
signifying beforehand the things to come. For here the church is
signified by the colt, and the new people, which was once unclean, but
which, after Jesus sat on them, became clean. And see the image
preserved throughout. I mean that the disciples loose the asses. For by
the apostles, both they and we were called; by the apostles were we
brought near. But because our acceptance provoked them also to
emulation, therefore the ass appears following the colt. For after
Christ hath sat on the Gentiles, then shall they also come moving us to
emulation. <span id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502) And Paul declaring
this, said, “That blindness <span id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503)
in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in; and so all Israel shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504) For that it was a prophecy is
evident from what is said. For neither would the prophet have cared to
express with such great exactness the age of the ass, unless this had
been so.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p36"></span>But not these things only are signified
by what is said, but also that the apostles should bring them with ease.
For as here, no man gainsaid them so as to keep the asses, so neither
with regard to the Gentiles was any one able to prevent them, of those
who were before masters of them.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p37"></span>But He doth not sit on the bare colt,
but on the apostles’ garments. For after they had taken the colt, they
then gave up all, even as Paul also said, “I will very gladly spend and
be spent for your souls.” <span id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505)

<span id="iii.LXIII-p39"></span>But mark how tractable the colt, how
being unbroken, and having never known the rein, he was not restive, but
went on orderly; which thing itself was a prophecy of the future,
signifying the submissiveness of the Gentiles, and their sudden
conversion to good order. For all things did that word work, which said,
“Loose him, and bring him to me:” so that the unmanageable became
orderly, and the unclean thenceforth clean.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p40"></span>3. But see the baseness of the Jews. He
had wrought so many miracles, and never were they thus amazed at Him;
but when they saw a multitude running together, then they marvel. “For
all the city was moved, saying, Who is this? But the multitudes said,
This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.” <span
id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506) And when they thought they were
saying something great, even then were their thoughts earthly, and low,
and dragging on the ground. <span id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507)

<span id="iii.LXIII-p43"></span>But these things He did, not as
displaying any pomp, but at once, as I have said, both fulfilling a
prophecy, and teaching self-denial, and at the same time also comforting
His disciples, who were grieving for His death, and showing them that He
suffers all these things willingly. And mark thou, I pray thee, the
accuracy of the prophet, how he foretold all things. And some things
David, some things Zechariah, had proclaimed beforehand. Let us also do
likewise, and let us sing hymns, and give up our garments to them that
bear Him. For what should we deserve, when some clothe the ass on which
He was set, and others strew the garments even under her feet; but we,
seeing him naked, and not being even commanded to strip ourselves, but
to spend of what is laid by, not even so are liberal? And when they
indeed attend upon Him before and behind, but we, when He cometh unto
us, send Him away, and thrust Him off and insult Him.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p44"></span>How sore a punishment do these things
<span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span id="iii.LXIII-Page_389"></span>
deserve, how great vengeance! Thy Lord cometh unto thee in need, and
thou art not willing so much as to listen to His entreaty, but thou
blamest and rebukest Him, and this, when thou hast heard such words as
these. But if in giving one loaf, and a little money, thou art so mean,
and haughty, and backward; if thou hadst to empty out all, what wouldest
thou become?

<span id="iii.LXIII-p45"></span>Seest thou not those that show their
magnificence in the theatre, how much they give away to the harlots? but
thou givest not so much as the half, nay often not the smallest part.
But the devil is exhorting to give to whom it may chance, procuring us
hell, and thou givest; but Christ to the needy, promising a kingdom, and
thou, far from giving, dost rather insult them, and thou choosest rather
to obey the devil, that thou mightest be punished, than to submit to
Christ, and be saved.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p46"></span>And what could be worse than this
frenzy? One procures hell, the other a kingdom, and ye leave the latter,
and run unto the former. And this ye send away, when He cometh unto you,
that when he is far off, ye call unto you. And what you do is the same
as if a king bearing a royal robe, and offering a diadem, did not win
your choice, but a robber brandishing a sword at you, and threatening
death, were to win it.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p47"></span>Considering these things then, beloved,
let us discern the truth at length though late, and let us grow sober.
For I am now ashamed of speaking of almsgiving, because that having
often spoken on this subject, I have effected nothing worth the
exhortation. For some increase indeed hath there been, but not so much
as I wished. For I see you sowing, but not with a liberal hand.
Wherefore I fear too lest ye also “reap sparingly.” <span
id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508)

<span id="iii.LXIII-p49"></span>For in proof that we do sow sparingly,
let us inquire, if it seem good, which <span
id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509) are more numerous in the city, poor
or rich; and which they, who are neither <span
id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510) poor nor rich, but have a middle
place. As, for instance, a tenth part is of rich, and a tenth of the
poor that have nothing at all, and the rest of the middle sort.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p52"></span>Let us distribute then amongst the poor
the whole multitude of the city, and ye will see the disgrace how great
it is. For the very rich indeed are but few, but those that come next to
them are many; again, the poor are much fewer than these. Nevertheless,
although there are so many that are able to feed the hungry, many go to
sleep in their hunger, not because those that have are not able with
ease to succor them, but because of their great barbarity and
inhumanity. For if both the wealthy, and those next to them, were to
distribute amongst themselves those who are in need of bread and
raiment, scarcely would one poor person fall to the share of fifty men
or even a hundred. Yet nevertheless, though in such great abundance of
persons to assist them, they are wailing every day. And that thou mayest
learn the inhumanity of the others, when the church is possessed of a
revenue of one of the lowest among the wealthy, and not of the very
rich, consider how many widows it succors every day, how many virgins;
for indeed the list of them hath already reached unto the number of
three thousand. Together with these, she succors them that dwell in the
prison, the sick in the caravansera, the healthy, those that are absent
from their home, those that are maimed in their bodies, those that wait
upon the altar; and with respect to food and raiment, them that casually
come every day; and her substance is in no respect diminished. So that
if ten men only were thus willing to spend, there would be no poor.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p53"></span>4. And what, it will be said, are our
children to inherit? The principal remains, and the income again is
become more abundant, the goods being stored up for them in Heaven.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p54"></span>But are ye not willing to do this? At
least do it by the half, at least by the third part, at least by the
fourth part, at least by the tenth. For owing to God’s favor, it were
possible for our city to nourish the poor of ten cities.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p55"></span>And if ye will, let us make some
calculation <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) in proof of this;
or rather there is no need so much as of reckoning; for of itself the
easiness of the thing is discernible. See at least, upon public
occasions, how much one house hath often not been backward to spend, and
hath not had so much as a little feeling of the expense, which service
if each of the rich were willing to perform for the poor, in a brief
moment of time he would have seized on Heaven.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p57"></span>What plea then will there be? what
shadow of defense, when not even of the things from which we must
assuredly be separated, when taken away from hence, not even of these do
we impart to the needy with as much liberality as others to those on the
stage, and this when we are to reap so many benefits therefrom? For we
ought indeed, even though we were always to be here, not even so to be
sparing of this good expenditure; but when after a little time, we are
to be removed from <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="iii.LXIII-Page_390"></span> hence, and dragged away naked from all,
what kind of defense shall we have for not even out of our income giving
to the hungry and distressed? <span id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512)

<span id="iii.LXIII-p59"></span>For neither do I constrain thee to
lessen thy possessions, not because I do not wish it, but because I see
thee very backward. It is not then this I say, but spend of your fruits,
and treasure up nothing from these. It is enough for thee to have the
money of thine income pouring in on thee as from a fountain; make the
poor sharers with thee, and become a good steward of the things given
thee of God.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p60"></span>But I pay tribute, one may say. For this
cause then dost thou despise, because in this case no one demands it of
thee? And the other, who, should the earth bear, or should it not bear,
takes by force, and extorts, thou darest not gainsay; but Him that is so
mild, and then only demands, when the earth bears, thou answerest not
even to a word? And who will deliver thee from those intolerable
punishments? There is no one. For if, because in the other case a very
sore punishment will ensue to thee for not giving, therefore thou
becomest diligent about the payment, consider here too is one more sore;
not to be bound, neither to be cast into prison, but to depart into the
eternal fire.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p61"></span>For all reasons then let us pay these
tributes first: for great is the facility, and greater the reward; and
more abundant the gain, and worse the punishments to us if we are
obstinate. For a punishment cometh upon us, which hath no end.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p62"></span>But if thou tell me of the soldier’s
fighting for thee with the barbarians, there is here too a camp, that of
the poor, and a war, which the poor are waging for thee. For when they
receive, by praying they make God propitious; and making Him propitious,
they repulse, instead of barbarians, the assaults of the devils; they
suffer not the evil one to be violent, neither to attack us continually,
but they relax his might.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p63"></span>5. Seeing therefore these soldiers every
day fighting in thy behalf with the devil by their supplications and
prayers, demand of thyself this good contribution, their nourishment.
For this King being mild hath not assigned thee any to demand it of
thee, but desires thou shouldest give it willingly; though thou pay by
little and little, He receives it; though being in difficulty, thou
shouldest pay after a long time, He doth not press him that hath not.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p64"></span>Let us not then despise His
long-suffering; let us treasure up for ourselves, not wrath, but
salvation; not death, but life; not punishment and vengeance, but honors
and crowns. There is no need in this case to pay a hire for the
conveyance of the things contributed; there is no need in this case to
labor in turning them into money. If thou givest them up, the Lord
Himself removes them into Heaven; He Himself makes the traffic the more
gainful for thee.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p65"></span>There is no need here to find one to
carry in what thou hast contributed; contribute only, and straightway it
goeth up, not that others may be maintained as soldiers, but that it may
remain for thee with great profit. For here <span
id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) whatsoever thou mayest have given,
it is not possible to recover; but there thou wilt receive them again
with much honor, and shalt gain greater, and more spiritual gains. Here
the gifts are a demand; there a loan, and money at interest, and a debt.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p67"></span>Yea farther, God hath given thee bonds.
For “he that showeth mercy to a poor man,” it is said, “lendeth to the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514) He gave thee also an
earnest, and bail, and this being God! What sort of earnest? The things
in the present life, the visible, the spiritual things, the foretaste of
the things to come.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p69"></span>Why then dost thou delay, and why art
thou backward, having received so many things already, looking for so
many things?

<span id="iii.LXIII-p70"></span>For what thou hast received are these:
He Himself made thee a body, He Himself put in thee a soul, He honored
with speech thee alone of the things on the earth, He gave thee the use
of all the things that are seen, He bestowed on thee the knowledge of
Himself, He gave up His Son for thee, He gave thee a baptism full of so
many good things, He gave thee a holy table, He promised a kingdom, and
the good things that cannot be told.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p71"></span>Having then received so many good
things, having to receive so many, again I say the same thing, art thou
making petty reckoning about perishing riches, and what excuse wilt thou
have?

<span id="iii.LXIII-p72"></span>But art thou looking altogether at thy
children? and dost draw back for the sake of these? Nay, rather teach
them also to gain such gains. For if thou hadst money lent out and
bearing interest, and thou hadst a grateful debtor, thou wouldest ten
thousand times rather choose instead of the gold to leave the bond to
thy child, so that he should have the large income from it, and not be
constrained to go about, and seek for others to borrow it.

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span id="iii.LXIII-Page_391"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p73"></span>And now give this bond to thy children,
and leave God a debtor to them. Thou dost not sell thy lands, and give
to thy children, but leavest them, that the income may remain, and that
they may have a greater increase of riches from thence; but this bond,
which is more productive than any land or revenue, and bears so many
fruits, this art thou afraid to leave to them? What great folly must
this be, and frenzy. And this when thou knowest, that though thou
shouldest leave it to them, thou thyself also shall again take it away
with thee.

<span id="iii.LXIII-p74"></span>Of this nature are the things spiritual;
they have great munificence. Let us not then be beggarly; neither be
inhuman and savage towards ourselves, but let us traffic in that good
merchandise; that we may both ourselves take it away with us when we
depart, and leave it to our own children, and attain to the good things
to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom be unto the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory,
might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[386:2497](1100071.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p5"></span>[John
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001), [John
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040)<span
id="iii.LXIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[386:2498](1100071.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p9.1"></span>παησαν βου</span>. Claim of access on account
of good life.

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[386:2499](1100071.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p12"></span>[Matt.
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#033)<span id="iii.LXIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[386:2500](1100071.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p13"></span>The words, “and to show them to be much
greater than they are,” are rejected by Montfaucon on the authority of
two <span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXIII-p13.1"></span>mss</span>., but
defended by Mr. Field. \[They are found in all the <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.LXIII-p13.2"></span>mss</span>. collated by
the latter editor, with one exception.—R.\] It seems to be true that our
Lord sometimes encouraged faith, and brought out good example, by
putting on an action a higher meaning and intention than was at all
fully formed in the mind of the doer.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[387:2501](1100071.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p17"></span>[Matt. xxi.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001)<span id="iii.LXIII-p17.1"></span>.
\[The textual variations are reproduced in the above rendering. The most
interesting variation is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p17.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p17.3"></span>ποστλλει</span> (“he sendeth”), the reading
attested in [Mark xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#003)<span
id="iii.LXIII-p17.4"></span>. It implies in the latter passage the
promise to send back the colt to the owners.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[388:2502](1100071.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p30"></span>[Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[388:2503](1100071.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p33"></span>Or, “emulating us,” <span
id="iii.LXIII-p33.1"></span>παραζηλοντε .

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[388:2504](1100071.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p34"></span>\[R.V., a hardening.\]

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[388:2505](1100071.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p35"></span>[Rom.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)<span id="iii.LXIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[388:2506](1100071.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p38"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[388:2507](1100071.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p41"></span>[Matt.
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#011)<span id="iii.LXIII-p41.1"></span>.
\[The Greek text agrees with that of the received.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[388:2508](1100071.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p42.1"></span>σεσυρμνη</span>.

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[389:2509](1100071.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p48"></span>[2 Cor. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[389:2510](1100071.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p50"></span>\[“who are more numerous.”…“and who are
they that are neither,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[389:2511](1100071.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p51"></span>\[“who are more numerous.”…“and who are
they that are neither,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[389:2512](1100071.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p56"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p56.1"></span>συλλογισμν</span> .

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[390:2513](1100071.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p58"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p58.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXIII-p58.2"></span>γχομνοι</span>.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[390:2514](1100071.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p66"></span>\[The translation has been altered here
to conform to the use of “here” and “there” in the original.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[390:2515](1100071.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="iii.LXIII-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXIII-p68"></span>[Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span id="iii.LXIII-p68.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXIV](1100072)
