[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100008)  [Next](1100010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c26"><span
id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Homilies of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c25"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c26"><span
id="iii.iv-p4.1"></span>gospel according to st. matthew.</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>It</span> were indeed meet for us not at all to
require <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) the aid of the written
Word, but to exhibit a life so pure, that the grace of the Spirit should
be instead of books to our souls, and that as these are inscribed with
ink, even so should our hearts be with the Spirit. But, since we have
utterly put away from us this grace, come, let us at any rate embrace
the second best course.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>For that the former was better, God hath
made manifest, <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) both by His words,
and by His doings. Since unto Noah, and unto Abraham, and unto his
offspring, and unto Job, and unto Moses too, He discoursed not by
writings, but Himself by Himself, finding their mind pure. But after the
whole people of the Hebrews had fallen into the very pit of wickedness,
then and thereafter was a written word, and tables, and the admonition
which is given by these.

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>And this one may perceive was the case, not
of the saints in the Old Testament only, but also of those in the New.
For neither to the apostles did God give anything in writing, but
instead of written words He promised that He would give them the grace
of the Spirit: for “He,” saith our Lord, “shall bring all things to your
remembrance.” <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) And that thou mayest
learn that this was far better, hear what He saith by the Prophet: “I
will make a new covenant with you, putting my laws into their mind, and
in their heart I will write them,” and, “they shall be all taught of
God.” <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) And Paul too, pointing out
the same superiority, said, that they had received a law “not in tables
of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.” <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span>But since in process of time they made
shipwreck, some with regard to doctrines, others as to life and manners,
there was again need that they should be put in remembrance by the
written word.

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span>2. Reflect then how great an evil it is for
us, who ought to live so purely as not even to need written words, but
to yield up our hearts, as books, to the Spirit; now that we have lost
that honor, and are come to have need of these, to fail again in duly
employing even this second remedy. For if it be a blame to stand in need
of written words, and not to have brought down on ourselves the grace of
the Spirit; consider how heavy the charge of not choosing to profit even
after this assistance, but rather treating what is written with neglect,
as if it were cast forth without purpose, and at random, and so bringing
down upon ourselves our punishment with increase. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span>But that no such effect may ensue, let us
<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_2"></span> give
strict heed unto the things that are written; and let us learn how the
Old Law was given on the one hand, how on the other the New Covenant.

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span>3. How then was that law given in time
past, and when, and where? After the destruction of the Egyptians, in
the wilderness, on Mount Sinai, when smoke and fire were rising up out
of the mountain, a trumpet sounding, thunders and lightnings, and Moses
entering into the very depth of the cloud. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) But in the new covenant not so,—neither
in a wilderness, nor in a mountain, nor with smoke and darkness and
cloud and tempest; but at the beginning of the day, in a house, while
all were sitting together, with great quietness, all took place. For to
those, being more unreasonable, and hard to guide, there was need of
outward pomp, <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) as of a wilderness, a
mountain, a smoke, a sound of trumpet, and the other like things: but
they who were of a higher character, and submissive, and who had risen
above mere corporeal imaginations, <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)
Yea, for it was removal of punishment, and remission of sins, and
“righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption,” <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) and adoption, and an inheritance of
Heaven, and a relationship unto the Son of God, which he came declaring
unto all; to enemies, to the perverse, to them that were sitting in
darkness. What then could ever be equal to these good tidings? God on
earth, man in Heaven; and all became mingled together, angels joined the
choirs of men, men had fellowship with the angels, and with the other
powers above: and one might see the long war brought to an end, and
reconciliation made between God and our nature, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) the devil brought to shame, demons in
flight, death destroyed, Paradise opened, the curse blotted out, sin put
out of the way, error driven off, truth returning, the word of godliness
everywhere sown, and flourishing in its growth, the polity of those
above planted on the earth, those powers in secure intercourse with us,
and on earth angels continually haunting, and hope abundant touching
things to come.

<span id="iii.iv-p25"></span>Therefore he hath called the history good
tidings, forasmuch as all other things surely are words only without
substance; as, for instance, plenty of wealth, greatness of power,
kingdoms, and glories, and honors, and whatever other things among men
are accounted to be good: but those which are published by the fishermen
would be legitimately and properly called good tidings: not only as
being sure and immoveable blessings, and beyond our deserts, but also as
being given to us with all facility.

<span id="iii.iv-p26"></span>For not by laboring and sweating, not by
fatigue and suffering, but merely as being beloved of God, we received
what we have received.

<span id="iii.iv-p27"></span>5. And why can it have been, that when
there were so many disciples, two write only from among the apostles,
and two from among their followers? (For one that was a disciple of
Paul, and another of Peter, together with Matthew and John, wrote the
Gospels.) It was because they did nothing for vainglory, but all things
for use.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p28"></span>“What then? Was not one evangelist
sufficient to tell all?” One indeed was sufficient; but if there be four
that write, not at the same times, nor in the same places, neither after
having met together, and conversed one with another, and then they speak
all things as it were out of one mouth, this becomes a very great
demonstration of the truth. <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

<span id="iii.iv-p30"></span>6. “But the contrary,” it may be said,
“hath come to pass, for in many places they are convicted of
discordance.” Nay, this very thing is a very great evidence of their
truth. For if they had agreed in all things exactly even to time, and
place, and to the very words, none of our enemies would have believed
but that they had met together, and had written what they wrote by some
human compact; because such entire agreement as this cometh not of
simplicity. But now even that discordance which seems to exist in little
matters delivers them from all suspicion, and speaks clearly in behalf
of the character of the writers.

<span id="iii.iv-p31"></span>But if there be anything touching times or
places, which they have related differently, this nothing <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) injures the truth of what they have said.
And these things too, so far as God shall enable us, we will endeavor,
as we proceed, to point out; requiring you, together with what we have
mentioned, to observe, that in the chief heads, those which constitute
our life and furnish out <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) our
doctrine, nowhere is any of them found to have disagreed, no not ever so
little.

<span id="iii.iv-p34"></span>But what are these points? Such as follow:
That God became man, that He wrought miracles, that He was crucified,
that He was buried, that He rose again, that He ascended, that He will
judge, that He hath given commandments tending to salvation, that He
hath brought in a law not contrary to the Old Testament, that He is a
Son, that He is only-begotten, that He is a true Son, that He is of the
same substance with the Father, and as many things as are like these;
for touching these we shall find that there is in them a full agreement.

<span id="iii.iv-p35"></span>And if amongst the miracles they have not
all of them mentioned all, but one these, the other those, let not this
trouble thee. For if on the one hand one had spoken of all, the number
of the rest would have been superfluous; and if again all had written
fresh things, and different one from another, the proof of their
agreement would not have been manifest. For this cause they have both
treated of many in common, and each of them hath also received and
declared something of his own; that, on the one hand, he might not seem
superfluous, and cast on the heap <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)
to no purpose; on the other, he might make our test of the truth of
their affirmations perfect. <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

<span id="iii.iv-p38"></span>7. Now Luke tells us also the cause
wherefore he proceeds to write: “that thou mayest hold,” saith he, “the
certainty of the words wherein thou hast been instructed;” <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) that is, that being continually reminded
thou mayest hold to the certainty, <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)
and abide in certainty.

<span id="iii.iv-p41"></span>But as to John, he hath himself kept
silence touching the cause; yet, <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)
(as a tradition <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) saith, which hath
come down to us from the first, even from the Fathers,) neither did he
come to write without purpose; but forasmuch as it had been the care of
the three to dwell upon the account of the dispensation, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) and the doctrines of the Godhead were
near being left in silence, he, moved by Christ, then and not till then
set himself to compose his Gospel. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)
And this is manifest both from the history itself, and from the opening
of his Gospel. For he doth not begin like the rest from beneath, but
from above, from the same point, at which he was aiming, and it was with
a view to this that <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) he composed the
whole book. And not in the beginning only, but throughout all the
Gospel, he is more lofty than the rest.

<span id="iii.iv-p47"></span>Of Matthew again it is said, <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) that when those who from amongst the Jews
had believed came to him, and besought him to leave to them in writing
those same things, which he had spoken to them by word, he also composed
his Gospel in the language of the Hebrews. And Mark too, in Egypt, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) is <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_4"></span> said to have done this self-same thing at the
entreaty of the disciples.

<span id="iii.iv-p50"></span>For this cause then Matthew, as writing to
Hebrews, sought to shew nothing more, than that He was from Abraham, and
David; but Luke, as discoursing to all in general, traces up the account
higher, going on even to Adam. And the one begins with His generation,
because nothing was so soothing to the Jew as to be told that Christ was
the offspring of Abraham and David: the other doth not so, but mentions
many other things, and then proceeds to the genealogy.

<span id="iii.iv-p51"></span>8. But the harmony between them we will
establish, both by the whole world, which hath received their
statements, and by the very enemies of the truth. For many sects have
had birth, since their time, holding opinions opposed to their words;
whereof some have received all that they have said, while some have cut
off from the rest certain portions of their statements, and so retain
them for themselves. <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) But if there
were any hostility <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) in their
statements, neither would the sects, who maintain the contrary part,
have received all, but only so much as seemed to harmonize with
themselves; nor would those, which have parted off a portion, be utterly
refuted by that portion; so that the very fragments <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) cannot be hid, but declare aloud their
connexion <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) with the whole body. And
like as if thou shouldest take any part from the side of an animal, even
in that part thou wouldest find all the things out of which the whole is
composed;—nerves and veins, bones, arteries, and blood, and a sample, as
one might say, of the whole lump;—so likewise with regard to the
Scriptures; in each portion of what is there stated, one may see the
connexion with the whole clearly appearing. Whereas, if they were in
discord, neither could this have been pointed out, and the doctrine
itself had long since been brought to nought: “for every kingdom,” saith
He, “divided against itself shall not stand.” <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) But now even in this shines forth the
might of the Spirit, namely, in that it prevailed on these men, engaged
as they were in those things which are more necessary and very urgent,
to take no hurt at all from these little matters.

<span id="iii.iv-p57"></span>Now, where each one was abiding, when he
wrote, it is not right for us to affirm very positively.

<span id="iii.iv-p58"></span>But that they are not opposed to each
other, this we will endeavor to prove, throughout the whole work. And
thou, in accusing them of disagreement, art doing just the same as if
thou wert to insist upon their using the same words and forms of speech.

<span id="iii.iv-p59"></span>9. And I do not yet say, that those
likewise who glory greatly in rhetoric and philosophy, having many of
them written many books touching the same matters, have not merely
expressed themselves differently, but have even spoken in opposition to
one another (for it is one thing to speak differently and another to
speak at variance); none of these things do I say. Far be it from me to
frame our defense from the frenzy of those men, neither am I willing out
of falsehood to make recommendations for the truth.

<span id="iii.iv-p60"></span>But this I would be glad to inquire: how
were the differing accounts believed? how did they prevail? how was it
that, while saying opposite things, they were admired, were believed,
were celebrated everywhere in the world?

<span id="iii.iv-p61"></span>And yet the witnesses of what they said
were many, and many too were the adversaries and enemies thereof. For
they did not write these things in one corner and bury them, but
everywhere, by sea and by land, they unfolded them in the ears of all,
and these things were read in the presence of enemies, even as they are
now, and none of the things which they said offended any one. And very
naturally, for it was a divine power that pervaded all, and made it to
prosper with all men.

<span id="iii.iv-p62"></span>10. For if it had not been so, how could
the publican, and the fisherman, and the unlearned, have attained to
such philosophy? <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) For things, which
they that are without have never been able to imagine, no not in a
dream, are by these men with great certainty both published and made
convincing, and not in their lives only, but even after death: neither
to two men, nor twenty men, nor an hundred, nor a thousand, nor ten
thousand, but to cities, nations, and people, both to land and sea, in
the land both of Greeks and barbarians, both inhabited and desert; and
all concerning things far beyond our nature. For leaving the earth, all
their discourse is concerning the things in heaven, while they bring in
unto us another principle of life, another <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_5"></span> manner of living: both wealth and
poverty, freedom and slavery, life and death, our world and our polity,
all changed.

<span id="iii.iv-p64"></span>Not like Plato, who composed that
ridiculous Republic, <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) or Zeno, or if
there be any one else that hath written a polity, or hath framed laws.
For indeed, touching all these, it hath been made manifest by
themselves, that an evil spirit, and some cruel demon at war with our
race, a foe to modesty, and an enemy to good order, oversetting all
things, hath made his voice be heard in their soul. When, for example,
they make their women common to all, and stripping virgins naked in the
Palæstra, bring them into the gaze of men; and when they establish
secret marriages, mingling all things together and confounding them, and
overturning the limits of nature, what else is there to say? For that
these their sayings are all inventions of devils, and contrary to
nature, even nature herself would testify, not tolerating what we have
mentioned; and this, though they write not amidst persecutions, nor
dangers, nor fightings, but in all security and freedom, and deck it out
with many ornaments from many sources. But these doctrines of the
fishermen, chased as they were, scourged and in jeopardy, both learned
and unlearned, both bond and free, both kings and private soldiers, both
barbarians and Greeks, have received with all good will.

<span id="iii.iv-p66"></span>11. And thou canst not say, that it was
because these things were trifling and low, that they were easily to be
received by all men: nay, for these doctrines are far higher than those.
For as to virginity, they never imagined even the name thereof so much
as in a dream, nor yet of voluntary poverty, nor of fasting, nor of any
other of those things that are high.

<span id="iii.iv-p67"></span>But they that are of our part not only
exterminate lust, they chastise not only the act, but even an unchaste
look, and insulting language, and disorderly laughter, and dress, and
gait, and clamor, and they carry on their exactness even to the smallest
things, and have filled the whole earth with the plant of virginity. And
touching God too, and the things in heaven, they persuade men to be
wise <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) with such knowledge as no one
of those hath at any time been able so much as to conceive in his mind.
For how could they, who made for gods images of beasts, and of monsters
that crawl on the earth, and of other things still more vile?

<span id="iii.iv-p69"></span>Yet these high doctrines were both accepted
and believed, and they flourish every day and increase; but the others
have passed away, and perished, having disappeared more easily than
spiders’ webs.

<span id="iii.iv-p70"></span>And very naturally, for they were demons
that published these things; wherefore besides their uncleanness, their
obscurity is great, and the labor they require greater. For what could
be more ridiculous than that “republic,” <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) in which, besides what I have mentioned,
the philosopher, when he hath spent lines without number, that he may be
able to shew what justice is, hath over and above this prolixity filled
his discourse with much indistinctness? This, even if it did contain
anything profitable, must needs be very useless for the life of man. For
if the husbandman and the smith, the builder and the pilot, and every
one who subsists by the labor of his hands, is to leave his trade, and
his honest toils, and is to spend such and such a number of years in
order to learn what justice is; before he has learnt he will often times
be absolutely destroyed by hunger, and perish because of this justice,
not having learnt anything else useful to be known, and having ended his
life by a cruel death.

<span id="iii.iv-p72"></span>12. But our lessons are not such; rather
Christ hath taught <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) us what is just,
and what is seemly, and what is expedient, and all virtue in general,
comprising it in few and plain words: at one time saying that, “on two
commandments hang the Law and the Prophets;” <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) that is to say, on the love of God and on
the love of our neighbor: at another time, “Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them; for this is the Law and the
Prophets.” <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)

<span id="iii.iv-p76"></span>And these things even to a laborer, and to
a servant, and to a widow woman, and to a very child, and to him that
appeareth to be exceedingly slow of understanding, are all plain to
comprehend and easy to learn. For the lessons of the truth are like
this; and the actual result bears witness thereto. All at least have
learned what things they are to do, and not learned only, but been
emulous also of them; and not in the cities alone nor in the midst of
the market places, but also in the summits of the mountains.

<span id="iii.iv-p77"></span>Yea, for there wilt thou see true
wisdom <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) abounding, and choirs of
angels shining forth in a human body, and the commonwealth <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) of Heaven manifested here on earth. For a
<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_6"></span>
commonwealth <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) did these fishermen
too write for us, not with commands that it should be embraced from
childhood, like those others, nor making it a law that the virtuous man
must be so many years old, but addressing their discourse generally to
every age. For those lessons are children’s toys, but these are the
truth of things.

<span id="iii.iv-p81"></span>And as a place for this their
commonwealth <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) they have assigned
Heaven, and God they have brought in as the framer thereof, and as
lawgiver of the statutes there set; as indeed was their duty. And the
rewards in their commonwealth <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) are
not leaves of bay nor olive, nor an allowance of meat in the public
hall, nor statues of brass, these cold and ordinary things, but a life
which hath no end, and to become children of God, to join the angels’
choir, and to stand by the royal throne, and to be always with Christ.
And the popular guides of this commonwealth <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) are publicans, and fishermen, and
tent-makers, not such as have lived for a short time, but such as are
now living for ever. Therefore even after their death they may possibly
do the greatest good to the governed.

<span id="iii.iv-p85"></span>This republic <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) is at war not with men, but with devils,
and those incorporeal powers. Wherefore also their captain is no one of
men, nor of angels, but God Himself. And the armor too of these warriors
suits the nature of the warfare, for it is not formed of hides and
steel, but of truth and of righteousness, and faith, and all true love
of wisdom. <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="iii.iv-p88"></span>13. Since then the aforesaid republic <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) is both the subject on which this book
was written, and it is now proposed for us to speak thereof, let us give
careful heed to Matthew, discoursing plainly concerning this: for what
he saith is not his own, but all Christ’s, who hath made the laws of
this city. <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) Let us give heed, I say,
that we may be capable of enrolment therein, and of shining forth among
those that have already become citizens thereof, and are awaiting those
incorruptible crowns. To many, however, this discourse seems to be easy,
while the prophetic writings are difficult. But this again is the view
of men who know not the depth of the thoughts laid up therein. Wherefore
I entreat you to follow us with much diligence, so as to enter into the
very ocean of the things written, with Christ for our guide at this our
entering in.

<span id="iii.iv-p91"></span>But in order that the word may be the more
easy to learn, we pray and entreat you, as we have done also with
respect to the other Scriptures, to take up beforehand that portion of
the Scripture which we may be going to explain, that your reading may
prepare the way for your understanding (as also was the case with the
eunuch <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) ), and so may greatly
facilitate our task.

<span id="iii.iv-p93"></span>14. And this because <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) the questions are many and frequent. See,
for instance, at once in the beginning of his Gospel, how many
difficulties might be raised one after the other. As first, wherefore
the genealogy of Joseph is traced, who was not father of Christ.
Secondly, whence may it be made manifest that He derives His origin from
David, while the forefathers of Mary, who bare Him, are not known, for
the Virgin’s genealogy is not traced? Thirdly, on what account Joseph’s
genealogy is traced, when he had nothing to do with the birth; while
with regard to the Virgin, who was the very mother, it is not shown of
what fathers, or grandfathers, or ancestors, she is sprung.

<span id="iii.iv-p95"></span>And along with these things, this is also
worth inquiry, wherefore it can be, that, when tracing the genealogy
through the men, he hath mentioned women also; and why since he
determined upon doing this, he yet did not mention them all, but passing
over the more eminent, such as Sarah, Rebecca, and as many as are like
them, he hath brought forward only them that are famed for some bad
thing; as, for instance, if any was a harlot, or an adulteress, or a
mother by an unlawful marriage, if any was a stranger or barbarian. For
he hath made mention of the wife of Uriah, and of Thamar, and of Rahab,
and of Ruth, of whom one was of a strange race, another an harlot,
another was defiled by her near kinsman, and with him not in the form of
marriage, but by a stolen intercourse, when she had put on herself the
mask of an harlot; and touching the wife of Uriah no one is ignorant, by
reason of the notoriety of the crime. And yet the evangelist hath passed
by all the rest, and inserted in the genealogy these alone. Whereas, if
women were to be mentioned, all ought to be so; if not all but some,
then those famed in the way of virtue, not for evil deeds.

<span id="iii.iv-p96"></span>See you how much care is required of us
straightway in the first beginning? and yet the beginning seems to be
plainer than the rest; to many perhaps even superfluous, as being a mere
numbering of names.

<span id="iii.iv-p97"></span>After this, another point again is worth
inquiry; wherefore he hath omitted three kings. For if, because they
were exceeding ungodly, he therefore passed by their names in silence,
neither should he have mentioned the others, that were like them.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_7"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p98"></span>And this again <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) is another question; why, after having
spoken of fourteen generations, he hath not in the third division
maintained the number. <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64)

<span id="iii.iv-p101"></span>And wherefore Luke hath made mention of
other names, and not only not all of them the same, but also many more
of them, while Matthew hath both fewer and different, though he too hath
ended with Joseph, with whom Luke likewise concluded.

<span id="iii.iv-p102"></span>Ye see how much wakeful attention is
needed on our part, not only for explanation, but even that we may learn
what things we have to explain. For neither is this a little matter, to
be able to find out the difficulties; there being also this other hard
point, how Elizabeth, who was of the Levitical tribe, was kinswoman to
Mary.

<span id="iii.iv-p103"></span>15. But that we may not overload your
memory, by stringing many things together, here let us stay our
discourse for a time. For it is enough for you in order that ye be
thoroughly roused, that you learn <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)
the questions only. But if ye long for <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) their solution also, this again depends
on yourselves, before we speak. For if I see you thoroughly awakened,
and longing to learn, I will endeavor to add the solution also; but if
gaping and not attending, I will conceal both the difficulties, and
their solution, in obedience to a divine law. For, saith He, “Give not
the holy things to the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine,
lest they trample them under their feet.” <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)

<span id="iii.iv-p107"></span>But who is he that tramples them under
foot? He that doth not account these things precious, and venerable. And
who, it may be asked, is so wretched as not to esteem these things
venerable, and more precious than all? He who doth not bestow on them so
much leisure as on the harlot women in the theatres of Satan. For there
the multitude pass the whole day, and give up not a few of their
domestic concerns for the sake of this unseasonable employment, and they
retain with exactness whatever they have heard, and this though it be to
the injury of their souls, that they keep it. But here, where God is
speaking, they will not bear to tarry even a little time.

<span id="iii.iv-p108"></span>Therefore, let me warn you, we have
nothing in common with Heaven, but our citizenship <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) goes no further than words. And yet
because of this, God hath threatened even hell, not in order to cast us
therein, but that He might persuade us to flee this grievous tyranny.
But we do the opposite, and run each day the way that leads thither, and
while God is commanding us not only to hear, but also to do what He
saith, we do not submit so much as to hearken.

<span id="iii.iv-p110"></span>When then, I pray thee, are we to do what
is commanded, and to put our hand to the works, if we do not endure so
much as to hear the words that relate to them, but are impatient and
restless about the time we stay here, although it be exceedingly short?

<span id="iii.iv-p111"></span>16. And besides, when we are talking of
indifferent matters, if we see those that are in company do not attend,
we call what they do an insult; but do we consider that we are provoking
God, if, while He is discoursing of such things as these, we despise
what is said, and look another way?

<span id="iii.iv-p112"></span>Why, he that is grown old, and hath
travelled over much country, reports to us with all exactness the number
of stadia, and the situations of cities, their plans, and their harbors
and markets; but we ourselves know not even how far we are from the city
that is in Heaven. For surely we should have endeavored to shorten the
space, had we known the distance. That city being not only as far from
us as Heaven is from the earth, but even much farther, if we be
negligent; like as, on the other hand, if we do our best, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) even in one instant we shall come to the
gates thereof. For not by local space, but by moral disposition, are
these distances defined.

<span id="iii.iv-p114"></span>But thou knowest exactly the affairs of
the world, as well new as old, and such too as are quite ancient; thou
canst number the princes under whom thou hast served in time past, and
the ruler of the games, and them that gained the prize, and the leaders
of armies, matters that are of no concern to thee; but who hath become
ruler in this city, the first or the second or the third, and for how
long, each of them; and what each hath accomplished, and brought to
pass, thou hast not imagined even as in a dream. And the laws that are
set in this city thou wilt not endure to hear, nor attend to them, even
when others tell thee of them. How then, I pray thee, dost thou expect
to obtain the blessings that are promised, when thou dost not even
attend to what is said?

<span id="iii.iv-p115"></span>17. But though never before, now, at any
rate, let us do this. Yea, for we <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)
are on the point of entering into a city (if God permit) of gold, and
more precious than any gold.

<span id="iii.iv-p117"></span>Let us then mark her foundations, her
<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_8"></span> gates
consisting of sapphires and pearls; for indeed we have in Matthew an
excellent guide. For through his gate we shall now enter in, and much
diligence is required on our part. For should He see any one not
attentive, He casts him out of the city.

<span id="iii.iv-p118"></span>Yes, for the city is most kingly and
glorious; not as the cities with us, divided into a market-place, and
the royal courts; for there all is the court of the King. Let us open
therefore the gates of our mind, let us open our ears, and with great
trembling, when on the point of setting foot on the threshold, let us
worship the King that is therein. For indeed the first approach hath
power straightway to confound the beholder.

<span id="iii.iv-p119"></span>For the present we find the gates closed;
but when we see them thrown open (for this is the solution of the
difficulties), then we shall perceive the greatness of the splendor
within. For there also, leading thee with the eyes of the Spirit, is one
who offers to show thee all, even this Publican; where the King sitteth,
and who of His host stand by Him; where are the angels, where the
archangels; and what place is set apart for the new citizens in this
city, and what kind of way it is that leads thither, and what manner of
portion they have received, who first were citizens therein, and those
next after them, and such as followed these. And how many are the orders
of these tribes, how many those of the senate, how many the distinctions
of dignity.

<span id="iii.iv-p120"></span>Let us not therefore with noise or tumult
enter in, but with a mystical silence.

<span id="iii.iv-p121"></span>For if in a theatre, when a great silence
hath been made, then the letters of the king are read, much more in this
city must all be composed, and stand with soul and ear erect. For it is
not the letters of any earthly master, but of the Lord of angels, which
are on the point of being read.

<span id="iii.iv-p122"></span>If we would order ourselves on this wise,
the grace itself of the Spirit will lead us in great perfection, and we
shall arrive at the very royal throne, and attain to all the good
things, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
now and always, even for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[1:15](1100009.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p8.1"></span>μηδ δεσθαι</span>, “not even to need,” as below
in sec. 2.—R.\]

<span id="fn_15"></span>[1:16](1100009.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p10.2"></span>δλωσεν</span>, “made evident, showed.” The
translator very frequently renders the aorist by the English perfect.
Attention will be called in some instances, where the sense is affected
by such renderings.—R.\]

<span id="fn_16"></span>[1:17](1100009.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>[John xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[1:18](1100009.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span>[Jer.
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031), [Isa.
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013), [Heb.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008), [John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[1:19](1100009.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span>[2 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p14.1"></span>.
\[The text here agrees with the Rec., not with the oldest <span
class="c41"><span id="iii.iv-p14.2"></span>mss</span>. followed in the
R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_19"></span>[1:20](1100009.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>\[Literally, “the punishment *that is*
greater.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_20"></span>[2:21](1100009.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span>\[Literally, “the very cloud.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_21"></span>[2:22](1100009.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p21.1"></span>σωματικ φαντασα</span>.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[2:23](1100009.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p22.1"></span>τν τν σωμτων ννοιαν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p22.2"></span>εαγγλιον</span>).—R.\]

<span id="fn_23"></span>[2:24](1100009.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.iv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p23"></span>\[A reminiscence of [1 Cor. i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv-p23.1"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_24"></span>[2:25](1100009.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p24"></span>\[Literally, “reconciliations of God to our
nature.” The doctrinal point of view is Pauline: God is reconciled, His
anger removed.—R.\]

<span id="fn_25"></span>[3:26](1100009.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p29"></span>\[The independence of the Gospels is thus
emphasized by the most competent exegete of the Nicene period. His
treatment of the apparent discrepancies is suggestive.—R.\]

<span id="fn_26"></span>[3:27](1100009.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p32"></span>\[That is, “in nothing,” in no
respect.—R.\]

<span id="fn_27"></span>[3:28](1100009.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p33"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p33.1"></span>συγκροτοσιν</span>. \[Literally, “weld
together,” used of organizing a body of soldiers.—R.\]

<span id="fn_28"></span>[3:29](1100009.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p36"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p36.1"></span>προσεφαι πλ</span>.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[3:30](1100009.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p37"></span>\[“accurate.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_30"></span>[3:31](1100009.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p39"></span>[Luke i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[3:32](1100009.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p40.1"></span>’</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p40.2"></span>Ασφλεια</span>, “certainty,” seems to be used
here first *objectively*, as when we say, “a thing is certain,” then
*subjectively*, as “I am certain of it.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[3:33](1100009.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p42"></span>\[The translator, with the Latin, follows
the reading <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p42.1"></span>δ</span>;
most <span class="c20"><span id="iii.iv-p42.2"></span>mss</span>. have
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p42.3"></span>γρ</span>, which is
the more difficult reading.—R.\]

<span id="fn_33"></span>[3:34](1100009.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.iv-p42.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p43"></span>So St. Irenæus, iii. 11, 1. “John, the
disciple of the Lord, purposing by the publication of a Gospel to take
away the error which Cerinthus had sown among men, and long before him
those who are called Nicolaitans….thus began the instruction of his
Gospel: *In the beginning, &c*.” See also St. Clem. of Alex. in Euseb.
E. H. vi. 14; St. Jerome, Pref. to Com. on St. Matth.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[3:35](1100009.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p44"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p44.1"></span>οκονομα</span>, *i.e*., our Lord’s assumption
of the Manhood. The word is so used continually by the Fathers.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[3:36](1100009.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p45"></span>\[This paraphrase fairly brings out the
sense, but is a very free rendering of the text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_36"></span>[3:37](1100009.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p46"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p46.1"></span>κα δι τοτο</span>.\]

<span id="fn_37"></span>[3:38](1100009.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p48"></span>Euseb. E. H. iii. 24; St. Jer. de Vir. Ill.
3; Orig. in Matth. t. iii. 440; St. Iren. iii. 1. But St. Chrysostom
seems to be quoting the words of some other writer besides these.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[3:39](1100009.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p49"></span>Or in Rome, before the death of St. Peter,
who approved the Gospel. So St. Clem. Alex. in Euseb. E. H. ii. 15; St.
Jer. de Vir. Illustr. c. 8. St. Iren. iii. 1, seems rather to agree with
St. Chrysostom. Perhaps they may be reconciled by supposing St. Mark’s
Gospel written at Rome and approved by St. Peter, but not published
until after his death, when St. Mark was in Egypt. See Massuet’s note on
the place in St. Irenæus; and Euseb. ii. 16.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[4:40](1100009.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p52"></span>The Arians, *e.g.* and kindred sects,
received all the Scriptures; the Marcionites, besides rejecting the Old
Testament received only the Gospel of St. Luke, and ten of St. Paul’s
epistles: out of which Tertulian refutes them at large. The Manichæans
rejected the Old Testament and The Acts of the Apostles in which latter
the Montanists agreed with them. This was besides numerous
interpolations which they all alleged in the books which they did
receive. See St. Aug. Ep. 237<span id="iii.iv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[4:41](1100009.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.iv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p53"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p53.1"></span>μχη</span>, the technical term for
“contradiction” when applied to statements. See *Sophocles’ Greek
Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine periods; sub voce*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_41"></span>[4:42](1100009.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.iv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p54"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p54.1"></span>κμματα</span>, Gr.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[4:43](1100009.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.iv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p55"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p55.1"></span>κμματα</span>, Gr.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[4:44](1100009.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.iv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p56"></span>[Matt.
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025), [Mark
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#024), [Luke
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[4:45](1100009.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p63"></span>\[Literally, “philosophize such things.”
Chrysostom, in common with other and earlier Fathers uses the terms
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p63.1"></span>φιλοσοφα</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p63.2"></span>φιλοσοφεν</span>, in
a wide sense. As the translator varies his rendering of these words to
suit the context, it seems proper to indicate when Chrysostom uses
them.—R\]

<span id="fn_45"></span>[5:46](1100009.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.iv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p65"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p65.1"></span>πολιτεαν</span>, as in the latter part of the
sentence. This term also is variously rendered by the translator, to
suit the context. But in this Homily there is always a reference to
Plato’s Republic, when the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p65.2"></span>πολιτεα</span> is used. Hence attention is
called to the instances where it occurs.—R.\]

<span id="fn_46"></span>[5:47](1100009.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p68"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p68.1"></span>φιλοσοφεν</span>. Literally “to philosophize
what no one of them was at any time able even to,” etc. The negatives
are repeated in the original for greater emphasis.—R.\]

<span id="fn_47"></span>[5:48](1100009.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.iv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p71"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p71.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>.\]

<span id="fn_48"></span>[5:49](1100009.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.iv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p73"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p73.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p73.2"></span>δδαξεν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_49"></span>[5:50](1100009.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.iv-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p74"></span>[Matt. xxii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040)<span id="iii.iv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[5:51](1100009.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iii.iv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p75"></span>[Matt. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[5:52](1100009.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iii.iv-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p78"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p78.1"></span>φιλοσοφαν</span>=true wisdom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_52"></span>[5:53](1100009.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iii.iv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p79"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p79.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_53"></span>[6:54](1100009.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iii.iv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p80"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p80.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_54"></span>[6:55](1100009.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iii.iv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p82"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p82.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_55"></span>[6:56](1100009.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iii.iv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p83"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p83.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_56"></span>[6:57](1100009.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iii.iv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p84"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p84.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_57"></span>[6:58](1100009.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iii.iv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p86"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p86.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_58"></span>[6:59](1100009.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iii.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p87"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p87.1"></span>φιλοσοφα</span>.\]

<span id="fn_59"></span>[6:60](1100009.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iii.iv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p89"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p89.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_60"></span>[6:61](1100009.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iii.iv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p90"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p90.1"></span>πολιτεα</span>, in its proper case.\]

<span id="fn_61"></span>[6:62](1100009.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iii.iv-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p92"></span>[Acts viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[6:63](1100009.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iii.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p94"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p94.1"></span>Κα γρ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_63"></span>[7:64](1100009.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iii.iv-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p99"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p99.1"></span>Κα γρ κα τοτο</span>.\]

<span id="fn_64"></span>[7:65](1100009.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iii.iv-p99.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p100"></span>\[See Homily iv., where this question is
discussed.—R.\]

<span id="fn_65"></span>[7:66](1100009.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iii.iv-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p104"></span>\[Literally, “and learn.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_66"></span>[7:67](1100009.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iii.iv-p104.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p105"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p105.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p105.2"></span>ρτε</span>

<span id="fn_67"></span>[7:68](1100009.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iii.iv-p105.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p106"></span>[Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p106.1"></span>.
\[The citation is not, however, verbally accurate.—R.\]

<span id="fn_68"></span>[7:69](1100009.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iii.iv-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p109"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p109.1"></span>πολιτεα</span> \]

<span id="fn_69"></span>[7:70](1100009.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iii.iv-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p113"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p113.1"></span>σπουδζωμεν</span>; the verb is rendered
“endeavor” in the preceding sentence.—R.\]

<span id="fn_70"></span>[7:71](1100009.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iii.iv-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p116"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p116.1"></span>Κα γρ</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily II](1100010)
