[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100080)  [Next](1100082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXIII"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXIV.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.LXXIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p3"></span>*“Then let them which be in Judæa flee
into the mountains. And let him that is on the housetop not come down to
take anything out of his house. Neither let him which is in his field
return back to take his clothes.”* <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p5.1"></span>Having</span> spoken of the ills that were
to overtake the city, and of the trials of the apostles, and that they
should remain unsubdued, and should overrun the whole world, He mentions
again the Jews’ calamities, showing that when the one should be
glorious, having taught the whole world, the others should be in
calamity.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p6"></span>And see how He relates the war, by the
things that seem to be small setting forth how intolerable it was to be.
For, “Then,” saith He, “let them which be in Judæa flee into the
mountains.” Then, When? When these things should be, “when the
abomination of desolation should stand in the holy place.” Whence he
seems to me to be speaking of the armies. Flee therefore then, saith He,
for thenceforth there is no hope of safety for you.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p7"></span>For since it had fallen out, that they
often had recovered themselves in grievous wars, as under Sennacherib,
under Antiochus again (for when at that time also, armies had come in
upon them, and the temple had been seized beforehand, the Maccabees
rallying gave their affairs an opposite turn); in order then that they
might not now also suspect this, that there would be any such change, He
forbids them all thought of the kind. For it were well, saith He, to
escape henceforth with one’s naked body. Therefore them also that are on
the housetop, He suffers not to enter into the house to take their
clothes, indicating the evils to be inevitable, and the calamity without
end, and that it must needs be that he that was involved therein should
surely perish. Therefore He adds also, him that is in the field, saying,
neither let this man turn back to take his clothes. For if they that are
in doors flee, much more they that are out of doors ought not to take
refuge within.

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span id="iii.LXXIII-Page_439"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p8"></span>“Woe unto them that are with child, and
to them that give suck,” <span id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777.md) to
the one because of their greater inertness, and because they cannot flee
easily, being weighed down by the burden of their pregnancy; to the
other, because they are held by the tie of feeling for their children,
and cannot save their sucklings. For money it is a light thing to
despise, and an easy thing to provide, and clothes; but the bonds of
nature how could any one escape? how could the pregnant woman become
active? how could she that gives suck be able to overlook that which she
had borne?

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p10"></span>Then, to show again the greatness of
the calamity, He saith, “Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter,
neither on the Sabbath day. For then shall be great tribulation, such as
was not since the beginning of the world until now, neither shall
be.” <span id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p12"></span>Seest thou that His discourse is
addressed to the Jews, and that He is speaking of the ills that should
overtake them? For the apostles surely were not to keep the Sabbath day,
neither to be there, when Vespasian did those things. For indeed the
most part of them were already departed this life. And if any was left,
he was dwelling then in other parts of the world.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p13"></span>But wherefore neither “in the winter,
nor on the Sabbath day?” <span id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779.md) Not
in the winter, because of the difficulty arising from the season; not on
the Sabbath day, because of the absolute authority exercised by the law.
For since they had need of flight, and of the swiftest flight, but
neither would the Jews dare to flee on the Sabbath day, because of the
law, neither in winter was such a thing easy; therefore, “Pray ye,”
saith He; “for then shall be tribulation, such as never was, neither
shall be.”

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p15"></span>And let not any man suppose this to
have been spoken hyperbolically; but let him study the writings of
Josephus, and learn the truth of the sayings. For neither can any one
say, that the man being a believer, in order to establish Christ’s
words, hath exaggerated the tragical history. For indeed He was both a
Jew, and a determined Jew, and very zealous, and among them that lived
after Christ’s coming.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p16"></span>What then saith this man? That those
terrors surpassed all tragedy, and that no such had ever overtaken the
nation. For so great was the famine, that the very mothers fought about
the devouring of their children, and that there were wars about this;
and he saith that many when they were dead had their bellies ripped up.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p17"></span>I should therefore be glad to inquire
of the Jews. Whence came there thus upon them wrath from God
intolerable, and more sore than all that had befallen aforetime, not in
Judæa only, but in any part of the world? Is it not quite clear, that it
was for the deed of the cross, and for this rejection? All would say it,
and with all and before all the truth of the facts itself.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p18"></span>But mark, I pray thee, the exceeding
greatness of the ills, when not only compared with the time before, they
appear more grievous, but also with all the time to come. For not in all
the world, neither in all time that is past, and that is to come, shall
any one be able to say such ills have been. And very naturally; for
neither had any man perpetrated, not of those that ever have been, nor
of those to come hereafter, a deed so wicked and horrible. Therefore He
saith, “there shall be tribulation such as never was, nor shall be.”

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p19"></span>“And except those days should be
shortened, there should no flesh be saved; but for the elect’s sake
those days shall be shortened.” <span
id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780.md) By these things He shows them to be
deserving of a more grievous punishment than had been mentioned,
speaking now of the days of the war and of that siege. But what He saith
is like this. If, saith He, the war of the Romans against the city had
prevailed further, all the Jews had perished (for by “no flesh” here, He
meaneth no Jewish flesh), both those abroad, and those at home. For not
only against those in Judæa did they war, but also those that were
dispersed everywhere they outlawed and banished, because of their hatred
against the former.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p21"></span>2. But whom doth He here mean by the
elect? The believers that were shut up in the midst of them. For that
Jews may not say that because of the gospel, and the worship of Christ,
these ills took place, He showeth, that so far from the believers being
the cause, if it had not been for them, all had perished utterly. For if
God had permitted the war to be protracted, not so much as a remnant of
the Jews had remained, but lest those of them who had become believers
should perish together with the unbelieving Jews, He quickly put down
the fighting, and gave an end to the war. Therefore He saith, “But for
the elect’s sake they shall be shortened.” But these things He said to
leave an encouragement to those of them who were <span id="page_440">p.
440</span> <span id="iii.LXXIII-Page_440"></span> shut up in the midst
of them, and to allow them to take breath, that they might not be in
fear, as though they were to perish with them. And if here so great is
His care for them, that for their sakes others also are saved, and that
for the sake of Christians remnants were left of the Jews, how great
will be their honor in the time for their crowns?

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p22"></span>By this He also encouraged them not to
be distressed at their own dangers, since these others are suffering
such things, and for no profit, but for evil upon their own head.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p23"></span>But He not only encouraged them, but
also led them off secretly and unsuspectedly from the customs of the
Jews. For if there is not to be a change afterwards, and the temple is
not to stand, it is quite evident that the law also shall be made to
cease.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p24"></span>However, He spake not this openly, but
by their entire destruction He darkly intimated it. But He spake it not
openly, lest He should startle them before the time. Wherefore neither
at the beginning did He of Himself fall into discourse touching these
things; but having first lamented over the city, He constrained them to
show Him the stones, and question Him, in order that as it were in
answering them their question, He might declare to them beforehand all
the things to come.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p25"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, the
dispensation of the Spirit, that John wrote none of these things, lest
he should seem to write from the very history of the things done (for
indeed he lived a long time after the taking of the city), but they, who
died before the taking, and had seen none of these things, they write
it, in order that every way the power of the prediction should clearly
shine forth.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p26"></span>“Then, if any man shall say unto you,
Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not: for there shall arise
false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show signs and wonders, so
as to deceive, if possible, the very elect. Behold, I have told you
before. <span id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781.md) Wherefore if they
shall say unto you, Behold, He is in the desert, go not forth: behold,
He is in the secret chambers, believe it not. For as the lightning
cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall also
the coming of the Son of Man be. For wheresoever the carcase is, there
shall the eagles be gathered together.” <span
id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p29"></span>Having finished what concerned
Jerusalem, He passes on to His own coming, and tells the signs of it,
not for their use only, but for us also, and for all that shall come
after us.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p30"></span>“Then.” When? Here, as I have often
said, the word, “then,” relates not to the connection in order of time
with the things before mentioned. At least, when He was minded to
express the connection of time, He added, “Immediately after the
tribulation of those days,” <span id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783.md)
but here not so, but, “then,” not meaning what should follow straightway
after these things, but what should be in the time, when these things
were to be done, of which He was about to speak. So also when it is
said, “In those days cometh John the Baptist,” <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784.md) he is not speaking of the time that
should straightway follow, but that many years after, and that in which
these things were done, of which He was about to speak. For, in fact,
having spoken of the birth of Jesus, and of the coming of the magi, and
of the death of Herod, He at once saith, “In those days cometh John the
Baptist;” although thirty years had intervened. But this is customary in
the Scripture, I mean, to use this manner of narration. So then here
also, having passed over all the intermediate time from the taking of
Jerusalem unto the preludes of the consummation, He speaketh of the time
just before the consummation. “Then,” He saith therefore, “if any man
shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not.”

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p33"></span>Awhile He secures them by the place,
mentioning the distinguishing marks of His second coming, and the
indications of the deceivers. For not, as when at His former coming He
appeared in Bethlehem, and in a small corner of the world, and no one
knew Him at the beginning, so doth He say it shall be then too; but
openly and with all circumstance, and so as not to need one to tell
these things. And this is no small sign that He will not come secretly.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p34"></span>But mark how here He saith nothing of
war (for He is interpreting the doctrine concerning His advent), but of
them that attempt to deceive. For some in the days of the apostles
deceived the multitude, “for they shall come,” saith He, “and shall
deceive many;” <span id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785.md) and others
shall do so before His second coming, who shall also be more grievous
than the former. “For they shall show,” He saith, “signs and wonders, so
as to deceive if possible the very elect:” <span
id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786.md) here He is speaking of Antichrist,
and indicates that some also shall minister to him. Of him <span
id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span id="iii.LXXIII-Page_441"></span> Paul
too speaks on this wise. Having called him “man of sin,” and “son of
perdition,” He added, “Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with
all power and signs and lying wonders; and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish.” <span
id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p38"></span>And see how He secures them; “Go not
forth into the deserts, enter not into the secret chambers.” He did not
say, “Go, and do not believe;” but, “Go not forth, neither depart
thither.” For great then will be the deceiving, because that even
deceiving miracles are wrought.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p39"></span>3. Having told them how Antichrist
cometh, as, for instance, that it will be in a place; He saith how
Himself also cometh. How then doth He Himself come? “As the lightning
cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall also
the coming of the Son of Man be. For wheresoever the carcase is, there
also will the eagles be gathered together.” <span
id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p41"></span>How then shineth the lightning? It
needs not one to talk of it, it needs not a herald, but even to them
that sit in houses, and to them in chambers it shows itself in an
instant of time throughout the whole world. So shall that coming be,
showing itself at once everywhere by reason of the shining forth of His
glory. But He mentions also another sign, “where the carcase is, there
also shall the eagles be;” meaning the multitude of the angels, of the
martyrs, of all the saints.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p42"></span>Then He tells of fearful prodigies.
What are these prodigies? “Immediately after the tribulation of those
days,” saith He, “the sun shall be darkened.” <span
id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789.md) Of the tribulation of what days
doth He speak? Of those of Antichrist and of the false prophets? For
there shall be great tribulation, there being so many deceivers. But it
is not protracted to a length of time. For if the Jewish war was
shortened for the elect’s sake, much more shall this temptation be
limited for these same’s sake. Therefore, He said not, “after the
tribulation,” but <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p43.2"></span>Immediately</span> “after the tribulation
of those days shall the sun be darkened,” for almost at the same time
all things come to pass. For the false prophets and false Christs shall
come and cause confusion, and immediately He Himself will be here.
Because no small turmoil is then to prevail over the world.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p44"></span>But how doth He come? The very creation
being then transfigured, for “the sun shall be darkened,” not destroyed,
but overcome by the light of His presence; and the stars shall fall, for
what shall be the need of them thenceforth, there being no night? and
“the powers of Heaven shall be shaken,” and in all likelihood, seeing so
great a change come to pass. For if when the stars were made, they
trembled and marvelled (“for when the stars were made, all angels,” it
is said, “praised Me with a loud voice”); <span
id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790.md) much more seeing all things in
course of change, and their fellow servants giving account, and the
whole world standing by that awful judgment-seat, and those who have
lived from Adam unto His coming, having an account demanded of them of
all that they did, how shall they but tremble, and be shaken?

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p46"></span>“Then shall appear the sign of the Son
of Man in Heaven;” <span id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791.md) that is,
the cross being brighter than the sun, since this last will be darkened,
and hide himself, and that will appear when it would not appear, unless
it were far brighter than the beams of the sun. But wherefore doth the
sign appear? In order that the shamelessness of the Jews may be more
abundantly silenced. For having the cross as the greatest plea, Christ
thus cometh to that judgment-seat, showing not His wounds only, but also
the death of reproach. “Then shall the tribes mourn,” for there shall be
no need of an accusation, when they see the cross; and they shall mourn,
that by His death they are nothing benefited; because they crucified Him
whom they ought to have adored.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p48"></span>Seest thou how fearfully He has
pictured His coming? how He has stirred up the spirits of His disciples?
For this reason, let me add, He puts the mournful things first, and then
the good things, that in this way also He may comfort and refresh them.
And of His passion He suggests to them the remembrance, and of His
resurrection, and with a display of glory, <span
id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792.md) He mentions His cross, so that they
may not be ashamed nor grieve, whereas indeed He cometh then setting it
forth for His sign. And another saith, “They shall look on Him whom they
pierced.” Therefore it is that they shall mourn, when they see that this
is He.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p50"></span>And forasmuch as He had made mention of
the cross, He added, “They shall see the Son of Man coming,” no longer
on the cross, but “in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great
glory.” <span id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p52"></span>For think not, He meaneth, because thou
hearest of the cross, that it is again anything <span id="page_442">p.
442</span> <span id="iii.LXXIII-Page_442"></span> mournful, for He shall
come with power and great glory. But He bringeth it, that their sin may
be self-condemned, as if any one who had been struck by a stone, were to
show the stone itself, or his garments stained with blood. And He cometh
in a cloud as He was taken up, and the tribes seeing these things mourn.
Not however that the terrors shall with them proceed no further than
mournings; but the mourning shall be, that they may bring forth their
sentence from within, and condemn themselves.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p53"></span>And then again, “He will send His
angels with a great trumpet, <span id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794.md)
and they shall gather the elect from the four winds, from one end of
Heaven to the other.” <span id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p56"></span>But when thou hast heard of this,
consider the punishment of them that remain. For neither shall they
suffer that former penalty only, but this too. And as above He said,
that they should say, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord,” <span id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796.md) so here, that they
shall mourn. For since He had spoken unto them of grievous wars, that
they might learn, that together with the fearful things here, the
torments there also await them, He brings them in mourning and separated
from the elect, and consigned to hell; by this again rousing the
disciples, and indicating from how many evils they should be delivered,
and how many good things they shall enjoy.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p58"></span>4. And why now doth He call them by
angels, if He comes thus openly? To honor them in this way also. But
Paul saith, that they “shall be caught up in clouds.” And He said this
also, when He was speaking concerning a resurrection. “For <span
id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797.md) the Lord Himself,” it is said,
“shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an
archangel.” So that when risen again, the angels shall gather them
together, when gathered together the clouds shall catch them up; and all
these things are done in a moment, in an instant. For it is not that He
abiding above calleth them, but He Himself cometh with the sound of a
trumpet. And what mean the trumpets and the sound? They are for
arousing, for gladness, to set forth the amazing nature of the things
then doing, for grief to them that are left.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p60"></span>Woe is me for that fearful day! For
though we ought to rejoice when we hear these things, we feel pain, and
are dejected, and our countenance is sad. Or is it I only that feel
thus, and do ye rejoice at hearing of these things? For upon me at least
there comes a kind of shudder when these things are said, and I lament
bitterly, and groan from the very depth of my heart. For I have no part
in these things, but in those that are spoken afterwards, that are said
unto the virgins, unto him that buried the talents he had received, unto
the wicked servant. For this cause I weep, to think from what glory we
are to be cast out, from what hope of blessings, and this perpetually,
and forever, to spare ourselves a little labor. For if indeed this were
a great toil, and a grievous law, we ought even so to do all things;
nevertheless many of the remiss would seem to have at least some
pretext, a poor pretext indeed, yet would they seem to have some, that
the toil was great, and the time endless, and the burden intolerable;
but now we can put forward no such objection; which circumstance most of
all will gnaw <span id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798.md) us no less than
hell at that time, when for want of a slight endeavor, and a little
toil, we shall have lost Heaven, and the unspeakable blessings. For both
the time is short, and the labor small, and yet we faint and are supine.
Thou strivest on earth, and the crown is in Heaven; thou art punished of
men, and art honored of God; the race is for two days, and the reward
for endless ages; the struggle is a corruptible body, and the rewards in
an incorruptible.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p62"></span>And apart from these things, we should
consider another point also, that even if we do not choose to suffer any
of the things that are painful for Christ’s sake, we must in other ways
most assuredly endure them. For neither, though thou shouldest not have
died for Christ, wilt thou be immortal; neither though thou shouldest
not have cast away thy riches for Christ, wilt thou go away hence with
them. These things He requires of thee, which although He should not
require them, thou wilt have to give up, because thou art mortal; He
willeth thee to do these by thy choice, which thou must do by necessity.
So much only He requires to be added, that it be done for His sake;
since that these things befall men and pass away, cometh to pass of
natural necessity. Seest thou how easy the conflict? What it is
altogether necessary for thee to suffer, that choose to suffer for my
sake; let this only be added, and I have sufficient obedience. The gold
which thou intendest to lend to another, this lend to me, both at more
profit, and in greater security. Thy body, wherewith thou art going to
warfare for another, make it to war for me, for indeed I surpass thy
toils with recompenses in the most abundant excess. Yet thou in all
other matters preferrest him <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="iii.LXXIII-Page_443"></span> that giveth thee more as well in loans,
as in marketing and in warfare; but Christ alone, when giving more, and
infinitely more than all, thou dost not receive. And what is this so
great hostility? What is this so great enmity? Where will there be any
excuse or defense left for thee, when the reasons for which thou
preferrest man to man avail not to induce thee to prefer God to man?

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p63"></span>Why dost thou commit thy treasure to
the earth? “Give it into my hand,” He saith. Doth not the earth’s Lord
seem to thee more worthy of trust than the earth? This indeed restoreth
that which thou laidest in it, though oftentimes not even this, but He
gives thee also recompense for His keeping of it? For indeed He doth
exceedingly love us. Therefore if thou shouldest wish to lend, He stands
ready; or to sow, He receives it; or if thou shouldest wish to build, He
draws thee unto Himself, saying, Build in my regions. Why runnest thou
unto poor, unto beggarly men, who also for little gains occasion thee
great trouble? Nevertheless, not even on hearing these things, do we
make up our minds to it, but where are fightings and wars, and wild
struggles, <span id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799.md) and trials and
suits of law, and false accusations, thither do we hasten.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p65"></span>5. Doth He not justly turn away from
us, and punish us, when He is giving up Himself unto us for all things,
and we are resisting Him? It is surely plain to all. For whether thou
art desirous to adorn thyself, “Let it, He saith, be with my ornaments;”
or to arm thyself, “with my arms,” or to clothe thyself, “with my
raiment;” or to feed thyself, “at my table;” or to journey, “on my way;”
or to inherit, “my inheritance;” or to enter into a country, “the city
of which I am builder and maker;” or to build a house, “amongst my
tabernacles.” “For I, so far from asking thee for a recompense of the
things that I give thee, to even make myself owe thee a recompense for
this very thing, if thou be willing to use all I have.” What can be
equal to this munificence, “I am Father, I am brother, I am bridegroom,
I am dwelling place, I am food, I am raiment, I am root, I am
foundation, all whatsoever thou willest, I am.” “Be thou in need of
nothing, I will be even a servant, for I came to minister, not to be
ministered unto; I am friend, and member, and head, and brother, and
sister, and mother; I am all; only cling thou closely <span
id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800.md) to me. I was poor for thee, and a
wanderer for thee, on the cross for thee, in the tomb for thee, above I
intercede for thee to the Father; on earth I am come for thy sake am
ambassador from my Father. Thou art all things to me, brother, and joint
heir, and friend, and member.” What wouldest thou more? Why dost thou
turn away from Him, who loveth thee? Why dost thou labor for the world?
Why dost thou draw water into a broken cistern? For it is this to labor
for the present life. Why dost thou comb wool into the fire? Why dost
thou “beat the air?” <span id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801.md) Why dost
thou “run in vain?” <span id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802.md)

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p69"></span>Hath not every art an end? It is surely
plain to every one. Do thou also show the end of thy worldly eagerness.
But thou canst not; for, “vanity of vanities, all is vanity.” <span
id="fr_2803"></span>[2804](#fn_2803.md) Let us go to the tombs; show me thy
father; show me thy wife. Where is he that was clad in raiment of gold?
he that rode in the chariot? he that had armies, that had the
girdle, <span id="fr_2804"></span>[2805](#fn_2804.md) that had the heralds?
he that was slaying these, and casting those into prison? he that put to
death whom he would, and set free whom he was minded? I see nothing but
bones, and a worm, and a spider’s web; all those things are earth, all
those a fable, all a dream, and a shadow, and a bare relation, and a
picture, or rather not so much as a picture. For the picture we see at
least in a likeness, but here not so much as a likeness.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p72"></span>And would that the evils stop with
this. For now the honor, and the luxury, and the distinction, end with a
shadow, with words; but the consequences of them, are no longer limited
to a shadow and to words, but continue, and will pass over with us
elsewhere, and will be manifest to all, the rapine, the covetousness,
the fornications, the adulteries, the dreadful things beyond number;
these not in similitude, neither in ashes, but written above, both words
and deeds.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p73"></span>With what eyes then shall we behold
Christ? For if any one could not bear to see his father, when conscious
to himself that he had sinned against him, upon Him who infinitely
exceeds a father in forbearance how shall we then look? how shall we
bear it? For indeed we shall stand at Christ’s judgment-seat, and there
will be a strict inquiry into all things.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p74"></span>But if any man disbelieve the judgments
to come, let him look at the things here, at those in the prisons, those
in the mines, those on the dunghills, the possessed, the frantic, them
that are struggling with incurable diseases, those that are fighting
against continual poverty, them that live in famine, them that are
pierced with irremediable woes, those in captivity. For these persons
would not suffer these things here, unless vengeance and <span
id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span id="iii.LXXIII-Page_444"></span>
punishments were to await all the others also that have committed such
sins. And if the rest have undergone nothing here, you ought to regard
this very fact as a sign that there is surely something to follow after
our departure here. For the self-same God of all would not take
vengeance on some, and leave others unpunished, who have committed the
same or more grievous offenses, unless He designed to bring some
punishments upon them there.

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p75"></span>By these arguments then and these
examples let us also humble ourselves; and let them who are obstinate
unbelievers of the judgment believe it henceforth, and become better
men; that having lived here in a manner worthy of the kingdom, we may
attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[438:2777](1100081.htm#fr_2776.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p4"></span>\[In minor details the Greek text agrees
with the received against that of our oldest <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. authorities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[439:2778](1100081.htm#fr_2777.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p9"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[439:2779](1100081.htm#fr_2778.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p11"></span>[Matt.
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.LXXIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[439:2780](1100081.htm#fr_2779.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p14"></span>\[There is a curious variation in the
Greek text here. Our best New Testament <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p14.1"></span>mss</span>. reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p14.2"></span>σαββτ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p14.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p14.4"></span>;</span></span> above the Homily has <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXIII-p14.5"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXIII-p14.6"></span>ἐ</span></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXIII-p14.7"></span>ν σαββτ</span>, but
here <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p14.8"></span>σαββτου</span>, without any
preposition.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[439:2781](1100081.htm#fr_2780.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p20"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p20.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “And except those days had been shortened, no flesh would have
been saved: but,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[440:2782](1100081.htm#fr_2781.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p27"></span>\[R.V., “to lead astray, if possible,
even the elect. Behold, I have told you beforehand.”\]

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[440:2783](1100081.htm#fr_2782.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p28"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
23-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.LXXIII-p28.1"></span>. \[The citation is in verbal agreement
with the received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[440:2784](1100081.htm#fr_2783.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p31"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[440:2785](1100081.htm#fr_2784.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p32"></span>[Matt. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p32.1"></span>.
See the comment on that place.

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[440:2786](1100081.htm#fr_2785.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p35"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[440:2787](1100081.htm#fr_2786.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p36"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[441:2788](1100081.htm#fr_2787.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p37"></span>[2 Thess.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.LXXIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[441:2789](1100081.htm#fr_2788.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p40"></span>[Matt.
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.LXXIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[441:2790](1100081.htm#fr_2789.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p43"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[441:2791](1100081.htm#fr_2790.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p45"></span>[Job xxxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p45.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXIII-p45.2"></span>LXX</span>. \[The
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXIII-p45.3"></span>LXX</span>. is
accurately cited. At this point there is a great variation in the
readings of the <span class="c41"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p45.4"></span>mss</span>. of the Homilies, which may be
due to the variation from the Hebrew.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[441:2792](1100081.htm#fr_2791.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p47"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[441:2793](1100081.htm#fr_2792.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p49"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p49.1"></span>μετ λαμπρο το σχματο</span>.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[441:2794](1100081.htm#fr_2793.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p51"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[442:2795](1100081.htm#fr_2794.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p54"></span>\[So Tischendorf, and R.V. margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[442:2796](1100081.htm#fr_2795.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p55"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[442:2797](1100081.htm#fr_2796.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p57"></span>[Matt. xxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[442:2798](1100081.htm#fr_2797.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p59"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[442:2799](1100081.htm#fr_2798.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p61"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p61.1"></span>διατργειν</span> .

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[443:2800](1100081.htm#fr_2799.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p64"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p64.1"></span>παγκρτια</span>.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[443:2801](1100081.htm#fr_2800.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p66"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIII-p66.1"></span>οκεω χε</span>.

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[443:2802](1100081.htm#fr_2801.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p67"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[443:2803](1100081.htm#fr_2802.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p68"></span>[Gal. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2803"></span>[443:2804](1100081.htm#fr_2803.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p70"></span>[Eccl. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.LXXIII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2804"></span>[443:2805](1100081.htm#fr_2804.md) <span
id="iii.LXXIII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIII-p71"></span>See On Stat. Hom. III. p. 59, a badge
of military rank.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXIV](1100082.md)
