[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100009)  [Next](1100011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>[Matt. I.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="iii.v-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span>“The book of the generation of Jesus Christ,
the Son of David, the Son of Abraham.”

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>Do</span> ye indeed remember the charge, which we
lately made you, entreating you to hearken unto all the things that are
said with all silence, and mystical quietness? For <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) we are to-day to set foot within the holy
vestibule, wherefore I have also put you in mind of the charge.

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span>Since, if the Jews, when they were to
approach “a mountain that burned, and fire, and blackness, and darkness,
and tempest;” <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) —or rather when they
were not so much as to approach, but both to see and to hear these
things from afar;—were commanded for three days before to abstain from
their wives, and to wash their garments, and were in trembling and fear,
both themselves and Moses with them; much more we, when we are to
hearken to such words, and are not to stand far from a smoking mountain,
but to enter into Heaven itself, ought to show forth a greater
self-denial; <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) not washing our
garments, but wiping clean the robe of our soul, and ridding ourselves
of all mixture with worldly things. For it is not blackness that ye
shall see, nor smoke, nor tempest, but the King Himself sitting on the
throne of that unspeakable glory, and angels, and archangels standing by
Him, and the tribes of the saints, with those interminable myriads.

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>For such is the city of God, having “the
Church of the first-born, the spirits of the just, the general assembly
of the angels, the <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_9"></span> blood of sprinkling,” <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) whereby all are knit into one, and Heaven
hath received the things of earth, and earth the things of Heaven, and
that peace hath come which was of old longed for both by angels and by
saints.

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span>Herein standeth the trophy of the cross,
glorious, and conspicuous, the spoils won by Christ, the
first-fruits <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) of our nature, the
booty of our King; all these, I say, we shall out of the Gospels know
perfectly. If thou follow in becoming quietness, we shall be able to
lead thee about everywhere, and to show where death is set forth
crucified, and where sin is hanged up, and where are the many and
wondrous offerings from this war, from this battle.

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span>Thou shalt see likewise the tyrant here
bound, and the multitude of the captives following, and the citadel from
which that unholy demon overran all things in time past. Thou wilt see
the hiding places, and the dens of the robber, broken up now, and laid
open, for even there also was our King present. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span>But be not thou weary, beloved, for if any
one were describing a visible war, and trophies, and victories, wouldest
thou feel no satiety at all; nay, thou wouldest not prefer either drink
or meat to this history. But if that kind of narrative be welcome, much
more this. For consider what a thing it is to hear, how on the one side
God from Heaven, arising “out of the royal thrones, leaped down <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) ” unto the earth, and even unto hell
itself, and stood in the battle array; and how the devil on the other
hand set himself in array against Him; or rather not against God
unveiled, but God hidden in man’s nature.

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span>And what is marvellous, thou wilt see death
destroyed by death, and curse extinguished by curse, and the dominion of
the devil put down by those very things whereby he did prevail. Let us
therefore rouse ourselves thoroughly, and let us not sleep, for lo, I
see the gates opening to us; but let us enter in with all seemly order,
and with trembling, setting foot straightway within the vestibule
itself.

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span>2. But what is this vestibule? “The book of
the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham.”

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span>“What sayest thou? Didst thou not promise to
discourse of the Only-begotten Son of God, and dost thou make mention of
David, a man born after a thousand generations, and say that he is both
father and ancestor?” Stay, seek not to learn all at once, but gently
and by little and little. Why, it is in the vestibule that thou art
standing, by the very porch; why then dost thou hasten towards the inner
shrine? As yet thou hast not well marked all without. For neither for a
while do I declare unto thee that other generation: or rather not even
this which cometh after, for it is unutterable, and unspeakable. And
before me the Prophet Esaias hath told thee this; where <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) when proclaiming His passion, and His
great care for the world, and admiring who He was, and what He became,
and whither He descended, he cried out loud and clear, saying thus, “Who
shall declare His generation?” <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span>It is not then of that we are now to speak,
but of this beneath, this which took place on earth, which was amongst
ten thousand witnesses. And concerning this again we will relate in such
wise as it may be possible for us, having received the grace of the
Spirit. For not even this may any one set forth altogether plainly,
forasmuch as this too is most awful. Think not, therefore, it is of
small things thou art hearing, when thou hearest of this birth, but
rouse up thy mind, and straightway tremble, being told that God hath
come upon earth. For so marvellous was this, and beyond expectation,
that because of these things the very angels formed a choir, and in
behalf of the world offered up their praise for them, and the prophets
from the first were amazed at this, that “He was seen upon earth, and
conversed with men <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) .” Yea, for it
is far beyond all thought to hear that God the Unspeakable, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) the Unutterable, the Incomprehensible,
and He that is equal to the Father, hath passed through a virgin’s womb,
and hath vouchsafed to be born of a woman, and to have Abraham and David
for forefathers. But why do I say Abraham and David? For what is even
more amazing, there are those women, whom we have lately mentioned.

<span id="iii.v-p25"></span>3. Hearing these things, arise, and surmise
nothing low: but even because of this very thing most of all shouldest
thou marvel, <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) that being Son of the
Unoriginate God, and His true Son, He suffered Himself to be called also
Son of David, that He might make <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_10"></span> thee Son of God. He suffered a slave to be
father to Him, that He might make the Lord Father to thee a slave.

<span id="iii.v-p27"></span>Seest thou at once from the beginning of
what nature are the Gospels? If thou doubt concerning the things that
pertain to thee, from what belongs to Him believe these also. For it is
far more difficult, judging by human reason, for God to become man, than
for a man to be declared a Son of God. When therefore thou art told that
the Son of God is Son of David and of Abraham, doubt not any more that
thou too, the son of Adam, shall be son of God. For not at random, nor
in vain did He abase Himself so greatly, only He was minded to exalt us.
Thus He was born after the flesh, that thou mightest be born after the
Spirit; He was born of a woman, that thou mightest cease to be the son
of a woman.

<span id="iii.v-p28"></span>Wherefore the birth was twofold, both made
like unto us, and also surpassing ours. For to be born of a woman indeed
was our lot, but “to be born not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor
of man,” but of the Holy Ghost, <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) was
to proclaim beforehand the birth surpassing us, the birth to come, which
He was about freely to give us of the Spirit. And everything else too
was like this. Thus His baptism also was of the same kind, for it
partook of the old, and it partook also of the new. To be baptized by
the prophet marked the old, but the coming down of the Spirit shadowed
out the new. And like as though any one were to place himself in the
space between any two persons that were standing apart, and stretching
forth both his hands were to lay hold on either side, and tie them
together; even so hath He done, joining the old covenant with the new,
God’s nature with man’s, the things that are His with ours.

<span id="iii.v-p30"></span>Seest thou the flashing brightness <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) of the city, with how great a splendor it
hath dazzled thee from the very beginning? how it hath straightway shown
the King in thine own form; as though in a camp? For neither there doth
the king always appear bearing his proper dignity, but laying aside the
purple and the diadem, he often disguises himself in the garb of a
common soldier. But there it is, lest by being known he should draw the
enemy upon himself; but here on the contrary, lest, if He were known, He
should cause the enemy to fly from the conflict with Him, and lest He
should confound all His own people: for His purpose was to save, not to
dismay.

<span id="iii.v-p32"></span>4. For this reason he hath also straightway
called Him by this title, naming Him Jesus. For this name, Jesus, is not
Greek, but in the Hebrew language it is thus called Jesus; which is,
when interpreted into the Greek tongue, “A Saviour.” And He is called a
Saviour, from His saving His people.

<span id="iii.v-p33"></span>Seest thou how he hath given wings to the
hearer, at once speaking things familiar, and at the same time by these
indicating to us things beyond all hope? I mean that <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) both these names were well known to the
Jews. For, because the things that were to happen were beyond
expectation, the types even of the names went before, in order that from
the very first all the unsettling power of novelty might be taken away.
Thus he is called Jesus, who after Moses brought the people into the
land of promise. Hast thou seen the type? Behold the truth. That led
into the land of promise, this into heaven, and to the good things in
the heavens; that, after Moses was dead, this after the law had ceased;
that as a leader, this as a King.

<span id="iii.v-p35"></span>However, lest having heard the word Jesus,
thou shouldest by reason of the identity of the name be perplexed, he
hath added, “Jesus Christ, Son of David.” But that other was not of
David, but of another tribe.

<span id="iii.v-p36"></span>5. But wherefore doth he call it a “book of
the generation of Jesus Christ,” while yet this book hath not the birth
only, but the whole dispensation? Because this is the sum of the whole
dispensation, and is made an origin and root of all our blessings. As
then Moses calleth it the book of heaven and earth, <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) although he hath not discoursed of heaven
and earth only, but also of all things that are in the midst thereof; so
also this man hath named his book from that which is the sum of all the
great things done. For that which teems with astonishment, and is beyond
hope and all expectation, is that God should become man. But this having
come to pass, all afterwards follows in reasonable consequence.

<span id="iii.v-p38"></span>6. But wherefore did he not say, “the Son of
Abraham,” and then “the Son of David?” It is not, as some suppose, that
he means to proceed upward from the lower point, since then he would
have done the same as Luke, but now he doth the contrary. Why then hath
he made mention of David? The man was in the mouths of all, both from
his distinction, and from the time, for he had not been so very long
since dead, like Abraham. And though God made promises to both, yet the
one, as old, was passed over in silence, <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>
<span id="iii.v-Page_11"></span> while the other, as fresh and recent,
was repeated of all. Themselves, for instance, say, “Doth not Christ
come of the seed of David, and out of Bethlehem, the town where David
was?” <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) And no man called Him Son of
Abraham, but all Son of David; and that because this last was more in
the recollection of all, both on account of the time, as I have already
said, and because of his royalty. On this principle again all the kings
whom they had in honor after his time were named from him, both by the
people themselves and by God. For both Ezekiel <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) and other prophets besides speak of David
as coming and rising again; not meaning him that was dead, but them who
were emulating his virtue. And to Hezekiah He saith, “I will defend this
city, for mine own sake and for my servant David’s sake.” <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) And to Solomon too He said, that for
David’s sake He rent not the kingdom during his lifetime. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) For great was the glory of the man, both
with God and with men.

<span id="iii.v-p43"></span>On account of this he makes the beginning at
once from him who was more known, and then runs up to his father;
accounting it superfluous, as far as regards the Jews, to carry the
genealogy higher up. For these were principally the persons held in
admiration; the one as a prophet and a king, the other as a patriarch
and a prophet.

<span id="iii.v-p44"></span>7. “But <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)
whence is it manifest that He is of David?” one may say. For if He was
not sprung of a man, but from a woman only, and the Virgin hath not her
genealogy traced, how shall we know that He was of David’s race? Thus,
there are two things inquired; both why His mother’s genealogy is not
recited, and wherefore it can be that Joseph is mentioned by them, who
hath no part in the birth: since the latter seems to be superfluous, and
the former a defect.

<span id="iii.v-p46"></span>Of which then is it necessary to speak
first? How the Virgin is of David. How then shall we know that she is of
David? Hearken unto God, telling Gabriel to go unto “a virgin betrothed
to a man (whose name was Joseph), of the house and lineage of
David.” <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) What now wouldest thou have
plainer than this, when thou hast heard that the Virgin was of the house
and lineage of David?

<span id="iii.v-p48"></span>Hence it is evident that Joseph also was of
the same. Yes, for there was a law, which bade that it should not be
lawful to take a wife from any other stock, but from the same tribe. And
the patriarch Jacob also foretold that He should arise out of the tribe
of Judah, saying on this wise: “there shall not fail a ruler out of
Judah, nor a governor out of his loins, until He come for whom it is
appointed, and He is the expectation of the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="iii.v-p50"></span>“Well; this prophecy doth indeed make it
clear that He was of the tribe of Judah, but not also that He was of the
family of David. Was there then in the tribe of Judah one family only,
even that of David, or were there not also many others? And might it not
happen for one to be of the tribe of Judah, but not also of the family
of David?”

<span id="iii.v-p51"></span>Nay, lest thou shouldest say this, the
evangelist hath removed this suspicion of thine, by saying, that He was
“of the house and lineage of David.”

<span id="iii.v-p52"></span>And if thou wish to learn this from another
reason besides, neither shall we be at a loss for another proof. For not
only was it not allowed to take a wife out of another tribe, but not
even from another lineage, that is, from another kindred. So that if
either we connect with the Virgin the words, “of the house and lineage
of David,” what hath been said stands good; or if with Joseph, by that
fact this also is proved. For if Joseph was of the house and lineage of
David, he would not have taken his wife from another than that whence he
himself was sprung.

<span id="iii.v-p53"></span>“What then,” one may say, “if he
transgressed the law?” Why, for this cause he hath by anticipation
testified that Joseph was righteous, on purpose that thou mightest not
say this, but having been told his virtue, mightest be sure also that he
would not have transgressed the law. For he who was so benevolent, and
free from passion, as not to wish, even when urged by suspicion, to
attempt inflicting punishment on the Virgin, how should he have
transgressed the law for lust? he that showed wisdom and self-restraint
beyond the law (for to put her away, and that privily, was to act with
self-restraint beyond the law), how should he have done anything
contrary to the law; and this when there was no cause to urge him? <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="iii.v-p55"></span>8. Now that the Virgin was of the race of
David is indeed from these things evident; but wherefore he gave not her
genealogy, but Joseph’s, requires explanation. For what cause was it
then? It was not the law among the Jews that the genealogy of women
should <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_12"></span>
be traced. In order then that he might keep the custom, and not seem to
be making alterations <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) from the
beginning, and yet might make the Virgin known to us, for this cause he
hath passed over her ancestors in silence, and traced the genealogy of
Joseph. For if he had done this with respect to the Virgin, he would
have seemed to be introducing novelties; and if he had passed over
Joseph in silence, we should not have known the Virgin’s forefathers. In
order therefore that we might learn, touching Mary, who she was, and of
what origin, and that the laws might remain undisturbed, he hath traced
the genealogy of her espoused husband, and shown him to be of the house
of David. For when this hath been clearly proved, that other fact is
demonstrated with it, namely, that the Virgin likewise is sprung from
thence, by reason that this righteous man, even as I have already said,
would not have endured to take a wife from another race.

<span id="iii.v-p57"></span>There is also another reason, which one
might mention, of a more mystical nature, because of which the Virgin’s
forefathers were passed over in silence; but this it were not seasonable
now to declare, because so much has been already said. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="iii.v-p59"></span>9. Wherefore let us stay at this point our
discourse concerning the questions, and in the meanwhile let us retain
with accuracy what hath been revealed to us; as, for instance, why he
mentioned David first; wherefore he called the book, “a book of the
generation;” on what account he said, “of Jesus Christ;” how the birth
is common and not common; whence it was that Mary was shown to be from
David; and wherefore Joseph’s genealogy is traced, while her ancestors
are passed over in silence.

<span id="iii.v-p60"></span>For if ye retain these things, ye will the
more encourage us with respect to what is to come; but if ye reject and
cast them from your mind, we shall be the more backward as to the rest.
Just as no husbandman would care to pay attention to a soil which had
destroyed the former seed.

<span id="iii.v-p61"></span>Wherefore I entreat you to revolve these
things. For from taking thought concerning such matters, there springs
in the soul some great good, tending unto salvation. For by these
meditations we shall be able to please God Himself; and our mouths will
be pure from insults, and filthy talking, and reviling, while they are
exercising themselves in spiritual sayings; and we shall be formidable
to the devils, while arming our tongue with such words; and we shall
draw unto ourselves God’s grace the more, and it will render our eye
more piercing. For indeed both eyes and mouth and hearing He set in us
to this intent, that all our members may serve Him, that we may speak
His words, and do His deeds, that we may sing unto Him continual hymns,
that we may offer up sacrifices of thanksgiving, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) and by these may thoroughly purify our
consciences.

<span id="iii.v-p63"></span>For as a body will be more in health when
enjoying the benefits of a pure air, even so will a soul be more endued
with practical wisdom <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) when
nourished in such exercises as these. Seest thou not even the eyes of
the body, that when they abide in smoke they are always weeping; but
when they are in clear air, and in a meadow, and in fountains and
gardens, they become more quicksighted and more healthy? Like this is
the soul’s eye also, for should it feed in the meadow of spiritual
oracles, it will be clear and piercing, and quick of sight; but should
it depart into the smoke of the things of this life, it will weep
without end, and wail both now and hereafter. For indeed the things of
this life are like smoke. On this account also one hath said, “My days
have failed like smoke.” <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) He indeed
was referring to their shortness of duration, and to their unsubstantial
nature, but I would say that we should take what is said, not in this
sense alone, but also as to their turbid character.

<span id="iii.v-p66"></span>For nothing doth so hurt and dim the eye of
the soul as the crowd of worldly anxieties and the swarm of desires. For
these are the wood that feedeth this smoke. And as fire, when it lays
hold of any damp and saturated fuel, kindles much smoke; so likewise
this desire, so vehement and burning, when it lays hold of a soul that
is (so to speak) damp and dissolute, produces also in its way abundance
of smoke. For this cause there is need of the dew of the Spirit, and of
that air, that it may extinguish the fire, and scatter the smoke, and
give wings to our thoughts. For it cannot, it cannot be that one weighed
down with so great evils should soar up to heaven; it is well if being
without impediment <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) we can cleave
our way thither; or rather it is not possible even so, unless we obtain
the wing of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.v-p68"></span>Now if there be need both of an unencum
<span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_13"></span> bered
mind, and of spiritual grace, that we may mount up to that height; what
if there be none of these things, but we draw to ourselves whatever is
opposite to them, even a satanical weight? how shall we be able to soar
upwards, when dragged down by so great a load? For indeed, should any
one attempt to weigh our words as it were in just balances; in ten
thousand talents of worldly talk he will scarcely find an hundred pence
of spiritual words, or rather, I should say, not even ten farthings. Is
it not then a disgrace, and an extreme mockery, that if we have a
servant, we make use of him for the most part in things necessary, but
being possessed of a tongue, we do not deal with our member so well even
as with a slave, but on the contrary make use of it for things
unprofitable, and mere makeweights? <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) And would it were only for
makeweights: <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) but now it is for
what are contrary and hurtful and in no respect advantageous to us. For
if the things that we spoke were profitable to us, they would assuredly
be also pleasing to God. But as it is, whatever the devil may suggest,
we speak it all, now laughing, and now speaking wittily; now cursing and
insulting, and now swearing, lying, and taking false oaths; now
murmuring, and now making vain babblings, and talking trifles more than
old wives; uttering all things that are of no concern to us.

<span id="iii.v-p71"></span>For, tell me, who of you that stand here, if
he were required, could repeat one Psalm, or any other portion of the
divine Scriptures? There is not one.

<span id="iii.v-p72"></span>And it is not this only that is the grievous
thing, but that while ye are become so backward with respect to things
spiritual, yet in regard of what belongs to Satan ye are more vehement
than fire. Thus should any one be minded to ask of you songs of devils
and impure effeminate melodies, he will find many that know these
perfectly, and repeat them with much pleasure.

<span id="iii.v-p73"></span>10. But what is the answer to these charges?
“I am not,” you will say, “one of the monks, but I have both a wife and
children, and the care of a household.” Why, this is what hath ruined
all, your supposing that the reading of the divine Scriptures appertains
to those only, when ye need it much more than they. For they that dwell
in the world, <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) and each day
receive wounds, these have most need of medicines. So that it is far
worse than not reading, to account the thing even “superfluous:” for
these are the words of diabolical invention. Hear ye not Paul saying,
“that all these things are written for our admonition”? <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)

<span id="iii.v-p76"></span>And thou, if thou hadst to take up a Gospel,
wouldest not choose to do so with hands unwashed; but the things that
are laid up within it, dost thou not think to be highly necessary? It is
because of this, that all things are turned upside down.

<span id="iii.v-p77"></span>For if thou wouldest learn how great is the
profit of the Scriptures, examine thyself, what thou becomest by hearing
Psalms, and what by listening to a song of Satan; and how thou art
disposed when staying in a Church, and how when sitting in a theatre;
and thou wilt see that great is the difference between this soul and
that, although both be one. Therefore Paul said, “Evil communications
corrupt good manners.” <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) For this
cause we have need continually of those songs, which serve as charms
from the Spirit. Yes, for this it is whereby we excel the irrational
creatures, since with respect to all other things, we are even
exceedingly inferior to them.

<span id="iii.v-p79"></span>This is a soul’s food, this its ornament,
this its security; even as not to hear is famine and wasting; for “I
will give them,” saith He, “not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of
water, but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)

<span id="iii.v-p81"></span>What then can be more wretched? when the
very evil, which God threatens in the way of punishment, this thou art
drawing upon thine head of thine own accord, bringing into thy soul a
sort of grievous famine, and making it the feeblest thing in the world?
For it is its nature both to be wasted and to be saved by words. Yea,
this leads it on to anger; and the same kind of thing again makes it
meek: a filthy expression is wont to kindle it to lust, and it is
trained to temperance by speech full of gravity.

<span id="iii.v-p82"></span>But if a word merely have such great power,
tell me, how is it thou dost despise the Scriptures? And if an
admonition can do such great things, far more when the admonitions are
with the Spirit. Yes, for a word from the divine Scriptures, made to
sound in the ear, doth more than fire soften the hardened soul, and
renders it fit for all good things.

<span id="iii.v-p83"></span>11. In this way too did Paul, when he had
found the Corinthians puffed up and inflamed, compose them, and make
them more considerate. For they were priding themselves on those very
things, touching which they ought to have been ashamed, and to have hid
their face. But after they had received the letter, hear the change in
them, of which the Teacher himself hath borne witness for them, saying
on this wise: for “this very thing, <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>
<span id="iii.v-Page_14"></span> that ye sorrowed after a godly sort,
what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves,
yea, what indignation, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge.” <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) In this way do we bring to order
servants and children, wives, and friends, and make our enemies friends.

<span id="iii.v-p85"></span>In this way the great men too, they that
were dear to God, became better. David, for instance, after his sin,
when he had had the benefit of certain words, then it was that he came
unto that most excellent repentance; and the apostles also by this mean
became what they did become, and drew after them the whole world.

<span id="iii.v-p86"></span>“And what is the profit,” one may say, “when
any one hears, but doeth not what is said?” No little will the profit be
even from hearing. For he will go on to condemn himself, <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) and to groan inwardly, and will come
in time also to do the things that are spoken of. But he that doth not
even know that he hath sinned, when will he cease from his negligence?
when will he condemn himself?

<span id="iii.v-p88"></span>Let us not therefore despise the hearing of
the divine Scriptures. For this is of Satan’s devising; not suffering us
to see the treasure, lest we should gain the riches. Therefore he saith
that the hearing the divine laws is nothing, lest he should see us from
the hearing acquiring the practice also.

<span id="iii.v-p89"></span>Knowing then this his evil art, let us
fortify ourselves against him on all sides, that being fenced with this
armor, we may both abide unconquered ourselves, and smite him on the
head: and thus, having crowned ourselves with the glorious wreaths of
victory, we may attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[8:72](1100010.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>κα γρ</span>; but there is some variation in the
readings.—R.\]

<span id="fn_72"></span>[8:73](1100010.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span>[Heb. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018)<span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>.
\[Here the Greek text agrees more closely with that of the received text
in Hebrews than with that of the earliest <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.v-p7.2"></span>mss</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_73"></span>[8:74](1100010.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iii.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>φιλοσοφαν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_74"></span>[9:75](1100010.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span>[Heb.
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#044)<span id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>.
\[The citation is free; but it is evident that Chrysostom accepts the
view indicated in the R.V. margin: “the general assembly of
angels.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_75"></span>[9:76](1100010.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p12.1"></span>τ κροθνια</span>, “the chief spoils,” see [Heb.
vii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v-p12.2"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_76"></span>[9:77](1100010.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span>See [1 Pet.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020), [1 Pet.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)<span id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>; St.
Iren. iv. 45; iii. 23; iv. 39, 56, 66; v. 31; Orig. in Joan, t. ii. 30;
contr. Cels. ii. 43; in Rom. lib. 5, l. t. iv. 551. B; Tert. de Anim. 7;
St. Greg. Naz. Or. 42, p. 693. Ed. Morell; and others cited by
Cotelerius on St. Hermas. iii. 16.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[9:78](1100010.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span>[Wisdom
18.15](../../../bib/apo/wis018.htm#015)<span id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[9:79](1100010.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span>\[Literally, “for.”\]

<span id="fn_79"></span>[9:80](1100010.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span>[Isaiah liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="iii.v-p21.1"></span>.
\[Here <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p21.2"></span>γενεν</span>
occurs; not the term used by Matthew, but in the phrase “that other
generation,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p21.3"></span>γννησιν</span>, occurs.—R.\]

<span id="fn_80"></span>[9:81](1100010.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span>[Baruch iii.
37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037)<span id="iii.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[9:82](1100010.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span>Or Unapproachable <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p24.2"></span>πρσιτο</span>, according to some <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.v-p24.3"></span>mss</span>. Savil.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[9:83](1100010.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p26"></span>\[Chrysostom uses the imperative: “Because
of this very thing especially marvel,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_83"></span>[10:84](1100010.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p29"></span>[John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="iii.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[10:85](1100010.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p31"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p31.2"></span>στραπν</span>. \[Used of a flash of lightning,
or dazzling brightness.—R.\]

<span id="fn_85"></span>[10:86](1100010.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p34"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p34.1"></span>κα γρ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_86"></span>[10:87](1100010.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p37"></span>[Gen. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)<span id="iii.v-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[11:88](1100010.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p39"></span>[John vii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042)<span id="iii.v-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[11:89](1100010.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.v-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p40"></span>[Ezek.
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024), [Ezek.
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#025), [Jer.
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009), [Hos.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)<span id="iii.v-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[11:90](1100010.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iii.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p41"></span>[2 Kings xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034)<span id="iii.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[11:91](1100010.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iii.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p42"></span>[1 Kings
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#013)<span id="iii.v-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[11:92](1100010.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iii.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p45"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p45.1"></span>Κα</span>.\]

<span id="fn_92"></span>[11:93](1100010.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p47"></span>[Luke i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)<span id="iii.v-p47.1"></span>.
\[The words, “and lineage” occur in some <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.v-p47.2"></span>mss</span>. of the New Testament. But the
citation here is probably made with freedom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_93"></span>[11:94](1100010.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p49"></span>[Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="iii.v-p49.1"></span>, from
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.v-p49.2"></span>LXX</span>. Our
translation preserving the Hebrew word renders it “until Shiloh come.”
\[Comp. the marginal renderings of the R.V. *in loco*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_94"></span>[11:95](1100010.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p54"></span>\[The labored argument here suggests that
Chrysostom was not sure of his exegetical position. In [Luke i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)<span id="iii.v-p54.1"></span>, the
phrase “of the house of David” is most naturally joined with “Joseph,”
and so Chrysostom himself implies.—R.\]

<span id="fn_95"></span>[12:96](1100010.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p56"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p56.1"></span>παραχαρττειν</span>. \[This word is the
technical one for counterfeiting or forging.—R.\]

<span id="fn_96"></span>[12:97](1100010.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.v-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p58"></span>See Hom. iii. sec. 1.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[12:98](1100010.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.v-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p62"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p62.1"></span>εχαριστα</span>.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[12:99](1100010.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p64"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p64.1"></span>φιλοσοφωτρα</span> is rendered, “more endued
with practical wisdom.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_99"></span>[12:100](1100010.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iii.v-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p65"></span>[Ps. cii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003)<span id="iii.v-p65.1"></span>, <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.v-p65.2"></span>LXX</span>. \[R.V., “My days
consume away like smoke.” The <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.v-p65.3"></span>LXX</span>. has the aorist, hence, “have failed”
is the rendering here adopted. Some editions of Chrysostom read the
imperfect here. The Oxford edition has a second note, the meaning of
which is not clear: “Rather *have failed*, <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.v-p65.4"></span>LXX.</span>”—R.\]

<span id="fn_100"></span>[12:101](1100010.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iii.v-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p67"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p67.1"></span>εζνου</span>, “well-girded,” then figuratively,
“unencumbered.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_101"></span>[13:102](1100010.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.v-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p69"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p69.1"></span>παρλκοντα</span> .\]

<span id="fn_102"></span>[13:103](1100010.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.v-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p70"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p70.1"></span>παρλκοντα</span>.\]

<span id="fn_103"></span>[13:104](1100010.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p74"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p74.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v-p74.2"></span>ν μσ στρεφομνοι</span> .\]

<span id="fn_104"></span>[13:105](1100010.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.v-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p75"></span>[1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="iii.v-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[13:106](1100010.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p78"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="iii.v-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[13:107](1100010.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iii.v-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p80"></span>[Amos viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011)<span id="iii.v-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[14:108](1100010.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iii.v-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p84"></span>\[[2 Cor. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span id="iii.v-p84.1"></span> is
here cited, but in abridged form. All the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.v-p84.2"></span>mss</span>. and editions of Chrysostom, except
the Benedictine, give the briefer reading, but in Migne’s edition, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v-p84.3"></span>αλλ φβον, λλ πιπθησιν</span>
(“yea, *what* fear, yea, *what* vehement desire”) are supplied in
brackets. In the New Testament passage there is no variation in text, so
far as these phrases are concerned. Like most patristic authors, this
great Homilist was quite free in his method of citing Scripture.—R.\]

<span id="fn_108"></span>[14:109](1100010.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iii.v-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p87"></span>\[Literally, “will condemn himself.”—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily III](1100011)
