<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](thol03)  [Next](thol05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Hollow Land*, by William Morris, \[1856\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f03"></span>

FYTTE THE SECOND

Such a horrible grey November day it was, the fog-smell all about, the
fog creeping into our very bones.

And I sat there, trying to recollect, at any rate something, under those
fir-trees that I ought to have known so well.

Just think now; I had lost my best years some-where; for I was past the
prime of life, my hair and beard were scattered with white, my body was
growing weaker, my memory of all things was very faint

My raiment, purple and scarlet and blue once, was so stained that you
could scarce call it any colour, was so tattered that it scarce covered
my body, though it seemed once to have fallen in heavy folds to my feet,
and still, when I rose to walk, though the miserable November mist lay
in great drops upon my bare breast, yet was I obliged to wind my raiment
over my arm, it dragged so (wretched, slimy, textureless thing!) in the
brown mud.

On my head was a light morion, which pressed on my brow and pained me;
so I put my hand up to take it ofi; but when I touched it I stood still
in my walk shuddering; I nearly fell to the earth with shame and sick
horror; for I laid my hand on a lump of Slimy earth with worms coiled up
in it I could scarce forbear from shrieking, but breathing such a prayer
as I could think of, I raised my hand again and seized it firmly. Worse
horror stilll The rust had eaten it into holes, and I gripped my own
hair as well as the rotting steel, the sharp edge of which cut into my
fingers; but setting my teeth, gave a great wrench, for I knew that if I
let go of it then, no power on the earth or under it could make me touch
it again. God be praised! I tore it off and cast it far from me; I saw
the earth, and the worms and green weeds and sun-begotten slime,
whirling out from it radiatingly, as it spun round about.

I was girt with a sword too, the leathern belt of which had shrunk and
squeezed my waist: dead leaves had gathered in knots about the buckles
of it, the gilded handle was encrusted with clay in many parts, the
velvet sheath miserably worn.

But, verily, when I took hold of the hilt, and pent in my hand; lo!
then, I drew out my own true blade and shook it flawless from hilt to
point, gleaming white in that mist.

Therefore it sent a thrill of joy to my heart, to know that there was
one friend left me yet: I sheathed it again carefully, and undoing it
from my waist, hung it about my neck.

Then catching up my rags in my arms, I drew them up till my legs and
feet were altogether clear from them, afterwards folded my arms over my
breast, gave a long leap and ran, looking downward, but not giving heed
to my way.

Once or twice I fell over stumps of trees, and such-like, for it was a
cut-down wood that I was in, but I rose always, though bleeding and
confused, and went on still; sometimes tearing madly through briars and
gorse bushes, so that my blood dropped on the dead leaves as I went.

I ran in this way for about an hour; then I heard a gurgling and
splashing of waters; I gave a great shout and leapt strongly, with shut
eyes, and the black water closed over me.

When I rose again, I saw near me a boat with a man in it; but the shore
was far off; I struck out toward the boat, but my clothes which I had
knotted and folded about me, weighed me down terribly.

The man looked at me, and began to paddle toward me with the oar he held
in his left hand, having in his right a long, slender spear, barbed like
a fish-hook; perhaps, I thought, it is some fishing spear; moreover his
raiment was of scarlet, with upright stripes of yellow and black all
over it.

When my eye caught his, a smile widened his mouth as if some one had
made a joke; but I was beginning to sink, and indeed my head was almost
under water just as he came and stood above me, but before it went quite
under, I saw his spear gleam, then felt it in my shoulder, and for the
present, felt nothing else.

When I woke I was on the bank of that river; the flooded waters went
hurrying past me; no boat on them now; from the river the ground went up
in gentle slopes till it grew a great hill, and there, on that hill-top,
Yes, I might forget many things, almost everything, but not that, not
the old castle of my fathers up among the hills, its towers blackened
now and shattered, yet still no enemy's banner waved from it.

So I said I would go and die there? and at this thought I drew my sword,
which yet hung about my neck, and shook it in the air till the true
steel quivered, then began to pace towards the castle. I was quite
naked, no rag about me; I took no heed of that only thanking God that my
sword was left, and so toiled up the hill. I entered the castle soon by
the outer court; I knew the way so well, that I did not lift my eyes
from the groimd, but walked on over the lowered drawbridge through the
unguarded gates, and stood in the great hall at lastmy father's hall as
bare of everything but my sword as when I came into the world fifty
years before: I had as little clothes, as little wealth, less memory and
thought, I verily believe, than then.

So I lifted up my eyes and gazed; no glass in the windows, no hangings
on the walls; the vaulting yet held good throughout, but seemed to be
going; the mortar had fallen out from between the stones, and grass and
fern grew in the joints; the marble pavement was in some places gone,
and water stood about in puddles, though one scarce knew how it had got
there.

No hangings on the walls—no; yet, strange to say, instead of them, the
walls blazed from end to end with scarlet paintings, only striped across
with green damp-marks in many places, some falling bodily from the wall,
the plaster hanging down with the fading colour on it.

In all of them, except for the shadows and the faces of the figures,
there was scarce any colour but scarlet and yellow. Here and there it
seemed the painter, whoever it was, had tried to make his trees or his
grass green, but it would not do; some ghastly thoughts must have filled
his head, for all the green went presently into yellow, out-sweeping
through the picture dismally. But the faces were painted to the very
life, or it seemed so; there were only five of them, however, that were
very marked or came much in the foreground; and four of these I knew
well, though I did not then remember the names of those that had borne
them. They were Red Harald, Swanhilda, Amald, and myself. The fifth I
did not know; it was a woman's and very beautiful.

Then I saw that in some parts a small penthouse roof had been built over
the paintings, to keep them from the weather. Near one of these stood a
man painting, clothed in red, with stripes of yellow and black: Then I
knew that it was the same man who had saved me from drowning by spearing
me through the shoulder; so I went up to him, and saw furthermore that
he was girt with a heavy sword. He turned round when he saw me coming,
and asked me fiercely what I did there. I asked why he was painting in
my castle.

Thereupon, with that same grim smile widening his mouth as heretofore,
he said, "I paint God's judgments."

And as he spoke, he rattled the sword in his scabbard; but I said,

"Well, then, you paint them very badly. Listen; I know God's judgments
much better than you do. See now; I will teach you God's judgments, and
you shall teach me painting."

While I spoke he still rattled his sword, and when I had done, shut his
right eye tight, screwing his nose on one side; then said:

"You have got no clothes on, and may go to the devil! What do you know
about God's judgments?"

"Well, they are not all yellow and red, at all events; you ought to know
better."

He screamed out, "O you fool! Yellow and red! Gold and blood, what do
they make?"

"Well," I said; "what?"

"HELL!" And, coming close up to me, he struck me with his open hand in
the face, so that the colour with which his hand was smeared was dabbed
about my face. The blow almost threw me down; and, while I staggered, he
rushed at me furiously with his sword. Perhaps it was good for me that I
had got no clothes on; for, being utterly unencumbered, I leapt this way
and that, and avoided his fierce, eager strokes till I could collect
myself somewhat; while he had a heavy scarlet cloak on that trailed on
the ground, and which he often trod on, so that he stumbled.

He very nearly slew me during the first few minutes, for it was not
strange that, together with other matters, I should have forgotten the
art of fence: but yet, as I went on, and sometimes bounded about the
hall under the whizzing of his sword, as he rested sometimes, leaning on
it, as the point sometimes touched my head and made my eyes start out, I
remembered the old joy that I used to have, and the swy, swy, of the
sharp edge, as one gazed between one's horse's ears; moreover, at last,
one fierce swift stroke, just touching me below the throat, tore up the
skin all down my body, and fell heavy on my thigh, so that I drew my
breath in and turned white; then first, as I swung my sword round my
head, our blades met, oh! to hear that tchink again! and I felt the
notch my sword made in his, and swung out at him; but he guarded it and
returned on me; I guarded right and left, and grew warm, and opened my
mouth to shout, but knew not what to say; and our sword points fell on
the floor together: then, when we had panted awhile, I wiped from my
face the blood that had been dashed over it, shook my sword and cut at
him, then we spun round and round in a mad waltz to the measured music
of our meeting swords, and sometimes either wounded the other somewhat
but not much, till I beat down his sword on to his head, that he fell
grovelling, but not cut through. Verily, thereupon my lips opened
mightily with "Mary rings."

Then, when he had gotten to his feet, I went at him again, he staggering
back, guarding wildly; I cut at his head; he put his sword up
confusedly, so I fitted both hands to my hilt, and smote him mightily
under the arm: then his shriek mingled with my shout, made a strange
sound together; he rolled over and over, dead, as I thought.

I walked about the hall in great exultation at first, striking my sword
point on the floor every now and then, till I grew faint with loss of
blood; then I went to my enemy and stripped off some of his clothes to
bind up my wounds withal; afterwards I found in a corner bread and wine,
and I eat and drank thereof.

Then I went back to him, and looked, and a thought struck me, and I took
some of his paints and brushes, and kneeling down, painted his face
thus, with stripes of yellow and red, crossing each other at right
angles; and in each of the squares so made I put a spot of black, after
the manner of the painted letters in the prayer-books and romances when
they are ornamented.

So I stood back as painters use, folded my arms, and admired my own
handiwork. Yet there struck me as being something so utterly doleful in
the man's white face, and the blood running all about him, and washing
off the stains of paint from his face and hands, and splashed clothes,
that my heart misgave me, and I hoped that he was not dead; I took some
water from a vessel he had been using for his painting, and, kneeling,
washed his face.

Was it some resemblance to my father's dead face, which I had seen when
I was young, that made me pity him? I laid my hand upon his heart, and
felt it beating feebly; so I lifted him up gently, and carried him
towards a heap of straw that he seemed used to lie upon; there I
stripped him and looked to his wounds, and used leech-craft, the memory
of which God gave me for this purpose, I suppose, and within seven days
I found that he would not die.

Afterwards, as I wandered about the castle, I came to a room in one of
the upper storeys, that had still the roof on, and windows in it with
painted glass, and there I found green raiment and swords and armour,
and I clothed myself.

So when he got well I asked him what his name was, and he me, and we
both of us said, "Truly I know not." Then said I, "but we must call each
other some name, even as men call days."

"Call me Swerker," he said, "some priest I knew once had that name."

"And me Wulf," said I, "though wherefore I know not."

Then I tried to learn painting till I thought I should die, but at last
learned it through very much pain and grief.

And, as the years went on and we grew old and grey, we painted purple
pictures and green ones instead of the scarlet and yellow, so that the
walls looked altered, and always we painted God's judgments.

And we would sit in the sunset and watch them with the golden light
changing them, as we yet hoped God would change both us and our works.
Often too we would sit outside the walls and look at the trees and sky,
and the ways of the few men and women we saw; therefrom sometimes befell
adventures.

Once there went past a great funeral of some king going to his own
country, not as he had hoped to go, but stiff and colourless, spices
filling up the place of his heart.

And first went by very many knights, with long bright hauberks on, that
fell down before their knees as they rode, and they all had
tilting-helms on with the same crest, so that their faces were quite
hidden: and this crest was two hands clasped together tightly as though
they were the hands of one praying forgiveness from the one he loves
best; and the crest was wrought in gold.

Moreover, they had on over their hauberks surcoats which were half
scarlet and half purple, strewn about with golden stars.

Also long lances, that had forked knights'-pennons, half purple and half
scarlet, strewn with golden stars.

And these went by with no sound but the fall of their horse-hoofs.

And they went slowly, so slowly that we counted them all, five thousand
five hundred and fifty-five. Then went by many fair maidens whose hair
was loose and yellow, and who were all clad in green raiment ungirded,
and shod with golden shoes. These also we counted, being five hundred;
moreover some of the outermost of them, viz., one maiden to every
twenty, had long silver trumpets, which they swung out to right and
left, blowing them, and their sound was very sad.

Then many priests, and bishops, and abbots, who wore white albs and
golden copes over them; and they all sang together mournfully, "Propter
amnen Babylonis;" and these were three hundred.

After that came a great knot of the Lords, who were tilting helmets and
surcoats emblazoned with each one his own device; only each had in his
hand a small staff two feet long whereon was a pennon of scarlet and
purple. These also were three hundred.

And in the midst of these was a great car hung down to the ground with
purple, drawn by grey horses whose trappings were half scarlet, half
purple. And on this car lay the King, whose head and hands were bare;
and he had on him a surcoat, half purple and half scarlet, strewn with
golden stars. And his head rested on a tilting helmet, whose crest was
the hands of one praying passionately for forgiveness.

But his own hands lay by his side as if he had just fallen asleep.

And all about the car were little banners, half purple and half scarlet,
strewn with golden stars. Then the King, who counted but as one, went by
also.

And after him came again many maidens clad in ungirt white raiment
strewn with scarlet flowers, and their hair was loose and yellow and
their feet bare: and, except for the falling of their feet and the
rustle of the wind through their raiment, they went past quite silently.
These also were five hundred.

Then lastly came many young knights with long bright hauberks falling
over their knees as they rode, and surcoats, half scarlet and half
purple, strewn with golden stars; they bore long lances with forked
pennons which were half purple, half scarlet, strewn with golden stars;
their heads and their hands were bare, but they bore shields, each one
of them, which were of bright steel wrought cunningly in the midst with
that bearing of the two hands of one who prays for forgiveness; which
was done in gold. These were but five hundred.

Then they all went by winding up and up the hill roads, and, when the
last of them had departed out of our sight, we put down our heads and
wept, and I said, "Sing us one of the songs of the Hollow Land." Then he
whom I had called Swerker put his hand into his bosom, and slowly drew
out a long, long tress of black hair, and laid it on his knee and
smoothed it, weeping on it: So then I left him there and went and armed
myself, and brought armour for him.

And then came back to him and threw the armour down so that it clanged,
and said:

"O Harald, let us go!"

He did not seem surprised that I called him by the right name, but rose
and armed himself, and then be looked a good knight; so we set forth.
And in a turn of the long road we came suddenly upon a most fair woman,
clothed in scarlet, who sat and sobbed, holding her face between her
bands, and her hair was very black.

And when Harald saw her, he stood and gazed at her for long through the
bars of bis helmet, then suddenly turned, and said:

"Florian, I must stop here; do you go on to the Hollow Land. Farewell."

"Farewell." And then I went on, never turning back, and him I never saw
more.

And so I went on, quite lonely, but happy, till I had reached the Hollow
Land.

Into which I let myself down most carefully, by the jutting rocks and
bushes and strange trailing flowers, and there lay down and fell asleep.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fytte the Third](thol05)

</div>
