<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](thol02)  [Next](thol04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Hollow Land*, by William Morris, \[1856\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f02"></span>

FAILING IN THE WORLD

Now at that time we drove cattle in Red Harald's land. And we took no
hoof but from the Lords and rich men, but of these we had a mighty
drove, both oxen and sheep, and horses, and besides, even hawks and
hounds, and huntsman or two to take care of them.

And, about noon, we drew away from the cornlands that lay beyond the
pastures, and mingled with them, and reached a wide moor, which was
called "Goliath's Land." I scarce know why, except that it belonged
neither to Red Harald or us, but was debatable.

And the cattle began to go slowly, and our horses were tired, and the
sun struck down very hot upon us, for there was no shadow, and the day
was cloudless.

All about the edge of the moor, except on the sidefrom which we had come
was a rim of hills, not very high, but very rocky and steep, otherwise
the moor itself was flat; and through these hills was one pass, guarded
by our men, which pass led to the Hill castle of the Lilies.

It was not wonderful, that of this moor many wild stories were told,
being such a strange lonely place, some of them one knew, alas to be
over true. In the old time, before we went to the good town, this moor
had been the mustering place of our people, and our house had done deeds
enough of blood and horror to turn our white lilies red, and our blue
cross to a fiery one. But some of those wild tales I never believed;
they had to do mostly with men losing their way without any apparent
cause, (for there were plenty of landmarks,) finding some well-known
spot, and then, just beyond it, a place they had never even dreamed of.

"Florian! FIorian!" said Arnald, "for God's sake stop! as every one else
is stopping to look at the hills yonder; I always thought there was a
curse upon us. What does God mean by shutting us up here? Look at the
cattle; O Christ, they have found it out too! See, some of them are
turning to run back again towards Harald's land. Oh! unhappy, unhappy,
from that day forward!"

He leaned forward, rested his head on his horse's neck, and wept like a
child. I felt so irritated with him, that I could almost have slain him
then and there. Was he mad? had these wild doings of ours turned his
strong wise head?

"Are you my brother Arnald, that I used to think such a grand man when I
was a boy?" I said, "or are you changed too, like everybody, and
everything else? What do you mean?"

"Look! look!" he said, grinding his teeth in agony. I raised my eyes:
where was the one pass between the rim of stern rocks? Nothing: the
enemy behind us—that grim wall in front: what wonder that each man
looked in his fellow's face for help, and found it not. Yet I refused to
believe that there was any troth either in the wild stories that I had
heard when I was a boy, or in this story told me so clearly by my eyes
now.

I called out cheerily, "Hugh, come here!" He came. "What do you think of
this? Some mere dodge on Harald's part? Are we cut off?" "Think! Sir
Florian? God forgive me for ever thinking at all; I have given up that
long and long ago, because thirty years ago I thought this, that the
House of Lilies would deserve anything in the way of bad fortune that
God would send them: so I gave up thinking, and took to fighting. But if
you think that Harald had anything to do with this, why-why-in God's
name, I wish I could think so!"

I felt a dull weight on my heart. Had our house been the devil's
servants all along? I thought we were God's servants.

The day was very still, but what little wind there was, was at our
backs. I watched Hugh's face, not being able to answer him. He was the
cleverest man at war that I have known, either before or since that day;
sharper than any hound in ear and scent, clearer sighted than any eagle;
he was listening now intently. I saw a slight smile cross his face;
heard him mutter, "Yes! I think so: verily that is better, a great deal
better." Then he stood up in his stirrups, and shouted, "Hurrah for the
Lilies! Mary rings!" "Mary rings!" I shouted, though I did not know the
reason for his exultation: my brother lifted his head, and smiled too,
grimly. Then as I listened I heard clearly the sound of a trumpet, and
enemy's trumpet too.

"After all, it was only mist, or some such thing," I said, for the pass
between the hills was clear enough now.

"Hurrah! only mist," said Amald, quite elated; "Mary rings!" and we all
began to think of fighting: for after all what joy is equal to that?

There were five hundred of us; two hundred spears, the rest archers; and
both archers and men at arms were picked men.

"How many of them are we to expect?" said I. "Not under a thousand,
certainly, probably more, Sir Florian." (My brother Arnald, by the way,
had knighted me before we left the good town, and Hugh liked to give me
the handle to my name. How was it, by the way, that no one had ever made
him a knight?)

"Let every one look to his arms and horse, and come away from these
silly cows' sons!" shouted Arnald.

Hugh said, "They will be here in an hour, fair Sir."

So we got clear of the cattle, and dismounted, and both ourselves took
food and drink, and our horses; afterwards we tightened our
saddle-girths, shook our great pots of helmets on, except Amald, whose
rustyred hair had been his only head-piece in battle for years and
years, and stood with our spears close by our horses, leaving room for
the archers to retreat between our ranks; and they got their arrows
ready, and planted their stakes before a little peat moss: and there we
waited, and saw their pennons at last floating high above the corn of
the fertile land, then heard their many horse-hoofs ring upon the
hard-parched moor, and the archers began to shoot.

It had been a strange battle; we had never fought better, and yet withal
it had ended in a retreat; indeed all along every man but Arnald and
myself, even Hugh, had been trying at least to get the enemy between him
and the way toward the pass; and now we were all drifting that way, the
enemy trying to cut us off, but never able to stop us, because he could
only throw small bodies of men in our way, whom we scattered and put to
flight in their turn.

I never cared less for my life than then; indeed, in spite of all my
boasting and hardness of belief, I should have been happy to have died,
such a strange weight of apprehension was on me; and yet I got no
scratch even. I had soon put off my great helm, and was fighting in my
mail-coif only: and here I swear that three knights together charged me,
aiming at my bare face, yet never touched me. For, as for one, I put his
lance aside with my sword, and the other two in some most wonderful
manner got their spears locked in each other's armour, and so had to
submit to be knocked off their horses.

And we still neared the pass, and began to see distinctly the ferns that
grew on the rocks, and the fair country between the rift in them,
spreading out there, blue-shadowed. Whereupon came a great rush of men
of both sides, striking side blows at each other, spitting, cursing, and
shrieking, as they tore away like a herd of wild hogs. So, being
careless of lfe, as I said, I drew rein, and turning my horse, waited
quietly for them. And I knotted the reins, and laid them on the horse's
neck, and stroked him, that he whinnied, then got both my hands to my
sword.

Then, as they came on, I noted hurriedly that the first man was one of
Arnald's men, and one of our men behind him leaned forward to prod him
with his spear, but could not reach so far, till he himself was run
through the eye with a spear, and throwing his arms up fell dead with a
shriek. Also I noted concerning this first man that the laces of his
helmet were loose, and when he saw me he lifted his left hand to his
head, took off his helm and cast it at me, and still tore on; the helmet
flew over my head, and I sitting still there, swung out, hitting him on
the neck; his head flew right off, for the mail no more held than a
piece of silk. "Mary rings," and my horse whinnied again, and we both of
us went at it, and fairly stopped that rout, so that there was a knot of
quite close and desperate fighting, wherein we had the best of that
fight and slew most of them, albeit my horse was slain and my mail-coif
cut through. Then I bade a squire fetch me another horse, and began
meanwhile to upbraid those knights for running in such a strange
disorderly race, instead of standing and fighting cleverly. Moreover we
had drifted even in this successful fight still nearer to the pass, so
that the conies who dwelt there were beginning to consider whether they
should not run into their holes.

But one of those knights said: "Be not angry with me. Sir Florian, but
do you think you will go to Heaven?"

"The saints! I hope so," I said, but one who stood near him whispered to
him to hold his peace, so I cried out: "O friend! I hold this world and
all therein so cheap now, that I see not anything in it but shame which
can any longer anger me; wherefore speak: out."

"Then, Sir Florian, men say that at your christening some fiend took on
him the likeness of a priest and strove to baptize you in the Devil's
name, but God had mercy on you so that the fiend could not choose but
baptize you in the name of the most holy Trinity: and yet men say that
you hardly believe any doctrine such as other men do, and will at the
end only go to Heaven round about as it were, not at all by the
intercession of our Lady; they say too that you can see no ghosts or
other wonders, whatever happens to other Christian men."

I smiled.  "Well, friend, I scarcely call this a disadvantage, moreover
what has it to do with the matter in hand?"

How was this in Heaven's name? We had been quite still, resting while
this talk was going on, but we could hear the hawks chattering from the
rocks, we were so close now.

And my heart sunk within me, there was no reason why this should not be
true; there was no reason why anything should not be true.

"This, Sir Florian," said the knight again, "how would you feel inclined
to fight if you thought that everything about you was mere glamour; this
earth here, the rocks, the sun, the sky? I do not know where I am for
certain, I do not know that it is not midnight instead of undem: I do
not know if I have been fighting men or only simulacra but I think, we
all think, that we have been led into some devil's trap or other,
and—and may God forgive me my sins! I wish I had never been born."

There now! he was weeping —they all wept —how strange it was to see
those rough, bearded men blubbering there, and snivelling till the tears
ran over their armour and mingled with the blood, so that it dropped
down to the earth in a dim, dull, red rain.

My eyes indeed were dry, but then so was my heart; I felt far worse than
weeping came to, but nevertheless I spoke cheerily.

"Dear friends, where are your old men's hearts gone to now? See now!
This is a punishment for our sins, is it? Well, for our forefathers'
sins or our own? If the first, O brothers, be very sure that if we bear
it manfully God will have something very good in store for us hereafter;
but if for our sins, is it not certain that He cares for us yet, for
note that He suffers the wicked to go their own ways pretty much;
moreover brave men, brothers, ought to be the masters of simulacra come,
is it so hard to die once for all?"

Still no answer came from them, they sighed heavily only. I heard the
sound of more than one or two swords as they rattled back to the
scabbards: nay, one knight, stripping himself of surcoat and hauberk,
and drawing his dagger, looked at me with a grim smile, and said, "Sir
Florian, do so!" Then he drew the dagger across his throat and he fell
back dead.

They shuddered, those brave men, and crossed themselves. And I had no
heart to say a word more, but mounted the horse which had been brought
to me and rode away slowly for a few yards; then I became aware that
there was a great silence over the whole field.

So I lifted my eyes and looked, and behold no man struck at another.

Then from out of a band of horsemen came Harald, and he was covered all
over with a great scarlet cloth as before, put on over the head, and
flowing all about his horse, but rent with the fight. He put off his
helm and drew back his mail-coif, then took a trumpet from the hand of a
herald and blew strongly.

And in the midst of his blast I heard a voice call out: "O Florian! come
and speak to me for the last time!"

So when I turned I beheld Arnald standing by himself, but near him stood
Hugh and ten others with drawn swords.

Then I wept, and so went to him weeping; and he said, "Thou seest,
brother, that we must die, and I think by some horrible and unheard-of
death, and the House of the Lilies is just dying too; and now I repent
me of Swanhilda's death; now I know that it was a poor cowardly piece of
revenge, instead of a brave act of justice; thus has God shown us the
right.

"O Florian! curse me! So will it be straighter; truly thy mother when
she bore thee did not think of this; rather saw thee in the tourney at
this time, in her fond hopes, glittering with gold and doing knightly;
or else mingling thy brown locks with the golden hair of some maiden
weeping for the love of thee. God forgive me! God forgive me!"

"What harm, brother?" I said, "this is only failing in the world; what
if we had not failed, in a little while it would have made no
difference; truly just now I felt very miserable, but now it has passed
away, and I am happy."

"O brave heart!" he said, "yet we shall part just now, Florian,
farewell."

"The road is long," I said, "farewell."

Then we kissed each other, and Hugh and the others wept.

Now all this time the trumpets had been ringing, ringing, great doleful
peals, then they ceased, and above all sounded Red Harald's voice.

(So I looked round towards that pass, and when I looked I no longer
doubted any of those wild tales of glamour concerning Goliath's Land;
and for though the rocks were the same, and though the conies still
stood gazing at the doors of their dwellings, though the hawks still
cried out shrilly, though the fern still shook in the wind, yet beyond,
oh such a land! not to be described by any because of its great beauty,
lying, a great hollow land, the rocks going down on this side in
precipices, then reaches and reaches of loveliest country, trees and
flowers, and corn, then the hills, green and blue, and purple, till
their ledges reached the white snowy mountains at last. Then with all
manner of strange feelings, "my heart in the midst of my body was even
like melting wax.")

"O you House of the Lily! you are conquered yet I will take vengeance
only on a few, therefore let all those who wish to live come and pile
their swords, and shields, and helms behind me in three great heaps, and
swear fealty afterwards to me; yes, all but the false knights Arnald and
Florian."

We were holding each other's hands and gazing, and we saw all our
knights, yea, all but Squire Hugh and his ten heroes, pass over the
field singly, or in groups of three or four, with their heads hanging
down in shame, and they cast down their notched swords and dinted,
lilied shields, and brave-crested helms into three great heaps, behind
Red Herald, then stood behind, no man speaking to his fellow, or
touching him.

Then dolefully the great trumpets sang over the dying House of the Lily,
and Red Harald led his men forward, but slowly: on they came, spear and
mail glittering in the sunlight; and I turned and looked at that good
land, and a shuddering delight seized my soul.

But I felt my brother's hand leave mine, and saw him turn his horse's
head and ride swiftly toward the pass; that was a strange pass now.

And at the edge he stopped, turned round and called out aloud, "I pray
thee, Harald, forgive mel now farewell all!"

Then the horse gave one bound forward, and we heard the poor creature's
scream when he felt that he must die, and we heard afterwards (for we
were near enough for that even) a clang and a crash.

So I turned me about to Hugh, and he understood me though I could not
speak.

We shouted all together, "Mary rings," then laid our bridles on the
necks of our horses, spurred forward, and in five minutes they were all
slain, and I was down among the horse-hoofs.

Not slain though, not wounded. Red Harald smiled grimly when he saw me
rise and lash out again; he and some ten others dismounted, and holding
their long spears out, I went back—back, back, I saw what it meant, and
sheathed my sword, and their laughter rolled all about me, and I too
smiled.

Presently they all stopped, and I felt the last foot of turf giving
under my feet; I looked down and saw the crack there widening; then in a
moment I fell, and a cloud of dust and earth rolled after me; then again
their mirth rose into thunder-peals of laughter. But through it all I
heard Red Harald shout, "Silence! Evil dogs!"

For as I fell I stretched out my arms, and caught a tuft of yellow broom
some three feet from the brow, and hung there by the hands, my feet
being loose in the air.

Then Red Harald came and stood on the precipice above me, his great axe
over his shoulder; and he looked down on me not ferociously, almost
kindly, while the wind from the Hollow Land blew about his red raiment,
tattered and dusty now.

And I felt happy, though it pained me to hold straining by the broom,
yet I said, "I will hold out to the last"

It was not long, the plant itself gave way and I fell, and as I fell I
fainted.

I had thought when I fell that I should never wake again; but I woke at
last: for a long time I was quite dizzied and could see nothing at all:
horrible doubts came creeping over me; I half expected to see presently
great half-formed shapes come rolling up to me to crush me; some thing
fiery, not strange, too utterly horrible to be strange, but utterly vile
and ugly, the sight of which would have killed me when I was upon the
earth, come rolling up to torment me. In fact I doubted if I were in
hell.

I knew I deserved to be, but I prayed, and then it came into my mind
that I could not pray if I were in hell.

Also there seemed to be a cool green light all about me, which was
sweet. Then presently I heard a glorious voice ring outclear, close to
me

  "Christ keep the Hollow Land  
  Through the sweet spring-tide,  
  When the apple-blossoms bless  
  The lowly bent hill side."

Thereat my eyes were slowly unsealed, and I saw the blessedest sight I
have ever seen before or since: for I saw my Love.

She sat about five yards from me on a great grey stone that had much
moss on it, one of the many scattered along the side of the stream by
which I lay; she was clad in loose white raiment close to her hands and
throat; her feet were bare, her hair hung loose a long way down, but
some of it lay on her knees: I said "white" raiment, but long spikes of
light scarlet went down from the throat, lost here and there in the
shadows of the folds, and growing smaller and smaller, died before they
reached her feet.

I was lying with my head resting on soft moss that some one had gathered
and placed under me. She, when she saw me moving and awake, came and
stood over me with a gracious smile.  She was so lovely and tender to
look at, and so kind, yet withal no one, man or woman, had ever
frightened me half so much.

She was not fair in white and red, like many beautiful women are, being
rather pale, but like ivory for smoothness, and her hair was quite
golden, not light yellow, but dusky golden.

I tried to get up on my feet, but was too weak, and sank back again. She
said: "No, not just yet, do not trouble yourself or try to remember
anything just at present."

There withal she kneeled down, and hung over me closer.

"To-morrow you may, perhaps, have something hard to do or bear, I know,
but now you must be as happy as you can be, quietly happy. Why did you
start and turn pale when I came to you? Do you not know who I am? Nay,
but you do, I see; and I have been waiting here so long for you; so you
must have expected to see me. You cannot be frightened of me, are you?"

But I could not answer a word, but all the time strange knowledge,
strange feelings were filling my brain and my heart, she said: "You are
tired; rest, and dream happily."

So she sat by me, and sang to lull me to sleep, while I turned on my
elbow, and watched the waving of her throat: and the singing of all the
poets I had ever heard, and of many others too, not born till years long
after I was dead, floated all about me as she sang, and I did indeed
dream happily.

When I awoke it was the time of the cold dawn, and the colours were
gathering themselves together, whereat in fatherly approving fashion the
sun sent all across the east long bars of scarlet and orange that after
faded through yellow to green and blue. And she sat by me still; I think
she had been sitting there and singing all the time; all through hot
yesterday, for I had been sleeping day-long and night-long, all through
the falling evening under moonlight and starlight the night through.

And now it was dawn, and I think too that neither of us had moved at
all; for the last thing I remembered before I went to sleep was the tips
of her fingers brushing my cheek, as she knelt over me with downdrooping
arm, and still now I felt them there. Moreover she was just finishing
some fainting measure that died before it had time to get painful in its
passion.

Dear Lord! how I loved her! Yet did I not dare to touch her, or even
speak to her. She smiled with delight when she saw I was awake again,
and slid down her hand on to mine, but some shuddering dread made me
draw it away again hurriedly; then I saw the smile leave her face: what
would I not have given for courage to hold her body quite tight to mine?
But I was so weak.

She said:

"Have you been very happy?"

"Yea," I said.

It was the first word I had spoken there, and my voice sounded strange.

"Ah!" she said, "you will talk more when you get used to the air of the
Hollow Land. Have you been thinking of your past life at all? If not,
try to think of it. What thing in Heaven or Earth do you Wish for most?"

Still I said no word; but she said in a wearied way: "Well now, I think
you will be strong enough to get to your feet and walk; take my hand and
try." Therewith she held it out: I strove hard to be brave enough to
take it, but could not; I only turned away shuddering, sick, and grieved
to the heart's core of me; then struggling hard with hand and knee and
elbow, I scarce rose, and stood up totteringly; while she watched me
sadly, still holding out her hand.

But as I rose, in my swinging to and fro the steel sheath of my sword
struck her on the hand so that the blood flowed from it, which she stood
looking at for a while, then dropped it downwards, and turned to look at
me, for I was going.

Then as I walked she followed me, so I stopped and turned and said
almost fiercely: "I am going alone to look for my brother."

The vehemence with which I spoke, or something else, burst some
blood-vessel within my throat, and we both stood there with the blood
running from us on to the grass and summer flowers.

She said: "If you find him, wait with him till I come."

"Yea," and I turned and left her, following the course of the stream
upwards, and as I went I heard her low singing that almost broke my
heart for its sadness.

And I went painfully because of my weakness, and because also of the
great stones; and sometimes I went along a spot of earth where the river
had been used to flow in flood-time, and which was now bare of
everything but stones; and the sun, now risen high, poured down on
everything a great flood of fierce light and scorching heat, and burnt
me sorely, so that I almost fainted.

But about noontide I entered a wood close by the stream, a beech-wood,
intending to rest myself; the herbage was thin and scattered there,
sprouting up from amid the leaf-sheaths and nuts of the beeches, which
had fallen year after year on that same spot; the outside boughs swept
low down, the air itself seemed green when you entered within the shadow
of the branches, they over-roofed the place so with tender green, only
here and there showing spots of blue.

But what lay at the foot of a great beech tree but some dead knight in
armour, only the helmet off? A wolf was prowling round about it, who ran
away snarling when he saw me coming.

So I went up to that dead knight, and fell on my knees before him,
laying my head on his breast, for it was Arnald. He was quite cold, but
had not been dead for very long; I would not believe him dead, but went
down to the stream and brought him water, tried to make him drink-what
would you? He was as dead as Swanhilda: neither came there any answer to
my cries that afternoon but the moaning of the wood doves in the
beeches. So then I sat down and took his head on my knees, and closed
the eyes, and wept quietly while the sun sank lower.

But a little after sunset I heard a rustle through the leaves, that was
not the wind, and looking up my eyes met the pitying eyes of that
maiden.

Something stirred rebelliously within me; I ceased weeping, and said:
"It is unjust, unfair: What right had Swanhilda to live? Did not God
give her up to us? How much better was he than ten Swanhildas?

And look you—See!  He is DEAD."

Now this I shrieked out, being mad; and though I trembled when I saw
some stormy wrath that vexed her very heart and loving lips, gathering
on her face, I yet sat there looking at her and screaming, screaming,
till all the place rang.

But when growing hoarse and breathless I ceased; she said, with
straitened brow and scornful mouth: "So! Bravely done! Must I then,
though I am a woman, call you a liar, for saying God is unjust? You to
punish her, had not God then punished her already? How many times when
she woke in the dead night do you suppose she missed seeing King
Urrayne's pale face and hacked head lying on the pillow by her side?
Whether by night or day, what things but screams did she hear when the
wind blew loud round about the Palace corners? And did not that face
too, often come before her, pale and bleeding as it was long ago, and
gaze at her from unhappy eyes! Poor eyesi With changed purpose in
them—no more hope of converting the world when that blow was once
struck, truly it was very wicked-no more dreams, but only fierce
struggles with the Devil for very life, no more dreams but failure at
last, and death, happier so in the Hollow Land."

She grew so pitying as she gazed at his dead face that I began to weep
again unreasonably, while she saw not that I was weeping, but looked
only on Arnald's face, but after turned on me frowning. "Unjust! Yes,
truly unjust enough to take away life and all hope from her; you have
done a base cowardly act, you and your brother here, disguise it as you
may; you deserve all God's judgment—you"

But I turned my eyes and wet face to her, and said: "Do not curse me
there—do not look like Swanhilda: for see now, you said at first that
you have been waiting long for me, give me your hand now, for I love you
so."

Then she came and knelt by where I sat, and I caught her in my arms and
she prayed to be forgiven.

"O, Florian! I have indeed waited long for you, and when I saw you my
heart was filled with joy, but you would neither touch me nor speak to
me, so that I became almost mad, forgive me, we will be so happy now. 0!
do you know this is what I have been waiting for all these years; it
made me glad, I know, when I was a little baby in my mother's arms to
think I was born for this; and afterwards, as I grew up, I used to watch
every breath of wind through the beech-boughs, every turn of the silver
poplar leaves, thinking it might be you or some news of you."

Then I rose and drew her up with me; but she knelt again by my brother's
side, and kissed him, and said:

"O brother! The Hollow Land is only second best of the places God has
made, for Heaven also is the work of His hand."

Afterwards we dug a deep grave among the beechroots and there we buried
Amald de Liliis.

And I have never seen him since, scarcely even in dreams; surely God has
had mercy on him, for he was very leal and true and brave; he loved many
men, and was kind and gentle to his friends, neither did he hate any but
Swanhilda.

But as for us two, Margaret and me, I cannot tell you concerning our
happiness, such things cannot be told; only this I know, that we abode
continually in the Hollow Land until I lost it.

Moreover this I can tell you. Margaret was walking with me, as she often
walked near the place where I had first seen her; presently we came upon
a woman sitting, dressed in scarlet and gold raiment, with her head laid
down on her knees; likewise we heard her sobbing.

"Margaret, who is she?" I said: "I knew not that any dwelt in the Hollow
Land but us two only."

She said, "I know not who she is, only sometimes; these many years, I
have seen her scarlet robe flaming from far away, amid the quiet green
grass: but I was never so near her as this.

Florian, I am afraid: let us come away."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fytte the Second](thol04)

</div>
