[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt307)  [Next](pt309.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### THE LAY OF DIARMAID

### NO. 2.

WHEN the Fhinn used to go to hunt, one of them used always to stay at
home to watch the women. It fell upon Diarmaid on that day that it was
he who should stay. There was a thing which they used to call SUGH SEIRC
(love juice), a kind of mark in the face of the--man, and there was a
helmet upon him that must not be raised, for there was no woman who
might see the *sugh seirc* that would not fall in love with him, and
Diarmaid knew that these gifts were in himself. On the day that he
stayed at home he thought that no being was seeing him, and he gave a
lift to the helmet; and Graidhne, the daughter of the King of Coig
Ullainn, sees the face of Diarmaid. The warm soul would not be in her
unless she should go with Diarmaid.

Said [Diarmaid](errata.htm#3.md), "That will not answer for me to go with
thee."

"O! we will go, or else I will tear my clothes, and I will give thee up
to Fionn."

"I have no doubt of thee but that he will believe thee, because thou art
his own beloved wife indeed."

They went away, and they travelled together three days and three nights.
They were crossing a river, and a little trout rose and struck her, and
she said--

"Thou art bolder than Diarmaid. If thou couldst go on shore!"

"Now," said he "Fionn has come home, and they will not find us within,
then they will come on our tracks, and they will get us."

"They will not get us," said she. "Whether they get us, or get us not,
we will try to hide ourselves. The thing that we will do is this, we
will go up to this wood up here, and the branches and leaves of the
trees will hide us."

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

They rose up into the tree, and they went into the heart of the tree,
and they drew the branches and leaves of the tree about them.

The Fhinn came to their house, and they did not find Diarmaid or
Graidhne at the house.

"Here, here! lads," said Fionn, "I am without a wife, and the Fhinn
without Diarmaid. We ought to go till we find them."

They went on their search, and they went over the same river. When they
went over, said Fionn--

"We have now been a while walking, and since we have we will breathe a
little at the root of this tree up here."

They took the advice of Fionn, and they sat at the foot of the tree.

Said Fionn--"We should turn to playing, lads."

"We are willing," said they.

Fionn and Osgar used to be the two leaders of the game. It was Diarmaid
who used always to be along with Fionn. Fionn knew that Diarmaid had
magic gifts at games. Now there was Osgar, and he needed a man to be
with him, and it was his own father who used to be with him. They began
at the games. Every game that was going, it was against Fionn that it
went, and Osgar was winning. They drove three games.

Said Fionn--"I am missing Djeermaid heavily; for it was seldom that a
game went against me when Diarmaid was with me. but they are now going
against me since he parted from me; but I will go against thee another
time."

Diarmaid was listening. He went and he put his hand against his right
side,--thus;--and he caught hold of one of the red rowan berries that
were on the tree,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and he let it fall down beside the tree, and the back of Fionn was
against the tree. He noticed something striking him on the back, and put
his hand behind him, and he caught the rowan berry, and he put it into
his pouch. They began at the game, and this game went with Fionn.

"One is with me," said Fionn.

"It is," said Osgar; "but two are wanting."

"Wilt thou go into it any more?" said Osgar.

"I will go, I will go," said Fionn; "try it again."

Diarmaid let down the next rowan berry, and Fionn won this one.

"Wilt thou go into any more?" said he.

"I will go," said Osgar. "If thou hast two, there is one wanting."

Diarmaid let down the third one, and Fionn won the third one.

"We are now," said Oscar, "even and even; all I won thou thyself hast
taken it back again."

"Wilt thou go into it any more?" said Fionn.

"I will go," said Osgar; "we shall have knowledge of its good or evil at
this time."

They went at it, and Diarmaid let down the fourth one, and Fionn won.

"Howsoever, it was whilst thou wert without Diarmaid on thy side I was
winning. Howsoever the matter may be, there were matters that belong to
Diarmaid about thee this day before thou hast won the fourth time."

Said Oisean--"My father did not drive (the game) against us with right,
my son, at all."

"I did drive it," said Fionn.

"Thou did'st not," said Oisean.

"I did; as a proof that I did there are four rowan

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

berries in my pouch opposite to (for) every game that I won."

He took out the four rowan berries, and when be took them out he said-

"Come down from that, Diarmaid, thyself and Graidhne, daughter of the
King of Coig-Ullainn, for ye are there together."

Diarmaid and Graidhne came down; the party was made anew, and Fionn and
Osgar fell out. The arms began, and the skaith began, and they were
doing much harm to each other. The other part of the Fhinn were seeing
that Osgar was like to win against the side of his grandfather.

Said Goll Mac Morna--"Though we had no part in the discord we should
make a redding, and an umpire's parting, between the children of Treun
Mhor."

Said Conan--"Let the Clann Baoisge back each other's bodies."

Then Fionn said to Osgar to stay the arms, in case the Clanna Morna
should still be after them in Alba.

Fionn took notice of Diarmaid, and he said--

My frame, and my band, and mine eye,  
Are longing to do honour to thee,  
Oh! Dhiarmaid O Duibhne, brave man,  
Going with my consort in secret?

There was a woman who was called Mala Lith, and she had a herd of swine,
and there was a venomous boar at their head, and many a good lad went to
hunt him that never came whole from the boar.

Said Fionn to Diarmaid--"Go to hunt the boar of Mala Lith on her herd of
swine. Many a one went there that did not come out of the burn besides a
trout." Diarmaid went to hunt the boar.

H. MACLEAN.

The Gaelic follows at page [78](pt309.htm#page_78.md).

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

These two stories and the following poem give the relationships of the
chiefs of that band of warriors whose exploits form the subject of all
that class of old Celtic poetry which is attributed to Oisean, Osin or
Ossian, and is called Fingalian in English, and Fenian in Ireland. This
is the family tree as here set forth:--

TREUNMHOR (great, mighty), who gives his name to the tribe, the children
of Treunmhor, or the clan of the BAOISGE (flashes of light,
coruscations, gleams).

CUMHAL (spelt Cooal in Manx), only mentioned as the father of Fionn. He
is sometimes called MacDhughil (Macdugald), or the son of black and
white *Brian* the king, brother of Fionn's father, who seldom does
anything.

FIONN MACCHUMAIL (fair), flath na Finne (chief of the Finne), married to
GRAIDHNE, daughter of the king of the fifth of Ullan.

OISEAN, the last of the Finne, son of Fionn, who afterwards sings the
departed glories of his race as a blind old man in poverty and
wretchedness.

OSGAR, his son, Flath nam Fear, chief of men.

DONN, brown, who gives his name to a tribe, clan O Duibhne.

A SISTER of Fionn, wife of King O Dhuine, mother of DIARMAID O DHUBHINE,
the Expert Shield, the best head in the Finne, whom all family histories
and oral traditions call the ancestor of the Campbells, but whom I
strongly suspect to be a Celtic divinity, whose attributes have been
ascribed to their ancestor by a Celtic tribe.

GOLL MAC MORNA, who is only mentioned here as an umpire in the strife,
but who is a very well known character in other poems, and is said to
have been a god in Ireland.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

CONAN, who only appears to utter a bitter taunt and thereby supports the
character always assigned to him. MAOL, the blunt, cropped, or bald.

The FINNE, who are not here named in detail, but are always introduced
into every poem or story in which the rest of these characters are
named. Besides these, there are--

MALA LITH, an old woman, who has a magical white boar with a spike of
venom in his back, invulnerable to all arms but the arms of Diarmaid.

There is a trout which Graidhne wishes to come on shore.

A savage who comes to the cave where Graidhne is, and who is killed by
Diarmaid, to whom the faithless Graidhne is unfaithful.

There is the rowan tree, which is magical, and whose berries are amulets
to this day; and nearly all this is common to Irish stories, as
published in 1855.

The scene is vague, and might be anywhere in Alba. It is commonly laid
near Oban, in Lorne, but Bein Gulbein is the favourite haunt of these
warriors, and it is generally placed in Ireland, and is said to be in
Sligo, and Diarmaid turns his dying face towards Bein Gulban, wherever
it may be.

This subject is referred to elsewhere; but let me here point out that
the "Feene" are the children of beams of light, "Baoisge;" of Great
Mighty, their great ancestor, and their chief is Fair, the son of Cooal,
or it may be of black and white, light and darkness. That Djeearmaid
might be translated "the armed god," who had yellow hair. That their
standard was called the sunbeam, and that in the following short poem we
have similar incidents to the loves of Venus and Adonis, the death of
Achilles, etc., and that all this points rather to

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

mythology than to a single historical incident connected with the
disbanding of an Irish militia.

It is worth remark that the poem alludes to several well known
adventures which are now told as stories, which may have been poems or
distorted facts.

The rowan tree dwelling, verse 21, is No. xxix. in vol. ii., or No.
xxxvi. I forget which story goes by the name. Who White Tooth may be I
do not know, but Diarmid had a son so called.

As to the date of the poem and its origin. There seems every reason to
believe that it is old, and that it has been orally transmitted for
centuries from generation to generation, in the islands of Scotland,
wherever it was composed.

A version of it, got in Kintyre or on Lochawe-side, was printed by John
Smith. D.D., minister of the gospel at Campbeltown, 1787, p. 99. That
version is avowedly pruned and polished.

It is printed without division into stanzas, but the rhythm here and
there appears to indicate that such was the original form of the poem.

That which is now printed is so divided by me, because the rhythm
generally accords, and the "assonance" and sense all point to separate
verses, each complete in itself, and fit for singing to music, as these
old songs are in fact sung at this day. Similar Irish poems are so
divided.

Several of the lines are nearly the same in Dr. Smith's version and in
this which is collected from the people eighty-four years later.

The story in the "Sean Dana" is clearly the same, though--the magic is
avowedly weeded from the original, and Graidhne is the faithful wife of
Diarmaid, not the faithless wife of his uncle Fionn.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

There is another version much older, in a MS. now in course of
publication, which dates from 1539.

One specimen page has been shewn to me, and it contains one stanza and
several lines almost the same as part of this "Lady of Diarmaid." It is
quite certain, then, that this old song has been preserved more or less
perfectly by oral tradition in Scotland amongst people who can neither
read nor write, for at least 330 years, and it gives a standard by which
to form an opinion of popular tradition as an aid to written history.

"The pursuit of Diarmaid and Grainne" fills the greater part of vol.
iii. of the Transactions of the Dublin Ossianic Society, 170 pages; and
a glance at the story as there told will shew that it is founded on the
same widely spread tradition, which, as I imagine, is not a tradition of
any one real event which happened at any given time anywhere; but a
chapter in the mythology of the Pagan world, which may be traced far and
wide in various forms.

Of the following poem, founded on this legend, the collector MacLean
says:

"This Laoidh Dhiarmaid is one of the most popular of the Ossianic pieces
recited in the Long Island, and is known to more individuals than any
other. In South Uist I heard it recited by Angus M'Donald, Janet Currie,
Allan M'Phie, and some others; in Barra by Alexander M'Donald, and
Donald M'Phie (smith), Breubhaig; also by a man in Minglay. The best
reciter of this and other Ossianic pieces, that I have met with, is
Donald M'Phie. This M'Phie says he learnt the poem from Neill M'Innes,
Cill Bharraidh, who died about twenty years ago, about sixty years of
age. M'Innes could neither read nor write. M'Donald

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

says he learnt it from his mother, Marion Galbraith; and traces it up
for six generations to a maternal ancestor of his, who came from
Kintyre. Janet Currie traces it to Neill Currie, her ancestor, who was
Clanronald's poet.

HECTOR MACLEAN."

For valid reasons, I have not given the Gaelic of all the prose stories,
or the whole of them, or the whole of those of which I translate a part.

J. F. C.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lay of Yeearmaid. No. 3](pt309.md)
