[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt302)  [Next](pt304.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### POPULAR TALES

###### OF

## THE WEST HIGHLANDS.

### LVII.

### THE RIDER OF GRIANAIG, [27-1](pt303.htm#xref_27-1.md) AND IAIN THE SOLDIER'S SON.

From Donald MacNiven, a lame carrier. Bowmore, Islay, 5th July, 1859.
Written down by Hector MacLean.

THE knight of [Grianaig](errata.htm#0.md) had three daughters, such that
their like were not to be found or to be seen in any place. There came a
beast from the ocean and she took them with her, and there was no
knowledge what way they had taken, nor where they might be sought.

There was a soldier in the town, and he had three sons, and at the time
of Christmas<span id="xref_28-2">28-2</span> they were playing at
shinny, and the youngest said that they should go and that they should
drive a hale on the lawn of the knight of Grianaig. The rest said that
they should not go; that the knight would not be pleased; that that
would be bringing the loss of his children to his mind, and laying
sorrow upon him. "Let that be as it pleases," said Iain, the youngest
son, "but we will go

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

there and we will drive a hale; I am careless of the knight of Grianaig,
let him be well pleased or angry."

They went to play shinny, and Iain won three hales from his brethren.
The knight put his head out of a window, and he saw them playing at
shinny, and he took great wrath that any one had the heart to play
shinny on his lawn--a thing that was bringing the loss of his children
to his mind, and putting contempt upon him. Said he to his wife, "Who is
so impudent as to be playing shinny on my ground, and bringing the loss
of my children to my mind? Let them be brought here in an instant that
punishment may be done upon them." The three lads were brought to the
presence of the knight, and they were fine lads.

"What made you," said the knight, "go and play shinny upon my ground and
bring the loss of my children to my mind? you must suffer pain for it."

"It is not thus it shall be," said Iain; "but since it befell us to come
wrong upon thee, thou hadst best make us a dwelling of a ship, and we
will go to seek thy daughters, and if they are under the leeward, or the
windward, or under the four brown boundaries of the
deep, [28-3](pt303.htm#xref_28-3.md) we will find them out before there
comes the end of a day and year, and we will bring them back to
Grianaig."

"Though thou be the youngest, it is in thy head that the best counsel
is, let that be made for you."

Wrights were got and a ship was made in seven days. They put in meat and
drink as they might need for the journey. They gave her front to sea and
her stern to land, and they went away, and in seven days they reached a
white sandy strand, and when they went on shore there were six men and
ten at work in the face of a rock blasting, with a foreman over them.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

"What place is here?" said the skipper.

"Here is the place where are the children of the knight of Grianaig;
they are to be married to three giants."

"What means are there to get where they are?"

"There are no means but to go up in this creel against the face of the
rock."

The eldest son went into the creel, and when he was up at the half of
the rock, there came a stumpy black raven, and he began upon him with
his claws, and his wings till he almost left him blind and
deaf. [29-4](pt303.htm#xref_29-4.md) He had but to turn back.

The second one went into the creel, and when he was up half the way,
there came the stumpy black raven, and he began upon him, and he had for
it but to return back as did the other one.

At last Iain went into the creel. When he was up half the way there came
the stumpy black raven, and he began upon him, and he belaboured him
about the face.

"Up with me quickly!" said he, "before I be blinded here."

He was set up to the top of the rock. When he was up the raven came
where he was, and he said to him.

"Wilt thou give me a quid of tobacco?" [29-5](pt303.htm#xref_29-5.md)

"Thou high-priced rogue! little claim hast thou on me for giving, that
to thee."

"Never thou mind that, I will be a good friend to thee. Now thou shalt
go to the house of the big giant, and thou wilt see the knight's
daughter sewing, and her thimble wet with tears."

He went on before him till he reached the house of the giant. He went
in. The knight's daughter was sewing.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

"What brought thee here?" said she.

"What brought thyself into it that I might not come into it."

"I was brought here in spite of me."

"I know that. Where is the giant?"

"He is in the hunting hill."

"What means to get him home?"

"To shake yonder battle-chain without, and there is no one in the
leeward, or in the windward, or in the four brown boundaries of the
deep, who will hold battle against him, but young Iain the soldier's
son, from Albainn, and he is but sixteen years of age, and he is too
young to go to battle against the giant."

"There is many a one in Albainn as strong as Iain the soldier's son,
though the soldier were with him."

Out he went. He gave a haul at the chain, and he did not take a turn out
of it, and he went on his knee. He rose up, be gave the next shake at
the chain, and he broke a link in it. The giant heard it in the hunting
hill.

"Aha!" said he, "who could move my battle-chain but young Iain the
soldier's son from Albainn, and he is but sixteen years of age; he is
too young yet?"

The giant put the game on a withy, and home he came.

"Art though young Iain the soldier's son, from Albainn?"

"Not I."

Who art thou in the leeward, or in the windward, or in the four brown
boundaries of the deep, that could move my battle-chain, but young Iain
the soldier's son, from Albainn?"

"There is many a one in Albainn as strong as young

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Iain the soldier's son, though the soldier
should be with him."

"I have got that in the prophesyings."

"Never thou mind what thou hast got in the prophesyings."

"In what way wouldst thou rather try thyself?"

"When I and my mother used to be falling out with each other, and I
might wish to get my own will, it was in tight wrestling ties we used to
try; and one time she used to get the better, and two times she used
not."

They seized each other, and they had hard hugs, and the giant put Iain
on his knee.

"I see," said Iain, "that thou art the stronger." "It is known that I
am," said the giant.

They went before each other again. They were twisting and hauling each
other. Iain struck a foot on the giant in the ankle, and he put him on
the thews of his back under him on the ground. He wished that the raven
were at him.

The stumpy black raven came, and he fell upon the giant about the face
and about the ears with his claws and with his wings until he blinded
him, and he deafened him.

"Hast thou got a nail of arms that will take the head off the monster?"

"I have not."

"Put thy hand under my right wing, and thou wilt find a small sharp
knife which I have for gathering briar-buds, and take the head off him."

He put his hand under the raven's right wing and he found the knife, and
he took the head off the giant.

"Now Iain thou shalt go in where is the big daughter of the knight of
Grianaig, and she will be asking thee

to return and not to go farther; but do not thou give heed, but go on,
and thou wilt reach the middle daughter; and thou shalt give me a quid
of tobacco."

"I will give that to thee indeed; well hast thou earned it. Thou shalt
have half of all I have."

"I will not. There's many a long day to Bealtain."

"The fortune will not let me be here till Bealtain."

"Thou hast knowledge of what has passed, but thou hast no knowledge of
what is before thee; get warm water, clean thyself in it; thou wilt find
a vessel of balsam above the door, rub it in thy skin, and go to bed by
thyself and thou wilt be whole and wholesome to-morrow, and to-morrow
thou shalt go on to the house of the next one."

He went in and he did as the raven asked him. He went to bed that night,
and he was whole and wholesome in the morning when he arose.

"It is better for thee," said the knight's big daughter, "not to go
further, and not to put thyself in more danger; there is plenty of gold
and silver here, and we will take it with us and we will return."

"I will not do that," said he; "I will take (the road) on my front."

He went forwards till he came to the house where was the middle daughter
of the knight of Grianaig. He went in and she was seated sewing, and she
(was) weeping, and her thimble wet with her tears.

"What brought thee here?"

"What brought thyself into it that I might not come into it?"

"I was brought in spite of me."

"I have knowledge of that. What set thee weeping?"

"I have but one night till I must be married to the giant."

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

"Where is the giant ?"

"He is in the hunting hill."

"What means to get him home?"

"To shake that battle chain without at the side of the house, and he is
not in the leeward nor in the windward, nor in the four brown boundaries
of the deep, who is as much as can shake it, but young Iain the
soldier's son, from Albainn, and he is too young yet, he is but sixteen
years of age."

"There are men in Albainn as strong as young Iain the soldier's son,
though the soldier should be with him."

He went out, and he gave a haul at the chain, and he came upon his two
knees. He rose up and gave the next haul at it, and he broke three links
in it.

The giant heard that in the hunting hill.

"Aha!" said he, and he put the game on a withy on his shoulder, and home
he came.

"Who could move my battle chain but young Iain the soldier's son from
Albainn, and he is too young yet; he is but sixteen years of age?"

"There are men in Albainn as strong as young Iain the soldier's son,
though the soldier should be with him."

"We have got that in the prophesyings."

"I care not what is in your prophesyings."

"In what way wouldst thou rather try thyself?"

"In hard hugs of wrestling."

They seized each other and the giant put him on his two knees.

"Thine is my life," said Iain, "thou art stronger than I. Let's try
another turn."

The tried each other again, and Iain struck his heel on the giant in the
ankle, and he set him on the thews of his back on the ground.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

"Raven!" said he, "a flapping of thine were good now."

The raven came, and he blinded and deafened the giant, giving it to him
with his beak, and with his claws, and with his wings.

"Hast thou a nail of a weapon?"

"I have not."

"Put thy hand under my right wing, and thou wilt find there a small
sharp knife that I have for gathering briar-buds, and take the head off
him."

He put his hand under the root of the raven's right wing, and he found
the knife, and he took the head off the giant.

"Now thou shalt go in and clean thyself with warm water, thou wilt find
the vessel of balsam, thou shalt rub it upon thyself, thou shalt go to
bed, and thou wilt be whole and wholesome to-morrow. This one will be
certainly more cunning and more mouthing than was the one before, asking
thee to return and not to go further; but give thou no heed to her. And
thou shalt give me a quid of tobacco."

"I will give it indeed; thou art worthy of it."

He went in and he did as the raven asked him. When he got up on the
morrow's morning he was whole and wholesome.

"Thou hadst better," said the knight's middle daughter, "return, and not
put thyself in more danger; there is plenty of gold and of silver here."

"I will not do that; I will go forward."

He went forward till he came to the house in which was the little
daughter of the knight; he went in and he saw her sewing, and her
thimble wet with tears.

"What brought thee here?"

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

"What brought thyself into it that I might not come into it?"

"I was brought into it in spite of me."

"I know that."

"Art thou young Iain the soldier's son, from Albainn?"

"I am; what is the reason that thou art weeping?"

"I have but this night of delay without marrying the giant."

"Where is he?"

"He is in the hunting hill."

"What means to bring him home?"

"To shake that battle chain without."

He went out, and he gave a shake at the chain and down he came on his
hurdies.

He rose again, and he gave it the next shake, and he broke four links in
it, and he made a great rattling noise. The giant heard that in the
hunting hill; he put the withy of game on his shoulder.

"Who in the leeward, or in the windward, or in the four brown boundaries
of the deep, could shake my battle chain but young Iain the soldier's
son, from Albainn; and if it be he, my two brothers are dead before
this?"

He came home in his might, making the earth tremble before him and
behind him.

"Art thou young Iain the soldier's son?"

"Not I."

"Who art thou in the leeward, or in the windward, or in the four brown
boundaries of the deep, that could shake my battle chain but young Iain
the soldier's son, from Albainn? and he is too young yet, he is but
sixteen years of age."

"Is there not many a one in Albainn as strong as

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

young Iain the soldier's son, though the soldier were with him?"

"It is not in our prophesyings."

"I care not what is in your prophesyings."

"In what way wouldst thou like thy trial?"

"Tight wrestling ties."

They seized each other and the giant set him on his haunches.

"Let me go; thine is my life."

They caught each other again; he struck his heel on the giant in the
ankle, and he laid him on the shower top of his shoulder, and on the
thews of his back on the ground.

"Stumpy black raven, if thou wert here now!"

No sooner said he the word than the raven came. He belaboured the giant
about the face, and the eyes, and the ears, with his beak, and with his
claws and with his wings. [30-7](pt303.htm#xref_30-7.md)

"Hast thou a nail of a weapon?

"I have not."

"Put thy hand under the root of my right wing and thou wilt find a small
sharp knife that I have for gathering whortle berries, and take his head
off."

He did that.

"Now," said the raven, "take rest as thou didst last night, and when
thou returnest with the three daughters of the knight, to the cut (edge)
of the rock, thou shalt go down first thyself, and they shall go down
after thee; and thou shalt give me a quid of tobacco."

"I will give it; thou hast well deserved it; here it is for thee
altogether."

"I will but take a quid; there is many a long day to Bealtain."

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

"The fortune will not let me be here till Bealtain."

Thou hast knowledge of what is behind thee, but thou hast no knowledge
what is before thee."

On the morrow they set in order asses, and on their backs they put the
gold and the silver that the giants had, and he himself and the three
daughters of the knight reached the edge of the rock: when they reached
the edge of the rock, for fear giddiness should come over any of the
girls, he sent them down one after one in the creel. There were three
caps of gold on them, made up finely with "daoimean" (diamond); caps
that were made in the Roimh (Rome), and such that their like were not to
be found in the universe. He kept up the cap that was on the youngest.
He was waiting and waiting, and though he should be waiting still the
creel would not come up to fetch him. The rest went on board, and away
they went till they reached Grianaig.

He, was left there, and without a way in his power to get out of the
place. The raven came where he was.

"Thou didst not take my counsel?"

"I did not take it; if I had taken it I should not be as I am."

"There is no help for it, Iain. The one that will not take counsel will
take combat. Thou shalt give me a quid of tobacco."

"I will give it."

"Thou shalt reach the giant's house, and thou shalt stay there this
night."

"Wilt thou not stay with me thyself to keep off my dullness?"

"I will not stay: it is not suitable for me."

On the morrow came the raven where he was.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

"Thou shalt now go to the giant's stable, and if thou art quick and
active, there is a steed there, and sea or shore is all one to her, and
that may take thee out of these straits."

They went together and they came to the stable, a stable of stone, dug
in into a rock, and a door of stone to it. The door was slamming without
ceasing, backwards and forwards, from early day to night, and from night
to day.

"Thou must now watch," said the raven, "and take a chance, and try if
thou canst make out to go in when it is open, without its getting a hold
of thee."

"Thou hadst best try first, since thou art best acquainted."

"It will be as well."

The raven gave a bob and a hop and in he went, but the door took a
feather out of the root of his wing, and he screeched.

"Poor Iain, if thou couldst get in with as little pain as I, I would not
complain."

Iain took a run back and a run forward, he took a spring to go in, the
door caught him, and it took half his hurdies off. Iain cried out, and
he fell cold dead on the floor of the stable. The raven lifted him, and
he carried him on the points of his wings, out of the stable to the
giant's house. He laid him on a board on his mouth and nose, he went out
and he gathered plants, and he made ointments that he set upon him, and
in ten days he was as well as ever he was.

He went out to take a walk and the raven went with him.

"Now, Iain, thou shalt take my counsel. Thou shalt not take wonder of
any one thing that thou mayest

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

see about the island, and thou shalt give me a quid of tobacco."

He was walking about the island, and going through a glen; be saw three
full heroes stretched on their backs, a spear upon the breast of every
man of them, and he in lasting sound sleep, and a bath of sweat.

"It seems to me that this is pitiable. What harm to lift the spears from
off them?"

He went and he loosed the spears from off them. The heroes awoke, and
they rose up.

"Witness fortune and men, that thou art young Iain the soldier's son,
from Albainn, and it is as spells upon thee to go with us through the
southern end of this island past the cave of the black fisherman."

He went away himself and the three full heroes. They saw a slender smoke
(coming) out of a cave. They went to the cave. One of the heroes went in
and when he went in there was a hag there seated, and the tooth that was
the least in her mouth would make a knitting pin in her lap, a staff in
her hand, and a stirring stick for the embers. There was a turn of her
nails about her elbows, and a twist of her hoary hair about her toes,
and she was not joyous to look upon.

She seized upon a magic club, she struck him, and she made him a bare
crag of stone. The others that were without were wondering why he was
not returning.

"Go in," said Iain to another one, "and look what is keeping thy
comrade."

He went in, and the carlin did to him as she did to the other. The third
went in, and she did to him as she did to the rest. Iain went in last.
There was a great red-skulled cat there, and she put a barrow full of
red ashes about her fur so as to blind and deafen him.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He struck the point of his foot on her and drove
the brain out of her. He turned to the carlin.

"Don't, Iain! these men are under spells, and in order to put the spells
off them thou must go to the island of big women and take a bottle of
the living water out of it, and when thou rubbest it upon them the
spells will go and they will come alive."

Iain turned back under black melancholy.

"Thou did'st not take my counsel," said the raven, "and thou hast
brought more trouble upon thyself. Thou shalt go to lie down this night,
and when thou risest to-morrow thou shalt take with thee the steed, and
shalt give her meat and drink. Sea or land is all one to her, and when
thou reachest the island of big women sixteen stable lads will meet
thee, and they will all be for giving food to the steed, and for putting
her in for thee, but do not thou let them. Say that thou wilt thyself
give her meat and drink. When thou leavest her in the stable, every one
of the sixteen will put a turn in the key, but thou shalt put a turn
against every turn that they put in it. Thou shalt give me a quid of
tobacco."

"I will indeed."

He went to rest that night, and in the morning he set the steed in
order, and he went away. He gave her front to sea and her back to shore,
and she went in her might till they reached the island of big women.
When he went on shore sixteen stable lads met him and every one of them
asking to set her in and feed her.

"I myself will put her in, and I will take care of her; I will not give
her to any one."

He put her in, and when he came out every man put a turn in the key, and
he put a turn against every turn that they put into it. The steed said
to him that

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

they would be offering him every sort of drink, but that he should not
take any drink from them but whey and water. He went in and every sort
of drink was being put round about there, and they were offering each
kind to him, but he would not take a drop of any drink but whey and
water. The were drinking, and drinking till they fell stretched about
the board.

The steed asked him before she parted from him that he should take care
and not sleep, and to take his chance for coming away. When they slept
he came out from the chamber; and he heard the very sweetest music that
ever was heard. He went on, and he heard in another place music much
sweeter. He came to the side of a stair and he heard music sweeter and
sweeter, and he fell asleep.

The steed broke out of the stable, and she came where he was, and she
struck him a kick, and she awoke him.

"Thou didst not take my counsel," said she, "and there is no knowing now
if thou canst get thy matter with thee, or if thou canst not get it."

He arose with sorrow; he seized upon a sword of light that was in a
corner of the chamber, and be took out the sixteen beads. He reached the
well, he filled a bottle and he returned. The steed met him, and be set
her front to sea and her back to shore, and he returned to the other
island. The raven met him.

"Thou shalt go and stable the steed, and thou shalt go to lie down this
night; and to-morrow thou shalt go and bring the heroes alive, and thou
shalt slay the carlin, and be not so foolish to-morrow as thou wert
before now."

"Wilt thou not come with me to-night to drive off my dullness from me?"

"I will not come; it will not answer for me."

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

On the morning he reached the cave, "FAILTE DHUIT, all hail to thee,
Iain," said the carlin; "FAILTE DHUIT'S, all hail to thee, but CHA
SHLAINTE DHUIT not health to thee."

He shook the water on the men and they rose up alive, and he struck his
palm on the carlin and scattered the brains out of her. They betook
themselves out, and they went to the southern end of the island. They
saw the black fisherman there working at his tricks. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) He drew his palm, and he struck him, and he
scattered the brains out of him, and he took the heroes home to the
southern end of the island. The raven came where he was.

"Now thou shalt go home, and thou shalt take with thee the steed to
which sea and shore are alike. The three daughters of the knight are to
have a wedding, two to be married to thy two brothers, and the other to
the chief that was over the men at the rock. Thou shalt leave the cap
with me, and thou wilt have but to think of me when thou hast need of
it, and I will be at thee."

"If any one asks thee from whence thou camest, say that thou camest out
from behind thee; and if he say to thee, where art thou going? say that
thou art going before thee."

He mounted upon the steed, and be gave her front to sea, and her back to
shore, and away be was, and no stop nor stay was made with him till he
reached the old church in Grianaig, and there there was a grass meadow,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and a well of water, and a bush of rushes, [31-8](pt303.htm#xref_31-8.md)
and he got off the steed.

"Now," said the steed, "thou shalt take a sword and thou shalt take the
head off me."

"I will not take it indeed; it would be sad for me to do it, and it
would not be my thanks."

"Thou must do it. In me there is a young girl under spells, and the
spells will not be off me till the head is taken off me. I myself and
the raven were courting; he in his young lad, and I in my young girl,
and the giants laid DRAOIDHEACHD magic upon us, and they made a raven of
him and a steed of me." [31-9](pt303.htm#xref_31-9.md)

He drew his sword, he turned his back, and he took the head off her with
a scutching blow, and he left the head and the carcass there. He went on
forwards and a carlin met him.

"From whence didst thou come?" said she.

"I am from behind me."

"Whither art thou going?

"I am going before me."

"That is the answer of a castle man."

"An answer that is pretty answerable for an impudent carlin such as thou
art."

He went in with her and he asked a drink, and he got that.

"Where is thy man?"

"He is at the house of the knight seeking gold and silver that will make
a cap [30-6](pt303.htm#xref_30-6.md) for the knight's young daughter, such
as her sisters have; and the like of the caps are not to be found in
Albainn."

The smith came home.

"What's trade to thee, lad?"

"I am a smith."

"That is good, and that thou shouldst help me to

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

make a cap for the knight's young daughter, and she going to marry."

"Dost thou not know that thou canst not make that."

"It must be tried; unless I make it I shall be hanged to-morrow; here
thou hadst best make it."

"Lock me into the smithy, keep the gold and silver, and I will have the
cap for thee in the morning."

The smith locked him in. He wished the raven to be with him. The raven
came, he broke in through the window, and the cap was with him.

"Thou shalt take the head off me now."

"It were sorrow for me to do that, and it would not be my thanks."

"Thou must do it. A young lad under spells am I, and they will not be
off me till the head comes off me."

He drew his sword, and he scutched his head off, and that was not hard
to do. In the morning the smith came in, and he gave him the cap, and he
fell asleep. There came in a noble-looking youth, with brown hair, and
he awoke him.

"I," said he, "am the raven, and the spells are off me now."

He walked down with him where he had left the dead steed, and a young
woman met them there as, lovely as eye ever saw.

"I," said she, "am the steed, and the spells are off me now."

The smith went with the cap to the house of the knight. The servant maid
betook herself to the knight's young daughter, and she said that there
was the cap which the smith had made. She looked at the cap.

"He never made that cap. Say to the lying rogue to bring hither the man
that made him the cap, or else that he shall be hanged without delay."

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

The smith went and he got the man that gave him the cap, and when she
saw him she took great joy. The matter was cleared up. Iain and the
knight's young daughter married, and backs were turned on the rest, and
they could not get the other sisters. They were driven away through the
town with stick swords and straw shoulder-belts.

 

\[<span id="xref_27-1">27-1</span>. Maclean writes as follows:--

Got this tale from Donald M'Niven, Bowmore, who learnt it from an old
man of the name of Neil MacArthur, who died some twenty years ago or
more.

Donald MacNiven is over forty years of age, is a cripple, but is
sometimes in the habit of acting as a carrier, and driving a cart from
Bowmore to Port Ellon and Port Askaig. He is of a fair complexion, a
demure expression, and evidently loves the wonderful. I do not think he
can either read or write. I was informed that he could recite a
considerable number of tales, but he tells me he has quite forgot them,
from having given up reciting them.

RIDIRE GHRIANAIG. The word Ridire, as explained elsewhere, now means a
knight, but it probably meant a minor king in the olden time.

GHRIANAIG is the genitive of Grianag, which has been corrupted into
Greenock.

The town is called by its Gaelic name throughout the Highlands. It is
derived from *Grian* the sun, pronounced GreeAn, which is probably the
root of many names which are now sounded "*green*," such as *Grisnez* in
France, *Crinan* in Argyllshire, and other places which are green and
sunny in other countries. I might translate the words freely, the knight
of Greenock, the knight of the sun, or the Ritter of Sunnynook, but
acting

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

on the principle with which I set out, I give the knight his Gaelic
name, and so avoid drawing doubtful conclusions.--J. F. C.

 

<span id="xref_28-2">28-2</span>. NOLLAIG is Christmas, and is also used
for New Year's day. The derivation is probably NODH, new; LA, day;
French, *noël*; Welsh, *nadolig*; Irish, *nodhlag*; Manks, *nollick*;
Breton, *nadolig*. The Highland customs which prevail at this season
smack rather of pagan times. Processions of boys go about on New Year's
eve shouting curious rhymes, some of which are full of the names which
pervade the Ossianic poems; curious ceremonies are performed, and the
singers are rewarded with food. I hope some day to be in a position to
say more about these old Christmas customs; they are mentioned in
Chambers's nursery rhymes.

The game of shinny is usually played at this season, and the great game
used to come off on the day of the great "Nollaig," New Year's day, old
style. The game is played in all parts of the United Kingdom as "hocky,"
"hurling," etc., and something like it is still played in the far east
on horseback. To drive the ball from one goal to the other is called
LETH BHAIR, a "half hale;" to drive it back again is BAIR, a "hale;" and
to win a goal at the man's game is nearly as great a feat as to gain a
battle. In some parts of the Highlands hundreds used to be engaged, all
excited to a degree that those who have been at a public school, or who
have read Tom Brown's account of football, may perhaps understand.

 

<span id="xref_28-3">28-3</span>. FHIORRACHD, FHUARRACHD, etc. This
phrase is (according to Maclean) frequently used, though few know what
the words literally mean. The common meaning attached to them is, "Not
to be found anywhere."

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] May they not be corrupt forms of IOCHDRACHD and
UACHDRACHD, it is not in the higher or lower regions.

I have given a different rendering; I have heard very similar words used
by boatmen for beating to windward and running to leeward, and *veering*
is an English sailor's word still.

RANNAN is used for *rain*nean, *divisions*, in this tale. This form of
the word in this sense is obsolete in Islay, and I suspect elsewhere. It
now signifies *verse*, which is no doubt so called from being *divided*
into lines and stanzas. We still use it in the genitive, thus, An Rainn,
the Rhynns; Ceann shios na Ranna, the farthest down part of the Rhynns;
An rugha Rannach.--H M‘L.

 

<span id="xref_29-4">29-4</span>. The raven attacking the man in the
basket might be a picture drawn from nature. Boys are often lowered over
rocks in the Western Highlands to take birds' nests, and the old birds
occasionally resent the injury. I have myself seen sparrow-hawks, terns,
and other birds stooping viciously at men who had gone near their nests.
I have heard of a man having his head laid open by enraged sea-swallows;
and there are all manner of stories current of adventures with birds in
rock climbing.--J. F. C.

 

<span id="xref_29-5">29-5</span>. The quid of baccy needs no
explanation, when it is remembered that the common fee for the
story-teller is a quid. An old man long ago was teaching a boy to play
the fiddle, and the following dialogue is recorded:--"Which finger shall
I raise?" "Hast thou tobacco?" "No; which finger shall I lift?" "Hast
thou got tobacco?" "No." "Then lift and lay them down as it may please
thyself." There is a hungering after tobacco amongst those who are given
to it, and cannot get it, which must be felt to be understood.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span id="xref_30-6">30-6</span>. CEAP may have been substituted for
CURRACHD, a cap, which was the old Gaelic name for all head-dresses,
male or female.--H. M‘L.

I have no doubt that the man who told the story meant a cap, and I have
so translated the word, but the Gaelic word means a trap or gin, and
many things besides. An old man who told me a story exceedingly like
"the Fisherman" in the Arabian Nights, introduced the character who
resembled the young king of the Black Isles, not as a man half marble,
but as a man with his head in a *ceap*, and on being interrogated,
explained that this was a kind of head-dress used for punishment or
torture, in which the head of the victim was fastened. Such
head-dresses, made of rusty iron, may be seen in museums, and ceap may
have meant something like a helmet, whose machinery bears some
resemblance to a rat-trap.

 

<span id="xref_30-7">30-7</span>. GODARLEUM (page [18](#page_18).md).--This
is a new word to me. The reciter could give no explanation of it farther
than that it was darting off very abruptly, which the context leads a
person to think. Godadh is a quick, somewhat violent shake of the head.
I find the reciters at Bowmore speak a more corrupt dialect than others
whom I have met. They use English words very frequently for Gaelic words
still in common use. This gives an idea of the manner in which English
words and forms of speech may have gradually replaced Gaelic ones in
these tales, MacNiven alternately used FORESMAN and UACHDARAN in
speaking of the overseer of the sixteen men that wrought at the
rock.--H. M‘L.

The flapping stone door occurs in a book called the "Romance of
History," and I think the magic cave was placed somewhere in Spain. I
have an impression that I have heard of it elsewhere.--J. F. C.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span id="xref_31-8">31-8</span>. TOM LUACHARACH, a bush of rushes,
perhaps a rushy knoll.

 

<span id="xref_31-9">31-9</span>. FO GHEASAN. Irish writers who take the
historical view of these traditions, translate geasa by vow or promise.
This seems to fix the meaning at MAGIC.

I have translated this passage as literally as my knowledge of the two
languages enables me to do it, because the language, which is simply
every day Gaelic, seems, when considered with its meaning in this
passage, to throw a light on past beliefs. The enchanted steed, and men
at the present day when they speak Gaelic, talk of themselves as if they
were something different from their bodies. In English it is said, "I
*am* an old man;" in Gaelic, "I am *in my* old man."

The form of words is the same when the speaker says "I am in my old
clothes," and this form of speech is here used together with
DRAOIDH-eachd (?), *druid*-ism, magic, and a *transformation* is
effected by *steel* at a *well*, in a *grass meadow*, near a *rushy
knoll*, beside *an old church* at *Grian*aig.

Something to do with GRIAN the sun, is mixed up with magic and worship,
at an old church, and with druidism, and wells, and magic metal, and
green meadows and rushes, things which usually have to do with magic,
and with metempsychosis, which is supposed to have been a druidical
doctrine; and all comes direct from a man who cannot possibly know
anything about such things except as traditions, which are supported by
similar traditions found elsewhere. I believe this tale to be founded on
Celtic mythology.--J. F. C.

The following Gaelic words used in this tale are very near to the
English, LENA, lawn; GRUND, ground; SGIOBAIR, skipper; PEANAS, penalty;
BLASTADH, corruption

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

for blasting; SAIL, heel. SIPAISDEAIR-ACHD is not in English, but it has
relations in Italian, andar *a spasso*, and in Norse and German,
spazieren.

The incidents may be compared with those in the Big Bird Dan, Norse
Tales, page 442; the King of Lochlin's Three Daughters, vol. i., page
236; but though these have much in common, I know nothing quite like
this story anywhere. To me it suggests a succession of vivid pictures,
perhaps because I understand the intention of the narrator from my
knowledge of the landscapes which he clearly had before his mind.\]

Gaelic omitted

...

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

...

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

...

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

...

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

...

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

...

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

...

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

...

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

...

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

...

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

...

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

...

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

...

 

<span id="img_04400"></span> ![FROM A STONE AT
ELGIN.--&lt;I&gt;Sculptured Stones of Scotland&lt;/I&gt;, Pl.
xvi.](img/04400.jpg.md)  
FROM A STONE AT ELGIN.--*Sculptured Stones of Scotland*, Pl. xvi.

 

In this tale the Gaelic is written as spoken by the narrator. There are
instances of bad grammar, and of

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

corruptions, which are left as found. Teine is used for tinne, a link.
Aig is a small bay or creek. Grianaig is Sun Creek. Many similar names
are found in the Highlands. In Islay is Dun Naomh-aig, Holy Creek Fort;
in Barra, Breubhaig-Breitheamhaig, Judge Creek. The word is no doubt
allied to eag, a notch, or a nook.--H. M‘L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[24:1](pt303.htm#fr_0.md) Here the narrator has
evidently forgotten some of the adventures. A similar character to the
black fisherman appears in other tales, and his adventures should be
added here, if the story were mended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIX. Fionn's Questions.](pt304.md)
