[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt326)  [Next](pt328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXVI.

### CONALL GULBAN; OR GUILBEINACH, OR GULBAIRNEACH.

IN translating this I have departed from my first plan, which was to
give in all cases exactly what I got from one man, and abstracts of
other versions. In this case the longest version was translated; and to
its passages and notes were added from three other written versions: and
from two of which I took notes myself. Where the same incidents are
given by two men in different words, the passage which seemed best has
been selected. Where one version has an additional incident which the
rest have not, it is inserted in its order. Where versions vary, the
variation is given in a note. Thus many passages are substituted and
inserted, but I have carefully avoided adding anything of my own
invention.

At the earnest request of the publishers, the Gaelic of this long story
is omitted, to make room for other

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

matter; but the manuscript is preserved, and some few curious passages
are given in foot notes.

The chief "author," as the scribe calls him, is John MacNair, who lives
at Clachaig, near the powder mills at Dunoon. The scribe is John Dewar,
a labourer now working in the woods at Roseneath, and their version
fills sixty foolscap pages. I find that there is a tendency to change
dialogue into narrative in writing a story, as is the case here; but
when these men *tell* stories, dialogue predominates.

MacNair, who is a shoemaker, got the story about thirty-five years ago
from an old man named Duncan Livingston, who lived in Glendaruel, and
was then about sixty-five. Dewar says that he was a shoemaker, and
grandfather to another old shoemaker, James Leitch, who lives at
Eas-clacbain in Glendaruel, and from whose dictation Dewar has taken
down several long and curious stories which I have. Leitch says that his
grandfather "had Ossian's Poems by heart," and many tales "sgeulachd;"
and a list of those who still know the latter is given.

Of Livingston, MacNair says--

"I have an interesting story about that old man. In the time of the
American war, the laird was pressing the tenants to go, and this old man
seemed not willing; so they pursued him through a deep river, or burn,
as we call it; and when he saw he could not escape, he placed his leg
between two stones and snapped it in two, so they had to carry him home.

The second version was written by Hector MacLean, and fills twenty-five
pages. The reciter was Alexander MacNeill, who lives in Barra, and who
names as his authorities several old men. He also recited No. XXXVI.

The third was also written by MacLean, from the

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

telling of John MacGilvray, labourer, Colonsay, in July 1860. It fills
fourteen pages, and has this tradition attached to it,--"Two ministers,
long ago, desirous of trying the powers of the Gaelic language, composed
this story and the Knight of the Red Shield (No. LII.). MacLean suggests
two Monks of Iona.

The fourth was written by Mr. Fraser of Mauld, near Beauly,
Inverness-shire, and fills six pages. It was told by Dugald Martin in
Crochal.

I have heard the story told by various reciters, particularly by Donald
MacPhie in South Uist, and Charles MacIntyre in Benbecula. The latter
spoke for an hour. I did not time the former, but be spoke for a long
time, and I though his version the most consistent and the most complete
story which I had then heard.

The story then is very widely spread in Scotland--from Beauly on the
east, to Barra on the west, and Dunoon and Paisley in the South. No two
give it in the same words, or give exactly the same incidents; but
MacNair's version written in Dunoon, and MacNeill's in Barra, written
independently by different scribes, so far as they go together, closely
resemble each other.

Dewar who is a very intelligent man, suggests that the story is "purely
Irish," and that "it was composed about the time of the crusade, as it
tells about the Turks invading the king of Iubhar's country." He thinks
the Green Isle is one of the Orkneys.

"Innse torrain, the isles of Noise. Ossian's poem on Cathul," so called
because covered with fir trees and with large rocks facing the sea,
against which the waves make a great noise." (There are no trees in
Orkney.) Dewar does not think this tale so old as many of the others
which he has written for me.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

My own opinion is that the story is mixed with the adventures of the
Norse sea rovers who frequented the Western Isles; and that it is
impossible to say whether it was composed in Ireland or in Scotland; but
it is clear that it was composed a long time ago, and by some one able
to imagine and carry out an elaborate plot. There are many old men in
Scotland, widely separated, and who cannot read, who know the story and
can remember the plot, in whole or in part; so it must be old. It is
also known in Ireland. I have traced the incidents amongst Irish
labourers in London. One man, a bricklayer, had "seen Conall Gulban in
an Irish manuscript;" and a story so called is mentioned in the
transactions of the Ossianic Society of Dublin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Conall Gulban](pt328)
