[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wov21)  [Next](wov23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VLT8O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Buddha's Way of Virtue*, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders,
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### § XVIII

#### SIN

235\. <span class="smallcaps">Thou</span> art withered as a sere leaf:
Death's messengers await thee. Thou standest at the gate of death, and
hast made no provision for the journey.

236\. Make to thyself a refuge; come, strive and be prudent: when thy
impurities are purged, thou shalt come into the heavenly abode of the
Noble.

237\. Thy life is ended; thou art come into the Presence of Death: there
is no resting-place by the way, and thou hast no provision for the
journey.

238\. Make for thyself a refuge; come, strive and play the sage! Burn
off thy taints, and thou shalt know birth and old age no more.

239\. As a smith purifies silver in the fire, so bit by bit continually
the sage burns away his impurities.

240\. It is the iron's own rust that destroys it: it is the sinner's own
acts that bring him to hell.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

241\. Disuse is the rust of mantras; laziness the rust of households;
sloth is the rust of beauty; neglect is the watcher's ruin.

242\. Impurity is the ruin of woman; and avarice the ruin of the giver:
ill-deeds are the rust of this world and the next.

243\. More corrosive than those is the rust of ignorance, the greatest
of taints: put off this rust and be clean, O Bhikkhus.

244\. Life is easy for the crafty and shameless, for the wanton, shrewd,
and impure:

245\. Hard it is for the modest, the lover of purity, the disinterested
and simple and clean, the man of insight.

246, 247. The murderer, the liar, the thief, the adulterer, and the
drunkard—these even in this world uproot themselves.

248\. Know this, O man, evil is the undisciplined mind! See to it that
greed and lawlessness bring not upon thee long suffering.

249\. Men give according to faith or caprice. If a man fret because food
and drink are given to another, he comes not day or night to serene
meditation (*i.e.* Samādhi).

250\. He in whom this (envious spirit) is destroyed and wholly uprooted,
he truly day and night attains serene meditation.

251\. There is no fire like lust, no ravenous beast like hatred, no
snare like folly, no flood like desire.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

252\. To see another's fault is easy: to see one's own is hard. Men
winnow the faults of others like chaff: their own they hide as a crafty
gambler hides a losing throw.

253\. The taints of this man are ever growing. He is far from the
purification of taints (Arahatship), the censorious one who is ever
blaming others.

254\. There is no path through the sky: there is no "religious" apart
from us. The world without delights in dalliance: the Blessed Ones are
freed from this thrall.

255\. There is no path through the sky; there is no "religious" apart
from us. Nothing in the phenomenal world is lasting; but Buddhas endure
immovable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § XIX: The Righteous](wov23)
