[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wov30)  [Next](wov32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VLT8O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Buddha's Way of Virtue*, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders,
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### NOTES

1, 2. <span class="smallcaps">These</span> stanzas contain two ideas
which are of the very warp and woof of Buddhism:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

(*a*) The view depends upon the point of view;

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

(*b*) Thought is potent in influencing man's destiny.

</div>

The Chinese Commentary illustrates both these ideas: Two merchants
listened to the Buddha's preaching; one was delighted, the other angry:
men hear what they are prepared to hear. Soon after one was killed, the
other became King: so potent is thought!

8\. *Cf.* Luke vi, 48.

9, 10. The Buddha often used a play upon words to arrest men's attention
and help their memory. The Pali of these stanzas contains a pun of this
kind, which cannot be imitated in English: *Kāsāvam* means either the
yellow robe of the mendicant, or impurity, stain, sin.

11, 12. The work of Gautama as a preacher lay largely in this directing
of men's efforts: the great reality is character; this and this alone is
man's business upon earth.

All else are "shadows" not worth pursuing. *Cf.* St. John's words:
"Little children, flee idols" (*i.e.* "shadows"), 1 John v, 21. So St.
Paul speaks of covetousness as "idolatry"—the pursuit of the great
"shadow," Mammon (Col. iii, 5).

When the Buddhist puts on the yellow robe, he symbolises his belief that
"virtue is the truest wealth": the gold of character is alone worth
striving after. (*Cf.* Dhammapada, 75 and note.) On the day of his
ordination (upasampadā) the candidate adorns himself with all the
jewellery he can obtain, and doffs it only to don the yellow robe.

15-18. *Here* and *Hereafter: i.e.* in this birth and the next. Man may
be reborn upon earth, or in one of the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

hells or in one of the heavens. A demon who does well may become a man
or a god: a god who lives unworthily may become a man or a demon.

*Tormented when he goes to hell.* The Buddhist Temples are full of
frescoes of these torments: men who have killed animals are being slowly
devoured by them; other sinners are being forced by demon torturers to
climb spiky trees, or burnt in fires most realistically drawn, or made
to swallow balls of red-hot iron; low-caste men who have offended the
high castes are being crushed by great rocks!

The Buddha's own discourses contain minute detail of such torments. It
is not clear whether he was using an *argumentum ad hominem,* or really
believed in a hereafter of physical torment. In any case his moral code
has been strangely perverted in modern Buddhism.

18\. The reward for virtue is twofold—the approval of conscience and a
good rebirth.

19\. *Cf.* Matt. xxiii, 2; John x, 12.

20\. *The holy ones:* Arahats, those who have attained. The sentence
means: "he is on his way to Nirvāna."

21\. *Amatapadam:* lit. "The endless or deathless state" (Fausböll).
Nirvāna is defined by many such phrases in the Dhammapada—sometimes
negative, as here; sometimes positive, as in 23—"highest freedom."
Whatever the Supreme Bliss be, it is unlike all human experience save
that of the Arahat.

Rhys Davids translates "ambrosia, or nectar."

*As it were dead: i.e.* spiritually or morally dead. *Cf.* "Let the dead
bury their dead," Matt. viii, 22, and "The life of the fool is worse
than death," Ecclus. xxii, 11.

22\. *The lot of the Noble.* The word "Aryo" meant in Gautama's day
Nobleman, or Aryan. He defined the nobleman anew, making nobility
consist not in birth, but in conduct. Then he developed the meaning till
it stood for Arahats—the experts in his system, those who have attained.

23\. *Meditation:* jhānam—that ecstatic contemplation in which the mind,
rapt from the sounds and sights of the

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

ordinary world, concentrates itself upon some single object or idea;
this leads to serenity and a unique bliss, anticipation of Nirvāna.

*Highest freedom.* Nirvāna is complete freedom from: (1) The body and
suffering; (2) Desire and other taints.

25\. *An island:* *i.e.* Nirvāna.

*Self-control, temperance.* Buddhism makes much of the "cardinal
virtues."

26\. The Buddhist motto may be said to be "Strive without ceasing."

27\. The joy which is born of meditation plays a great part in Buddhist
psychology and ethics. (*Cf.* Rhys Davids' *Early Buddhism,* pp. 62-5.)

28\. Contrast this somewhat Epicurean attitude with St. Paul's
exhortation "Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that
weep" (Rom. xii, 15).

The Buddhist position is in reality midway between the Epicurean and the
Christian; it is stoical: the attitude to be assumed towards the "crowd"
is either *mettam,* benevolence if (one's own salvation being certain)
one can help them: or it is *upekhā,* detachment. "What can't be cured
must be endured." *Muditā,* sympathy, and *Karunā,* pity, are also
duties, but it is no use wasting those upon the blinded and foolish
crowd. (*Cf.* 61, 64.)

30\. *Sakra: i.e.* Indra, a high god of Hinduism whom Buddhism has
relegated to the rank of an archangel, ruling the Tavatimsa heaven. He
is said to have been a young Brahmin who for his zeal in doing good was
reborn as Sakra. His human name was Magha. He is regarded by Buddhists
as a kind of recording angel. (Childers.)

31\. *Bhikkhu.* The "religious" of Buddhism is neither "priest" nor
"monk" in the strict sense, for he offers no sacrifice, and he lives not
alone, but either with one or two others, or with the "community." The
word "bhikkhu" means "mendicant."

*The greater and the lesser bonds:* all those "trammels" which bind him
to the phenomenal world; all that affects his senses.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

33\. In his doctrine of the mind, Gautama was no pessimist; it is by
nature fickle and difficult to control: yet nurture can make it stable
and obedient. (*Cf.* especially 40, where Gautama's optimistic attitude
to the mind is thrown into strong relief by his pessimistic attitude to
the body; if the body be brittle and of slight value, yet the mind may
be made strong and precious.) His pessimistic attitude to the body is
partly assumed with intent "to wean men from it," and this view is borne
out by the genial attitude he takes towards asceticism: once a man has
learnt to sit loose to the things of sense he is free to enjoy them.
Gautama laid himself open to the name of worldling, and the immediate
cause of his death was his courteous acceptance of the rich meal
prepared for him by Cunda the smith.

34\. The simile is obscure: it is apparently only intended to make one
point clear—the palpitating effort needed to escape Mara.

39\. *Merit.* The desire for merit is almost universal in Buddhist
lands; yet Buddha teaches that man should act with his eye fixed not
upon "merit," but upon Nirvāna. (But *cf.* 53.) By "merit" is meant the
credit balance in the bank of character—procuring rebirth to a happy
life on earth, or in a heaven.

46\. *The flowery shafts of Mara:* the insidious advances of the King of
Death. *Cf.* Ps. v, 9: "They flatter with their tongue."

49\. The mendicant is to take what is given him by the faithful, doing
them no harm, and taking nothing but what they freely give.

51\. *Cf.* Matt. xxiii, 3: "They say and do not."

54\. Natural law is not universally valid in the spiritual world!

56\. Certain "*rishis,*" having neglected cleanliness in their pursuit
of holiness, were ashamed to come into the presence of the gods: "Never
fear," said the gods, "our nostrils are filled with the fragrance of
your good deeds"

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Cf.* our phrases
"The odour of sanctity"; "The beauty of holiness."

61\. According to Buddhism neither will profit by such companionship.
(*Cf.* 64.)

64\. *Cf.* Ecclus. xxii, 7: "He that teacheth a fool is as one that
glueth a potsherd together."

70\. *i.e.* extreme asceticism and religious observance are not worth a
tithe of goodness.

73-4. Ambition and self-will are the besetting faults of the Brahmin.

75\. *Cf.* "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon."

76\. The wise will value a candid friend.

79\. A better draught than the soma juice, which led to ecstasy!

89\. *That leads to Arahatship.* Sambōdhi (Arahatship) has seven
component parts, which may be taken to represent the Buddhist ideal of
character: mindfulness, wisdom, energy, joyousness, serenity,
concentrated meditation, and equanimity.

*Whose delight is in renunciation. Cf.* Bhagavad-Gita xii:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Near to renunciation—very near—  
Dwelleth eternal Peace."

</div>

92, 93. *Whose goal is the freedom*… A definition of Nirvāna. The
Commentator explains the simile as expressing the mysterious freedom of
Arahats in the spiritual sphere. (*Cf.* "The wind bloweth where it
listeth, and thou hearest the sound of it, but canst not tell whence it
cometh and whither it goeth: *So is every one that is born of* *the
Spirit.*"—John iii, 8.)

94\. *Even the gods.* The true Buddhist is above all gods!

*Charioteer. Cf.* Plato's famous simile of the Charioteer Reason and the
two horses of Sensibility and Spirit: one rebellious, the other docile.
*Cf.* also "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak."

95\. *Whose patience is as the earth's:* the earth does not shrink or
protest whatever is laid upon it.

97\. This is one of those curious enigmas or puzzles which

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

occur in the Buddha's teaching. It can be translated in a sense opposed
to that here given: viz. *"Best of men is the faithless, the ungrateful,
the rebel, who has lost his chance of salvation, who has given up all
hope."* It was spoken by Gautama to some thirty recluses who accused
Sāriputto of these faults, because he told his master not to preach to
him, but to them, "I already know the truth by experience; these others
need it on authority: therefore preach to them." Buddha's words express
with great skill the two ways in which he and the recluses looked upon
his disciple's sturdy confidence. It is of course quite impossible in an
analytic language like English to reproduce the puns.

100\. *Cf.* St. Paul: "I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that I might instruct others also, than ten thousand
words in a tongue." (1 Cor. xiv, 19.)

103-5. *Cf.* Prov. xvi, 32: " He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty: and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city."

104, 105. Buddhist ethics make much of the truth that external forces
cannot harm the true man: man cannot be hurt except by himself. (*Cf.*
124.)

106\. *Cf.* 1 Sam. xv, 22: "To obey is better than sacrifice."

109\. *Cf.* Manu, II, 121: and Asoka's Rock Edict, II: "Father and
mother must be hearkened to… this leads to length of days." *Cf.* also
the fifth commandment of the Decalogue: "Honour thy father and thy
mother that thy days may be long in the land."

110, 111. *Cf.* the Psalmist: "One day in Thy courts is better than a
thousand."

125\. Gautama again and again insists that natural law holds good in the
spiritual world, though there are exceptions. (*Cf.* 54.)

126\. *Go to the womb:* *i.e.* are born upon earth.

127-8. *Cf.* Introduction, p. 13.

129-32. *Cf.* Luke vi, 31: The Golden Rule.

141\. *Doubt:* one of the deadly sins in Buddhism. The Buddha claimed
omniscience, and though he did not discourage

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

investigation and inquiry, from the great mass of men, who are ignorant
and foolish, he demanded the plunge of faith.

*Matted hair, etc.* The Sumāgadhā-avadāna relates that Sumāgadhā, seeing
the naked and unkempt ascetics of Brahminism, exclaimed: "O Mother, if
these are saints, what must sinners be like?" (*Cf.* Max Müller's
*Dhammapada,* p. 38.)

142\. Buddhism—so often labelled pessimistic—is striking in the genial
attitude it takes towards asceticism. It encourages fasting only as a
means to self-control and concentration of mind: for the rest the only
kind of fasting it urges is "fasting from sin." Even the "man of the
world" may be a true "Brahmin"—though it is very difficult. (*Cf.*
Asoka's Minor Rock Edict, I: "Even by the small man, who chooses to
exert himself, immense heavenly bliss may be won.")

The *Samana:* lit. "the calmed" (see note on 264).

144\. By *faith* Buddhism means the calm acceptance of all Gautama
taught: after his death it ceased to be an attitude to his person and
became a conviction that his claims to omniscience were well founded,
and that his system is the true interpretation of the world and of human
life.

But Buddhism is nothing if not psychological, and faith *(saddha)* came
to mean a subjective state of consciousness akin to serenity
*(passadhi)*, consequent upon acceptance of Buddha's teaching.

146\. Fire is for the Buddhist the synonym of suffering: all is regarded
as a flux—the world dissolving "with fervent heat." There is no meaning
or permanence in this world: all the more need to seek salvation. In the
burning heat of India the metaphor is a very vivid one for weariness and
pain.

147-51. The Body too is a poor thing: in these ways Buddhism is
distinctly pessimistic as compared with Christianity, which sees in the
world a potential Kingdom of God, and in the human body a "temple of the
Holy Spirit": yet, be it noted, Gautama painted this lurid picture

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

with intent to awaken men to the powers of their mind and character.

150\. *A citadel of bones.* There are occasional gleams of grim humour
in the Buddhist books: the following story illustrates both the "law of
apperception" and the Buddhist attitude to the body. The hermit
Mahā-Tissa was walking near Anuradhapura meditating upon the transiency
of life. A woman who had quarrelled with her husband passed him, gaily
dressed and bejewelled, and smiled at him, showing her pearly teeth.
When the husband, who was in pursuit, came up with him he called to him:
"Reverend Sir, did you see a woman pass this way?" "I saw only a
skeleton," replied the sage; "whether it was man or woman I know not"
(Visuddhi-Maggai).

151\. *Cf.* "My words shall never pass away."

152\. *Like the ox.* So the prophet Amos addresses the fat and sensual
women of his day: "Ye kine of Bashan" (Amos iv, 1): "massive in body but
small in mind " (*c f.* Deut. xxxii, 15).

153, 154. These famous words are held by Buddhists to have been those
uttered by Gautama at the moment of enlightenment.

The allegory that underlies them is this: The Builder is Desire (Tanhā)
the cause of rebirth: the seeker tried long to find this cause; at the
moment of his enlightenment it flashed into his mind, "If desire be
dead, then there is nothing to bind man to the wheel of existence." The
Builder causes the body to be built: its "corner-stone" (or ridgepole)
is ignorance *(avijjā)*, and its "beams" are bad states of
consciousness.

Admirably rendered by Sir Edwin Arnold:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Many a house of life  
Hath held me—seeking ever him who wrought  
These prisons of the senses, sorrow-fraught;  
        Sore was my ceaseless strife.  
            But now,  
Thou Builder of this tabernacle—Thou!

</div>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I know Thee! Never shall Thou build again  
        These walls of pain,  
Nor raise the roof-tree of deceits; nor lay  
        Fresh rafters on the clay;  
Broken Thy house is, and the ridge-pole split!  
        Delusion fashioned it !  
Safe pass I them—deliverance to obtain."

</div>

155\. *Cf.* "Like a pelican of the wilderness" (Ps. cii, 6).

157\. This is a practice enjoined in the Books: the passage may mean
also "for one of the three periods of life."

158\. *Cf.* Matt. vii, 1-5: "Judge not, that ye be not judged," etc.

164\. *Bears fruit* …It dies down after flowering.

166\. The hedonistic note in Buddhism cannot be denied: "Ethics," says
Dr. Martineau, "must either perfect themselves in religion, or
disintegrate themselves in hedonism." Buddhist ethics, seeing no great
social purpose being worked out in the world, fails to reconcile the
claims of self-culture and benevolence, falling back upon the monastic
compromise that in the long run self-culture is the highest benevolence.
(*Cf.* Introduction, p. 14)

171\. It *looks* gay and splendid: it *is* an engine of destruction; it
is treacherous as a morass.

174\. *Cf.* Matt. vii, 14: "Narrow is the way which leadeth unto life,
and few there be that find it."

Ps. cxxiv, 7: "Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowler."

175\. The East has always held that holy living gives miraculous power.
Arahats were said to possess this power *(jddhi)* of flying through the
air, or "levitation." There are still Hindus who claim these powers: but
southern Buddhism does not take them seriously. I asked several
Buddhists if this power were now attainable. "Possibly in Thibet," they
answered. <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

176*. Cf.* Jas. ii, 10: "Whosoever shall keep the whole

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

law, and yet stumble in one point, he is become guilty of all." But the
underlying idea in St. James, of loyalty to the King, is of course not
present to the Buddhist mind.

178\. *Universal empire:* the height of worldly ambition. *Conversion:
i.e.* the first step towards Nirvāna, when the attention is fixed upon
the Supreme Bliss. *"Sotāpattti"* means "entering the stream," up which
the convert has to forge his way. After this ethical change he may have
to undergo seven more births before he attains the goal.

182\. The Buddha, being free of all taints or germs of rebirth, has no
crack in his armour through which he may be wounded: *i.e.* he has no
cause of rebirth.

183\. The ideal is not, as is often said, merely negative: it is also
positive and inward. *Cf.* St. Paul's more emphatic words: "*Abhor* that
which is evil, *cleave* *to* that which is good" (Rom. xii, 9).

*The Buddhas.* According to the Books there are many Buddhas: some in
the dim past, others in the distant future. In Ceylon, Buddhists look
wistfully for the coming Buddha—*Metteyya* or *Maitri*—the Loving One.
In Japan they worship *Amida* Buddha—an ideal.

184\. The word translated "fortitude" is "*kantibalam,*"
patience-strength, that blending of great qualities, passive and active,
Eastern and Western, which is as rare as it is beautiful.

194\. *Cf.* Ps. cxxiii, 1: "Behold how good and pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity."

197-200. This section may be regarded as the Buddhist, analogue of the
Beatitudes of Christ: it depicts the blessed life as a life of calm and
peace; either solitary or in the company of Buddha's true followers, a
man may enjoy that bliss which is the bloom upon virtue in this life:
and hereafter the Rest of the Ineffable.

207\. Like Jesus, Gautama offers his followers a family life whose ties
are more intimate and tender than those of blood. In the Sangha they are
to find their kinsfolk and a better family life than they have left.
(*Cf.* "Who is My mother

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

or My brethren?… Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is My
brother and My sister and mother."—Mark iii, 35.) Yet it must be borne
in mind that to enter this company a man must be a celibate: and that
perfect solitude is held up as the safer ideal.

208\. The cold clear moonlight of this simile is symbolic of the
Buddhist ideal.

212, 213. Buddhism teaches benevolence to all, attachment to none. It is
a monastic ideal, and may be paralleled from such books as the
*Imitatio* *Christi.* *Cf.* Bk. I, chap. viii: "We must have charity
towards all, but familiarity is not expedient."

There is, however, a vital difference: the Buddhist Bhikkhu is to shun
society that nothing may mar his self-culture: the Christian monk that
he may be "familiar with God alone, and with His Angels." When Prince
Siddhartha (afterwards the Buddha) heard of the birth of his son Rahula,
and they tried to bring him back, he is said to have remarked: "That is
one more bond to be cut." The "Great Renunciation" involved no less than
this.

218\. *The Ineffable.* The Buddha describes Nirvāna probably from his
own experience of that ecstatic joy which is said to be the reward of
deep meditation.

This word "ineffable" is one used all by who have known this experience.
*Cf.* Myers' *St. Paul:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Oh could I tell, ye surely would believe it!  
Oh could I only say what I have seen!  
How should I tell, or how can ye receive it,  
How till He bringeth you where I have been?"

</div>

and St. Paul's words of his own experience in 2 Cor. xii, 2-4.

*Against the stream.* The fight for character is one against long odds.
Nature has at times to be "pitchforked." (*Cf.* Mrs. Rhys Davids'
*Buddhist Psychology,* p. lxvii.) Man is not at the mercy of the
"stream" of natural impulse; but swimming against it is hard work.
(*Cf.* 244, 245.)

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

221\. *Phenomenal existence:* Pali *namā* *rupa,* " name and form,"
*i.e.* things mental and material.

227\. *Atula:* according to the Commentator, one of Gautama's disciples:
he is not mentioned elsewhere. If we read "atulam" the meaning is "an
incomparable saying."

241\. *Disuse*…*mantras: i.e.* if the words are not used they are
forgotten.

251\. *Lust*… *hatred*… *folly.* The three inveterate foes of the good
life. Buddhism sees that man has in him ape, tiger, and ass. (*Cf.*
Introduction, p. 15.)

252\. Or "as the fowler hides his snare."

254, 255. We have followed the Sinhalese scholar, Mr. James D’Alwis, in
this translation: he is supported by the Commentary. Another possible
rendering is: "No one outside the Buddhist community can walk through
the air, but only a samana" (Fausböll). But this taxes the construction
too severely, and as Professor Max Müller says, Buddha did not encourage
the display of miraculous power.

264\. *Cf. Imitatio Christi,* bk. I, chap. xvii: "The habit and the
shaven crown do little profit: but change of manners, and perfect
mortification of passions make a true religious man."

*Samano,* before Gautama's day, meant "ascetic," being derived from the
root "*sram*"—to work hard, to do penance. He gave a new derivation and
a new significance to the word—*sam,* meaning "calm."

264-9. These stanzas contain a play on the words: Gautama is giving new
definitions of current terms. It is hardly possible to render these in
English: perhaps in 264-5 the use of the word "religious" as both noun
and adjective is a fair analogy from Christian monasticism. The pun in
270 is only to be permitted as illustrating the spirit of the section.

268-9. So Asoka says of impiety and piety: "The one course avails me for
the present life, the other avails me also for the life to come."
(Pillar Edict, III); and Thomas

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

á Kempis, quoting Phil. iii, 8: "He is truly prudent, that regards all
earthly things as dung, that he may gain Christ."

270\. Meekness is the true heroism: "Blessed are the meek, for they
shall inherit the earth"; "Fight the good fight." As in mediaeval
Europe, so in ancient India, all "nobles" (Aryans) were, warriors.
Gautama gives a new definition of the true knight. (*Cf.* the history of
the words "chivalry," "gentle," and "generous," under Christian
influences.)

273\. *The four truths:* suffering: its cause: its cure: the eightfold
path of escape.

*The seer: cakkhumā,* the man who has the eye for truth: the man of
insight.

274\. The *"seeing of Purity."* The phrase may mean equally well the
"purification of vision." The man of insight is the pure man; to one who
ventured to dispute Gautama's judgment he exclaimed: "Shall he whose
mind is dominated by passion surpass the Blessed One in wisdom?" (*Cf.*
Christ's words: "My judgment is just, because I seek not Mine own
will.")

276\. *Blessed Ones:* Tathāgatā, "those who have *arrived,*" or reached
Nirvāna.

277-9. *"All is passing"*: one of the leading tenets of Heraclitus and
the Orphists, who belong to the same century as the Buddha (sixth
century B.C). Their teaching, so far as it has survived, has many points
of similarity with his.

*"All is passing… all is sorrow… all is unreal."* The words ring out
again and again like the solemn tolling of some cloister bell, summoning
men away from the pursuit of shadows, to that only worthy object "the
path of Purity"—Nirvāna.

283\. *Vanam* means either "lust" or a "forest": English cannot
reproduce the play upon words.

284\. Even married love is regarded by Buddhism as an "entanglement" of
this kind.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

286\. *Cf.* the parable of the Rich Fool, and St. James: "Go to now, ye
that say to-day or to-morrow we will go into the city, and spend a year
there… whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow " (iv, 13, 14).

294\. The Commentator explains this curious verse as follows: The
*Mother* is lust: the *Father* self-will: the *Kings* are heresies—two
extremes on either side of the middle path (*cf.* Introductory Note, §
xx); the *Kingdom* is sensuality (*cf.* 97).

295\. The five roads are lust, hatred, disturbance of mind, sloth, and
doubt.

301\. The principal objects of meditation.

302\. *Hard is the community life:* reading *samānasamvāso* with Max
Müller and the Chinese version, instead of ’samānasamvāso (=
asamānasamvāso) with Fausböll and the Sinhalese.

*The wanderer in the world: i.e.* the layman.

307\. Suffering is the blight upon sin.

310\. *Therefore… Cf.* the simple authority of the seventh commandment,
"Thou shalt not commit adultery," and of Christ's words to the woman
taken in adultery, "Go and sin no more."

311\. *"Corruptio optimi pessima."*

324\. *Dhānapālako: i.e.* guardian of wealth.

340\. *The streams:* sensations.

*The creeper:* passion.

344\. The pun on the word *vanam* (forest and lust) is repeated here:
"tangle" perhaps expresses both meanings.

353\. Spoken, according to the Commentary, when the Buddha was on the
way to Benares, and the Brahmin Upaka sceptically asked him who was his
Teacher, and what the cause of his serenity and joy. Here Gautama claims
omniscience: elsewhere he claims to be the *only* Teacher: " Non
seulement Çākyamuni est source de verité, mais il est la source unique"
(De la Vallée Poussin, *Bouddhisme,* p. 138). (*Cf.* Mahāvagga i, 6, 8.)

356-9. As weeds spoil a good harvest, so these passions

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

spoil the good harvest of character. Seed sown in clean soil is
fruitful: so are gifts to the Noble.

370\. The five bonds to be cut are egoism, doubt, false asceticism,
lust, and hatred. The five to be left off are longing for higher states
of birth, for still higher ones, self-will, want of purpose, and
ignorance. The five to be taken are faith, manliness, mindfulness, deep
meditation, and wisdom. (Commentary.)

"He who has crossed the flood" = Oghatinna.

*Take five more.* Man is destined to be yoked, if not by sin, then by
duty. (*Cf.* "Whose service is perfect freedom.")

373\. *Divine pleasure:* the joy of the unified will.

384\. Meditation may be either special or general: *i.e.* upon any of
the forty objects which lead to Samādhi, or upon the transiency, sorrow,
and unreality of things.

*For he knows… Cf.* " Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make
you free" (John viii, 32).

385\. Lit. "In whom is found neither near bank nor far": *i.e.* neither
noticing external objects by attending to them, nor letting his desires
go out to seek them. (Commentary.)

387\. The face of the seer is said to shine.

388\. Deriving Brāhmano from the root *vah*—or *bah*—to put away.

394\. *Cf.* Luke xi, 39; Matt. xxiii, 27.

398\. The cable is Dōsa, hatred; the chain with its links is Tanhā,
desire in all its forms; the bolt is Mōha, infatuation, or folly.

395\. This stanza seems to have a Brahminical origin: unless we lay all
the stress on *meditating.*

405\. *Fixed or moving creatures,* according to the Sinhalese
Commentary, refers either to men or to animals. In a metaphorical sense,
fixed creatures are Arahats, moving ones are common men. In a literal
sense fixed creatures may be such things as molluscs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[93:\*](wov31.htm#fr_5) "*The Buddhist,*" vol. i,
No. 9, contains an account by an eye-witness of a self-levitated lāma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Illustrative Sayings of the Disciples of the Buddha](wov32)
