[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa05)  [Next](psa07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### CHAPTER V.

ON hearing of the birth of the infant, Kuns trembling with fear arose,
and taking a sword ran reeling along; his hair dishevelled, bathed in
sweat, he came to his sister in extreme agitation. When he snatched away
the child from her, she said, joining her hands, "O brother! this infant
girl is thy niece, do not kill her, as she is my last child. You have
put to death my sons, the loss of whom afflicts me greatly; why will you
increase your crimes by killing this infant without cause?"

Kuns replied, "I will not give the child alive to thee; that is; I will
not let her live, because whoever marries her, will put me to death."
Having said this, and gone outside, just as he was about to dash the
child to pieces, she escaped from his hand, and ascended to heaven, and
exclaimed, "O Kuns! what have you gained by attempting to dash me to
pieces, thy enemy has been born somewhere, and now thou shalt not escape
with life?"

Having heard this, Kuns filled with regret, came to where Basoodeo and
Dewukee were standing, and on his arrival, had their handcuffs and leg
irons cut off; and submissively said, "I have committed a great crime in
putting your sons to death; how will this stain be washed out, in what
birth shall I

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

obtain salvation? Your gods were false, who said, that in Dewukee's
eighth pregnancy a boy should be born; this has not been the case, but a
girl has been produced, and she too having escaped from my hands has
ascended to heaven; exercise compassion, and do not allow your thoughts
to dwell upon my sins; because no one can obliterate what has been
written in fate. After having come into the world, a man cannot be free
from life, death, good and bad fortune. They, who are wise, consider
life and death alike, and the proud look upon them as friendly and
hostile. You are great observers of truth in having brought your sons to
me."

Having thus spoken, when Kuns began repeatedly to entreat them, Basoodeo
Jee said, "O great king! you say truly, that the fault is not your's in
this case, as God had written what has happened in our fate." Hearing
this, Kuns, being highly delighted, brought Basoodeo and Dewukee in the
most friendly manner to his house; and having entertained them, and
presented them with robes, brought them back again with the greatest
respect: and having sent for a counsellor, he said, "Dewee has stated,
that my enemy has been born; for which reason, put the gods to death
wherever you find them; because they have spoken falsely to me, in
stating, that my foe should be born in the eighth pregnancy of
Dewukee."--The counsellor said, "O great king! what great difficulty
will there be in destroying them: they are beggars from birth; and
whenever you show anger, they will run away. What power have they of
opposing you? Bruhmù is engaged during the eight puhurs in reflection,
and contemplation: Muhadeo eats bhang, and the thorn apple: Indrù has no
power over you--There remains Narayun, who does not understand war; he
remains enjoying himself with Luchmee." Kuns said, "Explain, how can we
find Narayun, and conquer him?"--The counsellor replied, "If you wish to
conquer Narayun, destroy all those in whose houses he dwells during

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the eight puhurs: Brahmins, worshippers of Vishnù, Jogees, devotees with
matted hair, religious asceticks, Sunyasees, wandering religionists, and
all the worshippers of Huri:--seize them all, from children to old men,
so that not one may be left alive." On hearing this, Kuns said to the
counsellor, "Do you go, and destroy them all." Having obtained this
order, the counsellor, taking with him all sorts of devils, departed,
and having gone into the city began to search for cows, Brahmins,
children, and the worshippers of Huri, and adopting treachery and
violence, to put them to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](psa07)
