[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa15)  [Next](psa17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

### CHAPTER XV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! when Shree Krishnù removed his delusion,
Bruhmù acquired a knowledge of his own body (that is, recovered his
former intelligence.) Reflecting he went to Bhugwan, and implored him
most earnestly: falling at his feet, soliciting and standing before him
with joined hands, he began to say, "O lord! you have done me a great
kindness in having removed my pride, by which I had been blinded; who
has understanding sufficient to comprehend your actions, unless you take
compassion upon him? Your illusory power has fascinated all; who is
there with powers to fascinate you? You are the god of all; in every
hair of your body there are many Bruhmùs like me: in what reckoning am
I? O kind to the poor! be pleased now compassionately to forgive my
offence, and take not thought of my fault."

Having heard thus much, Shree Krishnù smiled: Bruhmù then brought all
the cowherds' children and the calves in a state of sleep: and being
ashamed, and offering praises to Krishnù, went to his own abode. The
assembly was formed exactly as it was before: although a year had
passed, no one was aware of it. When the cowherds' children awoke,
Krishnù collected the calves. Upon this, some of the children said,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Brother! you have
brought the calves quickly; we have not had time to eat our food."

Hearing this, Krishnù said laughing, "I was anxious on your account--I
found the calves, grazing near in one place; let us now go home, having
come here very early in the morning." Conversing thus, and taking the
calves with them, they all came home, laughing and playing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](psa17)
