[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa16)  [Next](psa18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

SHREE [SHOOKDEO](errata.htm#1) said,--O great king! when Shree Krishnù
was eight years of age, he one day said to Jusodha, "Mother! I will go
and take the cows to feed; do you prevail on my father to send me with
the cowherds." Hearing this, Jusodha spoke to Nund Jee on the subject.
He having fixed upon a lucky division of time, equal to forty-eight
minutes, sent for the cowherds' children; and on the eighth of the light
part of the month Kartik, having caused Krishnù to perform poojah to a
cowshed, he said in a supplicating mariner to the cowherds, "Brothers!
from to-day, take Ram Krishnù with you, when you take the cows to
pasture: but stay near him, and do not leave him alone in the jungle."
Having thus said, and given them food, and marked Krishnù and Bulram on
the forehead with coagulated milk, he dismissed them in company with all
the rest. They were delighted, and went to the jungle with the cowherds'
children and the cows. There, on beholding the beauty of the jungle,
Shree Krishnù began to say to Buldeo, "Buldeo! this is a very pleasant,
agreeable place; see, how the trees are bending under the weight of
their branches, and beasts and birds of various kinds, sporting in every
direction!"

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

When he had thus spoken, they ascended a high hillock, and began waiving
white cloths over their heads, to call out to the cows of different
colours, viz. black, white, yellow, purple, brown, blue. On hearing
their voices, they all came running up, lowing and panting. At this time
there was an appearance of such beauty, that it seemed as if clouds of
different colours had been collected from the four quarters. After this,
Shree Krishnù Chund having driven away the cows to feed, and having
eaten his meal with his brother, went to sleep under the shade of a
kudum tree, placing, his head on the thigh of a companion. Having awoke
after some time, he said to Bulram, "Let us play this game: let us fight
together, each arranging a separate army in battle order." When he had
thus spoken, they divided the cows and cowherds' children into two equal
portions; then gathering fruits and flowers from the jungle and filling
wallets with them, they began to play upon different kinds of martial
instruments, and engaging with each other, to call out. They fought in
this manner for some time, and then having taken their divisions apart,
they began to tend upon the cows (that is, take them to pasture.)

At this time, one of his companions said to Buldeo Jee, "O great king!
at a short distance from this, there is a palm jungle, in which there
are fruits, equal in flavour to nectar; an evil spirit in the shape of
an ass keeps guard there." On hearing this, Bulram Jee went into that
jungle with the cowherds' children and began knocking down the fruits by
throwing bricks, stones, clods and sticks. Having heard the noise, the
ass, whose name was Dhenook, came braying to the spot; and on coming up,
he turned round and kicked Buldeo Jee twice on the chest: upon which,
having taken him up, Buldeo dashed him on the ground. After roiling
about, the ass again got up; and pawing the ground, and putting his ears
down, he began to go back, and continue kicking with both hind legs. He
continued fighting in this manner for some time. On a sudden Bulram Jee
having seized both

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

his hind legs, and twisting them round, threw him upon a high tree, from
which he fell down dead: and with him the tree fell also, broken in
pieces. There was a very loud noise in consequence of the fall of both,
and all the trees of the forest were shaken. Having beheld from a
distance, Krishnù said, "The trees have been shaken, and there has been
a great noise." A friend of Buldeo's came, (and said) "Come quickly
Krishnù, Buldeo has sent for you: A demon has been killed, and is lying
on the ground." On hearing this, Shree Krishnù went also to Bulram. Then
all the demons, who were companions of Dhenook, came and attacked him.
Shree Krishnù Chund easily destroyed them all. Then the cowherds'
children being delighted and plucking the fruit without fear, filled as
many baskets as they wished; and having brought all the cows together,
they said to Shree Krishnù and Buldeo Jee, "O great kings! it is very
long since we calve here, let us now go home." On hearing this, both
brothers, taking the cows with them, came home laughing and playing with
the cowherds' children in the evening, and distributed the fruits they
brought throughout the whole of Brindabun. Having dismissed all their
friends and companions they went to sleep. In the morning they rose very
early, and Krishnù having called the cowherds' children, and giving them
breakfast, taking the cows with him, went to the jungle; and whilst
feeding the cows, they came to the whirlpool where the serpent Kalee
lived--there the cowherds watered the cows in the Jumna, and drank some
water themselves. When they got up after having drank the water, they,
as well as the cows, began rolling on the ground, in consequence of the
poison. Upon this, Shree Krishnù having looked at them with an immortal
glance, (a glance like nectar,) restored them all to life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](psa18)
