[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa20)  [Next](psa22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### CHAPTER XX.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! when Bulram returned, after having
killed Purlunt, he met Krishnù with his companions. And the cowherds'
children, who were in the jungle pasturing the cows, having heard that a
demon had been killed, left their cows and came to look at him. The cows
in the mean while went from one grass jungle to another. When the two
brothers arrived, they could not see any cows.

The cows and cowherds were dispersed: they lost their road, and wandered
about the grass and palm jungles. Climbing up trees, they (the cowherds'
children) called out to each other, and repeating names, they waived
cloths in the air.

In the meantime, one of his companions came, and said to Krishnù,
joining his hands, "O great king! the cowherds' children and the cows
having broken through (or destroyed,) the Mouj jungle have been mixed up
together, just in the same way as in the months of Sawun and Bhadon,
rivers rushing along with high waves, mix in the sea." At this time they
perceived that there was a fire blazing furiously. On seeing it, the
cowherds and their companions, being greatly alarmed and frightened,
called out, "Krishnù! Krishnù! save us quickly from this fire or we
shall all be instantly burnt to death."

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Krishnu said, "All
of you shut your eyes." When they had shut their eyes, Krishnù, having
put out the fire in a second, caused another delusion, and having taken
off the cowherds' children with the cows into a fig tree forest, told
them to open their eyes.

The cowherds having opened their eyes, said, gazing round, "Where has
that fire gone, Krishnù? When did we come into the fig tree forest: this
is indeed strange, Bulbeer?"

Having thus said, they accompanied Krishnù and Bulram with the cows to
Brindabun, and each went home and mentioned, that Bulram had that day
killed a demon, named Purlunt; and that there had been a fire in the
Mouj forest, which, through the power of Krishnù, had been extinguished.
Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--Raja! hearing these
words from the mouths of the cowherds' children, all the inhabitants of
Bruj went out to see: but they obtained no clue to the actions of
Krishnù.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](psa22)
