[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa25)  [Next](psa27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

### CHAPTER XXV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! I will now inform you, how Shree Krishnù
Chund raised the hill Goberdhun, and destroyed the pride of Indrù:
listen with attention. All the inhabitants of Bruj, on the anniversary
of the fourteenth of the dark part of the month of Kartik, having
bathed, and filled A square place with saffron and sandal, bringing
different kinds of sweetmeats and confectionary, and perfumes and lamps,
were in the habit of worshipping Indrù. This was a traditional custom
with them. On one of the returns of that anniversary, Nund Jee made
great preparations for a feast, and there were also great preparations
in the houses of all the inhabitants of Bruj. Shree Krishnù Chund came
and asked his mother, "What is the reason of there being so many
sweetmeats, and so much confectionary in each house to-day? Explain the
secret to me, that the doubts of my mind may be removed?" Jusodha
replied, "Son! I have no leisure now to talk: Go and ask your father,
and he will explain to you?"

On hearing this, Shree Krishnù came to Nund and Oopnund, and said,
"Father! for what god's worship are such splendid preparations being
made to-day, that there are sweetmeats and confectionary in each house?
What power has he of accomplishing men's desires, of granting absolution
from sin

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

and conferring boons? Explain to me his name, and his virtues, that the
doubts of my mind may disappear?"

Nund said, "Son! have you not yet found out the secret, that it is the
worship (poojah) of the lord of the clouds, who is the ruler of the
gods, through whose benignant liberality, prosperity and increase are
obtained in the world, and also grass, water and grain. The forests and
groves produce flowers and fruits: and through him all living things,
animals, four-footed beasts and birds have a joyful existence. This
custom of performing poojah to Indrù has obtained from the times of our
ancestors' ancestors, and is not one, which has been lately introduced."

On hearing these words from Nund Jee, Shree Krishnù replied, "Father!
our ancestors may with knowledge or without knowledge have worshipped
Indrù; but why do you intentionally leave a straight road and follow a
steep one? By obeying Indrù nothing is gained; because he has not the
power of granting men's desires, or absolution from sin; and who has
obtained prosperity and the accomplishment of his objects from him:
mention to me on whom has he ever conferred a boon?

"It is indeed true, that in consequence of his penances and sacrifices,
the gods made him their Raja, and seated him on a throne, but he has no
divine power; often (when he is worsted by evil spirits,) he runs away,
and passes his time in some hiding place. Why serve such a coward, and
why not have proper regard for your own dignity of character? Indrù has
not power to do any thing. What is written in fate, happens. Men obtain
enjoyment, wealth, benefactors, brothers and relations, as the result of
their virtues, or their fates. And the sun, which dries up the water for
eight months of the year, causes it to fall down in rain for the
remaining four. In consequence of this, grass, water and grain are
produced on the earth. And Bruhmù, who has formed the four castes,
Brahmins, Chutrees, Bys, Soodrús,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

has attached particular occupations to each; viz., that Brahmins should
read the scriptures (Vedas); Chutrees should protect all the others; Bys
should carry on agriculture, and trade; and Soodrús should be servants
to the three other divisions of caste. Father! we belong to the Bys
caste; in consequence of the number of cows we possess, we obtained the
town of Gokool, and thence is derived our name of cowherds. Our business
is to carry on agriculture and trade, and to attend upon cows and
Brahmins. The Vedas command us not to abandon our family customs. They,
who abandon their own religious customs and conform to others, are like
a virtuous woman of a good family, who should form an attachment to a
stranger of another family. Be pleased, therefore, to abandon the
worship of Indrù, and perform poojah to the forests and hills; because
we are inhabitants of the forest, and they are our kings. It is not
right for us to abandon those, under whose government we live happily,
and worship others. Wherefore take all the sweetmeats, confectionary and
grain, and perform poojah to the mountain Goberdhun."

Having heard these remarks, Nund and Oopnund arose, and went to a place
of assembly, where all the grown-up cowherds were seated.

On hearing what Krishnù had said, they remarked, "Krishnù speaks truly,
do not consider his words as those of a child, and set them aside. If
you yourselves consider well, who is Indrù? And why do we treat him with
deference? It is proper we should worship those who give us sustenance.

"What have we to do with the ruler of the gods; let us worship forests,
rivers and the hill Goberdhun." The cowherds again said, "Krishnù has
given good counsel, let us abandon all the gods; Goberdhun is a great
mountain, let us worship it."

On hearing this Nund Jee was delighted, and caused proclamation to be
made throughout the village, that on the next day, he and all the
inhabitants of Bruj would go and perform

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

poojah to Goberdhun. Having heard this proclamation, all the inhabitants
of Bruj rose very early next morning; and having bathed, and performed
their religious meditations, placed all articles necessary for the
poojah in baskets, plates, dishes and pots of various kinds, and brought
them on carts and bhangies to Goberdhun. Nund and Oopnund also with
their relatives took a stock of things necessary, and accompanied the
rest; and advancing in musical procession, they arrived at Goberdhun. On
arrival there, having swept and cleared the ground all round the hill,
and sprinkled water, they selected and deposited all kinds of
sweetmeats, food, condiments and pickles: so much indeed, that the
mountain was concealed by them; and they spread garlands above, and
silks of all colours.

The beauty of the scene at this time is not to be described: the
mountain appeared as splendid as a person in a jewelled dress,
ornamented from head to foot. And Nund Jee having summoned a family
priest, and accompanied by all the cowherds' children, placed on the
ground the mixture roolee, unbroken rice, flowers, perfumes, lamps,
consecrated food, pawn, betelnut and sacrificial presents, and performed
poojah according to the injunctions of the Vedas. Upon this Shree
Krishnù said, "Meditate now with pure minds upon the mountain Goberdhun,
and he will appear and eat with you."

Hearing this all the cowherds, together with Nund and Jusodha, stood
with their hands joined, their eyes shut, and in deep meditation. Nund
Lal on the other hand, having then assumed a huge, monstrous form, with
large hands and feet, came forth silently from the middle of the hill,
having lotus eyes, a face like the moon, a crown and a garland of
flowers reaching to his feet, dressed in yellow, and wearing jewels and
ornamented gems, and with his mouth open. And at. the same time, in his
own proper form, looking at his assumed form, Krishnù calling out to all
his companions said, "Behold! the mountain Goberdhun, whose poojah you
performed with such sincerity, has manifested itself."

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

Having said this, Shree Krishnù Chund Jee made a salutation to
Goberdhun. The cowherdesses and cowherds, seeing this, did the same, and
began to say to each other, "When did Indrù show himself in this manner?
We have worshipped him to no purpose: and there is no knowing why our
ancestors abandoned so perceptible a deity as Goberdhun, and obeyed
Indrù;--there is no understanding this." Whilst they were thus talking,
Shree Krishnù said, "What are you looking at? give him the food, which
you have brought." On hearing this the cowherdesses and cowherds filled
plates and dishes with food of all kinds, (literally of six flavours,)
and began to offer it to Goberdhun, who stretched out his hands to
receive it, and began eating. At length all that the inhabitants of
Bruj, and Nund and Jusodha had brought with them was eaten up. The form
of Goberdhun then went back to the hill.

Having finished these wonderful sports, Shree Krishnù Chund, taking all
his companions with him, went round the hill to the right by way of
adoration; and next day leaving Goberdhun they arrived at Brindabun,
laughing and playing on the road. Then there were rejoicings and
festivities in every house; and the cowherds' children, having painted
all the cows and calves, and fastened rings, small bells and other
tinkling ornaments on their necks, engaged in games and sports
separately.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](psa27)
