[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa26)  [Next](psa28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

### CHAPTER XXVI.

HAVING narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo, the sage, said, when they
abandoned the worship of the ruler of the gods, and worshipped the
mountain, Indrù was enraged and summoned all the gods.

On their arrival, Indrù asked them to explain, whose poojah had been
performed yesterday in Bruj. At this time, Narud Jee came and said to
Indrù, "O great king! every one obeys you, except the inhabitants of
Bruj; and they do not obey you, because Nund has had a son, according to
whose instructions they act. He has abolished your worship, and caused
them since yesterday to worship the mountain."

On hearing this Indrù was angry, and said, "The inhabitants of Bruj have
great wealth, and therefore they have become excessively proud. They
have given up the prayers, penances, sacrifices and fasts, which they
used to observe, and offer up on my account. They have invited famine
and wretchedness. They look upon the man, Krishnù, as a god: and believe
all he says to be true. He is a foolish, unintelligent child, a great
talker, and very proud. I will now put an end to his pride by destroying
all cattle, and deprive him of wealth."

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

Having spoken in this angry, foolish manner, the ruler of the gods sent
for the lord of the clouds. On receiving the message, he came and stood
before Indrù trembling, and with his hands joined. Indrù, when he saw
him, said, passionately, "Take all your army immediately with you, and
overwhelm with water the mountain Goberdhun, and the space round about
Bruj; so that not a single trace of the mountain, or the name of the
inhabitants of Bruj may remain."

Having received this order, the lord of the clouds made his obeisance,
and received permission from Raja Indrù to depart. On reaching his own
abode, he called together all the great clouds, and said to them, "It is
the order of the great king, that you should go immediately and pour
down, rain in such quantities as to set adrift the whole of Goberdhun."

Having heard this, all the clouds collected their masses, and
accompanied their ruler. He came and surrounded the whole country about
Bruj; and having thundered, began to pour down heavy rain in large
drops, and to point out the hill with his finger.

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja
Pureechit,--O great king! when the thundering clouds began to pour down
rain in this manner from all quarters, the cowherdesses and cowherds
together with Nund and Jusodha, alarmed and drenched with wet, trembled
violently, and having gone to Krishnù called out, "O Krishnù! how shall
we escape from this great deluge? You made us abandon the worship of
Indrù, and perform poojah to the hill; please call him quickly to
preserve us: otherwise, we shall all be drowned in a second, together
with the city."

Having heard this speech, and perceiving that they were all terrified,
Shree Krishnù Chund replied, "Be not at all anxious, the lord of hills
will come immediately and protect you." Thus saying, and heating the
hill Goberdhun, he made it like fire, and raised it up, and supported it
on the little finger of his left hand; upon this, all the inhabitants of
Bruj with their

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

cattle came and stood under it, and on beholding Shree Krishnù, began to
say with astonishment to each other, "Some Vishnù has descended upon the
earth; Krishnù is a god of gods. How, brother, can Mohun be a mortal,
since he has supported a hill upon his finger?"

Having proceeded thus far in the history, Shree Shookdeo, the Sage, said
to the Raja Pureechit,--The lord of the clouds, with his collected force
and in great wrath, poured down rain very heavy, which fell upon the
hill with a hissing sound, and became like drops falling upon a hot
baking plate.

Having been informed of this Indrù was enraged, and came himself and
poured down rain for seven days without ceasing; but through the glory
of Huri, not a drop fell upon Bruj. When all the water was expended, the
clouds came with joined hands and said, "Lord! we have expended as much
water as was expended at the general destruction (the great deluge,)
what shall we do now?"

Having heard this, Indrù reflecting and meditating, thought to himself,
"Vishnù has descended upon the earth: otherwise, who else could have had
the power, by supporting the hill, to protect Bruj?" With these
thoughts, and feeling great regret, Indrù returned to his abode with the
clouds, which having been dispersed, there was light. Then all the
inhabitants of Bruj, being delighted, said to Krishnù, "O great king! be
pleased now to restore the hill to its former position, as the clouds
are all gone." On hearing which Shree Krishnù Chund placed the hill
where it was before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](psa28)
