[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa39)  [Next](psa41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--O great king! Kesee and Byomasoor were
killed on the eleventh of the dark part of the month of Kartik; and
early in the morning of the thirteenth, Akroor obtained permission from
Kuns to set out, and when he had ascended his chariot, these thoughts
passed in his mind on his road to Brindabun: "What prayers, devotion,
sacrifice, offering, pilgrimage or fast have I performed, by virtue of
which I have obtained this great benefit? To my knowledge I have not
once during my present birth mentioned the name of Huri, but have
constantly remained in the retinue of Kuns; how shall I obtain a
knowledge of the mysteries of his adoration? (of the manner in which I
am to offer adoration to him) I must certainly have performed some very
virtuous act in a former birth, the excellence and glory of which have
procured me this very great advantage, that Kuns has sent me to bring
Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy. By going and obtaining a sight of
him, I shall obtain the greatest happiness my present birth can afford;
(literally, I shall make my birth fruitful.) I will fall at his feet
with joined hands; and afterwards put the dust of his feet on my head.
The feet, which have come to

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

destroy crime! and which Shree Bruhmù and the other gods worship. The
feet, which fell on Kalee's head; and which are filled with the milk of
the breast, and the perfume of sandal, which danced beautifully amidst
the festivities, and the assemblage of the cowherdesses; and after which
the cows roamed. The feet, by the dust of which the wife of Guotumù was
saved, from which the Ganges issued forth, having deceived the Raja
Buli, they performed an important act for Indrù. Those feet I shall see
to-day: the omens are propitious to me, herds of deer are running on the
right." O great king! with these thoughts in his mind, Akroor said again
to himself, "I hope they will not any of them look upon me as the
ambassador of Kuns." Again it occurred to him, "That he, whose name is
acquainted with the secrets of the heart, requires the true affection of
the mind, and can recognize friends and enemies--he will never look upon
me as Kuns' ambassador; moreover on seeing me, he will embrace me with
kindness, and place his soft, lotus-like hand on my head, then by gazing
fixedly on his moon-like body, on which body Bruhmù, Roodrù, Indrù and
all the gods constantly meditate, I will feast my eyes, in the way the
red partridge is delighted by gazing at the moon."

Having recited so much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--O great king! occupied with these thoughts, and driving
his chariot along, Akroor Jee proceeded on his journey, and Krishnù and
Buldeo were coming in an opposite direction, after having taken the cows
to pasture; and the two parties met outside Brindabun. On beholding the
brilliance of Huri, from a distance, Akroor dismounted from his ruth,
and running fell at his feet in great agitation of mind, and was so
overjoyed, that he could not speak, and through excess of joy began to
shed tears.

Shree Krishnù lifted him up, and embracing him with the greatest
affection, laid hold of his hand, and brought him to his house. Nund
Rae, on seeing Akroor there, was delighted, and

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

rose up to meet him; and having treated him with very great respect, and
washed his feet, placed him upon a seat.

The attendants brought oil, and bathed him, after having rubbed his body
with perfumed paste, and anointed it with sweet scents. Jusodha gave him
a square place to cook upon, and a board to sit upon, and prepared all
sorts of delicacies for him to eat. When he had rinsed his mouth after
eating, and sat down to eat pawn, Nund Jee made enquiries regarding his
health and welfare, and said, "Amongst the members of Judoo's family,
you are esteemed very virtuous, and always maintain the dignity of your
character. Explain to us, how you fare with the demon Kuns, and what is
the condition of people in that quarter, speak without any reserve?"

Akroor Jee said, "From the time Kuns has come to the city of Muthoora,
he has caused affliction to all. You ask after the welfare of the city:
the inhabitants suffer great distress. How can any of the family of
Judoo escape, so long as Kuns remains at Muttra? As the hunter is an
enemy to beasts, rams and goats, Kuns is an enemy to his subjects; every
one suffers." Akroor added, "You are well aware of Kuns' proceedings;
what more need I say about them?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](psa41)
