[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa46)  [Next](psa48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### CHAPTER XLVI.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--Raja! the wives of Kuns and his
brothers' wives, having completed the necessary ablutions, returned in
tears to the royal palace: and Shree Krishnù and Bulram, having come to
Basoodeo and Dewukee, and knocked off their handcuffs and fetters,
making obeisance, stood before them with joined hands. Whilst beholding
the countenance of Krishnù, Basoodeo and Dewukee became possessed of
knowledge, and had a firm belief in their minds, "That both brothers
were deities; and that they had descended upon the earth to destroy evil
spirits, and remove the burthens of the world." Whilst these thoughts
were passing in the minds of Basoodeo and Dewukee, Huri, acquainted with
the secrets of the heart, sent forth his delusive power, which deprived
them both of understanding; and they looked upon them both again as
their children. In the mean while, Shree Krishnù Chund said, with very
great humility, "You have for a long time past suffered great
afflictions, and have retained a constant recollection of us both. It
has not been any fault of ours, because since you placed us under charge
of Nund, at Gokool, we have been under the authority of others, and have
had no power of our own. But this thought was constantly in our minds,
that we had not contributed in any

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

way to the happiness of her, who had borne us in her womb; and had not
enjoyed the delightful society of our parents, and had wasted our lives
to no purpose in the house of strangers. They have suffered great
misfortunes on our account, and we have not done them any service. In
the world they are possessed of power, who serve their fathers and
mothers. We have remained indebted to them, and have not been able to do
any kind offices for them."

O lord of the earth! when Shree Krishnù Jee had thus given expression to
his mental grief, Basoodeo and Dewukee embraced the two brothers with
the greatest affection, and forgot all their former affliction in their
present joy. Having thus made their parents happy, the two brothers went
thence to Oogursen, and joining their hands said, "Grandfather! be
pleased to assume the regal power: this is a favourable constellation
and a propitious day for doing so."

When the Raja Oogursen had heard these words of Huri, he rose up, and
having come and thrown himself at the feet of Shree Krishnù Chund, began
to say, "O lord of compassion! be pleased to listen to my humble
petition; that, as you have destroyed the great sinner, Kuns, and all
evil spirits, and thereby conferred happiness on your worshippers, you
should yourself ascend the throne and rule over Muttra, and grant
protection to your subjects."

Krishnù replied,--"O great king! the members of the family of Judoo have
not any right of inheritance to the kingly power, a circumstance which
is universally known. When the Raja Jujat was in his old age, he called
his son Judoo, and said to him, 'Give me your youth, and take my old
age.' On hearing this, Judoo thought to himself, 'If I give my father my
present youth, he, being young again, will have sexual connexion, the
sin of which will fall on me: wherefore, it is better I should not do
so.' Having thus reflected and considered, he said to his father, 'I
cannot comply with your request.' On hearing these words, the Raja Jujat
was

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

angry and pronounced a curse upon Judoo, saying, 'Begone! none of your
descendants shall ever have regal power.' In the mean while, his younger
son, named Poor, presented himself, and joining his hands said, 'Father!
give me your old age, and accept my youth; this body is useless to me:
if any advantage can accrue to you from it, what can be better?' When
Poor had thus spoken, the Raja Jujat was highly pleased, and exchanged
with him his old age for Poor's youth, and said, 'The succession to the
throne shall continue in your family.' For this reason, grandfather! as
I am a descendant of Judoo, it is not right for me to exercise sovereign
power. Do you ascend the throne, and assume royal authority and banish
all solicitude. We will accomplish, whatever you may order us to
perform. We will inflict severe punishment on all, who do not obey your
commands. And be not troubled with care and anxiety, but carry on a just
and equitable government, and promote the welfare of your subjects.
Cause search to be made for all members of the family of Judoo, who,
from dread of Kuns, have abandoned their own cities to dwell under the
authority of strangers, and grant them a happy settlement in Muttra.
Worship brahmins, cows and the gods, and constantly give your attention
to their protection and support."

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo, the sage, said, O incarnation
of justice! Shree Krishnù Chund, the king of kings and the benefactor of
his worshippers, knowing Oogursen to be one who offered devotion to him,
having thus advised and seated him on the throne, made the marks of
sovereignty on his forehead; and having raised the royal canopy over his
head, both the brothers began to fan him.

All the inhabitants of the city were highly delighted, and began to
shout forth exclamations of joyful praise, and the gods to rain flowers.
O great king! having thus seated Oogursen upon the throne, the brothers
brought away with them many rich dresses and jewels, and went thence to

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nund Rae Jee, in
whose presence they stood with joined hands, and said with the greatest
humility, "How shall we speak in fitting terms of your greatness? If we
had a thousand tongues, we could not explain your many excellent
qualities. You have brought us up with the greatest affection as your
own sons, and shown us the most tender kindness; and our mother,
Jusodha, loves us greatly, fixes her kindest regards upon us, and always
treats us as her own children; she never allows her mind to be estranged
from us." Shree Krishnù added, "Father! you must not be offended at my
words, I will speak to you with sincerity, and will call you both my
parents; but shall now remain for some days at Muttra, and having
visited my brethren of the same caste, hear the history of the family of
Judoo, and will gladden my mother and father with a meeting, for they
have suffered great griefs on our account, if they had not had us
conveyed to your house, they would not have endured any troubles." With
these words Krishnù placed the dresses and jewels before Nund, and,
abandoning all affection, said, "Offer my respects to my mother by
kissing her feet, and continue to love me with affection."

On these words coming from Shree Krishnù's mouth, Nund Rae was very sad,
and began to heave deep sighs; and the cowherds' children said to
themselves, reflecting on what Krishnù had said, "This is a very strange
speech he has made, we are inclined to infer from it, that he is about
to deceive us, and go away, otherwise he would not have spoken so
unkindly."

O great king! after a short time, one of their companions, named
Soodamù, said, "Brother Krishnù! what business have you now at Muttra,
that you thus unfeelingly abandon your father? You have done well in
destroying Kuns, and completing the work you came to accomplish. Unite
now with Nund, and come and rule over Brindabun; be not eagerly desirous
to reign here, you will not be so happy as

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

at Brindabun. Fools, on obtaining sovereign power, forget themselves,
and are delighted at beholding elephants and horses. Do not quit
Brindabun to dwell elsewhere. Spring is perpetual there; the beauty of
the thick woods and of the Jumna is never effaced from the mind.
Brother! if you are determined on taking up your abode at Muttra,
resigning the pleasures of Brindabun, not attending to my suggestion,
and abandoning all affection for your parents, what accession to your
greatness will you acquire by doing so. You will attend upon Oogursen,
and suffer anxiety night and day. You must be subservient to him, on
whom you have conferred the government. How will you submit to this
disgrace? It is, therefore, most advisable that you should not cause
grief to Nund Rae, but continue to remain with him. Think of the
forests, the rivers and sports of Bruj. Forget not the herds! We will
not let you go alone, O lord of Bruj! but will all accompany you."

Having proceeded thus far in his recitation, Shree Shookdeo, the sage,
said to the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! when they had made many
speeches to the above effect, ten or twenty of their companions remained
with Shree Krishnù and Bulram; and they suggested to Nund Rae to go on,
without any anxiety, with all others, and that they would come
afterwards with Krishnù and Bulram. On hearing these words, the cowherds
were in great agitation, as though they had been bitten by snakes;
gazing on the face of Krishnù, and losing all resolution, they stood
like pictures.

Buldeo Jee, perceiving that Nund Rae was deeply grieved, said to him,
"Father! why are you so sad? We will return in a few days, after having
accomplished what we have to do here. We send you on in advance of us,
because our mother must be much disquieted by being left alone; she
will, in a measure, be restored to confidence by your going." Nund Jee
replied, "Son! come once with us, and return after the interview."

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

Having thus spoken, Nund was greatly disquieted and continued embracing
his feet. The splendour of his understanding abated and became dull; he
could not shed tears. O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund Jee saw,
that Nund and the cowherds' children were greatly troubled in mind,
without being under the power of delusion, he thought to himself, that
they would not live, if separated from him. He then sent forth that
particular delusive power belonging to him, which has deluded the whole
world. This power deprived Nund and the cowherds of all understanding.
Krishnù then said, "Father! why do you indulge in such regrets? Consider
what a short distance there is between Muttra and Brindabun. We are not
going far from you, that you should be so sad. The people of Brindabun
must be in grief, and, therefore, we send you before us."

When Krishnù had thus explained to Nund, his confidence was restored,
and joining his hands, he said, "Krishnù! if these are your sentiments,
I have no power to gainsay them. I will depart, as I cannot refuse
compliance with your expressed wishes." When Nund Jee had thus spoken,
Huri permitted him and the cowherds and their children to depart to
Brindabun; and the two brothers remained at Muttra with some of their
companions. The cowherds, who accompanied Nund were all during the whole
journey, perplexed with heavy thoughts, like gamblers, who have lost
every thing. Some retained their senses, but others had lost them
entirely; they fell down on the road, tripping over each other. Although
going to Brindabun they continued looking towards Muttra; and were
greatly distressed by the pain of separation. In this state, they
managed, by some means or other, to arrive at Brindabun. Hearing of
their arrival, the Ranee Jusodha came running forth in a state of great
perturbation; and being greatly disquieted in mind, at not seeing Bulram
and Krishnù, she said to Nund Jee, "Husband! where have you lost our
sons, that you have only brought back dresses and jewels?

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You have thrown
away the gold, and kept the glass. You have foolishly rejected nectar,
and taken poison. Like a blind man, obtaining possession of the
philosopher's stone, who throws it away, and afterwards strikes his
forehead on hearing of its valuable qualities. You have thrown away gems
of high value, (meaning Krishnù and Bulram.) You have thus lost our
sons, and brought dresses and jewels instead of them. What will you do
with wealth without them? O foolish husband! how can we pass life
without them, whose separation from us even for a moment caused us the
deepest grief? What was the state of your feelings, when they suggested
separation?"

Nund Jee was much grieved at these words, and replied, with downcast
looks, "It is true Krishnù gave me these dresses and jewels; but I know
not who brought them here. How shall I mention what Krishnù said to me?
You will also be grieved, when you hear his words. He returned to me
after having killed Kuns, and made use of most unkind expressions. They
have become the sons of Basoodeo; and have gone away from us, after
having completely gained our affections. When I was astonished at what
they said, they talked of remuneration to us for bringing them up. Do
not call Huri, Nund's son; look upon and worship him as a deity. I
thought, that he was Narayun from the very first; but being under the
power of delusion, regarded him as a son."

O great king! when Nund Rae Jee had repeated truly all Shree Krishnù had
said to him, Jusodha, being under the influence of delusion, at one time
looked upon Krishnù as her son, and was sorrowful and disturbed in mind,
and shed tears. At another time, recovering her reason, she regarded him
as a deity; and meditating upon him, and celebrating with songs his
excellent attributes, she dissipated the grief of her mind. And in this
manner all the inhabitants of Bruj, both men and women, being deeply
imbued with love for Huri, held various discourses regarding him, which
I have not power to describe.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

For which reason, I will mention the sports of Muttra; listen
attentively. When Huldhur and Gobind came to Basoodeo and Dewukee, after
having permitted Nund Rae to depart, they were delighted at seeing them,
and forgot all their former griefs, as a devotee is delighted on
obtaining the fruit of the penance which he has performed. Basoodeo Jee
first addressed Dewukee, saying, "Krishnù and Buldeo have dwelt amongst
strangers, and have ate and drank with them; and are not acquainted with
the customs of their own caste. It is right, therefore, that we should
send for, and consult the family priest, and act by his advice." Dewukee
assented. Basoodeo Jee then sent for Gurg, the sage, who was the family
priest; and on his arrival, after having explained all the perplexities
of his mind, enquired, "O great king! kindly inform us, what we ought to
do." Gurg, the sage, replied, "First of all send an invitation to all
their brethen of the same caste; and afterwards admit Bulram and Krishnù
to the caste, and present them with Brahminical threads."

When the family priest had thus spoken, Basoodeo sent an invitation into
the city, and invited all Brahmins, and all descendants of Judoo. They
came, and were received with the greatest respect, and offered seats.
Basoodeo, first of all, having gone through all the ceremonies of
initiation into caste, and caused their nativities to be written,
presented to the Brahmins ten thousand cows with horns of gold, backs of
copper, and feet of silver, dressed out in silken cloths, which cows he
had made a vow to give at the birth of Krishnù. He afterwards caused
festive rejoicings to be made, and having observed all the customs and
ordinances of the Vedas, bestowed Brahminical threads on Bulram and
Krishnù; and, having made presents to the two brothers, sent them forth
to acquire knowledge. They departed and came to the house of a learned
sage and great pundit, named Sandeepun, of the city of Awuntika, who was
then residing at Benares, and possessed of great knowledge; and
approaching him with an obeisance, and joined

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

hands, they said to him with great humility of manner, "O king of sages!
take compassion on us, and with sincerity of mind bestow upon us the
gift of knowledge." O great king! when Shree Krishnù and Bulram Jee had
made this humble address to Sandeepun, the sage, he brought them to his
house in the most affectionate manner, and began to instruct them with
great kindness. In a short time, having read the four Vedas, and
Oopvedas, six Shastrùs, nine treatises upon Grammar, eighteen Pooranùs,
and discourses upon charms, amulets, enchantments, futurity, astrology,
physic, copulation, music and prosody, they became the receptacles of
the fourteen sciences. After this, the two brothers said one day to
their spiritual preceptor, with joined hands and great humility, "O
great king! it is said, that however much a man may give in different
births, and various descents upon the earth, he cannot give a sufficient
recompense to those who have imparted knowledge to him: but please to
direct that we should make you a present according to our power; and we
will bestow it to the utmost limit of our means; and receiving your
blessing return home."

When Shree Krishnù and Bulram had thus spoken, Sandeepun, the sage, rose
up, and engaged in thought and reflection returned home. He explained to
his wife, "That the two children, Bulram and Krishnù, are immortal
deities, and have descended upon the earth for the sake of their
worshippers, and to remove the burthens of the world. I have discovered
this secret by witnessing their sports; because they, who read
continually in several successive births, cannot fathom the depths of
sea-like knowledge, and behold they have, in this state of infancy,
passed over this limitless and unfordable sea in a few days: they can
accomplish whatever they wish in a single second." The sage added, "What
boon shall we ask of them, wife?"

On hearing these words, she thought for a short time and said "Go and
ask them for our deceased son's corpse; they will bring it to us, if
they possess the powers of Huri."

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

Having thus reflected, Sandeepun, the sage, came out of his house with
his wife, into the presence of Shree Krishnù and Buldeo, and joining his
hands said, in a supplicating manner, "O great king! I had a son, with
whom, on a certain festival, I went, accompanied by my relations, to
bathe in the sea, when we arrived there, and all having undressed began
to bathe, a great wave of the sea came, in which my son was drowned, and
did not come forth again. Some shark must have swallowed him, I am
greatly grieved for his loss, if you desire to make me a present, as
your spiritual preceptor, restore that son, and remove the affliction of
my mind."

On hearing these words, Shree Krishnù and Bulram, having made obeisance
to their spiritual preceptor and his wife, and having ascended their
ruth, went towards the sea for the purpose of bringing their son; and,
having proceeded on their journey for some time, arrived on the shore.
Seeing them approach in angry mood, the sea was alarmed, and assuming
mortal shape came forth with many presents from her own element, and
stood on the shore before them trembling, and greatly agitated with
fear; placing her presents before them, and bowing her head, and making
submissive salutations, she said with joined hands, and in a tone of
supplication, "Great is my good fortune, that Krishnù has appeared to
me, for what purpose have you come here?" Shree Krishnù Chund said, "My
spiritual preceptor came here with his relatives to bathe; whose son you
swept away with a wave; bring him here, and give him up to us. This is
the purpose for which we have come."

The sea replied, bowing her head, "I have not overwhelmed him with a
wave. You are the spiritual guide of all, and lord of the universe, and
are the deity under the form of Ramù. I have been very much afraid since
this circumstance occurred, and have continued to live with a regard to
the dignity of my character and my limits." Huri replied, "If you did
not take him off, who else did so?" The sea said,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "O lord of
compassion! I will explain the mystery: there is a demon, named
Sunkasoor, in the form of a shell, who dwells in me, and who exercises
tyranny over all animals, moving in the water, and carries off all who
come to the shore to bathe; perhaps he may have taken away your
preceptor's son. I do not know certainly that he has done so; but be
pleased to come into the sea yourself and ascertain."

On hearing these words Krishnù went eagerly into the sea; on beholding
Sunkhasoor, he killed him, and splitting his belly, cast out his
entrails. He did not find his spiritual preceptor's son; and in
consequence thereof, expressed regret to Bulbhudrù, saying, "Brother! I
have destroyed Sunkhasoor to no purpose." Bulram Jee replied, "It does
not matter, carry him now about with you." On hearing this Huri made
that shell his weapon. The two brothers proceeding thence reached the
city of Jum, the region of the dead, the name of which is Sunjumnee, and
Dhurm Raj, the Raja thereof. On beholding them, Dhurm Raj descended from
his throne, and advancing to meet them, gave them a most welcome
reception. Having seated them on a throne, washed their feet, and taken
the water with which their feet had been washed, he said, "Happy is this
place! fortunate this city! which Krishnù has visited, and fulfilled the
supplications of his worshippers. Give me some business to perform for
you, that your servant may execute it." Krishnù replied, "Bring the son
of my spiritual preceptor."

When Huri had thus spoken, Dhurm Raj went off immediately and brought
the child, and joining his hands said in a tone of submission, "O lord
of compassion! through your favour I knew, beforehand, that you would
come to fetch the child, and have therefore taken the greatest care of
him; and have not yet restored him to life." O great king! with these
words Dhurm Raj, presented the child to Huri, who immediately placed him
upon his ruth, and proceeding thence conveyed him in a short time to the
presence of his spiritual

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

preceptor. The two brothers, joining their hands said, "O divine
preceptor! what further orders have you for us?"

On hearing these words, and seeing his son, Sandeepun, the sage, was
highly delighted, and bestowing many benedictions on Shree Krishnù and
Bulram Jee said, "What more shall I ask, O Krishnù! you have conferred
the greatest happiness on me by restoring my son. Great will be my
renown from having had such pupils as you. Return home now; and may you
have a safe and pleasant journey."

When the spiritual preceptor had given them this injunction, the two
brothers departed, after the usual ceremonies of obtaining permission to
go, and salutation; and ascending their ruth proceeded on their journey,
and arrived at Muttra. On hearing of their arrival, the Raja Oogursen,
together with Basoodeo and the inhabitants of the city, both male and
female, came forth to meet them. They met them outside the city, and
being greatly pleased brought Krishnù into the city in musical
procession, spreading silken cloths on the road for him to walk upon.
There were rejoicings and festivities in every house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII](psa48)
