[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa47)  [Next](psa49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

### CHAPTER XLVII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O lord of the earth! I will give an account
now how Shree [Krishnù](errata.htm#5) Chund brought Brindabun to mind;
listen attentively. One day Huri said to Bulram Jee, "Brother! all the
inhabitants of Brindabun must be very much grieved on thinking of me,
because the time has elapsed, in which I promised to return. We ought
therefore, to send some one there, to console them for my absence."

Having thus advised his brother, Huri sent for Oodho, and said to him,
"Oodho! you are a great friend of mine; and are wise and intelligent,
and resolute. I therefore wish to send you to Brindabun to offer
explanations and consolation to Nund and Jusodha, and the cowherdesses,
and to bring my mother Rohnee here." Oodho expressed an immediate
readiness to comply with this request. Shree Krishnù Chund again said,
"First of all, inform Nund and Jusodha, and cheer up their spirits, and
suggest to them to abandon all grief, and to look upon my arrival as
near at hand; and not to regard me as their son, but worship me as a
deity. Afterwards explain to those cowherdesses, who for my sake have
given up all respect for the world and for the Vedas, and day and night
sing of my sports, and are ready to die, if I do not fulfil their
expectation of my returning, that they must no longer consider

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

me as their lord, but worship me as Bhugwan, and lay aside all the
anxiety they now suffer in consequence of my separation from them."

O great king! having thus instructed Oodho, the two brothers wrote a
letter, in which they expressed to Nund and Jusodha, and the cowherds
and their children their respects and compliments, and blessing in due
form: and advised all the women of Bruj to perform penance, and
delivered the letter to Oodho, and told him to read it to them; and
after having made the necessary explanations to return quickly. Having
given him this message, Krishnù dressed Oodho in his own clothes, and
gave him his own jewels and crown, and seating him on his own ruth,
allowed him to depart to Brindabun. Proceeding on his journey, Oodho
reached the neighbourhood of Brindabun after a short time, and on
arrival there, heard birds singing melodiously in the thickly stocked
arbours, and cows of all colours, scattered like clouds in every
direction-and the cowherdesses and cowherds, with their children,
singing the praises of Shree Krishnù.

He was delighted at the beauty of the scene, and making obeisance to the
site of Krishnù's sports, arrived at the outskirts of the village, when
some one having recognized the ruth of Huri from a distance came and
having enquired his name, went to Nund and said, "O great king! a
person, named Oodho, has arrived from Muttra, in the appearance and ruth
of Shree Krishnù."

On hearing these words Nund Rae came forth from amidst the assembly of
the cowherds, where he was then sitting, and immediately approached
Oodho. Regarding him as the companion of Bulram and Krishnû, he embraced
him with the greatest affection; and enquiring kindly of his health and
welfare, escorted him to his house with great dignity and respect;
having caused his feet to be washed, he offered him a seat, and feasted
Oodho with delicacies of all kinds; when Oodho had enjoyed and finished
his meal, Nund had an elegant couch

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

prepared for him, shining like the foam of the sea, on which, after
eating pawn, he reclined most agreeably, and forgot all the fatigues of
his journey.

When after some time, Oodho awoke, Nund, the chief, came and sat near
him, and enquired after his son, Soorsen, and his great friend, Basoodeo
and his family, and asked whether they still continued to love him Nund
added, "Give me news of my son, with whom you have abode constantly.
Does he ever think of me, who am greatly grieved at his absence? He
promised us all to return, but the time of his return has long elapsed.
Jusodha constantly churns and makes butter for Krishnù, and places it
apart for him. Does Krishnù ever think of her and the women of Bruj, who
are deeply imbued with love and affection for him?"

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja Pureechit,--O lord of the earth! in this manner enquiring the
news and celebrating the former sports of Shree Krishnù Chund, Nund Rae
Jee, being deeply impregnated with affection for Krishnù, and meditating
upon him, became silent--"He has destroyed Kuns, and other powerful men;
why should Krishnù now forget us?"

In the mean while the Ranee Jusodha, greatly agitated, and losing all
sense and perception, came weeping bitterly to Oodho and enquiring after
Bulram and Krishnù said, "Tell me, Oodho Jee! how has Huri passed his
time so long without us, and what message has he sent us, and when will
he return to us?" On hearing these words Oodho Jee read the letter of
Shree Krishnù and Bulram to Nund and Jusodha, and said, "Who can explain
the greatness of those, in whose house Bhugwan has been born, and whom
he has made happy by his sports? You are most fortunate, because how can
the immortal Vishnù, the lord of Shivù and Bruhmù, who has neither
mother, nor father, nor brother nor relations, whom you look upon as
your own son, and constantly fix your thoughts and meditate upon, remain
separated from you? Huri is constantly near those who

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

love him; having assumed mortal shape for the sake of men, he has
neither friends nor enemies, whether of high or low estate. Whoever
offers adoration and worship to Huri, will be united to him, and become
a follower of his. As the large black bee carries off another insect,
and moulds it to its own form, and as it remains enclosed in the flower
of the lotus, and does not leave it and fly away, although other bees
buz over it during the whole night: in like manner Huri fashions after
his own model, and never abandons those who love him, and meditate upon
him." Oodho added, "Do not any longer regard Huri as your son, but
reverence him as the deity. Krishnù, the lord, who knows the secrets of
the heart, and befriends his worshippers, will appear and come to you,
and accomplish all your desires: be not at all anxious in your minds."

O great king! when in conversation of this kind the whole night, with
exception of about an hour, was spent, Oodho Jee said to Nund Rae, "O
great king! it is now time for churning: with your permission, I will go
and bathe in the Jumna." Nund, the chief, gave his assent; he remained
seated where he was, engaged in thought and reflection, and Oodho Jee
went in his ruth to the banks of the Jumna. Having taken off his
clothes, and purified himself, he approached the water, and placing dust
on his head, and joining his hands, singing the praises of the Jumna,
sipping water in the palm of his hand, he went into the river; and
having bathed, and performed his ablutions, and completed his
meditations, adorations and libations, began to count his beads. At the
same time, all the women of Bruj rose, and having swept and besmeared
with mud and cow-dung, the inside of their houses, and having burnt
perfumes and lighted lamps, began to churn. The sound of the churning
was like thunder, and like the sound produced by anklets and ornaments
for the toes. The beautiful women of Bruj, having churned took away the
butter, and finished their household work, went all together for water.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

O great king! the cowherdesses being distracted at separation from
Krishnù, and deeply imbued with love for him, and celebrating his many
excellent qualities with songs, began, as they went along the road, to
meditate upon him, and sing of his sports. One said, "I have seen
Krishnù;" another, "That he had run off and hid himself. He has laid
hold of my arm from behind: Huri is now standing under the shade of a
fig tree." One remarked, "I saw him milking:" another, "I beheld him
very early." Some said, "He is tending herds; others, "Listen! he is
playing the flute. We will not go this road, as Krishnù will ask for
presents. He will break our water pots, and untie the knots, on which we
carry them; and will steal away our senses by his many glances. He is
hid somewhere, and will come running towards us; and then where shall we
escape." The women of Bruj went along, conversing thus with each other;
their minds being much agitated in consequence of their separation from
Krishnù.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII](psa49)
