[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa49)  [Next](psa51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### CHAPTER XLIX.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--O great king! one day the sportive
Krishnù, the benefactor of his worshippers, thinking of the affection of
Koobja, went to her house, with the view of performing the promise he
had made her. When Koobja knew that Huri had come, she had cloths of
silk spread for him to walk on. She advanced to meet him with the
greatest joy; and all the good acts she had done in former births then
received their reward. Having given Oodho a seat outside, Krishnù
entered the house of Koobja; he there saw a splendid carpet spread in a
picture gallery, on which was arranged a beautiful couch of flowers.
Huri repaired to the couch, and Koobja, having withdrawn to another
room, bathed and perfumed herself, and having combed her braided hair,
wearing a most elegant dress and handsome jewels, adorned from head to
foot, having eaten pawn, and being sweetly scented, approached Shree
Krishnù Chund with the gaiety and endearment, with which Ruttee, (the
wife of Ramudevù,) approaches her husband. Having veiled herself from a
feeling of modesty, she remained apart and silent, having a great dread
of the first interview. On seeing her, Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of
joy, took her by the hand; and placing her near him, satisfied her
desires. He then

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

arose, and came to Oodho; blushing and smiling, and with downcast looks.
O great king! having thus made Koobja happy, Shree Krishnù Chund
returned home with Oodho Jee, and said to Bulram, "I promised Akroor
that I would pay him a visit, so let us go to his house first and
afterwards send him to Hustinapoor, to bring us the news of that
quarter." Upon this both brothers went to Akroor's house; he was much
pleased at seeing Krishnù; and making a salutation, and putting the dust
of his feet on his head, said with joined hands, and with great humility
of manner, "O lord of compassion! you have shown me great favour by
coming here, and making my house pure." Shree Krishnù replied, "Uncle!
why do you exalt me so highly? I am your son;" and added, "through your
kindness, uncle! all the demons have been destroyed, but there is one
subject, which occasions me anxiety, as I have heard that Pandoo has
gone to heaven, and that Doorjodhun tyrannizes over my five brothers. My
aunt, Koontee, is greatly distressed; unless yon go, who can afford her
relief by explanations?" Akroor Jee, on hearing these words, said in
reply to Huri, "Be not anxious on that subject, I will go to Hustinapoor
and explain matters, and bring back all the news."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L](psa51)
