[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa57)  [Next](psa59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### CHAPTER LVII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! Suttrajeet charged Shree Krishnù
Chund first with the theft of a jewel; and afterwards, finding his
accusation to be false, he was ashamed, and gave his daughter Sutbhama
in marriage to Huri. Raja Pureechit enquired from Shree Shookdeo Jee, "O
abode of compassion! who was Suttrajeet, where did he obtain the jewel,
and how did he accuse Huri of theft, and afterwards finding the charge
false, in what manner did he give his daughter in marriage; explain
these circumstances to me?" Shree Shookdeo Jee replied,--O great king!
be pleased to listen, and I will explain all the circumstances.
Suttrajeet belonged to the family of Judoo, who for a long time was
engaged in an act of very difficult religious penance in honour of the
sun. The sun-god was highly gratified, called him and having given him a
jewel, said, "This jewel's name is Soomuntka, it contains an unbounded
power of conferring happiness and wealth; Worship it continually, and
look upon it as equal to me in power and splendour; if you meditate upon
it, having offered up prayers, and performed acts of penance, abstinence
and fasting, you shall obtain whatever you ask for; into whatever
country, city and house this jewel shall enter, there misery, poverty
and

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

death shall not have access. There shall be constant plenty and
increase, and prosperity."

O great king! having thus spoken the sun-god allowed Suttrajeet to take
leave; who went home with the jewel. After this, rising, early and
performing his morning ablutions, and finishing his religious
meditations and libations, he was in the habit of offering adoration to
the jewel, with unbroken rice, flowers, sandal, perfumes, lamps and
consecrated food; and taking away the eight loads of gold, which came
from the jewel, he was delighted.

One day whilst engaged in worship, beholding the beauty and brilliancy
of the jewel, he thought to himself,--"It will be a good act to take
this jewel and show it to Shree Krishnù Chund." Having come to this
resolution, and fastening the jewel on his arm, Suttrajeet went to the
court of the descendants of Judoo. On seeing the brilliancy of the jewel
from a distance, the descendants of Judoo stood still with admiration,
and began to say to Shree Krishnù Jee, "O great king! the sun is coming
here from a longing desire to see you. Brahma, Roodrù, Indrù and all the
gods worship you; and meditating upon you during the eight puhurs, sing
of your celebrity. You are the immortal first male, Vishnù, Luchmee has
become your servant, and constantly waits upon you. You are the god of
all the gods. No one knows your nature. Your attributes and qualities of
mind are limitless; now, O lord I will you be concealed, having come
into the world?"

O great king! when the descendants of Judoo began to discourse thus, on
seeing Suttrajeet approach, Huri said, "This is not the sun; it is
Suttrajeet, one of the family of Judoo, who has obtained a jewel for
having performed an act of penance in honour of the sun. Its splendour
is equal to that of the sun. He is coming with that jewel, fastened on
his arm."

O great king! whilst Shree Krishnù Jee was thus speaking, Suttrajeet
came and sat down in the court, where the descendants of Judoo were
playing at "*choupur*" and dice. The. minds

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

of all were fascinated by beholding the brilliant lustre of the jewels,
and Shree Krishnù Chund remained also looking at it. Suttrajeet, then,
upon something occurring to his mind, took leave, and returned home; and
afterwards used constantly to come to the court with the jewel fastened
about his neck. One day, the descendants of Judoo said to Huri, "O great
king! take the jewel from Suttrajeet, and give it to Raja Oogursen and
obtain celebrity in the world. This jewel does not suit him, but is fit
for a Raja."

On hearing this, Shree Krishnù Jee smilingly said to Suttrajeet, "Give
this jewel to the Raja, and acquire for yourself a great name and
reputation in the world." On hearing this proposal to give the jewel
away, he made an obeisance, and rose up; and, engaged in thought, went
to his brother, and said, "Shree Krishnù Jee asked me for the jewel
to-day, and I did not give it him." When Suttrajeet had thus spoken, his
brother, Pursen, was angry, and took the jewel, and threw it on his own
neck; and arming himself, and mounting a horse, went out hunting. Having
gone into an extensive forest, he began to kill various kinds of deer
and antelopes with his bow and arrows. A deer having rushed out before
him, he was enraged, and pursued it on horseback; and in the course of
the pursuit came alone to a large deep cave, which had existed for ages.
On hearing the sound of the deer and horse's feet, a lion came forth
from the cave; and killing all three, and carrying off the jewel, went
into his cave again. The light was so great in consequence of the jewel
coming into the cave, that its rays extended to the infernal regions. A
bear, named Jamwunt, that had been with Shree Ramchund in the descent of
Ram upon the earth, and had since the Treta age dwelt in the regions
below with all his family, seeing that shining light in the cave, rose
up; and pursuing his journey came to the lion. Having killed the lion,
he carried off the jewel, and went with it to his wife who fastened it
in her daughter's cradle. The child constantly played and amused herself
with the

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

jewel, which filled their abode with a perpetual stream of light.

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! the
jewel was thus lost, and such was the fate of Pursen. The people, who
had accompanied Pursen, came and said to Suttrajeet, "O great king! he
left us, and went off alone, and we have found no trace of where he
went. They searched again in consequence of their statements not being
believed, but could not find Pursen any where in the forest."

On hearing this statement, Suttrajeet abstained from all food and drink;
and being greatly depressed and troubled in mind began to say to
himself, "This is Shree Krishnù's doing, he has killed my brother for
the sake of the jewel, and has carried off the jewel to his own home.
First of all he asked me for it; but I did not give it, and he has thus
carried it off." With these thoughts, he passed his time in great
anxiety. One night, he was sitting on his wife's bed, emaciated,
low-spirited, silent and deeply engaged in thought, when his wife said
to him, "Why are you so thoughtful, husband! tell me your secret
anxieties?" Suttrajeet replied, "It is not right to reveal important
secrets to a wife, as she cannot keep them; what she hears at home, she
publishes abroad; she is ignorant, and without knowledge of any thing,
good or bad." Suttrajeet's wife was angry at this speech, and said,
"When did I ever publish abroad any thing I heard at home, as you state?
Are all women alike?" She added, "Until you mention to me, what is
preying upon your mind I will abstain from all sustenance." Suttrajeet
replied, "Truth and falsehood are known to Bhugwan; but I will inform
you of what I am thinking, provided you will not tell any one." His wife
assented. Suttrajeet began to say, "One day Shree Krishnù Jee asked me
for the jewel, and I did not give it, I, therefore, think that he has
killed my brother in the forest, and taken away the jewel; this must
have been done by him, as no one else has the power to perform such an
act."

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! his wife did not sleep after hearing this account, and
passed the night in great perplexity of mind. Early in the morning, she
said to her female companions and servants, "Shree Krishnù Jee has
killed Pursen, and taken away the jewel, I heard this from my husband
last night, but do not mention it to any one." They went away silently
agreeing not to speak of the matter; but in private, began to talk to
each other, in astonishment, upon the subject. At length one of the
servants went and mentioned the subject in the female apartments of
Shree Krishnû Chund. On hearing it, all the women thought, that if
Suttrajeet's wife had said so, the statement could not be false; and
having formed this opinion, they began to blame, and speak ill of, Shree
Krishnù." In the mean while, some one came, and said to Shree Krishnù
Jee, "You are under a suspicion, O great king! of having killed Pursen,
and taken away the jewel; why are you sitting idle? You should adopt
some measures to counteract these statements." On hearing this
statement, Shree Krishnù Jee was at first frightened; afterwards,
reflecting on the subject, he came to the court, where Oogursen and
Basoodeo and Bulram were sitting, and said, O great king! I am accused
of having killed Pursen, and carried off the jewel; I will, therefore,
with your permission, go and search for them both, in order that this
disgrace may be wiped away."

Having thus spoken, Shree Krishnù Jee went thence to the forest, taking
with him several of the descendants of Judoo, and the companions of
Pursen. When they had gone some distance, they saw marks of horse's
feet, on tracing which, they reached the spot where a lion had devoured
Pursen and his horse. On seeing the remains of their bodies, and the
marks of a lion's feet, they were all of opinion, that the lion must
have killed them. Thinking thus, and not having obtained the jewel,
Shree Krishnù Chund went, accompanied by them all, to that

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

deep, dark and terrible cave. At the entrance, he saw a lion lying dead,
but did not find the jewel there. On beholding this strange sight, they
all said to Shree Krishnù Jee, "O great king! whence has such a powerful
animal come into this forest, as to be able to kill a lion, and carry
off the jewel into the cave? Adopt measures immediately against him. You
have made all necessary search, and have obliterated all the suspicions,
that were raised against you, the disgrace is now upon the lion's head."
Shree Krishnù Jee said, Come let us go into the cave, and see who has
killed the lion, and taken away the jewel." They all replied, "O great
king! we are terrified at beholding the mouth of the cave; how shall we
be able to enter it? Moreover, we beseech you also, not to go into this
frightful cavern, let us return home; we will all say in the city, that
a lion killed Pursen, and carried off the jewel; and that some animal
killed the lion, and went into a deep and very terrible cave with the
jewel. We all saw this with our own eyes." Shree Krishnù Chund replied,
"My mind is intent upon the jewel, and I will go into the cave alone; in
ten days, I will return, stay here that time; and if I delay beyond that
time, return home, and give information of the matter." O great king!
having thus spoken, Huri entered that dark, frightful cave, and pursuing
his journey arrived at the place, where Jamwunt was sleeping, and his
wife rocking her daughter in a cradle of chalk. On beholding Krishnù,
she called out through fear, and Jamwunt awoke, and making a rush,
grappled Krishnù, and they both began to wrestle. When neither his
stratagems nor strength succeeded against Huri, he began to reflect and
say, "Luchmun Ram is my equal in strength, who else in the world is so
powerful as to be able to fight with me?" O great king! Jamwunt having
thus reflected, and meditating upon Krishnù, shrunk back with joined
hands, and said, "O Rugoonath! "appear to me, I know you to be
acquainted with the secrets

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

of the heart, and recognize you by beholding your exploits. You have
done well in descending upon the earth; remove the burthens of the
world. I have dwelt here since the Treta age. Narud has told me your
history; that Krishnù would come here for the jewel, and then he will
appear to you."

Having narrated thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--Raja! When Jamwunt, having recognised Krishnù, spoke
thus, Shree Moorari, the friend of his worshippers, beholding the
attachment of Jamwunt, was delighted; and assuming the appearance of
Ram, appeared to him with a bow and arrows, and Jamwunt, having
prostrated himself so as to touch the ground with the eight principal
parts of his body, stood up; and joining his hands said, with the
greatest humility, "O sea of compassion and brother of the "poor! with
your permission, I will explain my wishes." Krishnù granted permission.
Then Jamwunt said, "O purifier of the guilty and lord of the poor! it is
the wish of my mind to give you this damsel, Jamwutee, in marriage, and
obtain celebrity and greatness in the world by so doing." Bhugwan
replied, "If such is your desire, it is acceptable to me." When Krishnù
had thus spoken, Jamwunt took sandal, unbroken rice, flowers, perfumes,
lamps and consecrated food, and worshipped him; and afterwards married
his daughter to him in the manner, and with the ceremonies prescribed by
the Vedas, giving her the jewel as a part of her dowry.

Having related thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo, the sage,
said,--Raja! Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, taking with him
Jamwutee and the jewel, came forth from the cave. And now be pleased to
listen to what befel the descendants of Judoo, and companions of Pursen
and Shree Krishnù, who were standing at the mouth of the cave. When
twenty-eight days had elapsed and Huri did not return, they went thence,
devoid of all hope; and came to Dwarka, troubled with all kinds of
perplexing thoughts, and shedding tears. The

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

descendants of Judoo were very much alarmed at the intelligence they
brought; and calling on the name of Shree Krishnù, and suffering great
[affliction](errata.htm#13), they began to weep and lament; and there
was mourning in all the female apartments. At length, all the women
being much agitated, emaciated and in low spirits, went forth from the
palace, and weeping violently came to a temple of Devee, distant about a
toss outside the city. Having worshipped and propitiated Devee, joining
their hands and bowing their heads, they began to say, "O Devee! gods,
men and sages, all meditate upon thee, and receive from thee whatever
boon they ask, tell us, when will Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy,
come?"

O great king! all the women sat down at the entrance of the temple, and
continued imploring Devee; Oogursen, Basoodeo, Buldeo and the other
descendants of Judoo were sitting in a state of great anxiety, when
Shree Krishnù, the immortal, the dweller in Dwarka, smiling and bringing
Jamwutee with him, came and stood in the royal court; all were delighted
at beholding the moon-like face of Krishnù. And on hearing the good news
of his arrival, all the women having worshipped Devee, returned home;
and began to engage in festive rejoicings.

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! Shree
Krishnù Jee, sitting in the court, sent for Suttrajeet, and, having
given him the jewel, said, "I did not take away this jewel, and you
suspected me falsely. Jamwunt took away this jewel, and has given it to
me, together with his daughter." Taking the jewel, Suttrajeet went away,
bowing his head, and thoughtful:--"I have committed a great crime
against Huri, and ignorantly abused his family; I have cast a slur and
suspicion on the lord of the Judoos, and have shown great enmity to him
for the sake of the jewel. I must now endeavour to atone for my fault,
and give the jewel, Sutbhama, to Krishnù." With these thoughts in his
mind, Suttrajeet went home with the jewel,

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

depressed in spirits, and explained all his anxieties to his wife. His
wife said, "O husband! this is a good thought of yours. Give Sutbhama to
Shree Krishnù, and obtain celebrity in the world."

On hearing these words, Suttrajeet sent for a brahmin; and having fixed
upon a favourable rising of a sign of the zodiack, and a division of
time equal to forty-eight minutes, and placing on a dish a coloured
mixture for the forehead, unbroken rice, a rupee and a cocoanut, sent
the nuptial gifts to Shree Krishnù Chund by the hands of the family
priest. Shree Krishnù Jee came to the marriage with great pomp and
splendour, wearing a high crowned hat. Then Suttrajeet, having observed
all the usual forms and ceremonies, gave his daughter in marriage
according to the injunctions of the Vedas, and having bestowed great
wealth upon her, added the jewel also to her dowry. On beholding the
jewel, Shree Krishnù Jee drew it forth, and said, "This jewel is of no
use to me, because you have obtained it for having performed a penance
in honour of the sun. Keep this in your own house, as my family do not
accept the things bestowed by other gods, with exception of Bhugwan."

O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund had thus spoken, Suttrajeet took
the jewel, and was ashamed, and Shree Krishnù Jee returned home in
musical procession with Sutbhama, and lived happily with her in the
royal palace. The Raja Pureechit interrupted Shree Shookdeo Jee in this
part of the story, and enquired, "O abode of compassion! kindly explain,
why the suspicion and calumny of the theft were fastened upon Shree
Krishnù Jee?" Shookdeo Jee replied, Raja! Mohun had seen the moon, when
it was four days old in the month of Bhadon; and hear me, whoever,
having heard this history, shall see the moon when four days old in the
month of Bhadon, shall escape unblemished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVIII](psa59)
