[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa56)  [Next](psa58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### CHAPTER LVI.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said, O great king! one day Shree Muhadeo Jee was
sitting in his house in a state of religious meditation, when Ramdeo
came suddenly, and annoyed him; and his thoughts wandered from Huri;
and, being without knowledge, he began to indulge in amorous dalliance
with Parbutee Jee. When, after having sported some time, his intellect
returned to Shivù, he was filled with anger, and burnt Ramdeo to ashes.
When Shivù had burnt the powerful Ramdeo, Ruti lost all firmness.
Without her husband, she was in a state of great agitation; and became
weak and restless. The wife of Ramdeo wandered about, rolling on the
ground: and calling on her husband, embraced the ground. Observing that
she was much distressed at the loss of her husband, Parbutee thus
addressed her, "O Ruti! be not sad, but listen while I mention how your
husband will be restored again to you. He will first be born in the
house of Shree Krishnù Chund, and his name will be Purdiyomun.
Afterwards, a demon, named Sunbur, will carry him off, and set him
adrift in the sea; having after this come into the belly of a fish, he
will appear in the food of Sunbur: go, and take up your abode there, and
when your husband arrives, take him and bring him up; eventually he
shall slay Sunbur, and, having taken you to Dwarka, shall live there
happily with you."

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O great king! the
wife of Shivù thus advised Ruti, who, having recovered her spirits, came
to the house of Sunbur, and took up her abode in his cook-room, and
night and day, was in anxious expectation of the arrival of her husband.

Having narrated thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee
said,--Raja! Ruti, in expectation of meeting with her husband, began
thus to take up her abode in the kitchen of Sunbur; and Rookmunee became
pregnant; and after the full period of ten months, was delivered of a
son. Having obtained intelligence of this event, the astrologers came;
and having determined upon. the proper moment, said to Basoodeo Jee, "O
great king! on beholding the favourable planet of this child, we are of
opinion, that he will be equal to Shree Krishnù Chund Jee in beauty,
qualities of mind and strength: but during his childhood, he will dwell
in water; and hereafter, having slain his enemy, will return."

Having thus spoken, the astrologers named him Purdiyomun, and receiving
presents took leave; and in the house of Basoodeo, the usual forms and
ceremonies were observed, and there were festive rejoicings. Narud Jee,
the sage, after this went to Sunbur, and, having entered into an
explanation with him, said, "Why are you asleep at this time; are you
without all thought?" He enquired the reason of the question, and Narud
replied, "Thy enemy, named Purdiyomun, one of the descents upon earth of
Ramdeo, has been born in the house of Shree Krishnù Chund Jee."

Raja! Narud Jee having thus informed and put Sun bur on his guard,
departed, and Sunbur having reflected, and thought over the subject in
his mind, determined upon this plan,--"In the form of air I will go, and
will bring him away with me thence, and will launch him into the sea, in
order that the troubles of my mind may be quieted; and that I may live,
free from alarm." Having formed this resolution, Sunbur went thence in
an invisible shape, and arrived at the abode of Shree Krishnù Chund,
where Rookmunee Jee was

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

nursing and suckling the infant in her chamber; and having silently made
all his secret arrangements, stood there. When Rookmunee's hand was
withdrawn from the child, the demon spread his delusive power, and
carried off the infant, so as that not one of all the women sitting
there knew or saw whether any one had come, and how the child had been
carried off. Rookmunee was very much frightened, when she did not see
her child, and began to weep. On hearing her lamentations, all the
descendants of Judoo, male and female, gathered together, and
discoursing variously amongst themselves, were in a state of great
anxiety. In the meanwhile Narud Jee came and explained to them, "Be not
apprehensive on account of the disappearance of the child; there is not
the slightest cause for fear. The child will go to some other place, but
death will not affect it; and when his childhood is passed, he will
return to you with a very beautiful wife."

O great king! when Narud, the sage, had thus explained the course of
events, the descendants of Judoo reflected on what he had said; and on
his taking leave, became satisfied, and tranquil in mind. Be pleased now
to listen to the progress of the history, how Sunbur, having carried off
Purdiyomun, cast him into the sea. A fish swallowed him, and was
swallowed by another large fish. A fisherman came and throwing a net
into the sea, caught the fish. On drawing the net, and seeing the fish,
the fisherman was much pleased, and brought it home and subsequently
made a present of it to Raja Sunbur, who sent it to his kitchen. When
the cook cut open the fish another fish came forth; and on ripping open
its belly, a very beautiful child of a black colour made its appearance.
The cook was greatly astonished, and took away the child, and gave it to
Ruti, who was highly delighted at receiving it. When Sunbur heard of it,
he sent for Ruti, and said to her, "Bring up this child with the
greatest care."

On hearing these words, Ruti brought the child to her own house. Narud
Jee then came and said to Ruti, "Bring up this

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

child with the greatest care, as it is your husband, who has appeared in
the form of Purdiyomun. He will destroy Sunbur, and take you hence,
passing his childhood here." Having divulged thus much of the future,
Narud, the sage, departed; and Ruti began to bring up the infant with
the greatest care and affection. As the child grew up, Ruti became
desirous of meeting with her husband. Sometimes, whilst looking at him,
she clasped him with affection to her bosom; and sometimes kissing his
eyes, mouth and cheeks, she smilingly clung to his neck, and thus said,
"Krishnù has contrived this lucky circumstance, and I have found my
husband in a fish;" and O great king! she brought milk for him, and gave
it to him in a fond, affectionate manner; and dandled him in her arms,
singing his praises, and lovingly calling him "husband." When Purdiyomun
was five years old, Ruti dressed him in all kinds of dresses and
ornaments to satisfy the longings of her mind, and gratify her eyes.
When the child laid hold of the hem of her garment, and began to call
her "mother," she replied laughingly, "O husband! what are you saying? I
am your wife, think and reflect upon this. Parbutee Jee told me to dwell
in the house of Sunbur; and that my husband should be born in the house
of Shree Krishnù Chund Jee, and should come to me in the belly of a
fish. And Narud Jee told me not to be sad, and that I should recover my
husband. From that time I have been in expectation of meeting with you,
and have abode here, my hopes have been realized by your coming."

Having thus spoken, Ruti instructed her husband in the science of
archery. When he had acquired a perfect knowledge, she one day said to
him, "Husband! we ought not to stay here any longer, because your
mother, Shree Rookmunee Jee, is as uneasy without you as a cow without
its calf, you ought, therefore, to slay the demon Sunbur; and, taking me
with you, return to Dwarka to your parents, and make them happy; for
they have a most ardent desire to see you."

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

Having narrated these circumstances, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja,--O great king! listening in this manner to the discourses of Ruti,
when Purdiyomun had grown up, he went one day playing to the Raja
Sunbur. On beholding him, and regarding him as his own son he said,
fondling him, "I have brought this child up as my own son." On hearing
these words, Purdiyomun Jee replied with very great anger, "I, though a
child, am your enemy; fight with me now, and see my strength." Having
thus spoken, he came forward, striking his arms in preparation for the
encounter; upon this Sunbur laughed, and began to say, "Brother! whence
has this other Purdiyomun come here on my account? What, have I fed with
milk, and nourished a snake, that he should thus speak to me?" After
this, he again said, "Son! why do you talk thus? Has the messenger of
death come to take you away."

O great king, on hearing these words from Sunbur, he replied,
"Purdiyomun is my name: fight with me to-day. You it was, who set me
adrift in the sea; but I have now returned to take my revenge. You have
brought up the instrument of your death in your own house; and I am
neither your son, nor are you my father."

On hearing this, Sunbur seized his weapons, the passions of his mind
being greatly inflamed with rage, like a person, who has trodden on a
snake's tail in the dark. Sunbur sent for all his army, and taking
Purdiyomun outside, he, in great fury, raised a club, and said in a
voice of thunder, "Let us see, who will now save you from death." When
he rushed towards him, and brandished the club, Purdiyomun Jee easily
evaded and parried his attacks. Being furious with rage he then
discharged arrows of fire, which he quenched with arrows of water.
Sunbur in great wrath then expended all the weapons he had and
Purdiyomun warded them off. When he had not a single weapon left, he
rushed forward furiously and grappled with Purdiyomun Jee, and they both
began to wrestle. After some

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

time, Purdiyomun flew off with him to the sky, and there cut off his
head with a sword; and on his return, slew the army of demons. Sunbur
being slain, Ruti was made happy. And at that time, a chariot descended
from the sky, on which Ruti and her husband ascended, and went to Dwarka
with the same celerity, as a beautiful cloud with lightning flies; and
on arriving there, they observed houses of gold, glittering like lofty
hills. On descending from the chariot, they both retired at once to the
female apartments. All the women were startled at seeing them; and were
ashamed, thinking that Shree Krishnù had brought a beautiful woman with
him. But no one knew, that it was Purdiyomun; all of them called him
Krishnù. When Purdiyomun asked where his father and mother were,
Rookmunee Jee began to say to her companions, "Friends! who is this in
the likeness of Huri?" They replied, "We think, that this must be a son
of Shree Krishnù's."

On hearing these words, a stream of milk came forth from the breast of
Rookmunee Jee, and her left arm began to shake; and her mind was in a
state of fear and agitation for the meeting; but without her husband's
permission, she could not meet him. At that time, Narud Jee came there,
and related all the preceding history, and tranquillized the minds of
them all; then Rookmunee Jee ran forward, and kissing her son's head,
clasped him to her bosom; and having his marriage celebrated with all
due forms and ceremonies, received her son and daughter-in-law into her
house. At that time, all the descendants of Judoo, men and women, came
and joined in festive rejoicings, and were highly delighted. Songs of
congratulation resounded in every house, and happiness was diffused
throughout the city of Dwarka.

Having recited thus much of the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! Purdiyomun having thus been born,
having spent his childhood in another place, killed his enemy, and came
with Ruti to the city of Dwarka, there was joy and festivity in every
house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII](psa58)
