[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa50)  [Next](psa52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

### CHAPTER L.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--O lord of the earth! when Shree
[Krishnù](errata.htm#6) Jee heard these words of Akroor, he sent him off
to bring intelligence of Pandoo. After travelling from Muttra some days
in his ruth, he reached Hustinapoor; and, on arrival there, went to the
court of the Raja Doorjodhun, who was sitting on his throne, and, having
made a salutation, stood before him. On seeing him, Doorjodhun arose
with all his court, and embraced him; and seating him with great dignity
and respect near him, made various enquiries, saying, "Happy are Soorsen
and Basoodeo! happy Krishnù and Buldeo! Oogursen has been made a Raja by
them, and on their account does not think of any one; since his son's
death he has reigned and is independent of every one."

When Doorjodhun had thus spoken, Akroor was silent, and began to
reflect, "That this was a court of wicked men, where it was not right
for him to remain: because if he staid there, they would make many more
such speeches, to which he could not with propriety listen; and,
therefore, he ought not to remain there."

With these thoughts in his mind, Akroor Jee arose, and went thence to
the house of Pandoo, accompanied by Bidoor.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On arrival there
he beheld Koontee in great affliction at the loss of her husband, and
shedding tears. He went and sat by her side, and said to her, "Mother!
no one has power over Bruhmù; and no one is immortal, and lives for
ever. Whilst in the body, the soul suffers pain and pleasure; for which
reason it is not becoming in man to grieve and be anxious, because
nothing is gained by indulging in grief; the mind only is afflicted by
it."

When, O great king! Akroor Jee had thus reasoned with Koontee, she
reflected upon what he had said, and remained silent; and then enquired
from Akroor, "Whether her mother, father, her brother, Basoodeo, and his
relations were all well; and whether Shree Krishnù and Bulram ever
thought of their five brothers, Bheem, Joodisthur, Urjoon, Nukool and
Suhdeo. They are here fallen into a sea of trouble; and when will they
come to their assistance and rescue? We cannot endure the tyranny of the
blind Dritrasht; because he acts by the advice of Doorjodhun, and is day
and night planning to destroy the five brothers. He has frequently mixed
poison for them, which my Bheemsen once drank." Koontee afterwards
added, "O Akroor Jee! since all the members of the family of Kooroo are
such great enemies, to whom are my children to look with affection, and
how shall they grow up, and escape death? How shall I explain to you the
great afflictions I endure? And as a doe, separated from the herd, is
greatly alarmed, in like manner I am constantly disquieted and sad. They
are my protectors, who have destroyed Kuns and all evil spirits. Go and
tell them of the griefs of their brothers, Judisthur, Urjoon and Bheem."

Akroor's eyes filled with tears at hearing these words of Koontee,
spoken with great humility; and he reasoned with her and said, "Mother!
banish all anxiety, these five sons of yours will be very powerful and
celebrated. They will utterly destroy their enemies, and all wicked
persons as Shree Gobind is their ally." Again Akroor Jee said, "Shree

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Krishnù and Bulram
sent me here with this message, 'Tell our aunt not to vex or fret
herself, as we will soon come to her.'"

O great king! having thus delivered Shree Krishnù's message, Akroor Jee
entered into explanations with Koontee, and restored her to confidence
and composure; and, taking leave went to Dritrasht, accompanied by
Bidoor, and said to him, "Why do you, who are an old man, exercise such
tyranny; and being under the influence of your son, make your nephews
(brothers' children) unhappy, after having forcibly seized upon the
government of your brother? According to what code are you guilty of
such injustice. You have lost your sight, but can you not see with the
eyes of your mind, your family is being destroyed by your crimes. Why
did you, when you were enjoying great ease and happiness, seize upon the
government of your brother, and bring distress upon Bheem and
Joodisthur?"

On hearing these words, Dritrasht laid hold of Akroor's hand, said,
"What can I do, no one will obey my orders? All follow their own
counsel, and I am looked upon as a fool by them. For this reason I never
take part in their affairs; but remain apart, and worship my lord in
silence."

When Dritrasht had thus spoken, Akroor Jee made a salutation, and rising
went thence in his ruth; and departing from Hustinapoor came to the city
of Muttra. He mentioned to Oogursen and Basoodeo the affairs of the
Panduries, the sons of Koontee are greatly afflicted, and their bodies
much emaciated with grief. Having told Oogursen and Basoodeo Jee all the
news of Hustinapoor, Akroor went to Shree Krishnù and Bulram; and,
making a salutation, said with joined hands, "O great king! I have been
to Hustinapoor, and seen that your aunt and five brothers suffer great
calamities at the hands of the Kooruvus. What more need I say, you know
the secrets of the heart, and the state of affairs there; and the ruin
which has befallen your family, are not hidden from you."

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

Having thus spoken, and delivered Koontee's message, Akroor Jee took
leave, and returned home. And having heard all the intelligence which
Akroor brought from Hustinapoor, Shree Krishnù and Buldeo, the gods of
all the gods, sat down after the fashion of men, and engaged in thought,
revolved in their minds, how they might remove the burthens of the
world.

Shree Shookdeo, the sage, having recited thus much of the history to the
Raja Pureechit, said,--O lord of the earth! I have related the first
half of history, comprising what took place in the forest of Bruj and at
Muttra, I will now relate the last half, if I obtain the power of the
lord of Dwarka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI](psa52)
