[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa58)  [Next](psa60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

### CHAPTER LVIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! I will now describe how
Sutdhunwa killed Suttrajeet, and, taking away the jewel, and giving it
to Akroor, fled from Dwarka, listen with attention. The son of the blind
Dritrasht (Doorjodhun) invited the Pandoos, and gave them beds in his
house; at midnight, he surrounded the house with flames.

On hearing of this circumstance, the two brothers were greatly grieved
and perplexed; and ordered the charioteer, Daruk, to bring their
chariot, mounting which, they went to Hustinapoor, and descending
entered the court of the Roroos, and there beheld them all sitting,
emaciated and low-spirited; Doorjodhun was thoughtful; Bheekmuk was
shedding tears; Dritrasht was in great affliction, and tears were even
falling from the eyes of Dronacharuj; Bidooruth Jee was greatly
dispirited, and Gundharee was sitting near him. And the other wives of
the Roroos, thinking of the Pandoos, continued to weep and the whole
court was sad.

O great king! seeing this state of affairs, Shree Krishnù and Bulram Jee
went and sat near them, and made enquiries regarding the Pandoos: but
all remained silent, and would not divulge any thing.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

Having narrated thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--O great king! Shree Krishnù and Bulram Jee, having
heard of the burning of the Pandoos went to Hustinapoor; and there was
in Dwarka a member of the family of Judoo, named Sutdhunwa, to whom
Sutbhama had been first betrothed. Akroor and Krutbruma went together to
him and both said to him, "Shree Krishnù and Bulram have gone to
Hustinapoor; now is your opportunity, take your revenge upon Suttrajeet;
because he has acted very wrongly towards you, in having given a girl,
who was betrothed to you, to Shree Krishnù; and, in having abused you;
there is no one here now to assist him."

On hearing these words, Sutdhunwa rose in great wrath; and, having gone
in the night to the house of Suttrajeet, called out; and at length,
having by stratagem and force, put him to death, carried away the jewel.
After this Sutdhunwa, sitting alone in his house, began to reflect, and
to say to himself with regret, "By listening to Akroor's counsel, I have
made an enemy of Krishnù; Krutbruma and Akroor both came here, and
advised me. If a good man speaks deceitfully, what control can any one
have over him?"

O great king! whilst Sutdhunwa, thus regretting, repeatedly exclaimed,
"No one has power over the future; the events of fate are not known by
any one;" the wife of Suttrajeet, on beholding her husband lying dead,
embraced his corpse, and wept and poured forth lamentations.

On hearing her cries, all her relations, male and female, speaking in a
very confused, disjointed manner, began to shed tears and strike their
bodies; and there was mourning in the whole house. Having heard of the
death of her father Sutbhama came to where her father was lying; and
having offered them all advice and consolation, and washed her father's
corpse in oil, sent for her chariot, and ascending it, went off to Shree
Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, and arrived after a

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

journey of a day and night. Huri rose on seeing her, and enquired,
whether all was well at home. Sutbhama replied, joining her hands, "How
can things go on well without you, O lord of the Judoos! Sutdhunwa has
brought calamity on me, by killing my father, and carrying off the
jewel; your father-in-law's corpse is preserved in oil. Remove all my
griefs."

Having thus spoken, Sutbhama Jee stood before Shree Krishnù and Buldeo
Jee, and exclaiming "Alas, father! alas, father!" began to weep, and
groan bitterly. On hearing her cries, Shree Krishnù and Bulram were at
first very sad; and began, after the manner of the world, to shed tears.
Afterwards, having consoled and comforted Sutbhama, they brought her
thence with them to Dwarka.

Shree Shookdeo Jee said, O great king! on coming to Dwarka, Shree
Krishnù Chund, perceiving that Sutbhama was very much grieved, made her
a promise, and said, "O beautiful Sutbhama! be of good cheer, and banish
all anxiety, what was to happen, has happened; but I will now destroy
Sutdhunwa, and revenge your father's death, and afterwards perform other
acts."

On the arrival of Shree Krishnù, Sutdhunwa was greatly terrified; and,
abandoning his home, said to himself, "At the suggestion of others, I
have made Shree Krishnù Jee my enemy, whose protection shall I now
seek?" He went to Krutbruma; and, joining his hands, said with many
supplications, "O great king! I have acted by your advice, and Shree
Krishnù and Bulram are now enraged against me, I have, therefore, fled
and come to seek an asylum with you, appoint me some place to reside
in." Krutbruma replied, "I can do nothing for you; whoever is at enmity
with Shree Krishnù Chund, is cut off from the rest of mankind. Did you
not know, that Krishnù is very powerful; and that you would be a loser
by being at enmity with him? What does it signify, who advised you; why
did you not act, with

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

reference to your own strength? It is customary in the world to contract
enmities, marriages and friendships with equals. Banish all hope of my
being able to do any thing for you, as I am a servant of Shree Krishnù
Chund, the root of joy, it does not become me to show enmity to him; go
somewhere else for protection."

Sudhunwa, O great king! was very sad at these words, and went thence to
Akroor, joining his hands bowing his head, supplicating, and expressing
great sorrow and regret, he began to say, "Lord! you are the greatest
chief among the Judoos; all of them respect and bow their heads to you;
you are holy, merciful and resolute; and submitting to afflictions
yourself, remove the griefs of others. The shame of having advised me
rests with you; grant me your protection, I have done this deed at your
suggestion, save me now from the hands of Shree Krishnù."

Akroor Jee replied, "You are a great fool, in talking thus to me; do you
not know that Shree Krishnù Chund is the creator of all men and the
dispeller of griefs? How can anyone remain in the world, who is at
enmity with him? What evil can befal the adviser? The whole affair is
now upon your head. There is a saying, 'That it is the custom of gods,
men and sages to form friendships for the furtherance of their own
selfish objects.' And there are many kinds of men in the world, who for
the sake of their own interests, advise after various fashions; it is,
therefore, advisable for a man not to act according to the opinions of
others; but in every affair of life to consider first, what may benefit,
and what may do him harm, and then enter upon it. You have
premeditatedly done this act; and now there is not any refuge for you in
the world. Whoever has shown enmity to Krishnù cannot live; to whatever
quarter he may fly, he will be destroyed, I do not wish to die, that I
should render you assistance. Life is dear to all men."

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

O great king! when Akroor Jee had made this unpalatable speech to
Sutdhunwa, he, being devoid of all hope, and giving up all thoughts of
life, left the jewel with Akroor; and mounting a chariot, fled from the
city. Spree Krishnù and Bulram pursued him in a chariot; and overtook
him after a pursuit of four hundred coss. On hearing the sound, of their
chariot Sutdhunwa was in great alarm; and descending from his chariot,
entered the city of Mithila. On seeing him, Krishnù was enraged, and
ordered the quoit, Soodursun, to cut off his head, which he did
forthwith: and Shree Krishnù Chund went up to him and searched for the
jewel; but without success. He then said to Buldeo Jee, "Brother! I have
killed Sutdhunwa, and not obtained the jewel." Bulram replied, "Brother!
some great man must have obtained possession of it, who has not brought
it and shown it to us. That jewel cannot possibly be concealed; wait a
little, and it will turn up somewhere." Buldeo Jee proceeded to say,
"Brother! set out now for Dwarka, and I will go and search for the
jewel; which I will bring with me, wherever I may find it."

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy,
having killed Sutdhunwa, started for Dwarka; and Bulram, the abode of
happiness, set out to search for the jewel. After having searched in
various countries, cities and villages, Buldeo Jee went to the city of
Ajoodiya. On receiving intelligence of his arrival, Doorjodhun, the Raja
of Ajoodiya rose up, and having advanced with presents to meet him,
escorted Bulram with music playing, and in silken clothes to his own
palace. Having seated him on a throne, and gone through various forms of
adoration, he entertained him: and standing in his presence, said, with
joined hands and bended head and great humility of manner, "O sea of
compassion! please inform me, how you came here?"

O great king! Buldeo Jee, observing his affection, was delighted, and
explained all the particulars of his journey.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After hearing the
account, Raja Doorjodhun said, "Lord! no one will be able to keep that
jewel concealed: it will be manifested of itself at some time or other."
He again said, with joined hands, "O kind to the poor! great is my good
fortune in having obtained a sight of you at my own home, and having
thereby obliterated the sins of every preceding birth. Do me the
kindness now to gratify your servant's desire; and, remaining here some
days, make me your pupil, and obtain celebrity in the world by
instructing me in the art of fighting with clubs."

O great king! having heard this speech, Bulram Jee made Doorjodhun his
pupil; and, staying a few days, instructed him in the science of
fighting with the club; but although he made search throughout the city,
he did not find the jewel. Some days after the arrival of Shree Krishnù
Chund at Dwarka, Bulram arrived also; when having taken all the Judoos
with him, and brought forth Suttrajeet's corpse from the oil, Shree
Krishnù Chund Jee made a purification of fire and lighted the funeral
pile with his own hands. When Shree Krishnù Jee had performed the
funeral obsequies, Akroor and Krutbruma, consulting with each other,
went to Shree Krishnù; and, having taken him aside and shown him the
jewel, said, "O great king! the Judoos have become impious, and
fascinated by riches, they have become blinded by wealth, and given up
all thought and meditation and memory of you. If they were now to suffer
some affliction, they would return to your service. We will, therefore,
take away the jewel and fly from the city; and when we have revived in
them the adoration and memory of you, we will return to Dwarka." Akroor
and Krutbruma, with all their relations, fled from Dwarka at midnight,
with the knowledge of Shree Krishnù, and no one knew in what direction
they had gone. Early in the morning, there was a report throughout the
city, that they had gone off somewhere during the night; but no one knew
where and what was the cause of their going.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! this
was a constant and general topic of conversation in the city; whilst on
the other hand, Akroor Jee first went to Prag, and, having caused
himself to be shaved, bathed at the confluence of the three sacred
rivers, and presented many gifts; and having performed many acts of
charity, built a ghaut in honour of Huri, and went to Gyah; there,
sitting on the bank of the river Phulgoo, they performed funeral
obsequies in the manner prescribed by the Shastrùs; and, having feasted
the brahmins of Gyah, gave many gifts. Having afterwards visited a
temple of Vishnù, they went thence to the city of Kasi. Hearing of their
arrival, all the neighbouring Rajas came with presents to meet them; and
they remained there offering sacrifices and presents, and performing
acts of penance and fasting.

Some days having elapsed, Shree Moorari, the friend of his worshippers,
determined to send for Akroor Jee; and coming to Bulram, said, "Brother!
bring some calamity on the inhabitants of the city, and send for
Akroor." Buldeo replied, "O great king! do whatever is most agreeable to
yourself, and confer happiness on virtuous men." When Bulram had thus
spoken, Shree Krishnù Chund caused fevers and diseases of all kinds to
rage in the city of Dwarka.

During four months, there was no rain; in consequence of which, all the
rivers, nullahs and tanks of the city were dried up: grass and grain
were not produced; birds, fishes, beasts and all animals with life and
cattle were greatly distressed, and died of drought. The inhabitants of
the city, through hunger, began to raise cries to heaven for
deliverance. At length, all the male and female population were in a
state of the greatest consternation; and came to Shree Krishnù Chund,
the extirpater of grief; and imploring him earnestly and beseeching him
with the utmost humility, began to say, with joined hands, and bowing
their heads, "We have come to you to seek an asylum; how shall we be
able to endure our great calamities?

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We are sorely
afflicted from the want of rain; why has Bruhmù brought this disaster
upon us?" They proceeded to say, "O compassionate lord of Dwarka! you
are our creator and dispeller of our griefs; to whom else shall we go
and address our petitions? Whence has this misery fallen upon us, whilst
we were living quietly at our homes, and why has it happened, kindly
explain to us?"

Shree Shookdeo, the sage said,--O great king! on hearing these words,
Shree Krishnù Chund replied, "Famine, misery and distress make their
entrance into every city, which holy men have abandoned. Since Akroor
Jee has departed hence, you have endured this state of calamity. Where
holy men, lovers of truth and servants of Huri dwell, there evil and
want, and misfortune cannot exist. Indrù has a friendship for the
worshippers of Huri; and, therefore, rain falls plentifully in the
cities where they dwell."

All the Judoos exclaimed, "O great king! you have spoken truly: this
thought had occurred to us also, because Akroor's father's name is
Soophulluk, and he too is a very holy, truth-loving and just man. Where
he dwells, there distress, poverty and famine have no existence; but
rain falls frequently, in consequence of which, the seasons are
prosperous and abundant. At one time, there was a terrible famine in the
city of Kasi, when the Raja thereof sent for Soophulluk. O great king!
on the arrival of Soophulluk, rain fell copiously, and as much as was
desired; and there was a plenteous season, and an end to all their
misery. After this, the Raja of Kasi gave his daughter in marriage to
Soophulluk, who dwelt there happily. This Raja's daughter's name was
Gadinka, whose son Akroor is." They went on to say, "O great king! we
were aware of this before, and will now do whatever you order."

Shree Krishnù Chund replied, "Behave with the greatest respect to Akroor
Jee, and bring him back here, wherever you may find him."

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

On receiving this injunction, the Judoos went forth in a body to search
for Akroor; and pursuing their search, arrived at the city of Baransee,
(Benares). Having had a meeting with Akroor Jee, and presented gifts,
they stood before him with joined hands, and bending their heads forward
said, "Return home, O lord! Bulram and Krishnù have sent for you: the
inhabitants of the city have been troubled during your absence. Where
you are, there happiness dwells, and where you are not, calamity and
distress take up their abode. A grievous famine has fallen upon the
city, although Shree Gopal (Krishnù) dwelt there. The husband of Luchmee
(Vishnù) is subservient to holy men; from them, all mortals derive
wealth and happiness."

O great king! on hearing these words, Akroor Jee rose up to depart in
great agitation; and arrived, after some days, at Dwarka, accompanied by
his relations, Krutbruma, and the members of the family of Judoo, with
music playing during the journey.

Having received news of his arrival, and going out to meet him, Shree
Krishnù and Bulram escorted him to the city with the greatest dignity
and honour. O Raja! rain fell on the entrance of Akroor Jee into the
city, and there was abundance. All the distress and want that had been
raging, disappeared. Akroor was greatly exalted; and the inhabitants of
Dwarka began to rejoice and indulge in festivities.

On a subsequent day, Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, sent for
Akroor Jee, and taking him aside said, "What have you done with
Suttrajeet's jewel?" He replied, "I still have it." Krishnù said,
"Restore it to its owner; and if he should not be alive, make it over to
his son. If there should not be a son, give it to his wife: and if there
should not be a wife, give it to his brother: and if there should not be
a brother, give it to a relation: in default of relations, give it to
his spiritual preceptor's son: and if there should not be a son of the
spiritual preceptor, give it to a brahmin. But do not

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

receive yourself any man's wealth. This is equity; wherefore, it is
right that you give the jewel to Suttrajeet's grandson, and obtain a
great name in the world by doing so." O great king! when Shree Krishnù
Chund had thus spoken, Akroor Jee took the jewel, and placing it before
Krishnù, joining his hands said in a very supplicating manner, "O lord
of the poor! be pleased to accept this jewel yourself, and forgive my
fault; because I have expended in the course of my pilgrimage the gold
which the jewel yielded." Krishnù assented, and went and presented the
jewel to Sutbhama, and removed all the anxieties of her mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIX](psa60)
