[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa61)  [Next](psa63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

### CHAPTER LXI.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! on one occasion, a jewelled
bedstead of pure gold with curtains was laid out in a golden palace,
studded with gems. On the bedstead a bedding, white as foam, and
decorated with flowers was spread. Pillows for the cheek, and the head
of the bed exhaled perfumes. Vessels filled with camphor, rosewater,
sandal and other perfumes were arranged on all sides of the bed.
Pictures of all kinds were drawn on the walls; flowers, fruits,
sweetmeats and confectionary were placed here and there in the recesses:
and every thing, that could contribute to pleasure, was provided.
Wearing a petticoat, and full loose robe of great splendour, on which
were sewn real pearls; and a shining boddice, glittering cloth for the
body, and a brilliant cloak, ornamented from head to foot; with red
horizontal lines drawn across the forehead, a ring for the nose of large
pearls, ornaments for the head, ear-rings, lines on the top of the head,
where the hair is parted, marks between the eyebrows, ornaments for the
ears, and forehead, a necklace composed of circular pieces of gold, a
string of gold beads and coral, an ornament for the breast and decked
out with numerous other jewels and ornaments,--bright as the moon,--of
the colour of chumpa, with eyes like those of a deer, a voice like the
kokila's (the Indian cuckoo) the gait of an elephant and

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

waist of a lion, Shree Rookmunee Jee was reclining; and also Shree
Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, of the colour of the clouds, a
countenance like the moon, lotus eyes, wearing a peacock crown, a
garland of various flowers reaching to the feet, dressed in yellow silk,
with a scarf of the same colour, the sea of beauty, the light of the
three worlds. They were enjoying the pleasures of mutual love, when
suddenly Shree Krishnù said to Rookmunee, "O beautiful Rookmunee! I wish
to say something to you, to which you must give me an answer; you are
possessed of great beauty, and many excellent qualities of mind, and the
daughter of Raja Bheekmuk; why did you reject Raja Sissoopal of
Chunderee who was very mighty and renowned; in whose family kingly power
has descended for seven generations, and from dread of whom I fled, and
abandoning Muttra took up my abode in the sea, and to whom your mother,
father and brother wished you to be married, and he himself came with a
marriage procession; and having refused to marry him sent for me through
a brahmin, thereby sacrificing all respect for the honour of your
family, disregarding the opinion of the world and laying aside all fear
of your parents and your brother? I am not worthy of you, nor equal to
you in accomplishments, I am not a Raja, nor have I beauty, or mental
superiority. Some beggars talked of my renown, whose praises of me you
heard, and treasured up in your mind. A Raja came to marry you,
accompanied by his army; you then sent an invitation to me. On my
arrival, there was a fierce battle: and how was my honour saved? I took
you away in sight of them all; and Bulram dispersed all their army. You
wrote to me, requesting that I would deliver you out of the hands of
Sissoopal; which wish of yours has been accomplished; and I have no
desire, believe me, O lovely Rookmunee, you have not hitherto suffered
any loss or injury; go and live with some powerful Raja, of high family,
and excellent qualities of mind, who may be worthy of you."

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

O great king! on hearing these words, Shree Rookmunee Jee was in a state
of consternation, and fell staggering and reeling upon the earth; and
struggling like a fish deprived of water, became senseless and heaved
deep, long-drawn sighs, then her curls fell in the greatest disorder
over her beautiful face, and became entangled with each other; like the
moon wandering from her path, as a snake that has imbibed the water of
immortality. On observing her condition, Shree Krishnù Chund rose up in
a state of great agitation and alarm, thinking that she was about to
die; and assuming a form with four arms, went up to her, and raising her
from the ground with two hands placed her on his bosom; and began to fan
her with the third hand, and arrange her hair with the fourth.

O great king! Nundlall (Krishnù) exerted himself greatly in consequence
of his affection. He sometimes wiped his beloved's face with a silken
cloth, and sometimes placed his soft, lotus-like hand on her breast: at
length Shree Rookmunee revived. Huri then said, "Thou hast a very deep
love for me, O beloved Rookmunee! and didst not retain a particle of
firmness in thy mind. You thought that I really meant to abandon you;
when I was only jesting and trifling with your affection. Be now of good
cheer; and, recovering your spirits and animation, open your eyes." On
seeing that Krishnù had taken her in his lap, she blushed, and was very
much ashamed. She rose and stood up in great confusion; and, joining her
hands, fell at his feet. Krishnù said, patting her on the back,
"Beautiful creature! who becamest insensible from love, what I said in
jest, you thought serious. It is not right to be angry, at what is said
in joke; rise and banish all anger and affliction."

O great king! Shree Rookmunee Jee rose on hearing these words; and,
joining her hands and bending her head, began to say to Krishnù, "You
have spoken truly in saying that you are not worthy of me, because you
are the husband of Luchmee, and the lord of Shivù and Bruhmù,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

who is equal to you in the three worlds? O lord of the world! whoever
abandons you, and goes to (worships) any other, is like a man, who
should give up singing the praises of Huri, and sing the praises of a
vulture. And, O great king! with respect to what you said regarding some
mighty and potent Raja, say where in the three worlds shall I find a
Raja more powerful and greater than you? Bruhmù, Roodrù, Indrù and all
the gods who bestow boons, are obedient to your commands. Through your
favour, they make whomsoever they please great and powerful, renowned,
celebrated and glorious, by conferring boons. And whatsoever persons
perform a very difficult penance in honour of you, for a hundred years,
attain to the dignity of Raja .And whoever forgetting and abandoning
your worship, [meditation](errata.htm#15), prayers, penance and
guidance, do wicked acts, are of themselves utterly ruined and
disgraced. O lord of compassion! it is your constant custom to descend
in various forms and frequently upon the earth for the sake of your
worshippers; and, having destroyed wicked demons, and removed the
burthens of the world, you confer happiness on your own, and grant all
their supplications. And, O lord! on whomsoever your great compassion is
shed, and he thereby obtains wealth, royal power, youth, beauty and
eminence; and subsequently being blinded by pride, forgets religion,
penance, truth, mercy, worship and adoration, you reduce him to poverty;
because the poor constantly meditate upon you, and keep you in
remembrance, for this reason the poor man is acceptable to you. He, to
whom your great mercy is shown, will always be without riches."

O great king! Rookmunee proceeded to say, "O lord of life, I will not do
as Unba, the daughter of Indrudown, Raja of Benares, did, abandoning her
husband, and going to the Raja Bheekmuk; and when he would not receive
her, she returned to her own husband, who, after this, turned her out of
doors; then having gone, and sat on the bank of the Ganges, she

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

performed a great penance in honour of Muhadeo, who came there, and
granted the boon she solicited. By means of that boon, she took her
revenge upon Raja Bheekmuk. I certainly will not imitate such conduct.
You have explained, O lord! that some beggars came, and extolled your
greatness; and that I believed what they said, and sent a brahmin to
you: the beggars who came, where Shivù, Bruhmù and Doorga. Narud, the
sage, constantly praises your excellent qualities. Knowing you to be
compassionate, I sent a brahmin; you came and brought destruction upon
wicked men. Knowing her humility, you brought me, your servant, with
you, and have raised me, lord! to greatness." Krishnù said in reply, "O
beloved! you have had experience of my mind, thoughts and nature. You
have attended upon me, and worshipped me, and known my love; for this
reason the affections of my mind are fixed upon you."

O great king! Rookmunee was gratified by this speech of Huri's, and
attended upon him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXII](psa63)
