[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa59)  [Next](psa61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

### CHAPTER LIX.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,—O great king! one day Shree Krishnù Chund, the
brother of the world, the root of joy, determined to go and see whether
the Pandoos had escaped alive from the conflagration. Huri started from
Dwarka with several of the descendants of Judoo, and went to
Hustinapoor. On hearing the news of his arrival, Joodisthur, Urjoon,
Bheem, Nukool and Suhdeo, five brothers, rose up with the greatest
delight; and, having gone outside the city, and met Krishnù with a most
cordial reception, escorted him to their house. As they were entering
the house, Koontee and Dropudee summoned seven married women: and having
filled up a square with pearls, placed a chair of gold upon it, upon
which they seated Shree Krishnù. Having caused all kinds of festive
rejoicings to be made, they performed the ceremony of "*Arta*" with
their own hands; and washing his feet, they conducted him to the
banquetting room, and feasted him with all sorts of delicacies.

O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund had finished his repast, and
began to eat betel, Koontee sat next him, and entering into conversation
enquired after her father and brother: "Are Soorsen and Basoodeo, my
brother, and my nephew, Buldeo, well? in whom my soul is bound up; who,

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

except you, can drive away affliction and grief? You afforded me
protection, when great calamity befel me. O Krishnù! you are the
dispeller of the sorrows of others: your five brothers fly to you for
refuge; as the doe dreads a herd of wolves, so do Doorjodhun's subjects
dread him."

O great king! when Koontee had thus spoken, Joodisthur joined his hands
and said, "You, O Krishnù! are chief and lord of the Judoos. Devotees
meditate constantly upon you, and not upon Shivù and Bruhmù. What
meritorious act have I performed, that you have visited me in my own
house. Gratify me by remaining four months, and return home after the
rainy season."

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,—O great king! on
hearing these words, Shree Beharee, the friend of his worshippers,
having inspired them all with hope and confidence, remained there; and
added daily to their joy and delight. One day, Shree Krishnù Chund
taking a bow and arrows in his hand, went in a chariot to hunt in the
forest, accompanied by the five brothers; and on arrival there,
dismounting from his chariot, and fastening his belt, prepared to shoot
his arrows; and, beating the jungle, began to kill lions, tigers,
rhinoceroses, wild buffaloes, and deer and antelopes of different kinds;
and brought all his game to the Raja Joodisthur, who distributed some of
it, and sent some for the supply of his own table. Whilst Shree Krishnù
Chund and Urjoon were engaged in sport, they advanced some distance
beyond the rest of the party, and stood under a tree. They then both
went to the banks of a river, and drank some water. At this time Shree
Krishnù Jee saw on the river-bank a very beautiful young virgin, with a
face like the moon, of the colour of the flower chumpa, with eyes like
those of a deer, a voice like the kokila, the gait of an elephant and a
waist like a lion's; ornamented from head to foot, having imbibed the
spirit of Kamù (Cupid,) of a most brilliant appearance, wandering about
alone. Huri was amazed and struck with astonishment at beholding her,
and

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

said, "Who is that beautiful creature, with such a charming figure,
wandering about without a companion?"

O great king! when Krishnù had thus spoken, Urjoon, who saw her also,
ran hurriedly to the spot, where the lovely girl was wandering about,
exulting on the river-bank, and began to address her, "Say, beauteous
damsel, who art thou, and whence hast thou come, and why art thou
wandering here alone? Explain this strange mystery to me." On hearing
these words, the beautiful girl explained her history, "I am a virgin
daughter of the sun, my name is Kalindee; my father appointed me an
abode in water. He came and having built for me a house in the river,
thus instructed me, 'Continue wandering, O daughter! near the river,
where you will meet with a husband. Krishnù will descend upon the earth
in the family of Judoo, and will come after you to the place of your
wandering, the first male, the immortal Huri, for whom you have been
born.' From the time my father, the sun, thus spoke to me, I have longed
for the approach of Huri."

Urjoon, O great king! was very much pleased to hear these words, and
said, "O beauteous creature! the immortal lord, the inhabitant of
Dwarka, Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, for whose sake thou art
wandering here, has arrived." When Urjoon, O great king! had thus
spoken, Shree Beharee, the friend of his worshippers, came up in his
chariot. When, on beholding Krishnù, Urjoon explained her history to
him, Shree Krishnù Chund Jee smiled, and quickly placing her upon his
chariot, returned towards the city. And Bishookurma, consulting
privately the taste and wishes of Shree Krishnù Chund, built a most
beautiful palace, whilst Krishnù was coming from the forest to the city:
and brought Kalindee there, and abode there himself. Sometime after
this, on one occasion Shree Krishnù Chund and Urjoon were sitting
together at night, when the element fire having conic, said to Huri,
joining his hands and bowing his head, "O great king!

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have wandered
about the whole world for a long time in a state of hunger, and have not
obtained any thing to eat. My only hope is in you: with your permission,
I will go and devour the forests and jungles." Krishnù granted him
permission. Fire then said, "O lord of compassion! I cannot go into the
jungle alone: if I do, Indrù will come and extinguish me." On hearing
this, Shree Krishnù Jee said to Urjoon, "Brother! go and allow Fire to
eat some food: he is dying from excessive hunger."

O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund Jee had thus spoken, Urjoon
accompanied Fire with his bow and arrows; who having reached the jungle
blazed forth, and began to burn up mango, tamarind and every kind of
tree, and the grass and bamboos crackled with a loud noise; and the
animals in the forest wandered about, losing their road. On all sides
fire raged and spread in the forest; and smoke ascended in wreaths to
the sky. On perceiving the smoke, Indrù summoned the lord of the clouds
and said, "Go and shower down rain most copiously, and put out the fire,
and save the lives of the beasts and birds, and animals of the forest."
Having received this order, the lord of the clouds, taking masses of
clouds with him, came there, and began to thunder: and as he was on the
point of pouring down rain, Urjoon discharged such arrows of wind, that
the clouds were dispersed, and blown in every direction; like flocks of
cotton, driven about by gusts of air. No one saw them come, or depart,
they vanished as they came; and fire, burning up the forest and jungle,
came to the abode of a demon, named Mye. Beholding Fire approach, full
of rage, Mye was terrified: and coming out of his house, with naked
feet, and a cloth thrown about his neck, came and stood in Fire's
presence with joined hands; and prostrating himself so as to touch the
ground with the eight principal parts of his body, said, most
beseechingly, "O lord! O lord! save me quickly from this fire, and
protect me, O deity of fire! you

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

have obtained a satiety of food, do not now meditate any crime, listen
to my supplications, and save me from Fire."

O great king! when the demon Mye had thus spoken, the deity of fire laid
hold of his fiery arrows; and even Urjoon started with amazement. At
length, they both took Mye with them to Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of
joy, and said, "O great king! this demon Mye will be of use, and will
build a place of abode for you. Take thought now of Mye; and, having
extinguished the fire, banish all his fears." Having thus spoken, Urjoon
placed his bow, Gandeeb, and arrows upon the ground; and Krishnù,
looking towards the deity of fire, made a sign by winking his eye, and
the fire was put out immediately; and the whole forest became cool.
Shree Krishnù Chund then went on with Urjoon and Mye. There Mye erected,
in a second, a most beautiful, elegant and fascinating house of gold,
studded with gems; a description of the beauty of which is impossible;
whoever came to see it, stood gazing like a picture with astonishment.
Shree Krishnù Jee remained there four months, and came thence to the
royal court of Joodisthur; and, on arrival, he solicited the Raja's
permission to go to Dwarka; when they heard this request, Raja
Joodisthur and his whole court were very sad, and there was great
anxiety amongst the women in the female apartments. At length Krishnù
having entered into suitable explanations with them all, and inspired
them with confidence, took leave of Joodisthur, accompanied by Urjoon.
Having left Hustinapoor, he arrived in a few days, after a very pleasant
trip, at Dwarka. Joy was spread through the city on the news of his
arrival; and the pangs of separation, which they had all endured, were
felt no longer. His mother and father, on seeing their son's face were
delighted; and forgot all their sorrows. Shree Krishnù Jee went, on a
subsequent day, to the Raja Oogursen, and explained the history of
Kalindee, "O great king! I have brought Kalindee, the daughter of the
sun, marry her to me in the manner prescribed by the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vedas." On hearing
this, Oogursen gave an order to one of his ministers "To go immediately
and prepare all things necessary for the marriage." On receipt of the
order, the minister immediately procured all that was required. Oogursen
and Basoodeo then sent for an astrologer, and having fixed upon a lucky
day, united Shree Krishnù Jee in marriage to Kalindee, according to the
forms and ceremonies prescribed by the Vedas. Having recited thus much
of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,—Raja! in this manner Kalindee
was married; I will now mention, how Huri brought away and married
Mittrabinda; listen with attention. Mittrabinda was the daughter of
Rajdhewee, the aunt of Krishnù and Soorsen's daughter. When she was
marriageable, she selected a husband for herself. Rajas from all
countries were collected together on the occasion, possessed of many
eminent mental qualities, very handsome, intelligent, powerful,
courageous, brave and resolute, and dressed and decked out, so as each
to rival the other. Having received intelligence of this event, Shred
Krishnù Chund Jee went, accompanied by Urjoon, and stood amongst the
rest of the party, assembled on the occasion. The girl was delighted at
seeing Krishnù; throwing a garland on his neck, she remained gazing on
his countenance.

O great king! all the Rajas were ashamed, and displeased on observing
this proceeding; and Doorjodhun went to her brother, Mittrasen, and said
"Brother! Huri is your uncle's son, with whom your sister has fallen in
love. This is contrary to the custom of the world, and the world will
laugh at such behaviour; go and advise your sister not to marry Krishnù,
otherwise the whole crowd of Rajas will laugh." Upon this Mittrasen went
and advised his sister against the marriage.

O great king! when Mittrabinda, listening to the advice of her brother,
withdrew and stood apart at some distance from Krishnù, Urjoon leaning
forward whispered in his ear, "O great king! what are you hesitating
about? the business is a failure; carry into execution immediately, and
without delay,

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

any plan you may have formed." When Urjoon had thus spoken, Shree
Krishnù Jee instantly seized Mittrabinda's hand in the midst of the
assembled party; and, carrying her off, placed her on his chariot, and
drove off in sight of them all. The Rajas seized their arms, and
mounting their horses, and circling round to the front of Krishnù, stood
in battle order. And the people in the city laughing, and clapping their
hands together, played upon musical instruments; and pouring forth
abuse, began to say, "Krishnù has come to marry his father's sister's
daughter; a notable act no doubt, which will make him very famous."

Shree Shookdeo Jee, having narrated thus much of the history, said,—O
great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund saw that he was surrounded on all
sides by the army of demons, and could not avoid fighting, he drew forth
several arrows from his quiver; and bending his bow, discharged them in
such a manner, that the whole army of demons was scattered and dispersed
in every direction, and Krishnù arrived safely at Dwarka, and free from
all alarm.

Shree Shookdeo Jee said,—O great king! in this manner Shree Krishnù Jee
took Mittrabinda to Dwarka, and married her there. Listen with
attention, and I will now mention, how he brought away Sutya. In the
Kuosul country, there was a Raja, named Nugnujjit, who had a daughter,
named Sutya. When she was of a marriageable age, the Raja procured seven
huge, terrible bulls without strings in their noses: and let them loose
in the country, making a vow, "That he would marry his daughter to any
person who should fasten strings in the noses of the seven at once."

O great king! those seven bulls ranged about the country, bellowing and
pawing the ground with their heads down and tails raised, and killed
whomsoever they met. Hearing of this circumstance, Shree Krishnù Chund
went, accompanied by Urjoon, and stood in the presence of the Raja
Nugnujjit. On seeing him, the Raja descended from his throne, and
prostrating

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

himself so as to touch the ground with the eight principal parts of his
body, seated Krishnù upon his throne; and placing sandal, unbroken rice
and flowers on his head, offering perfumes, lamps and consecrated food,
said, in a most supplicating manner, with joined hands and bended head,
"My good fortune to-day is very great, that Krishnù, the lord of Shivù
and Bruhmù, has come to my house." He went on to say, "O great king! I
have made a certain compact, which is difficult of accomplishment; but I
am now certain, that, through your favour, it will be speedily
accomplished." Krishnù said, "Tell me, what vow you have made so
difficult of fulfilment?" The Raja replied, "O lord of compassion! I
have let loose seven bulls without strings in their noses: and made this
compact, that I will marry my daughter to any person who shall put
strings in the noses of the seven at once,"

Shree Shookdeo Jee said,—O great king! Huri, having heard this, fastened
his girdle; and, having assumed seven different forms, went and stood
where the bulls were; no one saw what was done invisibly, and Krishnù
put strings in the noses of the seven at once: The bulls stood as
quietly as wooden bulls, whilst the strings were being fastened in their
noses; and when this was done, Krishnù led them all, with one rope, to
the court of the Raja. When the inhabitants of the city beheld this
exploit, they were all, both male and female, astonished, and began to
pour forth loud exclamations of praise. The Raja Nugnujjit then sent for
the family priest, and gave his daughter in marriage according to the
prescribed injunctions of the Vedas. Her dowry consisted of ten thousand
cows, nine lakhs of elephants, ten lakhs of horses, seventy-three lakhs
of chariots, and male and female servants without number. When Shree
Krishnù Chund departed thence, taking the dowry with him, the Rajas of
the country were greatly enraged; and came and surrounded him on his way
back. Urjoon destroyed and put them to flight, with arrows; and Huri
returned with them all to Dwarka,

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

happy and rejoicing. The inhabitants of the city, coming out to meet
him, and spreading silken cloths, brought Krishnù, in musical
procession, to the royal palace, and were amazed at seeing the dowry.
The people extolled Nugnujjit, and said, This is a great alliance. The
Raja of Kuosul has done well in marrying his daughter to Krishnù, and
giving such a large dowry."

O great king! the inhabitants of the city discoursed thus amongst
themselves, when Shree Krishnù Chund and Bulram arrived there; and gave
all Raja Nugnujjit's dowry to Urjoon, and acquired a great reputation in
the world by the act.

I will now mention the circumstances, attending the marriage of Shree
Krishnù Jee with Bhudra: listen attentively, and at your ease. Bhudra,
the daughter of the Raja of Kykye, chose a husband for herself, and
wrote letters to all the neighbouring Rajas, who all came, and were
assembled together. Shree Krishnù Chund went also, accompanied by
Urjoon, and stood in the court amongst the rest of the party. When the
Raja's daughter, looking at and observing the different chiefs with a
garland in her hand, came to the sea of beauty, the light of the world,
Shree Krishnù Chund, she was fascinated, and threw the garland upon his
neck. When her mother and father saw this, they were delighted, and
married their daughter to Huri according to the Vedas; bestowing upon
her an unbounded marriage portion.

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,—O
great king! Shree Krishnù Chund having thus married Bhudra, I will now
mention how he married Luchmuna. When Luchmuna, the daughter of the very
powerful and renowned Raja of Bhudrades, was marriageable, she chose a
husband for herself, and sent letters of invitation to the Rajas of all
countries; who came with great pomp and splendour, with their armies
arrayed and fully equipped; and sat down in the assembly in well
arranged rows. Shree Krishnù Chund Jee went there also, accompanied by
Urjoon; and as

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

he stood amongst the rest of the party, Luchmuna, having observed all
who were present, came and threw a garland on the neck of Krishnù. Her
father married Luchmuna to him according to the Vedas. All the Rajas who
had come there, were greatly abashed; and said to one another, "Let us
see whether Krishnù will take away Luchmuna while we are here."

Having thus spoken, they all arranged their forces, and blocking up the
road, stood ready for battle. As Shree Krishnù Chund and Urjoon advanced
in the chariot with Luchmuna, they came and stopped them, and began to
fight. At length, after some time, Urjoon and Shree Krishnù destroyed,
and put them all to flight with arrows; and reached the city of Dwarka,
happy and rejoicing. On their arrival, there were songs of
congratulation and rejoicing in every house throughout the city,
according to the injunctions of the Vedas.

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,—O
great king! in this manner Shree Krishnù Chund contracted five
marriages, and lived happily at Dwarka with his eight queens, who were
in constant attendance upon him. The queens' names were Rohnee,
Jamwutee, Sutbhama, Kalindee, Mittrabinda, Sutya, Bhudra and Luchmuna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX](psa61)
