[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa70)  [Next](psa72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

### CHAPTER LXX.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! it occurred once to Narud Jee to
go and see how Shree Krishnù Chund carried on his domestic affairs with
sixteen thousand one hundred and eight wives, with this thought in his
mind, he came to Dwarka, and beheld outside the city high, lofty trees,
flourishing, loaded with fruits and flowers, waving in the orchards, on
which, pigeons, parrots, peacocks and other birds were sitting, and
pouring forth pleasing notes; lotuses were blooming in elegant tanks, on
which swarms of bees buzzed; on the banks geese, cranes and other birds
were sporting about; in the flower gardens, the gardeners sang sweet
strains, and throwing water high and low, saturated the different beds
with it; in some places wheels and leather buckets were brought into
play, and on the quays there were crowds of women carrying water on
their heads: the beauty of whom cannot be described; to be appreciated,
it must have been seen.

O great king! Narud Jee having beheld with delight the beautiful
appearance of the forests and groves, saw on going into the city
elegant, golden houses, covered with jewels, and shining brilliantly, on
which flags and banners were waving. Wreaths and garlands of flowers
were fastened upon each

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

gate-way, at the doors were placed pillars of plantain and water-pots of
gold, filled with sprouts. From the trellis-work, windows and lattices
of each house, the smoke of the perfume, burnt at the time of
worshipping, came curling forth, like a black cloud; in the midst of
which the golden spires shone like lightning; in every dwelling there
was worshipping and reading of prayers, and sacrifice and offering of
gifts; and in every place people were engaged in adoration and
meditation, songs and reading, and hearing the Pooranùs; here and there
the descendants of Judoo were seated, forming a court, similar to that
of Indrù, and joy was diffused throughout the city.

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--O great king! Narud Jee being highly gratified on
entering the city, began to say, "To what house shall I go first to find
Shree Krishnù Chund?" Saying this, O great king! to himself, Narud Jee
went to Shree Rookmunee's house, where Shree Krishnù Chund was reclining
at his ease, and who rose and stood up on seeing him; they brought a
ewer of Rookmunee's filled with water; Krishnù, having washed Narud
Jee's feet, and given him a seat, placed before him perfume, lamps and
consecrated food, and offering adoration began to say to him with joined
hands, "Happiness and wealth will follow the man in whose house the feet
of good men fall. You have come and paid me, a householder, a visit in
my house, for the sake of my salvation."

O great king! when Krishnù had thus spoken, Narud Jee giving him this
blessing, "May you long live to protect Shree Rookmunee," went to the
abode of Jamwutee, where he saw Huri playing at choupur. On seeing Narud
Jee, Krishnù rose up; when, having given him a blessing, Narud went away
again; after this he went to Sutbhama's and saw Shree Krishnù Chund
seated, and having oil and perfumed paste applied to his body, Narud Jee
returned thence in silence,

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

because it is written in the Shastrùs "That at the time of the
application of oil, a Raja should not make a salutation, nor a brahmin
pronounce a benediction," Narud Jee then went to Kalindee's house, and
there saw Huri asleep. O great king! Kalindee, on seeing Narud Jee,
began to rub Huri's feet, and awoke him, Krishnù, on awaking, approached
the sage; and having made an obeisance, said with joined hands "The feet
of holy men are like the waters of places of pilgrimage; wherever they
fall they purify." On hearing this and having given his blessing, Narud
Jee rose, and went thence to the residence of Mittrabinda, he there saw
brahmins being fed, and Shree Krishnù serving out food to them, Krishnù
said, on seeing Narud Jee, "O great king! as you have done me the favour
to come here, please partake of this food, and give me your leavings,
and make pure my house." Narud Jee replied, "O great king! I will come
again, after having gone round to a few other houses, be pleased to
serve out food to the brahmins, and I will take what is left on my
return." With these words, Narud Jee took leave and went to Sutya's
house, and there saw Shree Beharee, the benefactor of his worshippers,
sitting pleased, and amusing himself, on beholding this state of
affairs, Narud Jee went away thence, and having then gone to Bhudra's
abode, saw Huri eating, he returned thence to the house of Luchmuna, and
there saw Krishnù bathing.

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative Shree Shookdeo said,--O great
king! in this manner the sage, Narud Jee, went about to sixteen thousand
one hundred and eight houses, but did not see a single house without
Shree Krishnù in it, and wherever he beheld him he saw him engaged in
some domestic occupation, having observed this custom Narud was
astonished, "That there was not a house without Krishnù in it, wherever
I go, there is the beloved Huri; thus has Krishnù spread about his
pastimes. In each of the sixteen thousand one hundred and eight houses,
the supporter of the hill (Krishnù)

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

remains with one of his wives." The delighted sage said reflecting, "The
deceptive power, which jogees are supposed to possess, belongs to thee,
O lord of the Judoos! no one can understand this power; and who can
escape from it?" O great king! when Narud Jee, in a state of
astonishment, had thus spoken, Shree Krishnù Chund, the bestower of
happiness said, "Narud! be not all grieved in thy mind; my delusive
power is very mighty and has been spread over the whole world; it
fascinates even me, who else has ability to escape from its influence,
and who that has come into the world is not affected by it." Narud
having heard this and bowing his head, said, beseechingly, "Take
compassion on me, O lord of the Judoos! in order that veneration for
thee may exist always in my thoughts and that my mind, being under the
influence of delusion, may not desire objects of sense." Raja! Narud Jee
having thus spoken, took leave of Krishnù, and, having made the usual
parting salutation, returned to his own dwelling playing on the lute and
singing. Shree Krishnù Chund Jee continued his pastimes at Dwarka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXI](psa72)
