[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa88)  [Next](psa90) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

### CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! the works of Bhugwut are
wonderful; every one knows this, whoever worships Huri will be poor; and
by serving other gods, a man will be rich. Compare the state and habits
of Huri and Muhadeo; one is the husband of Luchmee, the other of Devee;
the one wears a garland of flowers, the other, a necklace of skulls; the
former has a quoit in his hand, the latter a trident; one supports the
earth; the other, the Ganges; one plays upon a pipe, the other, upon a
cow's horn; one is lord of the celestial paradise, the other, an
inhabitant of Keilas, the former besmears his body with sandal, the
latter rubs ashes on it; one wears cloth, the other, a tiger's skin; one
reads the Vedas, the other, the science of Astrology; one rides upon the
sovereign of the feathered race, the other, upon the bull Nundee; one
dwells among cowherds' children, the other, amongst ghosts and goblins.
The habits and nature of each of the two lords are the reverse of those
of the other. Fix your affections on either of the two according to the
nature of your desires."

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! Shree Krishnù said to the Raja Joodisthur,--"O Joodisthur! I
destroy by degrees all the

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

wealth of him, to whom I show favour: because brothers, wives, sons and
relations abandon the poor, and then a spirit of devotion springs up in
their minds; and, from being occupied in religious devotion, they,
having abandoned the fascinations of riches and the world, become free
from all attachments, and worship me with zealous attention, and through
the glory of their adoration, obtain an everlasting emancipation from
matter, and a reunion with the deity." After having thus spoken,
Shookdeo Jee added,--O great king! by worshipping other gods, the
desires of the mind are fulfilled, but final salvation is not obtained.

After having related this story, the sage said to Raja Pureechit,--"O
great king! on one occasion as Bikasoor, the son of Kusyp, came out of
his house, desiring to perform penance, he met Narud, the sage, on the
road. On seeing Narud Jee he made a salutation; and, standing before him
with joined hands, enquired, with the utmost humility, "O great king!
which of the three deities Bruhmù, Vishnù or Muhadeo grants boons most
quickly, do me the kindness to say, in order that I may practice devout
austerities in his honour?" Narud Jee replied,--"Listen Bikasoor!
amongst these three deities, Muhadeo is the greatest granter of boons,
he neither loves delay, nor is he easily angry. Behold! Shivù Jee, being
delighted at the performance on his part of a slight penance, gave a
thousand arms to Suhusrajooraun, and destroyed him, being enraged at a
slight fault he had committed."

Narud, the sage, having thus spoken went away; and Bikasoor began, when
he came home, to perform severe penance and offer up sacrifice in honour
of Muhadeo. In the course of seven days, he cut off with a knife, and
offered as a burnt offering all the flesh of his body; on the eighth
day, when he resolved to cut off his head, Bholanath came, and having
laid hold of his hand said,--"I have been highly pleased with thee, ask
from me

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

whatever boon thou desirest, and I will now grant it to thee." When
Shivù Jee had thus spoken, Bikasoor, with joined hands, replied,--"Be
pleased, O lord! to take compassion upon me, and now grant me this boon,
that on whose head soever I may place my hand, he may be reduced to
ashes instantaneously." On his uttering these words, Muhadeo Jee granted
him the boon he had asked; which when he had obtained, he went to put
his hand upon Shivù's head; Muhadeo was alarmed, and quitted his seat
and fled, and the demon also ran after him, and carried on a close
pursuit of Sudashivù. At length Muhadeo went in a state of very great
agitation to Vishnù's heaven; seeing, that he was greatly afflicted,
Shree Moorari, the friend of his worshippers, the lord of paradise, the
abode of mercy, took compassion upon him, and assuming the appearance of
a brahmin went before Bikasoor and said, "O prince of demons! explain to
me why you toil in pursuit of Shivù?" On hearing this question, Bikasoor
explained all that had occurred, then Bhugwan said, "O chief of demons!
it is very strange that an intelligent person like you should commit
error, who believes any thing to be true, which this naked, mad jogee
says, who eats bhang and thornapple; he constantly dwells in cemeteries,
rubbing his body with ashes, and having snakes twisted round him;
assuming a terrifying appearance, and accompanied by ghosts and goblins,
who will believe what he says?" Shree Narayun proceeded to say, "O chief
of demons! if you think that what I have said is untrue, place your hand
on your own head and see."

O great king! on hearing the lord speak thus, when Bikasoor, who was
deprived of sense through the influence of the delusive power, placed
his hand upon his own head, he was burnt up, and became a heap of ashes;
there were musical rejoicings in the capital of Indrù on the death of
the demon; and the gods, raising shouts of victory and exultation, began
to

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

rain down flowers; the celestial dancers, musicians and choristers
celebrated in songs the excellent attributes of Huri, who, having at
that time, greatly glorified Muhadeo, allowed him to take leave, and
granted Bikasoor salvation.

Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! whosoever shall hear or recite
this story, shall doubtlessly obtain beatitude by the favour of Huri and
Muhadeo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXIX](psa90)
