[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa81)  [Next](psa83) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

### CHAPTER LXXXI.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! Shree Krishnù Jee, acquainted
with the secrets of the heart; having heard Soodama's speech, and
understanding what his many wishes were, said laughingly, "Brother! what
present has your wife sent for me; why do you not give it to me, but
keep it pressed down under your arm?"

Having heard this, O great king! Soodama was abashed, and his spirits
began to droop, when Krishnù hastily snatched the bundle of rice from
under his arm; having then opened it, and eaten two handfuls of rice
with the greatest avidity, when he had taken the third mouthful, Shree
Rookmunee Jee laid hold of the hand of Huri and said, "O great king! you
have given him two worlds, will you not keep some place for your own
habitation; this seems to be a brahmin of excellent disposition and very
good family, a great religious ascetic, and one who has abandoned all
terrestrial objects, because he has not exulted on obtaining wealth, I
know, therefore, that he looks upon gain and loss alike, rejoices not at
obtaining nor sorrows at losing." When Rookmunee Jee had thus spoken,
Shree Krishnù Chund Jee said, "Beloved! this is my best friend,

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

how can I enumerate his many excellent qualities? He remains constantly
immersed in the love of me; and in comparison with that love looks upon
the pleasures of the world as grass."

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja
Pureechit,--O great king! Krishnù, having addressed many speeches and
explanations to Rookmunee Jee, brought Soodama into the house; having
after this entertained him with delicacies of all kinds, and given him
betel, Huri took Soodama and placed him upon a bed like foam; he was
fatigued and knocked up by the journey, and enjoyed a pleasant sleep
upon the bed; Krishnù having then sent for Bishokurma, said, "Go now and
build a very beautiful house for Soodama of gold and jewels, and place
in it the eight fruits of ascetic severities, and the treasure of
Kouverù, consisting of nine gems, in order that no desire of his may be
unsatisfied."

When Krishnù had thus spoken Bishokurma went and built the house
instantly, and returned; having mentioned to Krishnù that he had done
so, he went home; early in the morning Soodama rose, and went to take
leave of Krishnù, after having bathed, and finished his religious
meditations, adoration and worship, Shree Krishnù Chund Jee was at that
time quite unable to speak; but remained gazing immersed in affection,
with downcast eyes, and stupified, Soodama, having taken leave and made
a salutation, went homewards, and on the road began to reflect, "I did
well in not asking Krishnù for any thing; had I asked him he would
certainly have given it, but he would have thought me greedy and
avaricious, no matter, I shall be able to explain all the circumstances
to my wife. Shree Krishnù Chund Jee treated me with the greatest respect
and honour, and considered me as free from avarice; this is for me equal
to a lakh of rupees."

With these thoughts in his mind Soodama, O great king! came near his
village, and was surprised at not perceiving either his former
residence, or broken hut, but a populous

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

city like that of Indrù's. On seeing this, Soodama was very much
grieved, and began to say, "Lord! what hast thou done? I had one
affliction, and thou has given me another: what has become of my
cottage, and where has my wife gone? From whom shall I enquire, and
where shall I search for them?" Having thus said Soodama went to the
gate, and asked the door-keeper, "Whose is this very beautiful house?"
The door-keeper replied, "It belongs to Soodama, the friend of Shree
Krishnù Chund. When upon hearing this Soodama was on the point of
speaking, his wife, who had seen him from the inside, came up to her
husband, dressed in fine clothes and jewels, adorned from head to foot,
having eaten betel, and applied perfumes, and accompanied by her female
companions; falling at his feet, she threw down silken cloths for him to
walk upon; and, having joined her hands, thus spoke, "Why are you
standing there, come into the house, and banish all anxiety from your
mind; after you left, Bishokurma came, who built this house in a
second."

O great king! when Soodama had heard his wife speak thus, he went into
the house; and on seeing the great profusion of wealth, was very much
dejected. The brahminee said, "Husband! people are rejoiced at obtaining
riches, but you are sad, what is the reason of this? Please kindly tell
me, that the perplexities of my mind may be removed?" Soodama replied,
"Beloved! this wealth is very deceptive, it has deceived, is still
deceiving and will continue to deceive the whole world. Krishnù has
bestowed it upon me, not having confidence in my affection; when have I
asked it from him, that he has given it to me? This is why my mind is
sad." The brahminee said, "Husband! you did not ask any thing from Shree
Krishnù Chund Jee; but, being acquainted with the secrets of the heart,
he knows the thoughts of each individual; in my mind there was a desire
for wealth, which

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Krishnù has
satisfied; do not form any other opinion in your mind upon this
subject."

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja
Pureechit,--O great king! whoever shall hear and repeat this story,
shall never, having come into the world, suffer any affliction; and in
the end shall go to the celestial paradise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXII](psa83)
