[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm210)  [Next](hm212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXXWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Hermetic Museum, Vol. II*, by Arthur Edward Waite, \[1893\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

#### THE FOUNT

###### OF

# CHEMICAL TRUTH.

OUR Magistery consists of three parts: the first deals with the
essential and substantial composition of our Stone; the second describes
their manner of combination; the third the mode of chemical procedure.
Our substances are "red ore," or matured Sulphur, and water, undigested
Mercury, or "white ore." To these a vessel is added, a furnace, and a
triple fire. In discussing their manner of combination, we have to
consider their weight and the regimen. The weight is twofold, and so is
the regimen: between them they produce the following
processes—Calcination, Dissolution, Separation, Conjunction,
Putrefaction, Distillation, Coagulation, Sublimation, Fixation, and
Exaltation. The first two produce the black, viscous powder, by means of
the "unnatural fire," a temperate, incomburent, and altering ignition.
There is then a further change into a mineral water. The three
operations Which follow are the result of the first and third fires,
namely, natural and contra-natural, and "circulate" the substance, until
the gross is separated from the subtle, and the whole is evenly
tempered, the separated elements being then recombined, impregnated, and
putrefied.

The five last operations are the result of natural fire which increases
and gets stronger from day to day, purifying the putrefied substance of
its dross, by continual ascensions and descents. This process is
therefore called distillation, volatilization, ablution, imbibition,
humectation of the earth, and is continued until the dryness gradually
thickens the substances, and, finally, under the influence of coction or
continued sublimation, induces

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

fixation, the terminal point of which is exaltation, an exaltation which
is not local, from the bottom to the surface, but qualitative, from
vileness to the highest excellence.

These operations are sometimes called regimens; but there. are only two
kinds of fire, the natural and the non-natural, the latter being
employed to call out the activity of the former. Putrefaction precedes
regeneration, and is caused by the strife of the two fires. That part of
the work which is subsequent to putrefaction and conjunction, when the
Sulphur and the water have become one, and also receive congelation, is
effected by the natural fire alone.

The substances are our body (commonly styled Lemnian earth) and our
water (our true rain water). Our water is the life of all things, and if
you can by much toil obtain it, you will have both silver and gold. It
is the water of Saltpetre, and outwardly resembles Mercury, while
inwardly at its heart there burns purest infernal fire. Do not be
deceived with common quicksilver, but gather that Mercury which the
returning Sun, in the month of March, diffuses everywhere, till the
month of October, when it is ripe.

Know that our Mercury is before the eyes of all men, though it is known
to few. When it is prepared, its splendour is most admirable; but the
sight is vouchsafed to none, save the sons of knowledge. Do not despise
it, therefore, when you see it in sordid guise; for if you do, you will
never accomplish our Magistery—and if you can change its countenance,
the transformation will be glorious. For our water is a most pure
virgin, and is loved of many, but meets all her wooers in foul garments,
in order that she may be able to distinguish the worthy from the
unworthy. Our beautiful maiden abounds in inward hidden graces; unlike
the immodest woman who meets her lovers in splendid garments. To those
who do not despise her foul exterior, she then appears in all her
beauty, and brings them an infinite dower of riches and health. Our
Queen is pure above measure, and her splendour like that of a celestial
being—and so indeed she is called by the Sages, who also style her their
quintessence. Her brilliancy is such as baffles imagination, and, if you
would have any idea of it, you must see it with your own eyes. Our water
is serene, crystalline, pure, and beautiful—

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

though it can assume its true form only through the aid of our Art. In
that form it is our sea, our hidden fountain, from which gold derives
its birth by natural descent; yet it is also stronger than geld, and
overcomes it, wherefore gold is united to it, and is washed in it, and
the two together grow up into a strong hero, whom neither Pope nor
Emperor can buy for a price. Hence you should, above all things, seek
this water, by means of which (with the solitary addition of a clean and
perfect body) the Stone may be prepared.

But it requires profound study to become acquainted with all the secrets
of our sea, and with its ebb and flow. It took me 18 months, after I had
discovered the spring of our water, to find the method of making it well
forth, because I did not know the meaning of the fiery furnace of the
Sages. When I discovered it, indeed, the sight which I beheld richly
rewarded me for all my pains. I was then suddenly, as by a flash of
inspiration, enabled to understand all the secret words and enigmas of
the Sages. Our water is the fire which causes both death, and, through
death, a more glorious life. Whoever discovers it has reached the autumn
of his Magistery, as Nature will then (when the pure body has been put
into it) perform all the other processes, and carry the substance onward
to perfection through all the different regimens. This water, though
one, is not simple, but compounded of two things: the vessel and the
fire of the Sages, and the bond which holds the two together. So when we
speak of our vessel, and our fire, we mean by both expressions, our
water; nor is our furnace anything diverse or distinct from our water.
There is then one vessel, one furnace, one fire, and all these make up
one water. The fire digests, the vessel whitens and penetrates, the
furnace is the bond which comprises and encloses all, and all these
three are our Mercury. There are many kinds of fire (and of water) in
our Magistery, but all these only represent different aspects of our
Mercury.

There is only one thing in the whole world from which our Mercury can be
obtained. It is like gold in essence, but different in substance, and if
you change its elements you will have what you seek. Join heaven to
earth in the fire of love, and you will see in the middle of the
firmament the bird of Hermes. Do not

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

confound the natures, but separate and re-combine them, and you will
reign in honour all your life.

In the South-west there is a high mountain (very near the Sun), one of
seven, and the second in height. This mountain is of a very hot
temperature (because it is not far from the Sun), and in this mountain
is enclosed a vapour or spirit, whose services are indispensable for our
work. But it does not ascend, unless it is quickened, nor is it
quickened unless you dig kneedeep on the summit of the mountain. If you
do this, a subtle exhalation (or spirit) ascends, and is congealed by
the air into drops of beautifully limpid water—which is our water, our
fire, our vessel, and our furnace; not common Mercury, but the hot and
moist liquid of most pure Salt, which we call Mercury, because in
comparison with the Sun, it is immature and cold. If the Almighty had
not created this Mercury, the transmutation of metals would be
impossible, because gold does not tinge unless it be first tinged
itself. Our Mercury is the beloved spouse of gold, and changes its body
into a purely spiritual substance; gold loves it so, that for very love
he dies, and is revived by his spouse, and she is impregnated by him,
and conceives, and bears a most beautiful royal son. The whole knowledge
of our Art consists in the discovery of this our sea; any Alchemist who
is ignorant of it, is simply wasting his money. Our sea is derived from
the mountain of which I told you above. The exhalation or white smoke
which ascends there, will accomplish our whole Magistery. There is
another secret which you should know if you wish to see your hope
fulfilled, viz., how you are to dig a hole in the mountain, as its
surface is impenetrable to ordinary tools, its dryness being such that
it has become harder than a flint. But in the places of Saturn a small
herb is found, called Saturnia, whose twigs appear dry, but in whose
roots there is abundance of juice. This herb you should carefully take
up with the roots, and carry with you to the foot of the mountain, and,
with the help of fire, bury it beneath the mountain; its virtue will at
once penetrate the whole mountain, and soften its earth. Then you may
ascend to the summit, easily dig a hole knee deep, and pour in so much
dry and viscous water, that it penetrates to where the herb lies buried,
and makes it ascend as a fume, which carries upward

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

with it the spirit of the mountain. This spirit is the strength of fire
mingling with water, and dwelling in it. The spirit of Saturnia is the
whitening fume, the vapour of the mountain is fire, and all these things
are fire. Thus you obtain Saturnia, the royal plant and mineral herb,
which together with fat flesh makes such a soup as to eclipse the
richest banquets in the world.

Here is an enigmatic description of our water, which should in course of
time and study, become plain to the diligent enquirer. There is the King
(gold), and the water which is the King's Bath; our water is the vessel,
inasmuch as our King is enclosed in it, and the furnace, inasmuch as our
fire is enclosed in it, and our fire, inasmuch as the virtue or spirit
of the mountain dwells in it, and the woman, inasmuch as it receives the
vapour of the plant Saturnia; and as the dear friend of the Sun
penetrates, whitens, and softens it, and causes it to emit its sperm.
Then the fiery virtue which is in the water, begins to act on our body,
wasting and mortifying it, until at length the innate heat of the Sun is
roused into activity. Our Stone is called a little world, because it
contains within itself the active and the passive, the motor and the
thing moved, the fixed and the volatile, the mature and the crude—which,
being homogeneous, help and perfect each other. We have already shewn
that our object in adding matured Sulphur to crude Mercury (the same
thing in different stages of development), is to shorten and accelerate
the natural process. Gold is a hot and dry body; silver a frigid and
humid one, Mercury the means of conveying tinctures. The body of the Sun
is most highly digested, that of the Moon imperfect and immature, while
Mercury is the bond by which these two contraries are united. Join the
Moon to Mercury by means of proper heat, so that the two become one
Mercury which retains its inward fire; then the Mercury will be freed
from all dross and superfluities, and it will become transparent like
the tears we shed, though not exactly perspicuous. If you then unite
this purified Mercury to gold, in which is the Moon and fire, the hot
and dry will love the cold and humid, and they will unite on the bed of
the fire of friendship; the man will dissolve over the woman, and the
woman be coagulated over the man, till the spirit and the body become
one by commixtion. Continue the same operation (let the heaven descend
to the earth) till the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

spirit puts on the body, and both are fixed together. Then our Stone
will have obtained its royal virtue. For Mercury is the water of all
metals, and they are digested in it. When vegetables are boiled in
ordinary water, which is naturally frigid and humid, it partakes of
their qualities, and is yet separable from them; so the pure Mercury,
which is in all metals and minerals, is perfectly separable from the
dross and foreign matter which has become mixed up with them; yet the
different minerals and metals qualify the Mercury in the same way as the
water is qualified by the vegetables cooked in it. There are these two
differences between the Mercury and the water, that the water is not
coagulated and fixed with the vegetables as our water is with the
metals; and that, while the colour of common water is changed by
anything boiled in it, Mercury retains its own colour and fluxibility,
though its essence is qualified. Therefore the Mercury is effectual in
the dissolution of the metal, and the metal in the coagulation of the
Mercury; and as, in the dissolution, the form and colour of the metal is
latent in the form and colour of the Mercury, so, in coagulation, the
form and colour of the Mercury is hidden in the form and colour of the
metal; neither do the qualities of the metal in dissolution prevent the
fluxibility of the Mercury, nor the qualities of Mercury in coagulation
the fixity of the metal. Do you not here observe a wonderful harmony
between Mercury and the metals? For their love is like that of mother
and son, sister and brother, male and female. Hence they are calculated
mutually to perfect each other, the water imparting to the body a
spiritual and volatile nature, while the body gives to the water a
corporeal substance. The reason that the colour of Mercury is not
changed in coction by the dissolved body, is this: the earth and water
in the Mercury are homogeneous, and so well tempered that neither can be
separated from the other, and they are so well mixed that the whole
substance exhibits (together with great fluxibility) so great a
consistency as entirely to conceal the colours—and only if a part of the
Mercury is destroyed or marred by some deleterious chemical corrosive,
are the colours seen. The relations of Mercury in respect of earth and
water are these: in respect of water it is fluxible and liquid, in
respect of earth it moistens nothing but what is of the same essence

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

with it. These hints will enable you to detect any errors in your
treatment of Mercury. Some obstruct or divide its homogeneity by unduly
drying up its water; others corrupt the earth and render it diaphanous
by disproportionate mixing. Mercury is the sperm of the metals; it
contains in itself the Sulphur by which alone it is digested (through
which Nature would in course of time have matured it into gold); nor
would it be possible to convert Mercury into gold without it. This
mature Sulphur, then, is radically mixed with the Mercury, and rapidly
digests it, while itself is putrefied by the Mercury, and is revived
again, not as common, but as spiritual, penetrative, and tinging gold,
which has power to purify imperfect metals of all their dross, and to
change them into its own nature. Thus you see that none of the Mercury
should be destroyed, or violently dealt with; all you have to do is to
add to it a mature body sprung from the same root, and mix the two in
their smallest parts, by means of our cunning conjunction (which is
performed, not by a manual, but by a purely natural process, of which
the Artist does not even understand the cause). We must distinguish,
however, between our transmutative conjunction, and a sort of
conjunction practised by sophists which is merely a fusing together of
the two substances, and leaves each exactly what it was before. In our
operation the spirit of gold infuses itself into the spirit of Mercury,
and their union becomes as inseparable as that of water mixed with
water. The conjunction can take place only by means of the Moon or an
imperfect body and fire; and this Moon is the sap of the water of life,
which is hidden in Mercury, and is stirred up by fire; it is a spirit
which enters the body, and compels it to retain its soul. We speak not
of common Mercury (which lacks the spirit and fire), but of our
Mercurial water—though common Mercury may be made like it by the
addition of that which it lacks. Our conjunction is the grand secret of
our Art; for earth is not inseparably united to water, but the union of
water with water is indissoluble; hence our conjunction can take place
only after dissolution, which dissolution takes place through the Moon
and fire that are in the Mercury. For the Moon penetrates and whitens,
and the fire mortifies and frets, while water combines both these
properties, according to the philosophical dictum: "The fire which I
shew you, is water,"

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

and, "Unless the bodies are subtilized by fire and water, nothing can be
done in our Magistery." Thus everything, from beginning to end, is
accomplished, not by sophistical operations, but by our Mercury, which,
unless it be violently impeded, is kept to the right road by the
necessity of arriving at a certain goal.

Some Alchemists fail because they put (common) gold with Mercury in a
phial over the fire, and thus sow good seed in barren earth. But gold is
not the substance of our Stone in its whole essence, nor yet Mercury.
What we want for our work of generation is the seed of gold which is
profoundly hidden in our metal. This seed must be received into its own
proper womb, and there mingle with the female seed, in order that, being
kindly fostered with heat, and fed with its proper aliment, it may
become that part of gold which is of abundant use in our work. It is not
the whole of a man that generates the infant, but only his seed, which
is rightly disposed in the proper womb; and so only the seed of gold
(and not the whole metal) is useful for our metallic generation. Gold is
the Father of our Stone, the substance of our Stone is in gold, but gold
is not the substance of our Stone; yet there is that in gold (the sperm)
which, by right manipulation, may become our Stone. We extract from
gold, by a cunning process, that which is its most highly matured
virtue, and this is called, not common, dead, but our living gold. The
difference between common gold and our gold, is that which exists
between a Father and his seed; common gold is dead and useless, as far
as our work is concerned, until it emits its living seed. Take the body
of gold, then, and gently extract from it its seed, and you will have
the living male seed of our Stone, which we now no longer call gold, but
ore, magnesia, lead, etc.—because it is no longer a body, like gold, but
a chaos, or spirit, which cannot revert to its corporeal form. Aristotle
says: "The first thing you should do is to sublime the Mercury, then you
should put a pure body into the pure Mercury." The sublimation of the
Mercury which is here referred to, is not an artificial, but a true and
natural one. It is the "first preparation of the thin substance," by
which the eclipse caused by the interposition of Earth is removed from
the Moon, enabling her to receive the light of the Sun—which happens
when the murky sphere of Saturn (that overshadowed

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

the whole horizon) is removed, and Jupiter ascends the throne; then
there rises upward a mist of dazzling whiteness, whence there is
distilled upon the earth a pure, sweet, and fragrant dew, that softens
it and stirs up great winds at its centre; these winds bear our Stone
upward, where it is endowed with heavenly virtue, and thence descending
once more to its nurse, the earth, is clothed upon with a corporeal
nature, and thus receives the strength both of things above and of
things below. This living gold is "that which is, but does not appear
till it pleases the Artist, and in the knowledge of which is the secret
of all perfection." Mercury is our field, in which the Sun rises and
sets; let the two be inseparably united on the bed of love, till from
this (regenerate) Mercury there comes forth a quickening virtue, which
is able to raise the dead. Then there will appear the royal child, whose
father is the Sun, whose mother is the Moon. . . Besides these things,
we need, of course, a furnace of clay, a vessel of glass, and a triple
fire; but we do not call these three *our* vessel, *our* fire, or *our*
furnace, because ordinary sophists employ these things as well as the
Sages; when we speak of our vessel, our furnace, and our fire, the terms
are to be interpreted in accordance with the explanation which we gave
above. Of this fire a Sage might well say: "Behold, the fire, which I
will shew you, is water"; and again, "The vessel of the Sages is their
water." Another Sage says, that all our operations take place in our
humid fire, in our secret furnace, and our hidden vessel, and thereby
clearly shews that there must be a fire, vessel, and furnace, other than
those which ignorant Alchemists possess in greater perfection and
abundance than we. Our appliances are part of our substance, and are
described by Sendivogius, for instance, as the "vessel of Nature," and
the "fire of Nature." This practice is followed by Flamellus, Artephius,
Lullius, and all other Sages; and I tell you that these three appliances
are, after all, only one; for the nature of our substance is one. Our
fire is that which dissolves and heats bodies more effectually than
ordinary fire; hence it is called ardent wine and a most strong fire,
and the Sages bid us burn our ore with our most strong fire—words which
are falsely interpreted of an ordinary coal fire. Of this fire John
Mehungus writes: "No artificial fire can infuse so high a degree of heat
as that which comes from heaven."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Helvetius’ Golden Calf](hm212)
