[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090057)  [Next](2090059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Concerning light,
fire, the luminaries, sun, moon and stars.*

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>Fire is one of the four elements,
light and with a greater tendency to ascend than the others. It has the
power of burning and also of giving light, and it was made by the
Creator on the first day. For the divine Scripture says, *And God said,
Let there be light, and there was light* <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711) . Fire is not a different thing
from what light is, as some maintain. Others again hold that this fire
of the universe is above the air <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) and call it ether. In the
beginning, then, that is to say on the first day, God created light, the
ornament and glory of the whole visible creation. For take away light
and all things remain in undistinguishable darkness, incapable of
displaying their native beauty. *And God called the light day, but the
darkness* <span id="page_23b">p. 23b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-Page_23b"></span>*He called night* <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) . Further, darkness is not any
essence, but an accident: for it is simply absence of light. The air,
indeed, has not light in its essence <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) . It was, then, this very absence
of light from the air that God called darkness: and it is not the
essence of air that is darkness, but the absence of light which clearly
is rather an accident than an essence. And, indeed, it was not night,
but day, that was first named, so that day is first and after that comes
night. Night, therefore, follows day. And from the beginning of day till
the next day is one complete period of day and night. For the Scripture
says, *And the evening and the morning were one day* <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) .

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p8"></span>When, therefore, in the first three
days the light was poured forth and reduced at the divine command, both
day and night came to pass <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716) .
But on the fourth day God created the great luminary, that is, the sun,
to have rule and authority <span id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717)
over the day: for it is by it that day is made: for it is day when the
sun is above the earth, and the duration of a day is the course of the
sun over the earth from its rising till its setting. And He also created
the lesser luminaries, that is, the moon and the stars, to have rule and
authority <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) over the night, and
to give light by night. For it is night when the sun is under the earth,
and the duration of night is the course of the sun under the earth from
its rising till its setting. The moon, then, and the stars were set to
lighten the night: not that they are in the daytime under the earth, for
even by day stars are in the heaven over the earth but the sun conceals
both the stars and the moon by the greater brilliance of its light and
prevents them from being seen.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p12"></span>On these luminaries the Creator
bestowed the first-created light: not because He was in need of other
light, but that that light might not remain idle. For a luminary is not
merely light, but a vessel for containing light <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) .

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p14"></span>There are, we are told, seven
planets amongst these luminaries, and these move in a direction opposite
to that of the heaven: hence the name planets. For, while they say that
the heaven moves from east to west, the planets move from west to east;
but the heaven bears the seven planets along with it by its swifter
motion. Now these are the names of the seven planets: Luna, Mercury,
Venus, Sol, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and in each zone of heaven is, we are
told, one of these seven planets:

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p15"></span>In the first and highest Saturn

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p16"></span>In the second Jupiter

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p17"></span>In the third Mars

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p18"></span>In the fourth Sol

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p19"></span>In the fifth Venus

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p20"></span>In the sixth Mercury

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p21"></span>In the seventh and lowest Luna.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p22"></span>The course which the Creator <span
id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720) appointed for them to run is
unceasing and remaineth fixed as He established them. For the divine
David says, *The moon and the stars which Thou establishedst* <span
id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721) , and by the word ‘establishedst,’
he referred to the fixity and unchangeableness of the order and series
granted to them by God. For He appointed them for seasons, and signs,
and days and years. It is through the Sun that the four seasons are
brought about. And the first of these is spring: for in it God created
all things <span id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) , and even down to
the present time its presence is evidenced by the bursting of the
flowers into bud, and this is the equinoctial period, since day and
night each consist of twelve hours. It is caused by the sun rising in
the middle, and is mild and increases the blood, and is warm and moist,
and holds a position midway between winter and summer, being warmer and
drier than winter, but colder and moister than summer. This season lasts
from March 21st till June 24th. Next, when the rising of the sun moves
towards more northerly parts, the season of summer succeeds, which has a
place midway between spring and autumn, combining the warmth of spring
with the dryness of autumn: for it is dry and warm, and increases the
yellow bile. In it falls the longest day, which has fifteen hours, and
the shortest night of all, having only nine hours. This season lasts
from June 24th till September 25th. Then when the sun again returns to
the middle, autumn takes the place of summer. It has a medium amount of
cold and heat, dryness and moisture, and holds a place midway between
summer and winter, combining the dryness of summer with the cold of
winter. For it is cold and dry, and increases the black bile. This
season, again, is equinoctial, both day and night consisting of twelve
hours, and it lasts from September 25th till December 25th. And when the
rising of the sun sinks to its smallest and lowest point, i.e. the
south, winter is reached, with its cold and moisture. It occupies a
place midway between autumn and spring, combining the cold of autumn
<span id="page_24b">p. 24b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-Page_24b"></span>and the moisture of spring. In it
falls the shortest day, which has only nine hours, and the longest
night, which has fifteen: and it lasts from December 25th till March
21st. For the Creator made this wise provision that we should not pass
from the extreme of cold, or heat, or dryness, or moisture, to the
opposite extreme, and thus incur grievous maladies. For reason itself
teaches us the danger of sudden changes.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p26"></span>So, then, it is the sun that makes
the seasons, and through them the year: it likewise makes the days and
nights, the days when it rises and is above the earth, and the nights
when it sets below the earth: and it bestows on the other luminaries,
both moon and stars, their power of giving forth light.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p27"></span>Further, they say that there are in
the heaven twelve signs made by the stars, and that these move in an
opposite direction to the sun and moon, and the other five planets, and
that the seven planets pass across these twelve signs. Further, the sun
makes a complete month in each sign and traverses the twelve signs in
the same number of months. These, then, are the names of the twelve
signs and their respective months:—

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p28"></span>The Ram, which receives the sun on
the 21st of March.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p29"></span>The Bull, on the 23rd of April.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p30"></span>The Twins, on the 24th of May.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p31"></span>The Crab, on the 24th of June.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p32"></span>The Virgin, on the 25th of July.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p33"></span>The Scales, on the 25th of
September.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p34"></span>The Scorpion, on the 25th of
October.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p35"></span>The Archer, on the 25th of November.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p36"></span>Capricorn, on the 25th of December.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p37"></span>Aquarius, on the 25th of January.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p38"></span>The Fish, on the 24th of February.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p39"></span>But the moon traverses the twelve
signs each month, since it occupies a lower position and travels through
the signs at a quicker rate. For if you draw one circle within another,
the inner one will be found to be the lesser: and so it is that owing to
the moon occupying a lower position its course is shorter and is sooner
completed.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p40"></span>Now the Greeks declare that all our
affairs are controlled by the rising and setting and collision <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) of these stars, viz., the sun and
moon: for it is with these matters that astrology has to do. But we hold
that we get from them signs of rain and drought, cold and heat, moisture
and dryness, and of the various winds, and so forth <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) , but no sign whatever as to our
actions. For we have been created with free wills by our Creator and are
masters over our own actions. Indeed, if all our actions depend on the
courses of the stars, all we do is done of necessity <span
id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) : and necessity precludes either
virtue or vice. But if we possess neither virtue nor vice, we do not
deserve praise or punishment, and God, too, will turn out to be unjust,
since He gives good things to some and afflicts others. Nay, He will no
longer continue to guide or provide for His own creatures, if all things
are carried and swept along in the grip of necessity. And the faculty of
reason will be superfluous to us: for if we are not masters of any of
our actions, deliberation is quite superfluous. Reason, indeed, is
granted to us solely that we might take counsel, and hence all reason
implies freedom of will.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p44"></span>And, therefore, we hold that the
stars are not the causes of the things that occur, nor of the origin of
things that come to pass, nor of the destruction of those things that
perish. They are rather signs of showers and changes of air. But,
perhaps, some one may say that though they are not the causes of wars,
yet they are signs of them. And, in truth, the quality of the air which
is produced <span id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) by sun, and moon,
and stars, produces in various ways different temperaments, and habits,
and dispositions <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) . But the
habits are amongst the things that we have in our own hands, for it is
reason that rules, and directs, and changes them.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p47"></span>It often happens, also, that comets
arise. These are signs of the death of kings <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) , and they are not any of the stars
that were made in the beginning, but are formed at the same time by
divine command and again dissolved <span
id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) . And so not even that star which
the Magi saw at the birth of the Friend and Saviour of man, our Lord,
Who became flesh for our sake, is of the number of those that were made
in the beginning. And this is evidently the case because sometimes its
course was from east to west, and sometimes from north to south; at one
moment it was hidden, and at the next it was revealed: which is quite
out of harmony with the order and nature of the stars.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p50"></span>It must be understood, then, that
the moon derives its light from the sun; not that God was unable to
grant it light of its own, but in order that rhythm and order may be
unimpressed upon nature, one part ruling, the other being ruled, and
that we might thus be taught to live in community and to share <span
id="page_25b">p. 25b</span> <span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-Page_25b"></span>our
possessions with one another, and to be under subjection, first to our
Maker and Creator, our God and Master, and then also to the rulers set
in authority over us by Him: and not to question why this man is ruler
and not I myself, but to welcome all that comes from God in a gracious
and reasonable spirit.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p51"></span>The sun and the moon, moreover,
suffer eclipse, and this demonstrates the folly of those who worship the
creature in place of the Creator <span
id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) , and teaches us how changeable and
alterable all things are. For all things are changeable save God, and
whatever is changeable is liable to corruption in accordance with the
laws of its own nature.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p53"></span>Now the cause of the eclipse of the
sun is that the body of the moon is interposed like a partition-wall and
casts a shadow, and prevents the light from being shed down on us <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) : and the extent of the eclipse is
proportional to the size of the moon’s body that is found to conceal the
sun. But do not marvel that the moon’s body is the smaller. For many
declare that the sun is many times larger even than the earth, and the
holy Fathers say that it is equal to the earth: yet often a small cloud,
or even a small hill or a wall quite conceals it.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p55"></span>The eclipse of the moon, on the
other hand, is due to the shadow the earth casts on it when it is a
fifteen days’ moon and the sun and moon happen to be at the opposite
poles of the highest circle, the sun being under the earth and the moon
above the earth. For the earth casts a shadow and the sun’s light is
prevented from illuminating the moon, and therefore it is then eclipsed.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p56"></span>It should be understood that the
moon was made full by the Creator, that is, a fifteen days’ moon: for it
was fitting that it should be made complete <span
id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) . But on the fourth day, as we
said, the sun was created. Therefore the moon was eleven days in advance
of the sun, because from the fourth to the fifteenth day there are
eleven days. Hence it happens that in each year the twelve months of the
moon contain eleven days fewer than the twelve months of the sun. For
the twelve months of the sun contain three hundred and sixty-five and a
quarter days, and so because the quarter becomes a whole, in four years
an extra day is completed, which is called bis-sextile. And that year
has three hundred and sixty-six days. The years of the moon, on the
other hand, have three hundred and fifty-four days. For the moon wanes
from the time of its origin, or renewal, till it is fourteen and
three-quarter days’ old, and proceeds to wane till the twenty-ninth and
a half day, when it is completely void of light. And then when it is
once more connected with the sun it is reproduced and renewed, a
memorial of our resurrection. Thus in each year the moon gives away
eleven days to the sun, and so in three years the intercalary month of
the Hebrews arises, and that year comes to consist of thirteen months,
owing to the addition of these eleven days <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) .

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p59"></span>It is evident that both sun and moon
and stars are compound and liable to corruption according to the laws of
their various natures. But of their nature we are ignorant. Some,
indeed, say that fire when deprived of matter is invisible, and thus,
that when it is quenched it vanishes altogether. Others, again, say that
when it is quenched it is transformed into air <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) .

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p61"></span>The circle of the zodiac has an
oblique motion and is divided into twelve sections called zodia, or
signs: each sign has three divisions of ten each, i.e. thirty divisions,
and each division has sixty very minute subdivisions. The heaven,
therefore, has three hundred and sixty-five degrees: the hemisphere
above the earth and that below the earth each having one hundred and
eighty degrees.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p62"></span>The abodes of the planets.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p63"></span>The Ram and the Scorpion are the
abode of Mars: the Bull and the Scales, of Venus <span
id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) : the Twins and the Virgin, of
Mercury: the Crab, of the Moon: the Lion, of the Sun: the Archer and the
Fish, of Jupiter: Capricorn and Aquarius, of Saturn.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p65"></span>Their altitudes.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p66"></span>The Ram has the altitude of the Sun:
the Bull, of the Moon: the Crab, of Jupiter: the Virgin, of Mars: the
Scales, of Saturn: Capricorn, of Mercury: the Fish, of Venus.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p67"></span>The phases of the moon.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p68"></span>It is in conjunction whenever it is
in the same degree as the sun: it is born when it is fifteen degrees
distant from the sun: it rises when it is crescent-shaped, and this
occurs twice <span id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) , at which times
it is sixty degrees distant from the sun: it is half-full twice, when it
is ninety degrees from the sun: twice it is gibbous, when it is one
hundred <span id="page_26b">p. 26b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-Page_26b"></span>and twenty degrees from the sun: it
is twice a full moon, giving full light, when it is a hundred and fifty
degrees from the sun: it is a complete moon when it is a hundred and
eighty degrees distant from the sun. We say twice, because these phases
occur both when the moon waxes and when it wanes. In two and a half days
the moon traverses each sign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[22b:1712](2090058.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p3"></span> [Gen. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[22b:1713](2090058.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p4"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>ὑπερ</span>. Variant, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p4.2"></span>ὑπο</span>, but this
does not agree with the view of the author or the ancients.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[23b:1714](2090058.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p5"></span> [Gen. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[23b:1715](2090058.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p6"></span> *Basil, Hom.* 2, *in Hexaëmeron*.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[23b:1716](2090058.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p7"></span> [Gen. i.
5.](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[23b:1717](2090058.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p9"></span> *Basil, Hom.* 2, *in Hexaëmeron*.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[23b:1718](2090058.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p10"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>ἐξουσίαν</span>: variant. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p10.2"></span>ἐξουσίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[23b:1719](2090058.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p11"></span> Variant here also, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p11.1"></span>ἐξουσίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[23b:1720](2090058.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p13"></span> *Basil, Hom.* 6, *in Hexaëmeron*.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[23b:1721](2090058.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p23"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p23.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p23.2"></span>Δημιουργός</span>. Variant, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p23.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p23.4"></span>δημιουργήσας</span>.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[23b:1722](2090058.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p24"></span> [Ps. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[23b:1723](2090058.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p25"></span> *Basil, Hom.* 6, *in Hexaëmeron*.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[24b:1724](2090058.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p41"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p41.1"></span>συγκρούσεως</span>. Variants, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p41.2"></span>συγκράσεως</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p41.3"></span>συγκρίσεως</span>.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[24b:1725](2090058.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p42"></span> *Basil, Hom.* 6, *in Hexaëmeron*.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[24b:1726](2090058.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p43"></span> *Nemes., de Nat. Hom.,* ch. 34.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[24b:1727](2090058.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p45"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p45.1"></span>ποιουμένη</span>. Variant, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p45.2"></span>ποιούμενον</span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[24b:1728](2090058.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p46"></span> *Basil, Hom.* 6, *in Hexaëmeron*.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[24b:1729](2090058.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p48"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p48.1"></span>θάνατον δηλοῦντα βασίλεων</span>.
Variant, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p48.2"></span>θανάτων βασίλεων</span>: also <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p48.3"></span>θάνατον, ἢ ἀνάδειξιν
σημαίνουσι βασίλεων</span>.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[24b:1730](2090058.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p48.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p49"></span> *Basil, Christi Nativit*.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[25b:1731](2090058.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p52"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[25b:1732](2090058.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p54"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p54.1"></span>διαναδοθῆναι</span>: variants, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p54.2"></span>διαδοθῆναι</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p54.3"></span>δοθῆναι</span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[25b:1733](2090058.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p57"></span> *Sever. Gabal., De opif. mundi,*
III.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[25b:1734](2090058.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p58"></span> *Ibid. De opif. mundi,* III.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[25b:1735](2090058.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p60"></span> *Nemes.,* ch. 5.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[25b:1736](2090058.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p64"></span> *Vide*Porph., *de antro Nymph*.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[25b:1737](2090058.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p69"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p69.1"></span>δίς</span>. R. 4 has <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.vii-p69.2"></span>δεύτερον</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning air and winds.](2090059)
