[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090013)  [Next](2090015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_52"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>Believers</span> have always found their
satisfaction in that Divine utterance, which our ears heard recited from
the Gospel at the moment when that Power, which is its attestation, was
bestowed upon us:—*Go now and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I command you; and, lo, I am with you
alway, even unto the end of the world* <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) . What element in the mystery of man’s
salvation is not included in those words? What is forgotten, what left
in darkness? All is full, as from the Divine fulness; perfect, as from
the Divine perfection. The passage contains the exact words to be used,
the essential acts, the sequence of processes, an insight into the
Divine nature. He bade them baptize *in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost*, that is with confession of the Creator
and of the Only-begotten, and of the Gift. For God the Father is One,
from Whom are all things; and our Lord Jesus Christ the Only-begotten,
through Whom are all things, is One; and the Spirit, God’s Gift to us,
Who pervades all things, is also One. Thus all are ranged according to
powers possessed and benefits conferred;—the One Power from Whom all,
the One Offspring through Whom all, the One Gift Who gives us perfect
hope. Nothing can be found lacking in that supreme Union which embraces,
in Father, Son and Holy Spirit, infinity in the Eternal, His Likeness in
His express Image, our enjoyment of Him in the Gift.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p4"></span>2. But the errors of heretics and
blasphemers force us to deal with unlawful matters, to scale perilous
heights, to speak unutterable words, to trespass on forbidden ground.
Faith ought in silence to fulfil the commandments, worshipping the
Father, reverencing with Him the Son, abounding in the Holy Ghost, but
we must strain the poor resources of our language to express thoughts
too great for words. The error of others compels us to err in daring to
embody in human terms truths which ought to be hidden in the silent
veneration of the heart.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p5"></span>3. For there have risen many who have
given to the plain words of Holy Writ some arbitrary interpretation of
their own, instead of its true and only sense, and this in defiance of
the clear meaning of words. Heresy lies in the sense assigned, not in
the word written; the guilt is that of the expositor, not of the text.
Is not truth indestructible? When we hear the name *Father*, is not
sonship involved in that Name? The Holy Ghost is mentioned by name; must
He not exist? We can no more separate fatherhood from the Father or
sonship from the Son than we can deny the existence in the Holy Ghost of
that gift which we receive. Yet men of distorted mind plunge the whole
matter in doubt and difficulty, fatuously reversing the clear meaning of
words, and depriving the Father of His fatherhood because they wish to
strip the Son of His sonship. They take away the fatherhood by asserting
that the Son is not a Son by nature; for a son is not of the nature of
his father when begetter and begotten have not the same properties, and
he is no son whose being is different from that of the father, and
unlike it. Yet in what sense is God a Father (as He is), if He have not
begotten in His Son that same substance and nature which are His own?

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p6"></span>4. Since, therefore, they cannot make
any change in the facts recorded, they bring novel principles and
theories of man’s device to bear upon them. Sabellius, for instance,
makes the Son an extension of the Father, and the faith in this regard a
matter of words rather than of reality, for he makes one and the same
Person, Son to Himself and also Father. Hebion allows no beginning to
the Son of God except from Mary, and represents Him not as first God and
then man, but as first man then God; declares that the Virgin did not
receive into herself One previously existent, Who had been in the
beginning God the Word dwelling with God, but that through the agency of
the Word she bore Flesh; the ‘Word’ meaning in his opinion not the
nature of the pre-existent Only-begotten God <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) , but only the sound of an uplifted
voice. Similarly certain teachers of our present day assert that the
Image and Wisdom and Power of God was produced out of nothing, and in
time. They do this to save God, regarded as Father of the Son, from
being lowered to the Son’s <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_53"></span>level. They are fearful lest this birth
of the Son from Him should deprive Him of His glory, and therefore come
to God’s rescue by styling His Son a creature made out of nothing, in
order that God may live on in solitary perfection without a Son born of
Himself and partaking His nature. What wonder that their doctrine of the
Holy Ghost should be different from ours, when they presume to subject
the Giver of that Holy Ghost to creation, and change, and non-existence.
Thus do they destroy the consistency and completeness of the mystery of
the faith. They break up the absolute unity of God by assigning
differences of nature where all is clearly common to Each; they deny the
Father by robbing the Son of His true Sonship; they deny the Holy Ghost
in their blindness to the facts that we possess Him and that Christ gave
Him. They betray ill-trained souls to ruin by their boast of the logical
perfection of their doctrine; they deceive their hearers by emptying
terms of their meaning, though the Names remain to witness to the truth.
I pass over the pitfalls of other heresies, Valentinian, Marcionite,
Manichee and the rest. From time to time they catch the attention of
some foolish souls and prove fatal by the very infection of their
contact; one plague as destructive as another when once the poison of
their teaching has found its way into the hearer’s thoughts.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p8"></span>5. Their treason involves us in the
difficult and dangerous position of having to make a definite
pronouncement, beyond the statements of Scripture, upon this grave and
abstruse matter. The Lord said that the nations were to be baptized *in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost*. The
words of the faith are clear; the heretics do their utmost to involve
the meaning in doubt. We may not on this account add to the appointed
form, yet we must set a limit to their license of interpretation. Since
their malice, inspired by the devil’s cunning, empties the doctrine of
its meaning while it retains the Names which convey the truth, we must
emphasise the truth which those Names convey. We must proclaim, exactly
as we shall find them in the words of Scripture, the majesty and
functions of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and so debar the heretics from
robbing these Names of their connotation of Divine character, and compel
them by means of these very Names to confine their use of terms to their
proper meaning. I cannot conceive what manner of mind our opponents
have, who pervert the truth, darken the light, divide the indivisible,
rend the scatheless, dissolve the perfect unity. It may seem to them a
light thing to tear up Perfection, to make laws for Omnipotence, to
limit Infinity; as for me, the task of answering them fills me with
anxiety; my brain whirls, my intellect is stunned, my very words must be
a confession, not that I am weak of utterance, but that I am dumb. Yet a
wish to undertake the task forces itself upon me; it means withstanding
the proud, guiding the wanderer, warning the ignorant. But the subject
is inexhaustible; I can see no limit to my venture of speaking
concerning God in terms more precise than He Himself has used. He has
assigned the Names—Father, Son and Holy Ghost,—which are our information
of the Divine nature. Words cannot express or feeling embrace or reason
apprehend the results of enquiry carried further; all is ineffable,
unattainable, incomprehensible. Language is exhausted by the magnitude
of the theme, the splendour of its effulgence blinds the gazing eye, the
intellect cannot compass its boundless extent. Still, under the
necessity that is laid upon us, with a prayer for pardon to Him Whose
attributes these are, we will venture, enquire and speak; and
moreover—it is the only promise that in so grave a matter we dare to
make—we will accept whatever conclusion He shall indicate.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p9"></span>6. It is the Father to Whom all
existence owes its origin. In Christ and through Christ He is the source
of all. In contrast to all else He is self-existent. He does not draw
His being from without, but possesses it from Himself and in Himself. He
is infinite, for nothing contains Him and He contains all things; He is
eternally unconditioned by space, for He is illimitable; eternally
anterior to time, for time is His creation. Let imagination range to
what you may suppose is God’s utmost limit, and you will find Him
present there; strain as you will there is always a further horizon
towards which to strain. Infinity is His property, just as the power of
making such effort is yours. Words will fail you, but His being will not
be circumscribed. Or again, turn back the pages of history, and you will
find Him ever present; should numbers fail to express the antiquity to
which you have penetrated, yet God’s eternity is not diminished. Gird up
your intellect to comprehend Him as a whole; He eludes you. God, as a
whole, has left something within your grasp, but this something is
inextricably involved in His entirety. Thus you have missed the whole,
since it is only a part which remains in your hands; nay, not even a
part, for you are dealing with a whole which you have failed to divide.
For a part implies division, a whole is undivided, and God is everywhere
and wholly present wherever He is. <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_54"></span>Reason, therefore, cannot cope with Him,
since no point of contemplation can be found outside Himself and since
eternity is eternally His. This is a true statement of the mystery of
that unfathomable nature which is expressed by the Name ‘Father:’ God
invisible, ineffable, infinite. Let us confess by our silence that words
cannot describe Him; let sense admit that it is foiled in the attempt to
apprehend, and reason in the effort to define. Yet He has, as we said,
in ‘Father’ a name to indicate His nature; He is a Father unconditioned.
He does not, as men do, receive the power of paternity from an external
source. He is unbegotten, everlasting, inherently eternal. To the Son
only is He known, for no one knoweth the Father save the Son and him to
whom the Son willeth to reveal Him, nor yet the Son save the
Father <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) . Each has perfect and
complete knowledge of the Other. Therefore, since *no one knoweth the
Father save the Son*, let our thoughts of the Father be at one with the
thoughts of the Son, the only faithful Witness, Who reveals Him to us.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p11"></span>7. It is easier for me to feel this
concerning the Father than to say it. I am well aware that no words are
adequate to describe His attributes. We must feel that He is invisible,
incomprehensible, eternal. But to say that He is self-existent and
self-originating and self-sustained, that He is invisible and
incomprehensible and immortal; all this is an acknowledgment of His
glory, a hint of our meaning, a sketch of our thoughts, but speech is
powerless to tell us what God is, words cannot express the reality. You
hear that He is self-existent; human reason cannot explain such
independence. We can find objects which uphold, and objects which are
upheld, but that which thus exists is obviously distinct from that which
is the cause of its existence. Again, if you hear that He is
self-originating, no instance can be found in which the giver of the
gift of life is identical with the life that is given. If you hear that
He is immortal, then there is something which does not spring from Him
and with which He has, by His very nature <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) , no contact; and, indeed, death is
not the only thing which this word ‘immortal’ claims as independent of
God <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) . If you hear that He is
incomprehensible, that is as much as to say that He is non-existent,
since contact with Him is impossible. If you say that He is invisible, a
being that does not visibly exist cannot be sure of its own existence.
Thus our confession of God fails through the defects of language; the
best combination of words we can devise cannot indicate the reality and
the greatness of God. The perfect knowledge of God is so to know Him
that we are sure we must not be ignorant of Him, yet cannot describe
Him. We must believe, must apprehend, must worship; and such acts of
devotion must stand in lieu of definition.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p14"></span>8. We have now exchanged the perils of
a harbourless coast for the storms of the open sea. We can neither
safely advance nor safely retreat, yet the way that lies before us has
greater hardships than that which lies behind. The Father is what He is,
and as He is manifested, so we must believe. The mind shrinks in dread
from treating of the Son; at every word I tremble lest I be betrayed
into treason. For He is the Offspring of the Unbegotten, One from One,
true from true, living from living, perfect from perfect; the Power of
Power, the Wisdom of Wisdom, the Glory of Glory, the Likeness of the
invisible God, the Image of the Unbegotten Father. Yet in what sense can
we conceive that the Only-begotten is the Offspring of the Unbegotten?
Repeatedly the Father cries from heaven, *This is My beloved Son in Whom
I am well pleased <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560)* . It is no
rending or severance, for He that begat is without passions, and He that
was born is the Image of the invisible God and bears witness, *The
Father is in Me and I in the Father* <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) . It is no mere adoption, for He is
the true Son of God and cries, *He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father also* <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) . Nor did He come
into existence in obedience to a command as did created things, for He
is the Only-begotten of the One God; and He has life in Himself, even as
He that begot Him has life, for He says, *As the Father hath life in
Himself, even so gave He to the Son to have life in Himself* <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) . Nor is there a portion of the Father
resident in the Son, for the Son bears witness, *All things that the
Father hath are Mine* <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) , and
again, *And all things that are Mine are Thine, and Thine are
Mine* <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) , and the Apostle
testifies, *For in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily* <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) ; and by the nature of
things a portion cannot possess the whole <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) . He is the perfect Son of the perfect
Father, for He Who has all has given all to Him. Yet we must not imagine
that the <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_55"></span>Father did not give, because He still
possesses, or that He has lost, because He gave to the Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p23"></span>9. The manner of this birth is
therefore a secret confined to the Two. If any one lays upon his
personal incapacity his failure to solve the mystery, in spite of the
certainty that Father and Son stand to Each Other in those relations, he
will be still more pained at the ignorance to which I confess. I, too,
am in the dark, yet I ask no questions. I look for comfort to the fact
that Archangels share my ignorance, that Angels have not heard the
explanation, and worlds do not contain it, that no prophet has espied it
and no Apostle sought for it, that the Son Himself has not revealed it.
Let such pitiful complaints cease. Whoever you are that search into
these mysteries, I do not bid you resume your exploration of height and
breadth and depth; I ask you rather to acquiesce patiently in your
ignorance of the mode of Divine generation, seeing that you know not how
His creatures come into existence. Answer me this one question:—Do your
senses give you any evidence that you yourself were begotten? Can you
explain the process by which you became a father? I do not ask whence
you drew perception, how you obtained life, whence your reason comes,
what is the nature of your senses of smell, touch, sight, hearing; the
fact that we have the use of all these is the evidence that they exist.
What I ask is:—How do you give them to your children? How do you ingraft
the senses, lighten the eyes, implant the mind? Tell me, if you can. You
have, then, powers which you do not understand, you impart gifts which
you cannot comprehend. You are calmly indifferent to the mysteries of
your own being, profanely impatient of ignorance concerning the
mysteries of God’s.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p24"></span>10. Listen then to the Unbegotten
Father, listen to the Only-begotten Son. Hear His words, *The Father is
greater than I* <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) , and *I and the
Father are One* <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) , and *He that
hath seen Me hath seen the Father also* <span
id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) , and *The Father is in Me and I in
the Father* <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) , and *I went out
from the Father* <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) , and *Who is
in the bosom of the Father* <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) ,
and *Whatsoever the Father hath He hath delivered to the Son* <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) , and *The Son hath life in Himself,
even as the Father hath in Himself* <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) . Hear in these words the Son, the
Image, the Wisdom, the Power, the Glory of God. Next mark the Holy Ghost
proclaiming *Who shall declare His generation* <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) ? Note <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) the Lord’s assurance, *No one knoweth
the Son save the Father, neither doth any know the Father save the Son
and He to whom the Son willeth to reveal Him* <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) . Penetrate into the mystery, plunge
into the darkness which shrouds that birth, where you will be alone with
God the Unbegotten and God the Only-begotten. Make your start, continue,
persevere. I know that you will not reach the goal, but I shall rejoice
at your progress. For He who devoutly treads an endless road, though he
reach no conclusion, will profit by his exertions. Reason will fail for
want of words, but when it comes to a stand it will be the better for
the effort made.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p36"></span>11. The Son draws His life from that
Father Who truly has life; the Only begotten from the Unbegotten,
Offspring from Parent, Living from Living. *As the Father hath life in
Himself, even so gave He to the Son also to have life in Himself* <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) . The Son is perfect from Him that is
perfect, for He is whole from Him that is whole. This is no division or
severance, for Each is in the Other, and the fulness of the Godhead is
in the Son. Incomprehensible is begotten of Incomprehensible, for none
else knows Them, but Each knows the Other; Invisible is begotten of
Invisible, for the Son is the Image of the invisible God, and he that
has seen the Son has seen the Father also. There is a distinction, for
They are Father and Son; not that Their Divinity is different in kind,
for Both are One, God of God, One God Only begotten of One God
Unbegotten. They are not two Gods, but One of One; not two Unbegotten,
for the Son is born of the Unborn. There is no diversity, for the life
of the living God is in the living Christ. So much I have resolved to
say concerning the nature of their Divinity; not imagining that I have
succeeded in making a summary of the faith, but recognising that the
theme is inexhaustible. So faith, you object, has no service to render,
since there is nothing that it can comprehend. Not so; the proper
service of faith is to grasp and confess the truth that it is
incompetent to comprehend its Object.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p38"></span>12. It remains to say something more
concerning the mysterious generation of the Son; or rather this
something more is everything. I quiver, I linger, my powers fail, I know
not where to begin. I cannot tell the time of the Son’s birth; it were
impious not to be certain of the fact. Whom shall I entreat? Whom shall
I call to my aid? From what books shall I borrow the terms needed to
state so hard a problem? Shall I ransack the philosophy of Greece? No! I
have read, *Where is* <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_56"></span>*the wise? Where is the enquirer of this
world* <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) *?* In this matter, then,
the world’s philosophers, the wise men of paganism, are dumb: for they
have rejected the wisdom of God. Shall I turn to the Scribe of the law?
He is in darkness, for the Cross of Christ is an offence to him. Shall
I, perchance, bid you shut your eyes to heresy, and pass it by in
silence, on the ground that sufficient reverence is shown to Him Whom we
preach if we believe that lepers were cleansed, the deaf heard, the lame
ran, the palsied stood, the blind (in general) received sight, the blind
from his birth had eyes given to him <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) , devils were routed, the sick
recovered, the dead lived. The heretics confess all this, and perish.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p41"></span>13. Look now to see a thing not less
miraculous than lame men running, blind men seeing, the flight of
devils, the life from the dead. There stands by my side, to guide me
through the difficulties which I have enunciated, a poor fisherman,
ignorant, uneducated, fishing-lines in hand, clothes dripping, muddy
feet, every inch a sailor. Consider and decide whether it were the
greater feat to raise the dead or impart to an untrained mind the
knowledge of mysteries so deep as he reveals by saying, *In the
beginning was the Word* <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) . What
means this *In the beginning was?* He ranges backward over the spaces of
time, centuries are left behind, ages are cancelled. Fix in your mind
what date you will for this beginning; you miss the mark, for even then
He, of Whom we are speaking, was. Survey the universe, note well what is
written of it, *In the beginning God made the heaven and the
earth* <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) . This word *beginning*
fixes the moment of creation; you can assign its date to an event which
is definitely stated to have happened *in the beginning*. But this
fisherman of mine, unlettered and unread, is untrammelled by time,
undaunted by its immensity; he pierces beyond the beginning. For his
*was* has no limit of time and no commencement; the uncreated Word *was
in the beginning*.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p44"></span>14. But perhaps we shall find that our
fisherman has been guilty of departure from the terms of the problem
proposed for solution <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) . He has
set the Word free from the limitations of time; that which is free lives
its own life and is bound to no obedience. Let us, therefore, pay our
best attention to what follows:—*And the Word was with God*. We find
that it is *with God* that the Word, Which *was* before the beginning,
exists unconditioned by time. The Word, Which *was*, is *with God*. He
Who is absent when we seek for His origin in time <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) is present all the while with the
Creator of time. For this once our fisherman has escaped; perhaps he
will succumb to the difficulties which await him.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p47"></span>15. For you will plead that a word is
the sound of a voice; that it is a naming of things, an utterance of
thoughts. This Word was with God, and was in the beginning; the
expression of the eternal Thinker’s thoughts must be eternal. For the
present I will give you a brief answer of my own on the fisherman’s
behalf, till we see what defence he has to make for his own simplicity.
The nature, then, of a word is that it is first a potentiality,
afterwards a past event; an existing thing only while it is being heard.
How can we say, *In the beginning was the Word,* when a word neither
exists before, nor lives after, a definite point of time? Can we even
say that there is a point of time in which a word exists? Not only are
the words in a speaker’s mouth non-existent until they are spoken, and
perished the instant they are uttered, but even in the moment of
utterance there is a change from the sound which commences to that which
ends a word. Such is the reply that suggests itself to me as a
bystander. But your opponent the Fisherman has an answer of his own. He
will begin by reproving you for your inattention. Even though your
unpractised ear failed to catch the first clause, *In the beginning was
the Word*, why complain of the next, *And the Word was with God?* Was it
*And the Word was in God* that you heard,—the dictum of some profound
philosophy? Or is it that your provincial dialect makes no distinction
between *in* and *with*? The assertion is that Which was in the
beginning was *with*, not *in*, Another. But I will not argue from the
beginning of the sentence; the sequel can take care of itself. Hear now
the rank and the name of the Word:—*And the Word was God*. Your plea
that the Word is the sound of a voice, the utterance of a thought, falls
to the ground. The Word is a reality, not a sound, a Being, not a
speech, God, not a nonentity.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p48"></span>16. But I tremble to say it; the
audacity staggers me. I hear, *And the Word was God;* I, whom the
prophets have taught that God is One. To save me from further fears,
give me, friend Fisherman, a fuller imparting of this great mystery.
Show that these assertions are consistent with the unity of God; <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_57"></span>that
there is no blasphemy in them, no explaining away, no denial of
eternity. He continues, *He was in the beginning with God*. This *He was
in the beginning* removes the limit of time; the word *God* shows that
He is more than a voice; that He is *with God* proves that He neither
encroaches nor is encroached upon, for His identity is not swallowed up
in that of Another, and He is clearly stated to be present with the One
Unbegotten God as God, His One and Only-begotten Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p49"></span>17. We are still waiting, Fisherman,
for your full description of the Word. He was in the beginning, it may
be said, but perhaps He was not before the beginning. To this also I
will furnish a reply on my Fisherman’s behalf. The Word could not be
other than He *was*; that *was* is unconditional and unlimited. But what
says the Fisherman for himself? *All things were made through Him*.
Thus, since nothing exists apart from Him through Whom the universe came
into being, He, the Author of all things, must have an immeasurable
existence. For time is a cognisable and divisible measure of extension,
not in space, but in duration. All things are from Him, without
exception; time then itself is His creature.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p50"></span>18. But, my Fisherman, the objection
will be raised that you are reckless and extravagant in your language;
that *All things were made through Him needs* qualification. There is
the Unbegotten, made of none; there is also the Son, begotten of the
Unborn Father. This *All things* is an unguarded statement, admitting no
exceptions. While we are silent, not daring to answer or trying to think
of some reply, do you break in with, *And without Him was nothing made.*
You have restored the Author of the Godhead to His place, while
proclaiming that He has a Companion. From your saying that nothing was
made *without Him*, I learn that He was not alone. He through Whom the
work was done is One; He without Whom it was not done is Another: a
distinction is drawn between Creator and Companion.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p51"></span>19. Reverence for the One Unbegotten
Creator distressed me, lest in your sweeping assertion that all things
were made by the Word you had included Him. You have banished my fears
by your *Without Him was nothing made*. Yet this same *Without Him was
nothing made* brings trouble and distraction. There was, then, something
made by that Other; not made, it is true, *without Him*. If the Other
did make anything, even though the Word were present at the making, then
it is untrue that *through Him all things were made*. It is one thing to
be the Creator’s Companion, quite another to be the Creator’s Self. I
could find answers of my own to the previous objections; in this case,
Fisherman, I can only turn at once to your words, *All things were made
through Him.* And now I understand, for the Apostle has enlightened
me:—*Things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions
or principalities or powers, all are* through *Him and* in *Him* <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) .

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p53"></span>20. Since, then, all things were made
through Him, come to our help and tell us what it was that was made not
without Him. *That which was made in Him is life*. That which was made
*in Him* was certainly not made *without Him;* for that which was made
in Him was also made *through Him*. All things were created in Him and
through Him <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) . They were created
in Him <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) , for He was born as God
the Creator. Again, nothing that was made in Him was made without Him,
for the reason that God the Begotten was life, and was born as Life, not
made life after His birth; for there are not two elements in Him, one
inborn and one afterwards conferred. There is no interval in His case
between birth and maturity. None of the things that were created in Him
was made without Him, for He is the Life which made their creation
possible. Moreover God, the Son of God, became God by virtue of His
birth, not after He was born. Being born the Living from the Living, the
True from the True, the Perfect from the Perfect, He was born in full
possession of His powers. He needed not to learn in after time what His
birth was, but was conscious of His Godhead by the very fact that He was
born as God of God. *I and the Father are One* <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) , are the words of the Only-begotten
Son of the Unbegotten. It is the voice of the One God proclaiming
Himself to be Father and Son; Father speaking in the Son and Son in the
Father. Hence also *He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father
also* <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) ; hence *All that the
Father hath, He hath given to the Son* <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) ; hence *As the Father hath life in
Himself so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself* <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) ; hence *No one knoweth the Father
save the Son, nor the Son save the Father* <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) ; hence *In Him dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily* <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) .

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p62"></span><span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_58"></span>21. This Life is the Light of men, the
Light which lightens the darkness. To comfort us for that powerlessness
to describe His generation of which the prophet speaks <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) , the Fisherman adds, *And the
darkness comprehended Him not* <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) .
The language of unaided reason was baffled and silenced; the Fisherman
who lay on the bosom of the Lord was taught to express the mystery. His
language is not the world’s language, for He deals with things that are
not of the world. Let us know what it is, if there be any teaching that
you can extract from his words, more than their plain sense conveys; if
you can translate into other terms the truth we have elicited, publish
them abroad. If there be none—indeed, because there are none—let us
accept with reverence this teaching of the fisherman, and recognise in
his words the oracles of God. Let us cling in adoration to the true
confession of Father and Son, Unbegotten and Only-begotten ineffably,
Whose majesty defies all expression and all perception. Let us, like
John, lie on the bosom of the Lord Jesus, that we too may understand and
proclaim the mystery.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p65"></span>22. This faith, and every part of it,
is impressed upon us by the evidence of the Gospels, by the teaching of
the Apostles, by the futility of the treacherous attacks which heretics
make on every side. The foundation stands firm and unshaken in face of
winds and rains and torrents; storms cannot overthrow it, nor dripping
waters hollow it, nor floods sweep it away. Its excellence is proved by
the failure of countless assaults to impair it. Certain remedies are so
compounded as to be of value not merely against some single disease but
against all; they are of universal efficacy. So it is with the Catholic
faith. It is not a medicine for some special malady, but for every ill;
virulence cannot master, nor numbers defeat, nor complexity baffle it.
One and unchanging it faces and conquers all its foes. Marvellous it is
that one form of words should contain a remedy for every disease, a
statement of truth to confront every contrivance of falsehood. Let
heresy muster its forces and every sect come forth to battle. Let our
answer to their challenge be that there is One Unbegotten God the
Father, and One Only-begotten Son of God, perfect Offspring of perfect
Parent; that the Sun was begotten by no lessening of the Father or
subtraction from His Substance, but that He Who possesses all things
begot an all-possessing Son; a Son not emanating nor proceeding from the
Father, but compact of, and inherent in, the whole Divinity, of Him Who
wherever He is present is present eternally; One free from time,
unlimited in duration, since by Him all things were made <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) , and, indeed, He could not be
confined within a limit created by Himself. Such is the Catholic and
Apostolic Faith which the Gospel has taught us and we avow.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p67"></span>23. Let Sabellius, if he dare, confound
Father and Son as two names with one meaning, making of them not Unity
but One Person. He shall have a prompt answer from the Gospels, not once
or twice, but often repeated, *This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well
pleased* <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) . He shall hear the
words, *The Father is greater than I* <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) , and *I go to the Father* <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) , and *Father, I thank Thee* <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) , and *Glorify Me, Father* <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) , and *Thou art the Son of the living
God* <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) . Let Hebion try to sap the
faith, who allows the Son of God no life before the Virgin’s womb, and
sees in Him the Word only after His life as flesh had begun. We will bid
him read again, *Father, glorify Me with Thine own Self with that glory
which I had with Thee before the world was* <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) , and *In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God* <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) , and *All things were made through
Him* <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) , and *He was in the world,
and the world was made through Him, and the world knew Him not* <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) . Let the preachers whose apostleship
is of the newest fashion—an apostleship of Antichrist—come forward and
pour their mockery and insult upon the Son of God. They must hear, *I
came out from the Father* <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) and
*The Son in the Father’s bosom* <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609)
, and *I and the Father are One* <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610)
, and *I in the Father, and the Father in Me* <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) . And lastly, if they be wrath, as the
Jews were, that Christ should claim God for His own Father, making
Himself equal with God, they must take the answer which He gave the
Jews, *Believe My works, that the Father is in Me and I in the
Father* <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) . Thus our one immovable
foundation, our one blissful rock of faith, is the confession from
Peter’s mouth, *Thou art the Son of the living God* <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) . On it we can base an answer to every
objection with which perverted ingenuity or embittered treachery may
assail the truth.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p84"></span>24. In what remains we have the
appointment of the Father’s will. The Virgin, the birth, the Body, then
the Cross, the death, the visit to the lower world; these things are our
salvation. For the sake of <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_59"></span>mankind the Son of God was born of the
Virgin and of the Holy Ghost. In this process He ministered to Himself;
by His own power—the power of God—which overshadowed her He sowed the
beginning of His Body, and entered on the first stage of His life in the
flesh. He did it that by His Incarnation He might take to Himself from
the Virgin the fleshly nature, and that through this commingling there
might come into being a hallowed Body of all humanity; that so through
that Body which He was pleased to assume all mankind might be hid in
Him, and He in return, through His unseen existence, be reproduced in
all. Thus the invisible Image of God scorned not the shame which marks
the beginnings of human life. He passed through every stage; through
conception, birth, wailing, cradle and each successive humiliation.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p85"></span>25. What worthy return can we make for
so great a condescension? The One Only-begotten God, ineffably born of
God, entered the Virgin’s womb and grew and took the frame of poor
humanity. He Who upholds the universe, within Whom and through Whom are
all things, was brought forth by common childbirth; He at Whose voice
Archangels and Angels tremble, and heaven and earth and all the elements
of this world are melted, was heard in childish wailing. The Invisible
and Incomprehensible, Whom sight and feeling and touch cannot gauge, was
wrapped in a cradle. If any man deem all this unworthy of God, the
greater must he own his debt for the benefit conferred the less such
condescension befits the majesty of God. He by Whom man was made had
nothing to gain by becoming Man; it was our gain that God was incarnate
and dwelt among us, making all flesh His home by taking upon Him the
flesh of One. We were raised because He was lowered; shame to Him was
glory to us. He, being God, made flesh His residence, and we in return
are lifted anew from the flesh to God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p86"></span>26. But lest perchance fastidious minds
be exercised by cradle and wailing, birth and conception, we must render
to God the glory which each of these contains, that we may approach His
self-abasement with souls duly filled with His claim to reign, and not
forget His majesty in His condescension. Let us note, therefore, who
were attendant on His conception. An Angel speaks to Zacharias;
fertility is given to the barren; the priest comes forth dumb from the
place of incense; John bursts forth into speech while yet confined
within his mother’s womb; an Angel blesses Mary and promises that she, a
virgin, shall be the mother of the Son of God. Conscious of her
virginity, she is distressed at this hard thing; the Angel explains to
her the mighty working of God, saying, *The Holy Ghost shall come from
above into thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow
thee* <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) . The Holy Ghost,
descending from above, hallowed the Virgin’s womb, and breathing therein
(for *The Spirit bloweth where it listeth* <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) ), mingled Himself with the fleshly
nature of man, and annexed by force and might that foreign domain. And,
lest through weakness of the human structure failure should ensue, the
power of the Most High overshadowed the Virgin, strengthening her
feebleness in semblance of a cloud cast round her, that the shadow,
which was the might of God, might fortify her bodily frame to receive
the procreative power of the Spirit. Such is the glory of the
conception.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p89"></span>27. And now let us consider the glory
which accompanies the birth, the wailing and the cradle. The Angel tells
Joseph that the Virgin shall bear a Son, and that Son shall be named
Emmanuel, that is, *God with us*. The Spirit foretells it through the
prophet, the Angel bears witness; He that is born is God with us. The
light of a new star shines forth for the Magi; a heavenly sign escorts
the Lord of heaven. An Angel brings to the shepherds the news that
Christ the Lord is born, the Saviour of the world. A multitude of the
heavenly host flock together to sing the praise of that childbirth; the
rejoicing of the Divine company proclaims the fulfilment of the mighty
work. Then *glory to God in heaven, and peace on earth to men of good
will* is announced. And now the Magi come and worship Him wrapped in
swaddling clothes; after a life devoted to mystic rites of vain
philosophy they bow the knee before a Babe laid in His cradle. Thus the
Magi stoop to reverence the infirmities of Infancy; its cries are
saluted by the heavenly joy of angels; the Spirit Who inspired the
prophet, the heralding Angel, the light of the new star, all minister
around Him. In such wise was it that the Holy Ghost’s descent and the
overshadowing power of the Most High brought Him to His birth. The
inward reality is widely different from the outward appearance; the eye
sees one thing, the soul another. A virgin bears; her child is of God.
An Infant wails; angels are heard in praise. There are coarse swaddling
clothes; God is being worshipped. The glory of His Majesty is not
forfeited when He assumes the lowliness of flesh.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p90"></span>28. So was it also during His further
life on earth. The whole time which He passed in <span id="page_60">p.
60</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_60"></span>human form was spent upon
the works of God. I have no space for details; it must suffice to say
that in all the varied acts of power and healing which He wrought, the
fact is conspicuous that He was man by virtue of the flesh He had taken,
God by the evidence of the works He did.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p91"></span>29. Concerning the Holy Spirit I ought
not to be silent, and yet I have no need to speak; still, for the sake
of those who are in ignorance, I cannot refrain. There is no need to
speak, because we are bound to confess Him, proceeding, as He does, from
Father and Son <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) . For my own
part, I think it wrong to discuss the question of His existence. He does
exist, inasmuch as He is given, received, retained; He is joined with
Father and Son in our confession of the faith, and cannot be excluded
from a true confession of Father and Son; take away a part, and the
whole faith is marred. If any man demand what meaning we attach to this
conclusion, he, as well as we, has read the words of the Apostle,
*Because ye are sons of God, God hath sent the Spirit of His Son into
our hearts, crying, Abba, Father* <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) , and *Grieve not the Holy Spirit of
God, in Whom ye have been sealed* <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) , and again, *But we have received not
the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may
know the things that are given unto us by God* <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) , and also *But ye are not in the
flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God is in you. But
if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is not His* <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) , and further, *But if the Spirit of
Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, He that raised
up Christ from the dead shall quicken also your mortal bodies for the
sake of His Spirit which dwelleth in you* <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) . Wherefore since He is, and is given,
and is possessed, and is of God, let His traducers take refuge in
silence. When they ask, Through Whom is He? To what end does He exist?
Of what nature is He? we answer that He it is through Whom all things
exist, and from Whom are all things, and that He is the Spirit of God,
God’s gift to the faithful. If our answer displease them, their
displeasure must also fall upon the Apostles and the Prophets, who spoke
of Him exactly as we have spoken. And furthermore, Father and Son must
incur the same displeasure.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p98"></span>30. The reason, I believe, why certain
people continue in ignorance or doubt is that they see this third Name,
that of the Holy Spirit, often used to signify the Father or the Son. No
objection need be raised to this; whether it be Father or Son, He is
Spirit, and He is holy.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p99"></span>31. But the words of the Gospel, *For
God is Spirit* <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) , need careful
examination as to their sense and their purpose. For every saying has an
antecedent cause and an aim which must be ascertained by study of the
meaning. We must bear this in mind lest, on the strength of the words,
*God is Spirit*, we deny not only the Name, but also the work and the
gift of the Holy Ghost. The Lord was speaking with a woman of Samaria,
for He had come to be the Redeemer for all mankind. After He had
discoursed at length of the living water, and of her five husbands, and
of him whom she then had who was not her husband, the woman answered,
*Lord, I perceive that Thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in
this mountain; and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought
to worship* <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) . The Lord replied,
*Woman, believe Me, the hour cometh when neither in this mountain, nor
in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father. Ye worship that which ye know
not; we worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews. But
the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in the Spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to
worship Him. For God is Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship
in the Spirit and in truth, for God is Spirit* <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) . We see that the woman, her mind full
of inherited tradition, thought that God must be worshipped either on a
mountain, as at Samaria, or in a temple, as at Jerusalem; for Samaria in
disobedience to the Law had chosen a site upon the mountain for worship,
while the Jews regarded the temple founded by Solomon as the home of
their religion, and the prejudices of both confined the all-embracing
and illimitable God to the crest of a hill or the vault of a building.
God is invisible, incomprehensible, immeasurable; the Lord said that the
time had come when God should be worshipped neither on mountain nor in
temple. For Spirit cannot be cabined or confined; it is omnipresent in
space and time, and under all conditions present in its fulness.
Therefore, He said, they are the true worshippers who shall worship in
the Spirit and in truth. And these who are to worship God the Spirit in
the Spirit shall have the One for the means, the Other for the object,
of their reverence: for Each of the Two stands in a different relation
to the worshipper. The words, *God is Spirit*, do not alter the fact
that the Holy Spirit has a Name of His own, and that He is the Gift to
us. The woman who <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-Page_61"></span>confined God to hill or temple was told
that God contains all things and is self-contained: that He, the
Invisible and Incomprehensible must be worshipped by invisible and
incomprehensible means. The imparted gift and the object of reverence
were clearly shewn when Christ taught that God, being Spirit, must be
worshipped in the Spirit, and revealed what freedom and knowledge, what
boundless scope for adoration, lay in this worship of God, the Spirit,
in the Spirit.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p103"></span>32. The words of the Apostle are of
like purport; *For the Lord is Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty* <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) . To make
his meaning clear he has distinguished between the Spirit, Who exists,
and Him Whose Spirit He is Proprietor and Property, *He* and *His* are
different in sense. Thus when he says, *The Lord is Spirit* he reveals
the infinity of God; when He adds, *Where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty*, he indicates Him Who belongs to God; for He is the
Spirit of the Lord, and *Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty*. The Apostle makes the statement not from any necessity of his
own argument, but in the interests of clearness. For the Holy Ghost is
everywhere One, enlightening all patriarchs and prophets and the whole
company of the Law, inspiring John even in his mother’s womb, given in
due time to the Apostles and other believers, that they might recognise
the truth vouchsafed them.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p105"></span>33. Let us hear from our Lord’s own
words what is the work of the Holy Ghost within us. He says, *I have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now* <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) . For *it is expedient for you that I
go: if I go I will send you the Advocate* <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) . And again, *I will ask the Father
and He shall send you another Advocate, that He may be with you for
ever, even the Spirit of truth* <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628)
. *He shall guide you into all truth, for He shall not speak from
Himself, but whatsoever things He shall hear He shall speak, and He
shall declare unto you the things that are to come. He shall glorify Me,
for He shall take of Mine* <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) .
These words were spoken to show how multitudes should enter the kingdom
of heaven; they contain an assurance of the goodwill of the Giver, and
of the mode and terms of the Gift. They tell how, because our feeble
minds cannot comprehend the Father or the Son, our faith which finds
God’s incarnation hard of credence shall be illumined by the gift of the
Holy Ghost, the Bond of union and the Source of light.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p110"></span>34. The next step naturally is to
listen to the Apostle’s account of the powers and functions of this
Gift. He says, *As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the
children of God. For ye received not the Spirit of bondage again unto
fear, but ye received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba,
Father* <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) ; and again, *For no man
by the Spirit of God saith anathema to Jesus, and no man can say, Jesus
is Lord, but in the Holy Spirit* <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631)
; and he adds, *Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit,
and diversities of ministrations, but the same Lord, and diversities of
workings, but the same God, Who worketh all things in all. But to each
one is given the enlightenment of the Spirit, to profit withal. Now to
one is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word
of knowledge according to the same Spirit, to another faith in the same
Spirit, to another gifts of healings in the One Spirit, to another
workings of miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of
spirits, to another kinds of tongues, to another interpretation of
tongues. But all these worketh the One and same Spirit* <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) . Here we have a statement of the
purpose and results of the Gift; and I cannot conceive what doubt can
remain, after so clear a definition of His Origin, His action and His
powers.

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p114"></span>35. Let us therefore make use of this
great benefit, and seek for personal experience of this most needful
Gift. For the Apostle says, in words I have already cited, *But we have
not received the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we may know the things that are given unto us by God* <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) . We receive Him, then, that we may
know. Faculties of the human body, if denied their exercise, will lie
dormant. The eye without light, natural or artificial, cannot fulfil its
office; the ear will be ignorant of its function unless some voice or
sound be heard; the nostrils unconscious of their purpose unless some
scent be breathed. Not that the faculty will be absent, because it is
never called into use, but that there will be no experience of its
existence. So, too, the soul of man, unless through faith it have
appropriated the gift of the Spirit, will have the innate faculty of
apprehending God, but be destitute of the light of knowledge. That Gift,
which is in Christ, is One, yet offered, and offered fully, to all;
denied to none, and given to each according to the measure of his
willingness to receive; its stores the richer, the more earnest the
desire to earn them. This gift is with us unto the end of the world, the
solace of our waiting, the assurance, by the favours which He bestows,
of the hope that shall be ours, the light of our minds, the sun of our
souls. This Holy Spirit we must seek and must earn, and then hold fast
by faith and obedience to the commands of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_555"></span>[52:556](2090014.htm#fr_555) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p3"></span> [Matt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[52:557](2090014.htm#fr_556) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p7"></span> Reading *non antea*.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[54:558](2090014.htm#fr_557) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p10"></span> Cf. St. [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[54:559](2090014.htm#fr_558) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p12"></span> Reading *a se*, instead of *alter*.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[54:560](2090014.htm#fr_559) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p13"></span> This is merely a verbal paradox, to
illustrate the inadequacy of language to treat of God. God is *ex
hypothesi* author of all things, and contains all things in Himself. But
the negative term ‘immortal’ excludes death, and its concomitants of
disease, pain, &c., from God’s sphere.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[54:561](2090014.htm#fr_560) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p15"></span> St. [Matt.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), [Matt.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>. Again in § 23 Hilary says that these
words were often repeated.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[54:562](2090014.htm#fr_561) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p16"></span> St. [John x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[54:563](2090014.htm#fr_562) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p17"></span> [John
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[54:564](2090014.htm#fr_563) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p18"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[54:565](2090014.htm#fr_564) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p19"></span> [John
16.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[54:566](2090014.htm#fr_565) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p20"></span> [John
17.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>. The words which follow, “and *Whatsoever
the Father hath He Hath given to the Son*,” printed in the editions as a
Scriptural citation, are evidently a gloss which has crept into the
text. The words do not occur in Scripture, but are used by Hilary in §
10 of this Book.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[54:567](2090014.htm#fr_566) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p21"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[54:568](2090014.htm#fr_567) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p22"></span> Omitting *esse*.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[55:569](2090014.htm#fr_568) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p25"></span> St. [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[55:570](2090014.htm#fr_569) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p26"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[55:571](2090014.htm#fr_570) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p27"></span> [John
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[55:572](2090014.htm#fr_571) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p28"></span> [John
10.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[55:573](2090014.htm#fr_572) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p29"></span> [John
16.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[55:574](2090014.htm#fr_573) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p30"></span> [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[55:575](2090014.htm#fr_574) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p31"></span> The citation which is interpolated in
§ 8, where see the note, and cf. St. [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[55:576](2090014.htm#fr_575) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p32"></span> St. [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[55:577](2090014.htm#fr_576) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p33"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[55:578](2090014.htm#fr_577) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p34"></span> Reading *observa*.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[55:579](2090014.htm#fr_578) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p35"></span> St. [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[55:580](2090014.htm#fr_579) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p37"></span> St. [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[56:581](2090014.htm#fr_580) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p39"></span> [1 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[56:582](2090014.htm#fr_581) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p40"></span> The healing of the blind man, St.
[John ix. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p40.1"></span> ff., is treated as a special case distinct
from more ordinary cases of blindness.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[56:583](2090014.htm#fr_582) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p42"></span> St. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[56:584](2090014.htm#fr_583) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p43"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[56:585](2090014.htm#fr_584) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p45"></span> I.e. how to reconcile the Unity of God
with the Divinity of Christ. To say that the Word is God might seem to
contradict the Unity by asserting the existence of a second God.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[56:586](2090014.htm#fr_585) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p46"></span> Reading *a cognitione temporis*.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[57:587](2090014.htm#fr_586) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p52"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[57:588](2090014.htm#fr_587) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p54"></span> Cf. [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[57:589](2090014.htm#fr_588) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p55"></span> I.e. potentially.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[57:590](2090014.htm#fr_589) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p56"></span> St. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[57:591](2090014.htm#fr_590) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p57"></span> [John
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[57:592](2090014.htm#fr_591) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p58"></span> [John
16.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[57:593](2090014.htm#fr_592) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p59"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[57:594](2090014.htm#fr_593) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p60"></span> St. [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[57:595](2090014.htm#fr_594) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p61"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p61.1"></span>.
The argument of §§ 18–20 is not easy. They begin with the possible
objection to *All things were made through Him*, that this would include
the Father among the Son’s creations. The answer is found in the
following words, *Without Him was not anything made*. These show that
the Son was not alone in His work; the Father is co-existent. But they
raise another difficulty. What if the Father were the sole agent in
creation, the Son only His inseparable Companion, yet taking no share in
the work? The answer is found in the preceding words, *All things were
made through Him*, amplified and explained by St. Paul when He says that
it was *through Him and in Him. In Him*, because when the Son, the
future Creator, was born, the world was potentially created; *in Him*
also because He is Life, and thus the condition of all existence. Again,
the truth of the words, *All things were made through Him*, is shewn by
the manner of His birth. It was instantaneous, and He was born endowed
with all His powers. We may say therefore that He was the author of His
own existence; *All things were made through Him*, with the necessary
exception of the Father.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[58:596](2090014.htm#fr_595) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p63"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[58:597](2090014.htm#fr_596) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p64"></span> St. [John i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[58:598](2090014.htm#fr_597) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p66"></span> Reading *sint*.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[58:599](2090014.htm#fr_598) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p68"></span> St. [Matt. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p68.1"></span>.
See the note to § 8.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[58:600](2090014.htm#fr_599) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p69"></span> St. [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[58:601](2090014.htm#fr_600) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p70"></span> [John
14.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[58:602](2090014.htm#fr_601) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p71"></span> [John
11.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[58:603](2090014.htm#fr_602) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p72"></span> [John
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[58:604](2090014.htm#fr_603) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p73"></span> St. [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[58:605](2090014.htm#fr_604) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p74"></span> St. [John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[58:606](2090014.htm#fr_605) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p75"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[58:607](2090014.htm#fr_606) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p76"></span> [John
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[58:608](2090014.htm#fr_607) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p77"></span> [John
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[58:609](2090014.htm#fr_608) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p78"></span> [John
16.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[58:610](2090014.htm#fr_609) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p79"></span> [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[58:611](2090014.htm#fr_610) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p80"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[58:612](2090014.htm#fr_611) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p81"></span> [John
14.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[58:613](2090014.htm#fr_612) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p82"></span> [John
10.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[58:614](2090014.htm#fr_613) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p83"></span> St. [Matt. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[59:615](2090014.htm#fr_614) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p87"></span> St. [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[59:616](2090014.htm#fr_615) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p88"></span> St. [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[60:617](2090014.htm#fr_616) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p92"></span> *Qui Patre et Filio auctoribus
confitendus est*; A comparison with *dum et usum et auctorem eius
ignorant* in § 4 makes this appear the probable translation. It might,
of course, mean *confess Him on the evidence of Father and Son*.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[60:618](2090014.htm#fr_617) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p93"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[60:619](2090014.htm#fr_618) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p94"></span> [Eph. iv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[60:620](2090014.htm#fr_619) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p95"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[60:621](2090014.htm#fr_620) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p96"></span> [Rom. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[60:622](2090014.htm#fr_621) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p97"></span> [Rom.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[60:623](2090014.htm#fr_622) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p100"></span> St. [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[60:624](2090014.htm#fr_623) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p101"></span> [John
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[60:625](2090014.htm#fr_624) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p102"></span> [John
4.21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[61:626](2090014.htm#fr_625) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p104"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[61:627](2090014.htm#fr_626) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p106"></span> St. [John xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[61:628](2090014.htm#fr_627) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p107"></span> [John
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[61:629](2090014.htm#fr_628) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p108"></span> [John
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[61:630](2090014.htm#fr_629) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p109"></span> [John
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[61:631](2090014.htm#fr_630) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p111"></span> [Rom.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[61:632](2090014.htm#fr_631) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p112"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[61:633](2090014.htm#fr_632) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p113"></span> [1 Cor.
12.4-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[61:634](2090014.htm#fr_633) <span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.ii-p115"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span
id="ii.v.ii.ii-p115.1"></span>, cited in § 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](2090015)
