[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090097)  [Next](2090099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*In reply to those
who say* <span id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170) *“If man has two
natures and two energies, Christ must be held to have three natures and
as many energies.”*

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p3"></span>Each individual man, since he is
composed of two natures, soul and body, and since these natures are
unchangeable in him, could appropriately be spoken of as two natures:
for he preserves even after their union thee natural properties of
either. For the body is not immortal, but corruptible; neither is the
soul mortal, but immortal: and the body is not invisible nor the soul
visible to bodily eyes: but the soul is rational and intellectual, and
incorporeal, while the body is dense and visible, and irrational. But
things that are opposed to one another in essence have not <span
id="page_65b">p. 65b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-Page_65b"></span>one nature, and, therefore, soul and
body cannot have one essence.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p4"></span>And again: if man is a rational and
mortal animal, and every definition is explanatory of the underlying
natures, and the rational is not the same as the mortal according to the
plan of nature, man then certainly cannot have one nature, according to
the rule of his own definition.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p5"></span>But if man should at any time be
said to have one nature, the word “nature” is here used instead of
“species,” as when we say that man does not differ from man in any
difference of nature. But since all men are fashioned in the same way,
and are composed of soul and body, and each has two distinct natures,
they are all brought under one definition. And this is not unreasonable,
for the holy Athanasius spake of all created things as having one nature
forasmuch as they were all produced, expressing himself thus in his
Oration against those who blasphemed the Holy Spirit: “That the Holy
Spirit is above all creation, and different from the nature of things
produced and peculiar to divinity, we may again perceive. For whatever
is seen to be common to many things, and not more in one and less in
another, is called essence <span id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171) .
Since, then, every man is composed of soul and body, accordingly we
speak of man as having one nature. But we cannot speak of our Lord’s
subsistence as one nature: for each nature preserves, even after the
union, its natural properties, nor can we find a class of Christs. For
no other Christ was born both of divinity and of humanity to be at once
God and man.”

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p7"></span>And again: man’s unity in species is
not the same thing as the unity of soul and body in essence. For man’s
unity in species makes clear the absolute similarity between all men,
while the unity of soul and body in essence is an insult to their very
existence, and reduces them to nothingness: for either the one must
change into the essence of the other, or from different things something
different must be produced, and so both would be changed, or if they
keep to their own proper limits there must be two natures. For, as
regards the nature of essence the corporeal is not the same as the
incorporeal. Therefore, although holding that man has one nature, not
because the essential quality of his soul and that of his body are the
same, but because the individuals included under the species are exactly
the same, it is not necessary for us to maintain that Christ also has
one nature, for in this case there is no species embracing many
subsistences.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p8"></span>Moreover, every compound <span
id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) is said to be composed of what
immediately composes it. For we do not say that a house is composed of
earth and water, but of bricks and timber. Otherwise, it would be
necessary to speak of man as composed of at least five things, viz., the
four elements and soul. And so also, in the case of our Lord Jesus
Christ we do not look at the parts of the parts, but at those divisions
of which He is immediately composed, viz., divinity and humanity.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p10"></span>And further, if by saying that man
has two natures we are obliged to hold that Christ has three, you, too,
by saying that man is composed of two natures must hold that Christ is
composed of three natures: and it is just the same with the energies.
For energy must correspond with nature: and Gregory the Theologian bears
witness that man is said to have and has two natures, saying, “God and
man are two natures, since, indeed, soul and body also are two
natures <span id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) .” And in his
discourse “Concerning Baptism” he says, “Since we consist of two parts,
soul and body, the visible and the invisible nature, the purification is
likewise twofold, that is, by water and Spirit <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[64b:2171](2090098.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p2"></span> This is directed to another
argument of the Severians. Cf. *Leont., De Sect*., 7, *Contr. Nest. et
Eutych*., I.

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[65b:2172](2090098.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p6"></span> *Epist*. 2 *ad Serap*., towards the
end; *Collect*., as above, c. 19.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[65b:2173](2090098.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p9"></span> *Anast., Collect*., ch. 19.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[65b:2174](2090098.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p11"></span> *Epist*. 1, *ad Cledon*.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[65b:2175](2090098.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xvi-p12"></span> *Orat*. 4, not far from the
beginning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the deification of the nature of our Lord's flesh and
of His will.](2090099)
