[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090018)  [Next](2090020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_118">p. 118</span>
<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_118"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Book VII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c12"><span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>This</span> is the seventh book of our
treatise against the wild extravagance of modern heresy. In order of
place it must follow its predecessors; in order of importance, as an
exposition of the mysteries of the right faith, it precedes and excels
them all. I am well aware how hard and steep is the path of evangelical
instruction up which we are mounting. The fears inspired by
consciousness of my own incapacity are plucking me back, but the warmth
of faith urges me on; the assaults of heresy heat my blood, and the
dangers of the ignorant excite my compassion. I fear to speak, and yet I
cannot be silent. A double dread subdues my spirit; it may be that
speech, it may be that silence, will render me guilty of a desertion of
the truth. For this cunning heresy has hedged itself round with
marvellous devices of perverted ingenuity. First there is the semblance
of devotion; then the language carefully chosen to lull the suspicions
of a candid listener; and again, the accommodation of their views to
secular philosophy; and finally, their withdrawing of attention from
manifest truth by a pretended explanation of Divine methods. Their loud
profession of the unity of God is a fraudulent imitation of the faith;
their assertion that Christ is the Son of God a play upon words for the
delusion of their hearers; their saying that He did not exist before He
was born a bid for the support of the world’s philosophers; their
confession of God as incorporeal and immutable leads, by a display of
fallacious logic, up to a denial of the birth of God from God. They turn
our arguments against ourselves; the Church’s faith is made the engine
of its own destruction. They have contrived to involve us in the
perplexing position of an equal danger, whether we reason with them or
whether we refrain. For they use the fact that we allow certain of their
assumptions to pass unchallenged as an argument on behalf of those which
we do contradict.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p3"></span>2. We call to mind that in the
preceding books the reader has been urged to study the whole of that
blasphemous manifesto <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844.md) , and mark
how it is animated throughout by the one aim of propagating the belief
that our Lord Jesus Christ is neither God, nor Son of God. Its authors
argue that He is permitted to use the names of God and of Son by virtue
of a certain adoption, though neither Godhead nor Sonship be His by
nature. They use the fact, true in itself, that God is immutable and
incorporeal, as an argument against the birth of the Son from Him. They
value the truth, that God the Father is One, only as a weapon against
our faith in the Godhead of Christ; pleading that an incorporeal nature
cannot be rationally conceived as generating another, and that our faith
in One God is inconsistent with the confession of God from God. But our
earlier books have already refuted and foiled this argument of theirs by
an appeal to the Law and the Prophets. Our defence has followed, step by
step, the course of their attack. We have set forth God from God, and at
the same time confessed One true God; shewing that this presentation of
the faith neither falls short of the truth by ascribing singleness of
Person to the One true God, nor adds to the faith by asserting the
existence of a second Deity. For we confess neither an isolated God, nor
yet two Gods. Thus, neither denying that God is One nor maintaining that
He is alone, we hold the straight road of truth. Each Divine Person is
in the Unity, yet no Person is the One God. Next, our purpose being to
demonstrate the irrefragable truth of this mystery by the evidence of
the Evangelists and Apostles, our first duty has been to make our
readers acquainted with the nature, truly subsisting and truly born, of
the Son of God; to demonstrate that He has no origin external to God,
and was not created out of nothing, but is the Son, born from God. This
is a truth which the evidence adduced in the last book has placed beyond
all doubt. The assertion that He bears the name of Son by virtue of
adoption has been put to silence, and He stands forth as a true Son by a
true birth. Our present task is to prove from the Gospels that, because
He is true Son, He is true God also. For unless He be true Son He cannot
be true God, nor true God unless He be true Son.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p5"></span>3. Nothing is more harassing to human
nature than the sense of impending danger. If calamities unknown or
unanticipated befall <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_119"></span>us, we may need pity, yet we have been
free from care; no load of anxiety has oppressed us. But he whose mind
is full of possibilities of trouble suffers already a torment in his
fear. I who now am venturing out to sea, am a mariner not unused to
shipwreck, a traveller who knows by experience holy brigands lurk in the
forests, an explorer of African deserts aware of the danger from
scorpions and asps and basilisks <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845.md)
. I enjoy no instant of relief from the knowledge and fear of present
danger. Every heretic is on the watch, noting every word as it drops
from my mouth. The whole progress of my argument is infested with
ambuscades and pitfalls and snares. It is not of the road, of its
hardness or steepness, that I complain; I am following in the footsteps
of the Apostles, not choosing my own path. My trouble is the constant
peril, the constant dread, of wandering into some ambush, of stumbling
into some pit, of being entangled in some net. My purpose is to proclaim
the unity of God, in the sense of the Law and Prophets and Apostles.
Sabellius is at hand, eager with cruel kindness to welcome me, on the
strength of this unity, and swallow me up in his own destruction. If I
withstand him, and deny that, in the Sabellian sense, God is One a fresh
heresy is ready to receive me, pointing out that I teach the existence
of two Gods. Again, if I undertake to tell how the Son of God was born
from Mary, Photinus, the Ebion of our day, will be prompt to twist this
assertion of the truth into a confirmation of his lie. I need mention no
other heresies save one; all the world knows that they are alien from
the Church. It is one that has been often denounced, often rejected, yet
it preys upon our vitals still. Galatia <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846.md) has reared a large brood of godless
assertors of the unity of God. Alexandria <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847.md) has sown broadcast, over almost the
whole world, her denial, which is an affirmation, of the doctrine of two
Gods. Pannonia <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848.md) upholds her
pestilent doctrine that the only birth of Jesus Christ was from the
Virgin. And the Church, distracted by these rival faiths, is in danger
of being led by means of truth into a rejection of truth. Doctrines are
being forced upon her for godless ends, which, according to the use that
is made of them, will either support or overthrow the faith. For
instance, we cannot, as true believers, assert that God is One, if we
mean by it that He is alone; for faith in a lonely God denies the
Godhead of the Son. If, on the other hand, we assert, as we truly can,
that the Son is God, we are in danger, so they fondly imagine, of
deserting the truth that God is One. We are in peril on either hand; we
may deny the unity or we may maintain the isolation. But it is a danger
which has no terrors for the *foolish things of the world* <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849.md) . Our adversaries are blind to the
fact that His assertion that He is not alone is consistent with unity;
that though He is One He is not solitary.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p11"></span>4. But I trust that the Church, by the
light of her doctrine, will so enlighten the world’s vain wisdom, that,
even though it accept not the mystery of the faith, it will recognise
that in our conflict with heretics we, and not they, are the true
representatives of that mystery. For great is the force of truth; not
only is it its own sufficient witness, but the more it is assailed the
more evident it becomes; the daily shocks which it receives only
increase its inherent stability. It is the peculiar property of the
Church that when she is buffeted she is triumphant, when she is
assaulted with argument she proves herself in the right, when she is
deserted by her supporters she holds the field. It is her wish that all
men should remain at her side and in her bosom; if it lay with her, none
would become unworthy to abide under the shelter of that august mother,
none would be cast out or suffered to depart from her calm retreat. But
when heretics desert her or she expels them, the loss she endures, in
that she cannot save them, is compensated by an increased assurance that
she alone can offer bliss. This is a truth which the passionate zeal of
rival heresies brings into the clearest prominence. The Church, ordained
by the Lord and established by His Apostles, is one for all; but the
frantic folly of discordant sects has severed them from her. And it is
obvious that these dissensions concerning the faith result from a
distorted mind, which twists the words of Scripture into conformity with
its opinion, instead of adjusting that opinion to the words of
Scripture. And thus, amid the clash of mutually destructive errors, the
Church stands revealed not only by her own teaching, but by that of her
rivals. They are ranged, all of them, against her; and the very fact
that she stands single and alone is her sufficient answer to their
godless delusions. The hosts of heresy assemble themselves against her;
each of them can defeat all the others, but not one can win a victory
for itself. The only victory is the triumph which the Church celebrates
over them all. Each heresy wields against its adversary some weapon
<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_120"></span>already shattered, in another instance,
by the Church’s condemnation. There is no point of union between them,
and the outcome of their internecine struggles is the confirmation of
the faith.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p12"></span>5. Sabellius sweeps away the birth of
the Son, and then preaches the unity of God; but he does not doubt that
the mighty Nature, which acted in the human Christ, was God. He shuts
his eyes to the revealed mystery of the Sonship; the works done seem to
him so marvellous that he cannot believe that He who performed them
could undergo a true generation. When he hears the words, *He that hath
seen Me hath seen the Father also* <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850.md) , he jumps to the blasphemous
conclusion of an inseparable and indistinguishable identity of nature in
Father and Son, because he fails to see that the revelation of the birth
is the mode in which Their unity of nature is manifested to us. For the
fact that the Father is seen in the Son is a proof of the Son’s
Divinity, not a disproof of His birth. Thus our knowledge of Each of
Them is conditioned by our knowledge of the Other, for there is no
difference of nature between them and, since in this respect they are
One, a reverent study of the character of Either will give us a true
insight into the nature of Both. For, indeed, it is certain that He, Who
was in the form of God, must in His self-revelation present Himself to
us in the exact aspect of the form of God <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851.md) . Again, this perverse and insane
delusion derives a further encouragement from the words, *I and the
Father are One* <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852.md) . From the fact
of unity in the same nature they have impiously deduced a confusion of
Persons; their interpretation, that the words signify a single Power,
contradicts the tenour of the passage. For *I and the Father are One*
does not indicate a solitary God. The use of the conjunction *and* shews
clearly that more than one Person is signified; and *are* requires a
plurality of subject. Moreover, the *One* is not incompatible with a
birth. Its sense is, that the Two Persons have the one nature in common.
The *One* is inconsistent with difference; the *are* with identity.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p16"></span>6. Set our modern heresy in array
against the delusion, equally wild, of Sabellius; let them make the best
of their case. The new heretics will advance the passage. *The Father is
greater than I* <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853.md) . Neglecting the
mystery of the Divine birth, and the mystery of God’s emptying Himself
and taking flesh, they will argue the inferiority of His nature from His
assertion that the Father is the greater. They will plead against
Sabellius that Christ is a Son, in so far as One can be a Son who is
inferior to the Father and needs to ask for restoration to His glory,
and fears to die and indeed did die. In reply Sabellius will adduce His
deeds in evidence of His Divine nature; and while our novel heresy, to
escape the admission of Christ’s true Sonship, will heartily agree with
him that God is One, Sabellius will emphatically assert the same article
of the faith, in the sense that no Son exists. The one side lays stress
upon the action of the Son; the other urges that in that action God is
manifest. The one will demonstrate the unity, the other disprove the
identity. Sabellius will defend his position thus:—“The works that were
done could have been done by no other nature than the Divine. Sins were
remitted, the sick were healed, the lame ran, the blind saw, the dead
lived. God alone has power for this. The words *I and the Father are
One* could only have been spoken from self-knowledge; no nature, outside
the Father’s, could have uttered them. Why then suggest a second
substance, and urge me to believe in a second God? These works are
peculiar to God; the One God wrought them.” His adversaries, animated by
a hatred, equally venomous, for the faith, will argue that the Son is
unlike in nature to God the Father:—“You are ignorant of the mystery of
your salvation. You must believe in a Son through Whom the worlds were
made, through Whom man was fashioned, Who gave the Law through Angels,
Who was born of Mary, Who was sent by the Father, was crucified, dead
and buried, Who rose again from the dead and is at the right hand of
God, Who is the Judge of quick and dead. Unto Him we must rise again, we
must confess Him, we must earn our place in His kingdom.” Each of the
two enemies of the Church is fighting the Church’s battle. Sabellius
displays Christ as God by the witness of the Divine nature manifested in
His works; Sabellius’ antagonists confess Christ, on the evidence of the
revealed faith, to be the Son of God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p18"></span>7. Again, how glorious a victory for
our faith is that in which Ebion—in other words, Photinus—both wins the
day and loses it! He castigates Sabellius for denying that the Son of
God is Man, and in his turn has to submit to the reproaches of Arian
fanatics for failing to see that this Man is the Son of God. Against
Sabellius he calls the Gospels to his aid, with their evidence
concerning the Son of Mary; Arius deprives him of this ally by proving
that the Gospels make Christ some<span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_121"></span>thing more than the Son of Mary.
Sabellius denies that there is a Son of God; against him Photinus
elevates man to the place of Son. Photinus will hear nothing of a Son
born before the worlds; against him, Arius denies that the only birth of
the Son of God was His human birth. Let them defeat one another to their
hearts’ content, for every victory which each of them wins is balanced
by a defeat. Our present adversaries are ranted in the matter of the
Divine nature of the Son; Sabellius in the matter of the Son’s revealed
existence; Photinus is convicted of ignorance, or else of falsehood, in
his denial of the Son’s birth before the worlds. Meanwhile the Church,
whose faith is based upon the teaching of Evangelists and Apostles,
holds fast, against Sabellius, her assertion that the Son exists;
against Arius, that He is God by nature; against Photinus, that He
created the universe. And she is the more convinced of her faith, in
that they cannot combine to contradict it. For Sabellius points to the
works of Christ in proof of the Divinity of Him Who wrought them, though
he knows not that the Son was their Author. The Arians grant Him the
name of Son, though they confess not that the true nature of God dwelt
in Him. Photinus maintains His manhood, though in maintaining it he
forgets that Christ was born as God before the worlds. Thus, in their
several assertions and denials, there are points in which each heresy is
in the right in defence or attack; and the result of their conflicts is
that the truth of our confession is brought into clearer light.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p19"></span>8. I felt that I must spare a little
space to point this out. It has been from no love for amplification, but
that it might serve as a warning. First, I wished to expose the vague
and confused character of this crowd of heresies, whose mutual feuds
turn, as we have seen, to our advantage. Secondly, in my warfare against
the blasphemous doctrines of modern heresy; that is, in my task of
proclaiming that both God the Father and God the Son are God,—in other
words, that Father and Son are One in name, One in nature, One in the
kind of Divinity which they possess,—I wished to shield myself from any
charge which might be brought against me, either as an advocate of two
Gods or of one lonely and isolated Deity. For in God the Father and God
the Son, as I have set them forth, no confusion of Persons can be
detected; nor in my exposition of Their common nature can any difference
between the Godhead of the One and of the Other be discerned. In the
preceding book I have sufficiently refuted, by the witness of the
Gospels, those who deny the subsistence of God the Son by a true birth
from God; my present duty is to shew that He, Who in the truth of His
nature is Son of God, is also in the truth of His nature God. But this
proof must not degenerate into the fatal profession of a solitary God,
or of a second God. It shall manifest God as One yet not alone; but in
its care to avoid the error of making Him lonely it shall not fall into
the error of denying His unity.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p20"></span>9. Thus we have all these different
assurances of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ:—His name, His
birth, His nature, His power, His own assertion. As to the name, I
conceive that no doubt is possible. It is written, *In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God* <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854.md) . What reason can there be for
suspecting that He is not what His name indicates? And does not this
name clearly describe His nature? If a statement be contradicted, it
must be for some reason. What reason, I demand, is there in this
instance for denying that He is God? The name is given Him, plainly and
distinctly, and unqualified by any incongruous addition which might
raise a doubt. The Word, we read, which was made flesh, was none other
than God. Here is no loophole for any such conjecture as that He has
received this name as a favour or taken it upon Himself, so possessing a
titular Godhead which is not His by nature.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p22"></span>10. Consider the other recorded
instances in which this name was given by favour or assumed. To Moses it
was said, *I have made thee a god to Pharaoh* <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855.md) . Does not this addition, *to
Pharaoh*, account for the title? Did God impart to Moses the Divine
nature? Did He not rather make Moses a god in the sight of Pharaoh, who
was to be smitten with terror when Moses’ serpent swallowed the magic
serpents and returned into a rod, when he drove back the venomous flies
which he had called forth, when he stayed the hail by the same power
wherewith he had summoned it, and made the locusts depart by the same
might which had brought them; when in the wonders that he wrought the
magicians saw the finger of God? That was the sense in which Moses was
appointed to be god to Pharaoh; he was feared and entreated, he
chastised and healed. It is one thing to be appointed a god; it is
another thing to be God. He was made a god to Pharaoh; he had not that
nature and that name wherein God consists. I call to mind another
instance <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_122"></span>of the name being given as a title;
that where it is written, *I have said, Ye are gods* <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856.md) . But this is obviously the granting
of a favour. *I have said* proves that it is no definition, but only a
description by One Who chooses to speak thus. A definition gives us
knowledge of the object defined; a description depends on the arbitrary
will of the speaker. When a speaker is manifestly conferring a title,
that title has its origin only in the speaker’s words, not in the thing
itself. The title is not the name which expresses its nature and kind.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p25"></span>11. But in this case the *Word* in
very truth is God; the essence of the Godhead exists in the Word, and
that essence is expressed in the Word’s name. For the name Word is
inherent in the Son of God as a consequence of His mysterious birth, as
are also the names *Wisdom* and *Power*. These, together with the
substance which is His by a true birth, were called into existence to be
the Son of God <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857.md) ; yet, since they
are the elements of God’s nature, they are still immanent in Him in
undiminished extent, although they were born from Him to be His Son.
For, as we have said so often, the mystery which we preach is that of a
Son Who owes His existence not to division but to birth. He is not a
segment cut off, and so incomplete, but an Offspring born, and therefore
perfect; for birth involves no diminution of the Begetter, and has the
possibility of perfection for the Begotten. And therefore the titles of
those substantive properties <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858.md) are
applied to God the Only-begotten, for when He came into existence by
birth it was they which constituted His perfection; and this although
they did not thereby desert the Father, in Whom, by the immutability of
His nature, they are eternally present. For instance, the Word is God
the Only-begotten, and yet the Unbegotten Father is never without His
Word. Not that the nature of the Son is that of a sound which is
uttered. He is God from God, subsisting through a true birth; God’s own
Son, born from the Father, indistinguishable from Him in nature, and
therefore inseparable. This is the lesson which His title of the Word is
meant to teach us. And in the same way Christ is the Wisdom and the
Power of God; not that He is, as He is often regarded <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859.md) , the inward activity of the Father’s
might or thought, but that His nature, possessing through birth a true
substantial existence, is indicated by these names of inward forces. For
an object, which has by birth an existence of its own, cannot be
regarded as a property; a property is necessarily inherent in some being
and can have no independent existence. But it was to save us from
concluding that the Son is alien from the Divine nature of His Father
that He, the Only-begotten from the eternal God His Father, born as God
into a substantial existence of His own, has had Himself revealed to us
under these names of properties, of which the Father, out of Whom He
came into existence, has suffered no diminution. Thus He, being God, is
nothing else than God. For when I hear the words, *And the Word was
God,* they do not merely tell me that the Son was called God; they
reveal to my understanding that He is God. In those previous instances,
where Moses was called god and others were styled gods, there was the
mere addition of a name by way of title. Here a solid essential truth is
stated; *The Word was God*. That *was* indicates no accidental title,
but an eternal reality, a permanent element of His existence, an
inherent character of His nature.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p29"></span>12. And now let us see whether the
confession of Thomas the Apostle, when he cried, *My Lord and My God,*
corresponds with this assertion of the Evangelist. We see that he speaks
of Him, Whom he confesses to be God, as *My God*. Now Thomas was
undoubtedly familiar with those words of the Lord, *Hear, O Israel, the
Lord thy God is One*. How then could the faith of an Apostle become so
oblivious of that primary command as to confess Christ as God, when life
is conditional upon the confession of the Divine unity? It was because,
in the light of the Resurrection, the whole mystery of the faith had
become visible to the Apostle. He had often heard such words as, *I and
the Father are One*, and, *All things that the Father hath are Mine*,
and, *I in the Father and the Father in Me* <span
id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860.md) ; and now he can confess that the name
of God expresses the nature of Christ, without peril to the faith.
Without breach of loyalty to the One God, the Father, his devotion could
now regard the Son of God as God, since he believed that everything
contained in the nature of the Son was truly of the same nature with the
Father. No longer need he fear that such a confession as his was the
proclamation of a second God, a treason against the unity of the Divine
nature; for it was not a second God Whom that perfect birth of the
Godhead had brought into being. Thus it was with full knowledge of the
mystery of the Gospel that Thomas confessed his Lord and his God. It was
not a title of honour; <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_123"></span>it was a confession of nature. He
believed that Christ was God in substance and in power. And the Lord, in
turn, shews that this act of worship was the expression not of mere
reverence, but of faith, when He says, *Because thou hast seen, thou
hast believed; blessed are they which have not seen, and have believed*.
For Thomas had seen before he believed. But, you ask, What was it that
Thomas believed? That, beyond a doubt, which is expressed in his words,
*My Lord and my God*. No nature but that of God could have risen by its
own might from death to life; and it is this fact, that Christ is God,
which was confessed by Thomas with the confidence of an assured faith.
Shall we, then, dream that His name of God is not a substantial reality,
when that name has been proclaimed by a faith based upon certain
evidence? Surely a Son devoted to His Father, One Who did not His own
will but the will of Him that sent Him, Who sought not His own glory but
the glory of Him from Whom He came, would have rejected the adoration
involved in such a name as destructive of that unity of God which had
been the burden of His teaching. Yet, in fact, He confirms this
assertion of the mysterious truth, made by the believing Apostle; He
accepts as His own the name which belongs to the nature of the Father.
And He teaches that they are blessed who, though they have not seen Him
rise from the dead, yet have believed, on the assurance of the
Resurrection, that He is God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p31"></span>13. Thus the name which expresses His
nature proves the truth of our confession of the faith. For the name,
which indicates any single substance, points out also any other
substance of the same kind; and, in this instance, there are not two
substances but one substance, of the one kind. For the Son of God is
God; this is the truth expressed in His name. The one name does not
embrace two Gods; for the one name God is the name of one indivisible
nature. For since the Father is God and the Son is God, and that name
which is peculiar to the Divine nature is inherent in Each, therefore
the Two are One. For the Son, though He subsists through a birth from
the Divine nature, yet preserves the unity in His name; and this birth
of the Son does not compel loyal believers to acknowledge two Gods,
since our confession declares that Father and Son are One, both in
nature and in name. Thus the Son of God has the Divine name as the
result of His birth. Now the second step in our demonstration was to be
that of shewing that it is by virtue of His birth that He is God. I have
still to bring forward the evidence of the Apostles that the Divine name
is used of Him in an exact sense; but for the present I purpose to
continue our enquiry into the language of the Gospels.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p32"></span>14. And first I ask what new element,
destructive of His Godhead, can have been imported by birth into the
nature of the Son? Universal reason rejects the supposition that a being
can become different in nature, by the process of birth, from the being
to which its birth is due; although we recognise the possibility that
from parents, different in kind, an offspring sharing the nature of
both, yet diverse from either, may be propagated. The fact is familiar
in the case of beasts, both tame and wild. But even in this case there
is no real novelty; the new qualities already exist, concealed in the
two different parental natures, and are only developed by the connexion.
The birth of their joint offspring is not the cause of that offspring’s
difference from its parents. The difference is a gift from them of
various diversities, which are received and combined in one frame. When
this is the case as to the transmission and reception even of bodily
differences, is it not a form of madness to assert that the birth of God
the Only-begotten was the birth from God of a nature inferior to
Himself? For the giving of birth is a function of the true nature of the
transmitter of life; and without the presence and action of that true
nature there can be no birth. The object of all this heat and passion is
to prove that there was no birth, but a creation, of the Son of God;
that the Divine nature is not His origin and that He does not possess
that nature in His personal subsistence, but draws, from what was
non-existent, a nature different in kind from the Divine. They are angry
because He says, *That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the Spirit is Spirit* <span
id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861.md) . For, since God is a Spirit, it is
clear that in One born from Him there can be nothing alien or different
from that Spirit from which He was born. Thus the birth of God
constitutes Him perfect God. And hence also it is clear that we must not
say that He began to exist, but only that He was born. For there is a
sense in which beginning is different from birth. A thing which begins
to exist either comes into existence out of nothing, or developes out of
one state into another, ceasing to be what it was before; so, for
instance, gold is formed out of earth, solids melt into liquids, cold
changes to warmth, white to red, water <span id="page_124">p. 124</span>
<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_124"></span>breeds moving creatures, lifeless
objects turn into living. In contrast to all this, the Son of God did
not begin, out of nothing, to be God, but was born as God; nor had He an
existence of another kind before the Divine. Thus He Who was born to be
God had neither a beginning of His Godhead, nor yet a development up to
it. His birth retained for Him that nature out of which He came into
being; the Son of God, in His distinct existence, is what God is, and is
nothing else.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p34"></span>15. Again, any one who is in doubt
concerning this matter may gain from the Jews an accurate knowledge of
Christ’s nature; or rather learn that He was truly born from the Gospel,
where it is written, *Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill Him
because He not only broke the Sabbath, but said also that God was His
own Father, making Himself equal with God* <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862.md) . This passage is unlike most others
in not giving us the words spoken by the Jews, but the Apostle’s
explanation of their motive in wishing to kill the Lord. We see that no
plea of misapprehension can excuse the wickedness of these blasphemers;
for we have the Apostle’s evidence that the true nature of Christ was
fully revealed to them. They could speak of His birth:—*He said that God
was His Father, making Himself equal with God*. Was not His clearly a
birth of nature from nature, when He published the equality of His
nature by speaking of God, by name, as His own Father? Now it is
manifest that equality consists in the absence of difference between
those who are equal. Is it not also manifest that the result of birth
must be a nature in which there is an absence of difference between Son
and Father? And this is the only possible origin of true equality; birth
can only bring into existence a nature equal to its origin. But again,
we can no more hold that there is equality where there is confusion,
than we can where there is difference. Thus equality, as of the
image <span id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863.md) , is incompatible with
isolation and with diversity; for equality cannot dwell with difference,
nor yet in solitude.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p37"></span>16. And now, although we have found
the sense of Scripture, as we understand it, in harmony with the
conclusions of ordinary reason, the two agreeing that equality is
incompatible either with diversity or with isolation, yet we must seek a
fresh support for our contention from actual words of our Lord. For only
so can we check that licence of arbitrary interpretation whereby these
bold traducers of the faith would even venture to cavil at the Lord’s
solemn self-revelation. His answer to the Jews was this:—*The Son can do
nothing of Himself but what He seeth the Father do; for what things
soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. For the Father
loveth the Son, and sheweth Him all things that Himself doeth; and He
will shew Him greater works than these, that ye may marvel. For as the
Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will. For the Father judgeth no man, but hath given
all judgment to the Son, that all may honour the Son even as they honour
the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which
hath sent Him* <span id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864.md) . The course of
our argument, as I had shaped it in my mind, required that each several
point of the debate should be handled singly; that, since we had been
taught that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God in name, in
birth, in nature, in power, in self-revelation, our demonstration of the
faith should establish each successive point in that order. But His
birth is a barrier to such a treatment of the question; for a
consideration of it includes a consideration of His name and nature and
power and self-revelation. For His birth involves all these, and they
are His by the fact that He is born. And thus our argument concerning
His birth has taken such a course that it is impossible for us to keep
these other matters back for separate discussion in their turn.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p39"></span>17. The chief reason why the Jews
wished to kill the Lord was that, in calling God His Father, He had made
Himself equal with God; and therefore He put His answer, in which He
reproved their evil passion, into the form of an exposition of the whole
mystery of our faith. For just before this, when He had healed the
paralytic and they had passed their judgment upon Him that He was worthy
of death for breaking the Sabbath, He had said, *My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work* <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865.md) . Their
jealousy had been inflamed to the utmost by the raising of Himself to
the level of God which was involved in this use of the name of Father.
And now He wishes to assert His birth and to reveal the powers of His
nature, and so He says, *I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do*. These opening words of His
reply are aimed at that wicked zeal of the Jews, which hurried them on
even to the desire of slaying Him. It is in reference to the charge of
breaking the Sabbath that He says, *My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work*. He wished them to <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_125"></span>understand that His practice was
justified by Divine authority; and He taught them by the same words that
His work must be regarded as the work of the Father, Who was working in
Him all that He wrought. And again, it was to subdue the jealousy
awakened by His speaking of God as His Father that He uttered those
words, *Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do*. Lest this making of Himself
equal to God, as having the name and nature of God’s Son, should
withdraw men’s faith from the truth that He had been born, He says that
the Son can do nothing but what He sees the Father do. Next, in
confirmation of the saving harmony of truths in our confession of Father
and of Son, He displays this nature which is His by birth; a nature
which derives its power of action not from successive gifts of strength
to do particular deeds, but from knowledge. He shews that this knowledge
is not imparted by the Father’s performance of any bodily work, as a
pattern, that the Son may imitate what the Father has previously done;
but that, by the action of the Divine nature, He had come to share the
subsistence of the Divine nature, or, in other words, had been born as
Son from the Father. He told them that, because the power and the nature
of God dwelt consciously within Him, it was impossible for Him to do
anything which He had not seen the Father doing; that, since it is in
the might of the Father that God the Only-begotten performs His works
His liberty of action coincides in its range with His knowledge of the
powers of the nature of God the Father; a nature inseparable from
Himself, and lawfully owned by Him in virtue of His birth. For God sees
not after a bodily fashion, but possesses, by His nature, the vision of
Omnipotence.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p41"></span>18. The next words are, *For what
things soever He*—the Father—*doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise*.
This *likewise* is added to indicate His birth; *whatsoever* and *same*
to indicate the true Divinity of His nature. *Whatsoever* and *same*
make it impossible that there should be any actions of His that are
different from or outside, the actions of the Father. Thus He, Whose
nature has power to do all the same things as the Father, is included in
the same nature with the Father. But when, in contrast with this, we
read that all these same things are done by the Son *likewise*, the fact
that the works are like those of Another is fatal to the supposition
that He Who does them works in isolation. Thus the same things that the
Father does are all done likewise by the Son. Here we have clear proof
of His true birth, and at the same time a convincing attestation of the
Mystery of our faith, which, with its foundation in the Unity of the
nature of God, confesses that there resides in Father and Son an
indivisible Divinity. For the Son does the same things as the Father,
and does them likewise; while acting in like manner He does the same
things. Two truths are combined in one proposition; that His works are
done likewise proves His birth; that they are the same works proves His
nature.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p42"></span>19. Thus the progressive revelation
contained in our Lord’s reply is at one with the progressive statement
of truth in the Church’s confession of faith. Neither of them divides
the nature, and both declare the birth. For the next words of Christ
are, *For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth Him all things that
Himself doeth; and He will shew Him greater works than these, that ye
may marvel. For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them,
even so the Son quickeneth whom He will*. Can there be any other purpose
in this revelation of the manner in which God works, except that of
inculcating the true birth; the faith in a subsisting Son born from the
subsisting God, His Father? The only other explanation is that God the
Only-begotten was so ignorant that He needed the instruction conveyed in
this showing; but the reckless blasphemy of the suggestion makes this
alternative impossible. For He, knowing, as He does, everything that He
is taught, has no need of the teaching. And accordingly, after the
words, *The Father loveth the Son, and sheweth Him all things that
Himself doeth*, we are next informed that all this shewing is for our
instruction in the faith; that the Father and the Son may have their
equal share in our confession, and we be saved, by this statement that
the Father shews all that He does to the Son, from the delusion that the
Son’s knowledge is imperfect. With this object He goes on to say, *And
He will shew Him greater works than these, that ye may marvel. For as
the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will*. We see that the Son has full knowledge of the
future works which the Father will shew Him hereafter. He knows that He
will be shewn how, after His Father’s example, He is to give life to the
dead. For He says that the Father will shew to the Son things at which
they shall marvel; and at once proceeds to tell them what these things
are; *For as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so
the Son quickeneth whom He will*. The power is equal because the nature
is one and the same. The shewing of the works is an aid, not to
ignorance in <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_126"></span>Him, but to faith in us. It conveys to
the Son no knowledge of things unknown, but it imparts to us the
confidence to proclaim His birth, by assuring us that the Father has
shewn to Him all the works that He Himself can do. The terms used in
this Divine discourse have been chosen with the utmost deliberation,
lest any vagueness of language should suggest a difference of nature
between the Two. Christ says that the Father’s works were shewn Him,
instead of saying that, to enable Him to perform them, a mighty nature
was given Him. Hereby He wishes to reveal to us that this shewing was a
substantive part of the process of His birth, since, simultaneously with
that birth, there was imparted to Him by the Father’s love a knowledge
of the works which the Father willed that He should do. And again, to
save us from being led, by this declaration of the shewing, to suppose
that the Son’s nature is ignorant and therefore different from the
Father’s, He makes it clear that He already knows the things that are to
be shewn Him. So far, indeed, is He from needing the authority of
precedent to enable Him to act, that He is to give life to whom He will.
To will implies a free nature, subsisting with power to choose in the
blissful exercise of omnipotence.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p43"></span>20. And next, lest it should seem that
to give life to whom He will is not within the power of One Who has been
truly born, but is only the prerogative of ingenerate Omnipotence, He
hastens to add, *For the Father judgeth no man, but hath given all
judgment to the Son*. The statement that all judgment is given teaches
both His birth and His Sonship; for only a nature which is altogether
one with the Father’s could possess all things; and a Son can possess
nothing, except by gift. But all judgment has been given Him for He
quickens whom He will. Now we cannot suppose that judgment is taken away
from the Father, although He does not exercise it; for the Son’s whole
power of judgment proceeds from the Father’s, being a gift from Him. And
there is no concealment of the reason why judgment has been given to the
Son, for the words which follow are, *But He hath given all judgment to
the Son, that all men may honour the Son even as they honour the Father.
He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father Which hath sent
Him*. What possible excuse remains for doubt, or for the irreverence of
denial? The reason for the gift of judgment is that the Son may receive
an honour equal to that which is paid to the Father; and thus he who
dishonours the Son is guilty of dishonouring the Father also. How, after
this proof, can we imagine that the nature given Him by birth is
different from the Father’s, when He is the Father’s equal in work, in
power, in honour, in the punishment awarded to gainsayers? Thus this
whole Divine reply is nothing else than an unfolding of the mystery of
His birth. And the only distinction that it is right or possible to make
between Father and Son is that the Latter was born; yet born in such a
sense as to be One with His Father.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p44"></span>21. Thus the Father works hitherto and
the Son works. In Father and Son you have the names which express Their
nature in relation to Each other. Note also that it is the Divine
nature, that through which God works, that is working here. And
remember, lest you fall into the error of imagining that the operation
of two unlike natures is here described, how it was said concerning the
blind man, *But that the works of God may be made manifest in him, I
must work the works of Him that sent Me* <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866.md) . You see that in his case the work
wrought by the Son is the Father’s work; and the Son’s work is God’s
work. The remainder of the discourse which we are considering also deals
with works; but my defence is at present only concerned with assigning
the whole work to Both, and pointing out that They are at one in Their
method of working, since the Son is employed upon that work which the
Father does hitherto. The sanction contained in this fact that, by
virtue of His Divine birth, the Father is working with Him in all that
He does, will save us from supposing that the Lord of the Sabbath was
doing wrong in working on the Sabbath. His Sonship is not affected, for
there is no confusion of His Divinity with the Father’s, and no negation
of it; His Godhead is not affected, for His Divine nature is untouched.
Their unity is not affected, for no difference is revealed to sever
Them; and Their unity is not presented in such a light as to contradict
Their distinct existence. First recognise the Sonship of the Son; *The
Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do.* Here
His birth is manifest; because of it He can do nothing of Himself till
He sees it being done. He cannot be unbegotten, because He can do
nothing of Himself; He has no power of initiation, and therefore He must
have been born. But the fact that He can see the Father’s works proves
that He has the comprehension which belongs to the conscious Possessor
of Divinity. Next, mark that He does possess this true Divine
nature;—*For what things soever He doeth, these also doeth* <span
id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_127"></span>*the
Son likewise*. And now that we have seen Him endowed with the powers of
that nature, note how this results in unity, how one nature dwells in
the Two;—*That all men may honour the Son, even as they honour the
Father*. And then, lest reflection on this unity entangle you in the
delusion of a solitary and self-contained God, take to heart the mystery
of the faith manifested in these words, *He that honoureth not the Son
honoureth not the Father Which hath sent Him*. The rage and cunning of
heresy may do their worst; our position is impregnable. He is the Son,
because He can do nothing of Himself; He is God, because, whatever the
Father does, He does the same; They Two are One, because He is equal in
honour to the Father and does the very same works; He is not the Father,
because He is sent. So great is the wealth of mysterious truth contained
in this one doctrine of the birth! It embraces His name, His nature, His
power, His self-revelation; for everything conveyed to Him in His birth
must be contained in that nature from which His birth is derived. Into
His nature no element of any substance different in kind from that of
His Author is introduced, for a nature which springs from one nature
only must be entirely one with that nature which is its parent. An unity
is that which, containing no discordant elements, is one in kind with
itself; an unity constituted through birth cannot be solitary; for
solitude can have but a single occupant, while an unity constituted
through birth implies the conjunction of Two.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p46"></span>22. And furthermore, let His own
Divine words bear witness to Himself. He says, *They that are of My
sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow Me; and I give
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them of My hand. That which My Father hath given Me is greater
than all, and no man shall be able to pluck them out of My Father’s
hand. I and the Father are one* <span id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867.md)
. What lethargy can blunt so utterly the edge of our understanding as to
render so precise a statement for one moment obscure to us? What proud
sophistry can play such pranks with human docility as to persuade those,
who have learnt from these words the knowledge of what God is that they
must not recognise God in Him Whose Godhead was here revealed to them?
Heresy ought either to bring forward other Gospels in support of its
doctrine; or else, if our existing Gospels are the only documents which
teach of God, why do they not believe the lessons taught? If they are
the only source of knowledge, why not draw faith, as well as knowledge,
from them? Yet now we find that their faith is held in defiance of their
knowledge; and hence it is a faith rooted not in knowledge, but in sin;
a faith of bold irreverence, instead of reverent humility, towards the
truth confessedly known. God the Only-begotten, as we have seen, fully
assured of His own nature, reveals with the utmost precision of language
the mystery of His birth. He reveals it, ineffable though it is, in such
wise that we can believe and confess it; that we can understand that He
was born and believe that He has the nature of God and is One with the
Father, and One with Him in such a sense that God is not alone nor Son
another name for Father, but that in very truth He is the Son. For,
firstly, He assures us of the powers of His Divine nature, saying of His
sheep, *and no man shall pluck them out of My hand*. It is the utterance
of conscious power, this confession of free and irresistible energy,
that will allow no man to pluck His sheep from His hand. But more than
this; not only has He the nature of God, but He would have us know that
nature is His by birth from God, and hence He adds, *That which the
Father has given Me is greater than all*. He makes no secret of His
birth from the Father, for what He received from the Father He says is
greater than all. And He Who received it, received it at His birth, not
after His birth, and yet it came to Him from Another, for He received
it <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868.md) . But He, Who received this
gift from Another, forbids us to suppose that He Himself is different in
kind from That Other, and does not eternally subsist with the same
nature as that of Him Who gave the gift, by saying, *No man shall be
able to pluck them out of My Father’s hand*. None can pluck them out of
His hand, for He has received from His Father that which is greater than
all things. What, then, means this contradictory assertion that none can
pluck them from His Father’s hand? It is the Son’s hand which received
them from the Father, the Father’s hand which gave them to the Son: in
what sense is it said that what cannot be plucked from the Son’s hand
cannot be plucked from the Father’s hand? Hear, if you wish to know:—*I
and the Father are one*. The Son’s hand is the Father’s hand. For the
Divine nature does not deteriorate or cease to be the same in passing
through birth: nor yet is this sameness a bar to our faith in the birth,
for in that birth no alien element was admitted into His nature. And
here He <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_128"></span>speaks of the Son’s hand, which is the
hand of the Father, that by a bodily similitude you may learn the power
of the one Divine nature which is in Both; for the nature and the power
of the Father is in the Son. And lastly, that in this mysterious truth
of the birth you may discern the true and indistinguishable unity of the
nature of God, the words were spoken, *I and the Father are One*. They
were spoken that in this unity we might see neither difference nor
solitude; for They are Two, and yet no second nature came into being
through that true birth and generation.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p49"></span>23. There still remains, if I read
them aright, the same desire in these maddened souls, though their
opportunity for fulfilling it is lost. Their bitter hearts still cherish
a longing for mischief which they can no longer hope to satisfy. The
Lord is on His throne in heaven, and the furious hatred of heresy cannot
drag Him, as the Jews did, to the Cross. But the spirit of unbelief is
the same, though now it takes the form of rejecting His Godhead. They
bid defiance to His words, though they cannot deny that He spoke them.
They vent their hatred in blasphemy; instead of stones they shower
abuse. If they could they would bring Him down from His throne to a
second crucifixion. When the Jews were moved to wrath by the novelty of
Christ’s teaching we read, *The Jews therefore took up stones to stone
Him. He answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from the
Father; for which of those works do ye stone Me? The Jews answered Him,
For a good work we stone Thee not, but for blasphemy; and because Thou,
being a man, makest Thyself God* <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869.md)
. I bid you, heretic, to recognise herein your own deeds, your own
words. Be sure that you are their partner, for you have made their
unbelief your pattern. It was at the words, *I and the Father are One*,
that the Jews took up stones. Their godless irritation at the revelation
of that saving mystery hurried them on even to an attempt to slay. There
is no one whom you can stone; but is your guilt in denying Him less than
theirs? The will is the same, though it is frustrated by His throne in
heaven. Nay, it is you that are more impious than the Jew. He lifted his
stone against the Body, you lift yours against the Spirit; he as he
thought, against man, you against God; he against a sojourner on earth,
you against Him that sits upon the throne of majesty; he against One
Whom he knew not, you against Him Whom you confess; he against the
mortal Christ, you against the Judge of the universe. The Jew says,
*Being Man;* you say, ‘Being a creature.’ You and he join in the cry,
*Makest Thyself God*, with the same insolence of blasphemy. You deny
that He is God begotten of God; you deny that He is the Son by a true
birth; you deny that His words, *I and the Father are One*, contain the
assertion of one and the same nature in Both. You foist upon us in His
stead a modern, a strange, an alien god; you make Him God of another
kind from the Father, or else not God at all, as not subsisting by a
birth from God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p51"></span>24. The mystery contained in those
words, *I and the Father are One*, moves you to wrath. The Jew answered,
*Thou, being a man makest Thyself God;* your blasphemy is a match for
his:—‘Thou, being a creature, makest Thyself God.’ You say, in effect,
‘Thou art not a Son by birth, Thou art not God in truth; Thou art a
creature, excelling all other creatures. But Thou wast not born to be
God, for I refuse to believe that the incorporeal God gave birth to Thy
nature. Thou and the Father are not One. Nay more. Thou art not the Son,
Thou art not like God, Thou art not God.’ The Lord had His answer for
the Jews; an answer that meets the case of your blasphemy even better
than it met theirs:—*Is it not written in the Law, I said, Ye are gods?
If, therefore, He called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and
the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of Me, Whom the Father hath
sanctified and sent into this world, that I have blasphemed, because I
said I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of the Father, believe
Me not; but if I do, and ye will not believe Me, believe the works, that
ye may know and be sure that the Father is in Me, and I in Him* <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870.md) . The matter of this reply was
dictated by that of the blasphemous attack upon Him. The accusation was
that He, being a man, made Himself God. Their proof of this allegation
was His own statement, *I and the Father are One*. He therefore sets
Himself to prove that the Divine nature, which is His by birth, gives
Him the right to assert that He and the Father are One. He begins by
exposing the absurdity, as well as the insolence, of such a charge as
that of making Himself God, though He was a man. The Law had conferred
the title upon holy men; the word of God, from which there is no appeal,
had given its sanction to the public use of the name. What blasphemy,
then, could there be in the assumption of the title of Son of <span
id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_129"></span>God
by Him Whom the Father had sanctified and sent into the world? The
unalterable record of the Word of God has confirmed the title to those
to whom the Law assigned it. There is an end, therefore, of the charge
that He, being a man, makes Himself God, when the Law gives the name of
*gods* to those who are confessedly men. And further, if other men may
use this name without blasphemy, there can obviously be no blasphemy in
its use by the Man Whom the Father has sanctified,—and note here that
throughout this argument He calls Himself Man, for the Son of God is
also Son of Man—since He excels the rest, who yet are guilty of no
irreverence in styling themselves gods. He excels them, in that He has
been hallowed to be the Son, as the blessed Paul says, who teaches us of
this sanctification:—*Which He had promised afore by His prophets in the
Holy Scriptures, concerning His Son, Which was made of the seal of David
according to the flesh, and was appointed to be the Son of God with
power, according to the spirit of sanctification* <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871.md) . Thus the accusation of blasphemy on
His part, in making Himself God, falls to the ground. For the Word of
God has conferred this name upon many men; and He, Who was sanctified
and sent by the Father, did no more than proclaim Himself the Son of
God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p54"></span>25. There remains, I conceive, no
possibility of doubt but that the words, *I and the Father are One*,
were spoken with regard to the nature which is His by birth. The Jews
had rebuked Him because by these words He, being a man, made Himself
God. The course of His answer proves that, in this *I and the Father are
One*, He did profess Himself the Son of God, first in name, then in
nature, and lastly by birth. For *I* and *Father* are the names of
substantive Beings; *One* is a declaration of Their nature, namely, that
it is essentially the same in Both; *are* forbids us to confound Them
together; *are one*, while forbidding confusion, teaches that the unity
of the Two is the result of a birth. Now all this truth is drawn out
from that name, the Son of God, which He being sanctified by the Father,
bestows upon Himself; a name, His right to which is confirmed by His
assertion, *I and the Father are One*. For birth cannot confer any
nature upon the offspring other than that of the parent from whom that
offspring is born.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p55"></span>26. Once more, God the Only-begotten
has summed up for us, in words of His own, the whole revealed mystery of
the faith. When He had given His answer to the charge that He, being a
man, made Himself God, He determined to shew that His words, *I and the
Father are One*, are a clear and necessary conclusion; and therefore He
thus pursued His argument;—*Ye say that I have blasphemed, because I
said, I am the Son of God. If I do not the works of the Father, believe
Me not; but if I do, and ye will not believe Me, believe the works, that
ye may know and be sure that the Father is in Me, and I in the Father*.
After this, heresy that still persists in its course perpetrates a
wilful outrage in conscious despair; the assertion of unbelief is
deliberate shamelessness. They who make it take pride in folly and are
dead to the faith, for it is not ignorance, but madness, to contradict
this saying. The Lord had said, *I and the Father are One;* and the
mystery of His birth, which He revealed, was the unity in nature of
Father and Son. Again, when He was accused for claiming the Divine
nature, He justified His claim by advancing a reason;—*If I do not the
works of the Father, believe Me not*. We are not to believe His
assertion that He is the Son of God, unless He does His Father’s works.
Hence we see that His birth has given Him no new or alien nature, for
His doing of the Father’s works is to be the reason why we must believe
that He is the Son. What room is there here for adoption, or for leave
to use the name, or for denial that He was born from the nature of God,
when the proof that He is God’s Son is that He does the works which
belong to the Father’s nature? No creature is equal or like to God, no
nature external to His is comparable in might to Him; it is only the
Son, born from Himself, Whom we can without blasphemy liken and equal to
Him. Nothing outside Himself can be compared to God without insult to
His august majesty. If any being, not born from God’s self, can be
discovered that is like Him and equal to Him in power, then God, in
admitting a partner to share His throne, forfeits His pre-eminence. No
longer is God One, for a second, indistinguishable from Himself, has
arisen. On the other hand, there is no insult in making His own true Son
His equal. For then that which is like Him is His own; that which is
compared with Him is born from Himself; the Power that can do His own
works is not external to Him. Nay more, it is an actual heightening of
His glory, that He has begotten Omnipotence, and yet not severed that
Omnipotent nature from Himself. The Son performs the Father’s works, and
on that ground demands that we should believe that He is God’s Son. This
is no <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_130"></span>claim of mere arrogance; for He bases
it upon His works, and bids us examine them. And He bears witness that
these works are not His own, but His Father’s. He would not have our
thoughts distracted by the splendour of the deeds from the evidence for
His birth. And because the Jews could not penetrate the mystery of the
Body which He had taken, the Humanity born of Mary, and recognise the
Son of God, He appeals to His deeds for confirmation of His right to the
name;—*But if I do them, and ye will not believe Me, believe the works*.
First, He would not have them believe that He is the Son of God, except
on the evidence of God’s works which He does. Next, if He does the
works, yet seems unworthy, in His bodily humility, to bear the Divine
name, He demands that they shall believe the works. Why should the
mystery of His human birth hinder our recognition of His birth as God,
when He that is Divinely born fulfils every Divine task by the agency of
that Manhood which He has assumed? If we believe not the Man, for the
works’ sake, when He tells us that He is the Son of God, let us believe
the works when they, which are beyond a doubt the works of God, are
manifestly wrought by the Son of God. For the Son of God possesses, in
virtue of His birth, everything that is God’s; and therefore the Son’s
work is the Father’s work because His birth has not excluded Him from
that nature which is His source and wherein He abides, and because He
has in Himself that nature to which He owes it that He exists eternally.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p56"></span>27. And so the Son, Who does the
Father’s works and demands of us that, if we believe not Him, at least
we believe His works, is bound to tell us what the point is as to which
we are to believe the works. And He does tell us in the words which
follow:—*But if I do, and ye will not believe Me, believe the works,
that ye may know and be sure that the Father is in Me, and I in Him*. It
is the same truth as is contained in *I am the Son of God*, and *I and
the Father are One*. This is the nature which is His by birth; this the
mystery of the saving faith, that we must not divide the unity, nor
separate the nature from the birth, but must confess that the living God
was in truth born from the living God. God, Who is Life, is not a Being
built up of various and lifeless portions; He is Power, and not compact
of feeble elements, Light, intermingled with no shades of darkness,
Spirit, that can harmonise with no incongruities. All that is within Him
is One; what is Spirit is Light and Power and Life, and what is Life is
Light and Power and Spirit. He Who says, *I am, and I change not* <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872.md) , can suffer neither change in detail
nor transformation in kind. For these attributes, which I have named,
are not attached to different portions of Him, but meet and unite,
entirely and perfectly, in the whole being of the living God. He is the
living God, the eternal Power of the living Divine nature; and that
which is born from Him, according to the mysterious truth which He
reveals, could not be other than living. For when He said, *As the
living Father hath sent Me, and I live through the Father* <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873.md) , He taught that it is through the
living Father that He has life in Himself. And, moreover, when He said,
*For as the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son
also to have life in Himself* <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874.md) ,
He bore witness that life, to the fullest extent, is His gift from the
living God. Now if the living Son was born from the living Father, that
birth took place without a new nature coming into existence. Nothing new
comes into existence when the Living is begotten by the Living; for life
was not sought out from the non-existent to receive birth; and Life,
which receives its birth from Life, must needs, because of that unity of
nature and because of the mysterious event of that perfect and ineffable
birth, live always in Him that lives and have the life of the Living in
Himself.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p60"></span>28. I call to mind that, at the
beginning of our treatise <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875.md) , I
gave the warning that human analogies correspond imperfectly to their
Divine counterparts, yet that our understanding receives a real, if
incomplete, enlightenment by comparing the latter with visible types.
And now I appeal to human experience in the matter of birth, whether the
source of their children’s being remain not within the parents. For
though the lifeless and ignoble matter, which sets in motion the
beginnings of life, pass from one parent into the other, yet these
retain their respective natural forces. They have brought into existence
a nature one with their own, and therefore the begetter is bound up with
the existence of the begotten; and the begotten, receiving birth through
a force transmitted, yet not lost, by the begetter, abides in that
begetter. This may suffice as a statement of what happens in a human
birth. It is inadequate as a parallel to the perfect birth of God the
Only-begotten; for humanity is born in weakness and from the union of
two unlike natures, and maintained in life by a combination of lifeless
substances. Again, humanity does not enter at once into the exercise of
its appointed life, <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_131"></span>and never fully lives that life, being
always encumbered with a multitude of members which decay and are
insensibly discarded. In God, on the other hand, the Divine life is
lived in the fullest sense, for God is Life; and from Life nothing that
is not truly living can be born. And His birth is not by way of
emanation but results from an act of power. Thus, since God’s life is
perfect in its intensity, and since that which is born from Him is
perfect in power, God has the power of giving birth but not of suffering
change. His nature is capable of increase <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876.md) , not of diminution, for He continues
in, and shares the life of, that Son to Whom He gave in birth a nature
like to, and inseparable from, His own. And that Son, the Living born
from the Living, is not separated by the event of His birth from the
nature that begat Him.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p63"></span>29. Another analogy which casts some
light upon the meaning of the faith is that of fire as containing fire
in itself and as abiding in fire. Fire contains the brightness of light,
the heat which is its essential nature, the property of destroying by
combustion the flickering inconstancy of flame. Yet all the while it is
fire, and in all these manifestations there is but one nature. Its
weakness is that it is dependent for its existence upon inflammable
matter, and that it perishes with the matter on which it has lived. A
comparison with fire gives us, in some measure, an insight into the
incomparable nature of God; it helps us to believe in the properties of
God that we find them, to a certain extent, present in an earthly
element. I ask, then, whether in fire derived from fire there is any
division or separation. When one flame is kindled from another, is the
original nature cut off from the derived, so as not to abide in it? Does
it not rather follow on, and dwell in the second flame by a kind of
increase, as it were by birth? For no portion has been cut off from the
nature of the first flame, and yet there is light from light. Does not
the first flame live on in the second, which owes its existence, though
not by division, to the first? Does not the second still dwell in the
first, from which it was not cut off; from which it went forth,
retaining its unity with the substance to which its nature belongs? Are
not the two one, when it is physically impossible to derive light from
light by division, and logically impossible to distinguish between them
in nature.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p64"></span>30. These illustrations, I repeat,
must only be used as aids to apprehension of the faith, not as standards
of comparison for the Divine majesty. Our method is that of using bodily
instances as a clue to the invisible. Reverence and reason justify us in
using such help, which we find used in God’s witness to Himself, while
yet we do not aspire to find a parallel to the nature of God. But the
minds of simple believers have been distressed by the mad heretical
objection that it is wrong to accept a doctrine concerning God which
needs, in order to become intelligible, the help of bodily analogies.
And therefore, in accordance with that word of our Lord which we have
already cited, *That which is born of the flesh is flesh, but that which
is born of the Spirit is Spirit* <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877.md)
, we have thought it expedient, since God is Spirit, to give to these
comparisons a certain place in our argument. By so doing we shall avert
from God the charge that He has deceived us in using these analogies;
shewing, as we have done, that such illustrations from the nature of His
creatures enable us to grasp the meaning of God’s self-revelation to us.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p66"></span>31. We see how the living Son of the
living Father, He Who is God from God, reveals the unity of the Divine
nature, indissolubly One and the same, and the mystery of His birth in
these words, *I and the Father are One*. Because the seeming arrogance
of them engendered a prejudice against Him, He made it more clear that
He had spoken in the conscious possession of Divinity by saying, *Ye say
that I have blasphemed because I said, I am the Son of God;* thus
shewing that the oneness of His nature with that of God was due to birth
from God. And then, to clench their faith in His birth by a positive
assertion, and to guard them, at the same time, from imagining that the
birth involves a difference of nature, He crowns His argument with the
words, *Believe the works, that the Father is in Me, and I in the
Father*. Does His birth, as here revealed, display His Divinity as not
His by nature, as not His own by right? Each is in the Other; the birth
of the Son is from the Father only; no alien or unlike nature has been
raised to Godhead and subsists as God. God from God, eternally abiding,
owes His Godhead to none other than God. Import, if you see your
opportunity, two gods into the Church’s faith; separate Son from Father
as far as you can, consistently with the birth which you admit; yet
still the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and this
by no interchange of emanations but by the perfect birth of the living
nature. Thus you cannot add together God the Father and God the Son, and
count Them as two Gods, <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_132"></span>for They Two are One God. You cannot
confuse Them together, for They Two are not One Person. And so the
Apostolic faith rejects two gods; for it knows nothing of two Fathers or
two Sons. In confessing the Father it confesses the Son; it believes in
the Son in believing in the Father. For the name of Father involves that
of Son, since without having a son none can be a father. Evidence of the
existence of a son is proof that there has been a father, for a son
cannot exist except from a father. When we confess that God is One we
deny that He is single; for the Son is the complement of the Father, and
to the Father the Son’s existence is due. But birth works no change in
the Divine nature; both in Father and in Son that nature is true to its
kind. And the right expression for us of this unity of nature is the
confession that They, being Two by birth and generation, are One God,
not one Person.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p67"></span>32. We will leave it to him to preach
two Gods, who can preach One God without confessing the unity; he shall
proclaim that God is solitary, who can deny that there are two Persons,
Each dwelling in the Other by the power of Their nature and the mystery
of birth given and received. And that man may assign a different nature
to Each of the Two, who is ignorant that the unity of Father and of Son
is a revealed truth. Let the heretics blot out this record of the Son’s
self-revelation *I in the Father and the Father in Me;* then, and not
till then, shall they assert that there are two Gods, or one God in
loneliness. There is no hint of more natures than one in what we are
told of Their possession of the one Divine nature. The truth that God is
from God does not multiply God by two; the birth destroys the
supposition of a lonely God. And again, because They are interdependent
They form an unity; and that They are interdependent is proved by Their
being One from One. For the One, in begetting the One, conferred upon
Him nothing that was not His own; and the One, in being begotten,
received from the One only what belongs to one. Thus the apostolic
faith, in proclaiming the Father, will proclaim Him as One God, and in
confessing the Son will confess Him as One God; since one and the same
Divine nature exists in Both, and because, the Father being God and the
Son being God, and the one name of God expressing the nature of Both,
the term ‘One God’ signifies the Two. God from God, or God in God, does
not mean that there are two Gods, for God abides, One from One,
eternally with the one Divine nature and the one Divine name; nor does
God dwindle down to a single Person, for One and One can never be in
solitude.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p68"></span>33. The Lord has not left in doubt or
obscurity the teaching conveyed in this great mystery; He has not
abandoned us to lose our way in dim uncertainty. Listen to Him as He
reveals the full knowledge of this faith to His Apostles;—*I am the Way
and the Truth and the Life; no man cometh unto the Father but through
Me. If ye know Me, ye know My Father also; and from henceforth ye shall
know Him, and have seen Him. Philip saith unto Him, Lord, shew us the
Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long
time with you, and ye have not known Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father also. How sayest thou, Shew us the Father? Dost
thou not believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me?
The words that I speak unto you I speak not of Myself, but the Father
that dwelleth in Me, He doeth His works. Believe Me, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in Me; or else believe for the very works’
sake* <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878.md) . He Who is the Way leads
us not into by-paths or trackless wastes: He Who is the Truth mocks us
not with lies; He Who is the Life betrays us not into delusions which
are death. He Himself has chosen these winning names to indicate the
methods which He has appointed for our salvation. As the Way, He will
guide us to the Truth; the Truth will establish us in the Life. And
therefore it is all-important for us to know what is the mysterious
mode, which He reveals, of attaining this life. *No man cometh to the
Father but through Me*. The way to the Father is through the Son. And
now we must enquire whether this is to be by a course of obedience to
His teaching, or by faith in His Godhead. For it is conceivable that our
way to the Father may be through adherence to the Son’s teaching, rather
than through believing that the Godhead of the Father dwells in the Son.
And therefore let us, in the next place, seek out the true meaning of
the instruction given us here. For it is not by cleaving to a
preconceived opinion, but by studying the force of the words, that we
shall enter into possession of this faith.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p70"></span>34. The words which follow those last
cited are, *If ye know Me, ye know My Father also*. It is the Man, Jesus
Christ, Whom they behold. How can a knowledge of Him be a knowledge of
the Father? For the Apostles see Him wearing the aspect of that human
nature which belongs to Him; but God is not encumbered with body and
flesh, and <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_133"></span>is incognisable by those who dwell in
our weak and fleshly body. The answer is given by the Lord, Who asserts
that under the flesh, which, in a mystery, He had taken, His Father’s
nature dwells within Him. He sets the facts in their due order thus;—*If
ye know Me, ye know My Father also; and from henceforth ye shall know
Him, and have seen Him*. He makes a distinction between the time of
sight, and the time of knowledge. He says that from henceforth they
shall know Him Whom they had already seen; and so shall possess, from
the time of this revelation onward, the knowledge of that nature, on
which, in Him, they long had gazed.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p71"></span>35. But the novel sound of these words
disturbed the Apostle Philip. A Man is before their eyes; this Man avows
Himself the Son of God, and declares that when they have known Him they
will know the Father. He tells them that they have seen the Father, and
that, because they have seen Him, they shall know Him hereafter. This
truth is too broad for the grasp of weak humanity; their faith fails in
the presence of these paradoxes. Christ says that the Father has been
seen already and shall now be known; and this, although sight, is
knowledge. He says that if the Son has been known, the Father has been
known also; and this though the Son has imparted knowledge of Himself
through the bodily senses of sight and sound, while the Father’s nature,
different altogether from that <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879.md)
of the visible Man, which they know, could not be learnt from their
knowledge of the nature of Him Whom they have seen. He has also often
borne witness that no man has seen the Father. And so Philip broke
forth, with the loyalty and confidence of an Apostle, with the request,
*Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us*. He was not tampering
with the faith; it was but a mistake made in ignorance. For the Lord had
said that the Father had been seen already and henceforth should be
known; but the Apostle had not understood that He had been seen.
Accordingly he did not deny that the Father had been seen, but asked to
see Him. He did not ask that the Father should be unveiled to his bodily
gaze, but that he might have such an indication as should enlighten him
concerning the Father Who had been seen. For he had seen the Son under
the aspect of Man, but cannot understand how he could thereby have seen
the Father. His adding, *And it sufficeth us*, to the prayer, *Lord,
shew us the Father*, reveals clearly that it was a mental, not a bodily
vision of the Father which he desired. He did not refuse faith to the
Lord’s words, but asked for such enlightenment to his mind as should
enable him to believe; for the fact that the Lord had spoken was
conclusive evidence to the Apostle that faith was his duty. The
consideration which moved him to ask that the Father might be shewn, was
that the Son had said that He had been seen, and should be known because
He had been seen. There was no presumption in this prayer that He, Who
had already been seen, should now be made manifest.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p73"></span>36. And therefore the Lord answered
Philip thus;—*Have I been so long time with you, and ye have not known
Me, Philip?* He rebukes the Apostle for defective knowledge of Himself;
for previously He had said that when He was known the Father was known
also. But what is the meaning of this complaint that for so long they
had not known Him? It means this; that if they had known Him, they must
have recognised in Him the Godhead which belongs to His Father’s nature.
For His works were the peculiar works of God. He walked upon the waves,
commanded the winds, manifestly, though none could tell how, changed the
water into wine and multiplied the loaves, put devils to flight, healed
diseases, restored injured limbs and repaired the defects of nature,
forgave sins and raised the dead to life. And all this He did while
wearing flesh; and He accompanied the works with the assertion that He
was the Son of God. Hence it is that He justly complains that they did
not recognise in His mysterious human birth and life the action of the
nature of God, performing these deeds through the Manhood which He had
assumed.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p74"></span>37. And therefore the Lord reproached
them that they had not known Him, though He had so long been doing these
works, and answered their prayer that He would shew them the Father by
saying, *He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also*. He was not
speaking of a bodily manifestation, of perception by the eye of flesh,
but by that eye of which He had once spoken;—*Say not ye, There are yet
four months, and then cometh harvest? Behold, I say unto you, Lift up
your eyes and look on the fields; for they are white to harvest* <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880.md) . The season of the year, the fields
white to harvest are allusions equally incompatible with an earthly and
visible prospect. He was bidding them lift the eyes of their
understanding to contemplate the bliss of the final harvest. And so it
is with His present words, *He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father
also*. It was not the carnal body, <span id="page_134">p. 134</span>
<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_134"></span>which He had received by birth
from the Virgin, that could manifest to them the image and likeness of
God. The human aspect which He wore could be no aid towards the mental
vision of the incorporeal God. But God was recognised in Christ, by such
as recognised Christ as the Son on the evidence of the powers of His
Divine nature; and a recognition of God the Son produces a recognition
of God the Father. For the Son is in such a sense the Image, as to be
One in kind with the Father, and yet to indicate that the Father is His
Origin. Other images, made of metals or colours or other materials by
various arts, reproduce the appearance of the objects which they
represent. Yet can lifeless copies be put on a level with their living
originals? Painted or carved or molten effigies with the nature which
they imitate? The Son is not the Image of the Father after such a
fashion as this; He is the living Image of the Living. The Son that is
born of the Father has a nature in no wise different from His; and,
because His nature is not different, He possesses the power of that
nature which is the same as His own. The fact that He is the Image
proves that God the Father is the Author of the birth of the
Only-begotten, Who is Himself revealed as the Likeness and Image of the
invisible God. And hence the likeness, which is joined in union with the
Divine nature, is indelibly His, because the powers of that nature are
inalienably His own.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p76"></span>38. Such is the meaning of this
passage, *Have I been so long time with you, and ye have not known Me,
Philip? He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also. How sayest thou,
Shew us the Father? Dost thou not believe Me, that I am in the Father,
and the Father is in Me?* It is only the Word of God, of Whom we men are
enabled, in our discourse concerning Divine things, to reason. All else
that belongs to the Godhead is dark and difficult, dangerous and
obscure. If any man propose to express what is known in other words than
those supplied by God, he must inevitably either display his own
ignorance, or else leave his readers’ minds in utter perplexity. The
Lord, when He was asked to shew the Father, said, *He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father also*. He that would alter this is an antichrist,
he that would deny it is a Jew, he that is ignorant a Pagan. If we find
ourselves in difficulty, let us lay the fault to our own reason; if
God’s declaration seem involved in obscurity, let us assume that our
want of faith is the cause. These words state with precision that God is
not solitary, and yet that there are no differences within the Divine
nature. For the Father is seen in the Son, and this could be the case
neither if He were a lonely Being, nor yet if He were unlike the Son. It
is through the Son that the Father is seen: and this mystery which the
Son reveals is that They are One God, but not one Person. What other
meaning can you attach to this saying of the Lord’s, *He that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father also?* This is no case of identity; the use of
the conjunction also shews that the Father is named in addition to the
Son. These words, *The Father also*, are incompatible with the notion of
an isolated and single Person. No conclusion is possible but that the
Father was made visible through the Son, because They are One and are
alike in nature. And, lest our faith in this regard should be left in
any doubt, the Lord proceeded, *How sayest thou, Shew us the Father?*
The Father had been seen in the Son; how then could men be ignorant of
the Father? What need could there be for Him to be shewn?

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p77"></span>39. Again, the unity of Begetter and
Begotten, manifested in sameness of nature and true oneness of kind,
proves that the Father was seen in His true nature. And this is shewn by
the Lord’s next words, *Believe ye not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in Me?* In no other words than these, which the Son has used, can
the fact be stated that Father and Son, being alike in nature, are
inseparable. The Son, Who is the Way and the Truth and the Life, is not
deceiving us by some theatrical transformation of names and aspects,
when He, while wearing Manhood, styles Himself the Son of God. He is not
falsely concealing the fact that He is God the Father <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881.md) ; He is not a single Person <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882.md) Who hides His features under a mask,
that we may imagine that Two are present. He is not a solitary Being,
now posing as His own Son, and again calling Himself the Father;
tricking out one unchanging nature with varying names. Far removed from
this is the plain honesty of the words. The Father is the Father, and
the Son is the Son. But these names, and the realities which they
represent, contain no innovation upon the Divine nature, nothing
inconsistent, nothing alien. For the Divine nature, being true to
itself, persists in being itself; that which is from God is God. The
Divine birth imports neither diminution nor difference into the Godhead,
for the Son is born into, and subsists with, a nature that is within the
Divine nature and is like to it, and the Father sought out no alien
element <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_135"></span>to be mingled in the nature of His
Only-begotten Son, but endowed Him with all things that are His own, and
this without loss to the Giver. And thus the Son is not destitute of the
Divine nature, for, being God, He is from God and from none other; and
He is not different from God, but is indeed nothing else than God, for
that which is begotten from God is the Son, and the Son only, and the
Divine nature, in receiving birth as a Son, has not forfeited its
Divinity. Thus the Father is in the Son, the Son is in the Father, God
is in God. And this is not by the combination of two harmonious, though
different, kinds of being, nor by the incorporating power of an ampler
substance exercised upon a lesser; for the properties of matter make it
impossible that things which enclose others should also be enclosed by
them. It is by the birth of living nature from living nature. The
substance remains the same, birth causes no deterioration in the Divine
nature; God is not born from God to be ought else than God. Herein is no
innovation, no estrangement, no division. It is sin to believe that
Father and Son are two Gods, sacrilege to assert that Father and Son are
one solitary God, blasphemy to deny the unity, consisting in sameness of
kind, of God from God.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p80"></span>40. Lest they, whose faith conforms to
the Gospel, should regard this mystery as something vague and obscure,
the Lord has expounded it in this order;—*Dost thou not believe Me, that
I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me? The words that I speak unto
you I speak not of Myself, but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth
His works*. In what other words than these could, or can, the possession
of the Divine nature by Father and Son be declared, consistently with
prominence for the Son’s birth? When He says, *The words that I speak
unto you I speak not of Myself*, He neither suppresses His personality,
nor denies His Sonship, nor conceals the presence in Himself of His
Father’s Divine nature. While speaking of Himself—and that He does so
speak is proved by the pronoun *I*—He speaks as abiding in the Divine
substance; while speaking not of Himself, He bears witness to the birth
which took place in Him of God from God His Father. And He is
inseparable and indistinguishable in unity of nature from the Father;
for He speaks, though He speaks not of Himself. He Who speaks, though He
speak not of Himself, necessarily exists, inasmuch as He speaks; and,
inasmuch as He speaks not of Himself, He makes it manifest that His
words are not His own. For He has added, But the *Father that dwelleth
in Me, He doeth His works*. That the Father dwells in the Son proves
that the Father is not isolated and alone; that the Father works through
the Son proves that the Son is not an alien or a stranger. There cannot
be one Person only, for He speaks not of Himself; and, conversely, They
cannot be separate and divided when the One speaks through the voice of
the Other. These words are the revelation of the mystery of Their unity.
And again, They Two are not different One from the Other, seeing that by
Their inherent nature Each is in the Other; and They are One, seeing
that He, Who speaks, speaks not of Himself, and He, Who speaks not of
Himself, yet does speak. And then, having taught that the Father both
spoke and wrought in Him, the Son establishes this perfect unity as the
rule of our faith;—*But the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth His
works. Believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me; or
else believe for the very works’ sake*. The Father works in the Son; but
the Son also works the works of His Father.

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p81"></span>41. And so, lest we should believe and
say that the Father works in the Son through His own omnipotent energy,
and not through the Son’s possession, as His birthright, of the Divine
nature, Christ says, *Believe Me, that I am in the Father, and the
Father in Me*. What means this, *Believe Me?* Clearly it refers back to
the previous, *Shew us the Father*. Their faith—that faith which had
demanded that the Father should be shewn—is confirmed by this command to
believe. He was not satisfied with saying, *He that hath seen Me hath
seen the Father also*. He goes further, and expands our knowledge, so
that we can contemplate the Father in the Son, remembering meanwhile
that the Son is in the Father. Thus He would save us from the error of
imagining a reciprocal emanation of the One into the Other, by teaching
Their unity in the One nature through birth given and received. The Lord
would have us take Him at His word, lest our hold upon the faith be
shaken by His condescension in assuming Humanity. If His flesh, His
body, His passion seem to make His Godhead doubtful, let us at least
believe, on the evidence of the works, that God is in God and God is
from God, and that They are One. For by the power of Their nature Each
is in the Other. The Father loses nothing that is His because it is in
the Son, and the Son receives His whole Sonship from the Father. Bodily
natures are not created after such a fashion that they mutually contain
each other, or possess the perfect unity of one abiding nature. In their
case it would be impossible that an Only-<span id="page_136">p.
136</span> <span id="ii.v.ii.vii-Page_136"></span>begotten Son could
exist eternally, inseparable from the true Divine nature of His Father.
Yet this is the peculiar property of God the Only-begotten, this the
faith revealed in the mystery of His true birth, this the work of the
Spirit’s power, that to be, and to be in God, is for Christ the same
thing; and that this being in God is not the presence of one thing
within another, as a body inside another body, but that the life and
subsistence of Christ is such that He is within the subsisting God, and
within Him, yet having a subsistence of His own. For Each subsists in
such wise as not to exist apart from the Other, since They are Two
through birth given and received, and therefore only one Divine nature
exists. This is the meaning of the words, *I and the Father are One,*
and *He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father also*, and *I in the
Father and the Father in Me*. They tell us that the Son Who is born is
not different or inferior to the Father; that His possession, by right
of birth, of the Divine nature as Son of God, and therefore nothing else
than God, is the supreme truth conveyed in the mysterious revelation of
the One Godhead in Father and Son. And therefore the doctrine of the
generation of the Only-begotten is guiltless of ditheism, for the Son of
God, in being born into the Godhead, manifested in Himself the nature of
God His Begetter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_844"></span>[118:845](2090019.htm#fr_844.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p4"></span> The *Epistola Arii ad Alexandrum*; see
Books iv. 12, vi. 5.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[119:846](2090019.htm#fr_845.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p6"></span> Cf. Lucan. IX. 696 ff.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[119:847](2090019.htm#fr_846.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p7"></span> Marcellus of Ancyra.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[119:848](2090019.htm#fr_847.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p8"></span> Arius.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[119:849](2090019.htm#fr_848.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p9"></span> Photinus of Sirmium.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[119:850](2090019.htm#fr_849.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p10"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[120:851](2090019.htm#fr_850.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p13"></span> St. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[120:852](2090019.htm#fr_851.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p14"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[120:853](2090019.htm#fr_852.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p15"></span> St. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[120:854](2090019.htm#fr_853.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p17"></span> [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[121:855](2090019.htm#fr_854.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p21"></span> St. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[121:856](2090019.htm#fr_855.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p23"></span> [Exod. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[122:857](2090019.htm#fr_856.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p24"></span> [Psa.
82.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[122:858](2090019.htm#fr_857.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p26"></span> I.e. These are the elements of which
His Person is composed by the eternal generation.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[122:859](2090019.htm#fr_858.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p27"></span> Word, Wisdom, Power.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[122:860](2090019.htm#fr_859.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p28"></span> By the Sabellians.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[122:861](2090019.htm#fr_860.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p30"></span> St. [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md), [John
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015.md), [John
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[123:862](2090019.htm#fr_861.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p33"></span> St. [John iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[124:863](2090019.htm#fr_862.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p35"></span> St. [John v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[124:864](2090019.htm#fr_863.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p36"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[124:865](2090019.htm#fr_864.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p38"></span> St. [John v.
19-22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[124:866](2090019.htm#fr_865.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p40"></span> [John
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[126:867](2090019.htm#fr_866.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p45"></span> St. [John ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[127:868](2090019.htm#fr_867.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p47"></span> St. [John x.
27-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[127:869](2090019.htm#fr_868.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p48"></span> I.e. He is not Unbegotten.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[128:870](2090019.htm#fr_869.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p50"></span> St. [John x.
31-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[128:871](2090019.htm#fr_870.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p52"></span> St. [John x.
34-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[129:872](2090019.htm#fr_871.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p53"></span> [Rom. i.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[130:873](2090019.htm#fr_872.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p57"></span> [Mal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[130:874](2090019.htm#fr_873.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p58"></span> St. [John vi.
57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[130:875](2090019.htm#fr_874.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p59"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[130:876](2090019.htm#fr_875.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p61"></span> Book i. § 19, iv. § 2, vi. § 9.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[131:877](2090019.htm#fr_876.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p62"></span> Cf. the next section.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[131:878](2090019.htm#fr_877.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p65"></span> St. [John ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[132:879](2090019.htm#fr_878.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p69"></span> St. [John xiv.
6-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[133:880](2090019.htm#fr_879.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p72"></span> Reading *ab ea*.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[133:881](2090019.htm#fr_880.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p75"></span> St. [John iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[134:882](2090019.htm#fr_881.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p78"></span> Sabellianism.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[134:883](2090019.htm#fr_882.md) <span
id="ii.v.ii.vii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ii.vii-p79"></span> *Personalis* occurs here for the
first time; *persona* is found in iii. 23, v. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII](2090020.md)
