[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090046)  [Next](2090048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.i.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.i.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*Concerning what is
affirmed about God as though He had body.*

<span id="iii.iv.i.xi-p2"></span>Since we find many terms used
symbolically in the Scriptures concerning God which are more applicable
to that which has body, we should recognise that it is quite impossible
for us men clothed about with this dense covering of flesh to understand
or speak of the divine and lofty and immaterial energies of the Godhead,
except by the use of images and types and symbols derived from our own
life <span id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595.md) . So then all the
statements concerning God, that imply body, are symbols, but have a
higher meaning: for the Deity is simple and formless. Hence by God’s
eyes and eyelids and sight we are to understand His power of overseeing
all things and His knowledge, that nothing can escape: for in the case
of us this sense makes our knowledge more complete and more full of
certainty. By God’s ears and hearing is meant His readiness to be
propitiated and to receive our petitions: for it is this sense that
renders us also kind to suppliants, inclining our ear to them more
graciously. God’s mouth and speech are His means of indicating His will;
for it is by the mouth and speech that we make clear the thoughts that
are in the heart: God’s food and drink are our concurrence to His will,
for we, too, satisfy the necessities of our natural appetite through the
sense of taste. And God’s sense of smell is His appreciation of our
thoughts of and good will towards Him, for it is through this sense that
we appreciate sweet fragrance. And God’s countenance is the
demonstration and manifestation of Himself through His works, for our
manifestation is through the countenance. And God’s hands mean the
effectual nature of His energy, for it is with our own hands that we
accomplish our most useful and valuable work. And His right hand is His
aid in prosperity, for it is the right hand that we also use when making
anything of beautiful shape or of great value, or where much strength is
required. His handling is His power of accurate discrimination and
exaction, even in the minutest and most secret details, for those whom
we have handled cannot conceal from us aught within themselves. His feet
and walk are His advent and presence, either for the purpose of bringing
succour to the needy, or vengeance against enemies, or to perform any
other action, for it is by using our feet that we come to arrive at any
place. His oath is the unchangeableness of His counsel, for it is by
oath that we confirm our compacts with one another. His anger and fury
are His hatred of and aversion to all wickedness, for we, too, hate that
which is contrary to our mind and become enraged thereat <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596.md) . His forgetfulness and sleep and
slumbering are His delay in taking vengeance on His enemies and the
postponement of the accustomed help to His own. And to put it shortly,
all the statements made about God that imply body have some hidden
meaning and teach us what is above us by means of something familiar to
ourselves, with the exception of any statement concerning the bodily
sojourn of the God-Word. For He for our safety took upon Himself the
whole nature of man <span id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597.md) , the
thinking spirit, the body, and all the properties of human nature, even
the natural and blameless passions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[13b:1596](2090047.htm#fr_1595.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i.xi-p3"></span> *Dionys., De div. nom*., c. 1; *De
Cæl. Hier.,* c. 15.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[13b:1597](2090047.htm#fr_1596.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i.xi-p4"></span> *Greg. Naz., Orat.* 37.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[13b:1598](2090047.htm#fr_1597.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i.xi-p5"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.i.xi-p5.1"></span>πάντα τὸν ἄνθρωπον</span>: variant, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.i.xi-p5.2"></span>ἅπαντα</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Same.](2090048.md)
