[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090028)  [Next](2090030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Psalm LIII. (LIV.).</span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p2"></span>For the end among the hymns, of the
meaning of David when the Ziphims came and said to Saul: behold, is not
David hid with us?

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p3"></span>*Save me, O God, by Thy name, and judge
me by Thy power. Hear my prayer, O God; give ear unto the words of my
mouth,* and so on.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p4"></span>1. The doctrines of the Gospel were
well known to holy and blessed David in his capacity of Prophet, and
although it was under the Law that he lived his bodily life, he yet
filled, as far as in him lay, the requirements of the Apostolic behest
and justified the witness borne to him by God in the words: *I have
found a man after My own heart, David, the son of Jesse* <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) . He did not avenge himself upon
his foes by war, he did not oppose force of arms to those that laid wait
for him, but after the pattern of the Lord, Whose name and Whose
meekness alike he foreshadowed, when he was betrayed he entreated, when
he was in danger he sang psalms, when he incurred hatred he rejoiced;
and for this cause he was found a man after God’s own heart. For
although twelve legions of angels might have come to the help of the
Lord in His hour of passion, yet that He might perfectly fulfil His
service of humble obedience, He surrendered Himself to suffering and
weakness, only praying with the words: *Father into Thy hands I commend
My spirit* <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) . After the same
pattern, David, whose actual sufferings prophetically foretold the
future sufferings of the Lord, opposed not his enemies either by word or
act; in obedience to the command of the Gospel, he would not render evil
for evil, in imitation of his Master’s meekness, in his affliction, in
his betrayal, in his fight, he called upon the Lord and was content to
use His weapons only in his contest with the ungodly.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p7"></span>2. Now to this Psalm is prefixed a
title arising out of an historical event; but before the event is
described we are instructed as to the scope, time and application of the
incidents underlying it. First we have: *For the end of the meaning of
that David*. Then there follows: *When the Ziphims came and said to
Saul: behold, is not David hid with us?* Thus David’s betrayal by the
Ziphims awaits for its interpretation the end. This shews that what was
actually being done to David contained a type of something yet to come;
an innocent man is harassed by railing, a prophet is mocked by reviling
words, one approved by God is demanded for execution, a king is betrayed
to his foe. So the Lord was betrayed to Herod and Pilate by those very
men in whose hands He ought to have been safe. The Psalm then awaits the
end for its interpretation, and finds its meaning in the true David, in
Whom is the end of the Law, that David who holds the keys and opens with
them the gate of knowledge, in fulfilling the things foretold of Him by
David.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p8"></span>3. The meaning of the proper name,
according to the exact sense of the Hebrew, affords us no small
assistance in interpreting the passage. *Ziphims* mean what we call
sprinklings of the face; these were called in Hebrew *Ziphims*. Now, by
the Law, sprinkling was a cleansing from sins; it purified the people
through faith by the sprinkling of blood, of which this same blessed
David thus speaks: *Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be
cleansed* <span id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) ; the Law, through
faith, providing as a temporary substitute, in the blood of whole
burnt-offerings, a type of the sprinkling with the blood of the Lord,
which was to be. But this people, like the people of the Ziphims, being
sprinkled on their face and not in their faith, and receiving the
cleansing drops on their lips and not in their hearts, turned faithless
and traitors towards their David, as God had foretold by the Prophet:
*This people honoureth Me with their lips, but their heart is far from
Me* <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) . They were ready to
betray David because, the faith of their heart being dead, they had
performed all the mystical ceremonies of the Law with deceitful face.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p11"></span>4. *Save me, O God, by Thy Name, and
judge me by Thy power. Hear my prayer, O God; give ear unto the words of
my mouth.*

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="page_244">p. 244</span>
<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-Page_244"></span>The suffering of the Prophet
David is, according to the account we have given of the title, a type of
the Passion of our God and Lord Jesus Christ. This is why his prayer
also corresponds in sense with the prayer of Him Who being the Word was
made flesh: in such wise that He Who suffered all things after the
manner of man, in everything He said, spoke after the manner of man; and
He who bore the infirmities and took on Him the sins of men approached
God in prayer with the humility proper to men. This interpretation, even
though we be unwilling and slow to receive it, is required by the
meaning and force of the words, so that there can be no doubt that
everything in the Psalm is uttered by David as His mouthpiece. For he
says: *Save me O God, by Thy name*. Thus prays in bodily humiliation,
using the words of His own Prophet, the Only-begotten Son of God, Who at
the same time was claiming again the glory which He had possessed before
the ages. He asks to be saved by the Name of God whereby He was called
and wherein He was begotten, in order that the Name of God which rightly
belonged to His former nature and kind might avail to save Him in that
body wherein He had been born.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p13"></span>5. And because the whole of this
passage is the utterance of One in the form of a servant—of a servant
obedient unto the death of the Cross—which He took upon Him and for
which He supplicates the saving help of the Name that belongs to God,
and being sure of salvation by that Name, He immediately adds: *and
judge Me by Thy power*. For now as the reward for His humility in
emptying Himself and assuming the form of a servant, in the same
humility in which He had assumed it, He was asking to resume the form
which He shared with God, having saved to bear the Name of God that
humanity in which as God He had obediently condescended to be born. And
in order to teach us that the dignity of this Name whereby He prayed to
be saved is something more than an empty title, He prays to be judged by
the power of God. For a right award is the essential result of judgment,
as the Scripture says: *Becoming obedient unto death* <span
id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) *, yea, the death of the Cross.
Wherefore also God highly exalted Him and gave unto Him the name which
is above every name*. Thus, first of all the name which is above every
name is given unto Him; then next, this is a judgment of decisive force,
because by the power of God, He, Who after being God had died as man,
rose again from death as man to be God, as the Apostle says: *He was
crucified from weakness, yet He liveth by the power of God* <span
id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) *, and again: For I am not ashamed
of the Gospel: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believeth* <span id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) . For by the
power of the Judgment human weakness is rescued to bear God’s name and
nature; and thus as the reward for His obedience He is exalted by the
power of this judgment unto the saving protection of God’s name; whence
He possesses both the Name and the Power of God. Again, if the Prophet
had begun this utterance in the way men generally speak, he would have
asked to be judged by mercy or kindness, not by power. But judgment by
power was a necessity in the case of One Who being the Son of God was
born of a virgin to be Son of Man, and Who now being Son of Man was to
have the Name and power of the Son of God restored to Him by the power
of judgment.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p17"></span>6. Next there follows: *Hear my
prayer, O God, give ear unto the words of my mouth*. The obvious thing
for the Prophet to say was, *O God, hear me*. But because he is speaking
as the mouthpiece of Him, Who alone knew how to pray, we are given a
constantly reiterated demand that prayer shall be heard. The words of
St. Paul teach us that no man knows how he ought to pray: *For we know
not how to pray as we ought* <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394)
. Man in his weakness, therefore, has no right to demand that his prayer
shall be heard: for even the teacher of the Gentiles does not know the
true object and scope of prayer, and that, after the Lord had given a
model. What we are shewn here is the perfect confidence of Him, Who
alone sees the Father, Who alone knows the Father, Who alone can pray
the whole night through—the Gospel tells us that the Lord continued all
night in prayer—Who in the mirror of words has shewn us the true image
of the deepest of all mysteries in the simple words we use in prayer.
And so, in making the demand that His prayer should be heard, he added,
in order to teach us that this was the prerogative of His perfect
confidence: *Give ear unto the words of My mouth*. Now can any man
suppose that it is a human confidence which can thus desire that the
words of his mouth should be heard? Those words, for instance, in which
we express the motions and instincts of the mind, either when anger
inflames us, or hatred moves us to slander, or pain to complaint, when
flattery makes us fawn, when hope of gain or shame of the truth begets
the lie, or resentment over injury, the insult? Was there ever any man
at all points so pure and patient in his life as not to be liable to
these failings of human insta<span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-Page_245"></span>bility? He alone could confidently
desire this Who did no sin, in Whose mouth was no deceit, Who gave His
back to the smiters, Who turned not His cheek from the blow, Who did not
resent scorn and spitting, Who never crossed the will of Him, to Whose
Will ordering it all He gave in all points glad obedience.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p19"></span>7. He has next added the reason why He
prays for His words to be heard: *For strangers are risen up against Me
and violent men have sought after My soul; they have not set God before
their eyes*. The Only-begotten Son of God, the Word of God and God the
Word—although assuredly He could Himself do all things that the Father
could, as He says: *What things soever the Father doeth, the Son also
doeth in like manner* <span id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) , while
the name describing the divine nature which was His inseparably involved
the inseparable possession of divine power,—yet in order that He might
present to us a perfect example of human humility, both prayed for and
underwent all things that are the lot of man. Sharing in our common
weakness He prayed the Father to save Him, so that He might teach us
that He was born man under all the conditions of man’s infirmity. This
is why He was hungry and thirsty, slept and was weary, shunned the
assemblies of the ungodly, was sad and wept, suffered and died. And it
was in order to make it clear that He was subject to all these
conditions, not by His nature, but by assumption, that when He had
undergone them all He rose again. Thus all His complaints in the Psalms
spring from a mental state belonging to our nature. Nor must it cause
surprise if we take the words of the Psalms in this sense, seeing that
the Lord Himself testified, if we believe the Gospel, that the Psalms
spiritually foretold His Passion.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p21"></span>8. Now they were *strangers that rose
up against Him*. For these are no sons of Abraham, nor sons of God, but
a brood of vipers, servants of sin, a Canaanitish seed, their father an
Amorite and their mother a daughter of Heth, inheriting diabolical
desires from the devil their parent. Further it is the violent that seek
after His soul; such as was Herod when he asked the chief priests where
Christ should be born, such as was the whole synagogue when it bore
false witness against Him. But in deeming this soul to be of human
nature and weakness *they set not God before their eyes;* for God had
stooped from that estate wherein He abode as God, even to the beginnings
of human birth; that is, He became Son of Man Who before was the Son of
God. For the Son of God is none other than He Who is Son of Man, and Son
of Man not in partial measure but born so, the Form of God divesting
Itself of that which It was and becoming that which It was not, that so
It might be born into a soul and body of Its own. Hence He is both Son
of God and Son of Man, hence both God and Man: in other words the Son of
God was born with the attributes derived from human birth, the Nature of
God condescending to assume the nature of one born as man who is wholly
moulded of soul and flesh. Wherefore strangers, when they rise up
against Him, and the mighty, when they seek after that soul of His,
which in the Gospels is often sad and cast down, set not God before
their eyes, because God it was, and the Son of God existing from out the
ages, that was born with the attributes of human nature, was born as
man, that is, with our body and our soul, by a virgin birth; the mighty
and glorious works He wrought never opened their eyes to the fact that
the Son of Man Whose soul they were seeking had come to be man with a
beginning of life after an eternal existence as Son of God.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p22"></span>9. The introduction of a pause <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) marks a change of person. He no
longer speaks but is addressed. For now the prophetic utterance assumes
a general character. Thus immediately after the prayer addressed to God,
he has added, in order that the confidence of the speaker might be
understood to have obtained what He was asking even in the very moment
of asking: *Behold, God is My helper and the Lord is the upholder of My
soul. He has requited evil unto Mine enemies*. To each separate petition
he has assigned its proper result, thus teaching us both that God does
not neglect to hear, and that to look for a pledge of His pitifulness in
hearing our several petitions is not a thing unreasonable. For to the
words, *For strangers are risen up against Me*, the corresponding
statement is: *God is My helper;* while with regard to *and the violent
have sought after My soul,* the exact result of the hearing of His
prayer is expressed in the words: *and the Lord is the upholder of My
soul;* lastly the statement, *they have not set God before their eyes*,
is appropriately balanced by, *He hath requited evil unto Mine enemies*.
Thus God both gives help against those that rise up, and upholds the
soul of His Holy One when it is sought by the violent, and when He is
not set before the eyes, nor considered by the ungodly, He requites upon
His enemies the very evils which they had wrought; so that while without
think<span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-Page_246"></span>ing upon God they seek the soul of the
righteous and rise up against Him, He is saved and upheld, and they find
that He Whom, absorbed in their wicked works, they did not consider,
avenges their malice by turning it against themselves.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p24"></span>10. Let pure religion, therefore, have
this confidence, and doubt not that amid the persecutions at the hand of
man and the dangers to the soul, it still has God for its helper,
knowing that, if at length it comes to a violent and unjust death, the
soul on leaving the tabernacle of the body finds rest with God its
upholder; let it have, moreover, perfect assurance of requital in the
thought that all evil deeds return upon the heads of those that work
them. God cannot be charged with injustice, and perfect goodness is
unstained by the impulses and motions of an evil will. He does not
awaken mischief out of malice, but requites it in vengeance; He does not
inflict it because He wishes us ill, but He aims it against our sins.
For these evils are universally appointed as instruments of retribution
without destruction of life, such being the sternly just ordinance of
that righteous judgment. But these evils are warded off from the
righteous by the law of righteousness, and are turned back upon the
unrighteous by the righteousness of that judgment. Each proceeding is
equally just; for the righteous, because they are righteous, the warning
exhibition of evil without actual infliction; for the wicked, because
they so deserve, the punitive infliction of evil; the righteous will not
suffer it, though it is displayed to them; the wicked will never cease
to suffer it, because it is displayed to them.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p25"></span>11. After this there is a return to
the Person of God, to Whom the petition was at the first addressed:
*Destroy them by Thy truth*. Truth confounds falsehood, and lying is
destroyed by truth. We have shewn that the whole of the foregoing prayer
is the utterance of that human nature in which the Son of God was born;
so here it is the voice of human nature calling upon God the Father to
destroy His enemies in His truth. What this truth is, stands beyond
doubt; it is of course He Who said: *I am the Life, the Way, the
Truth* <span id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) . And the enemies were
destroyed by the truth when, for all their attempts to win Christ’s
condemnation by false witness, they heard that He was risen from the
dead and had to admit that He had resumed His glory in all the reality
of Godhead. Ere long they found, in ruin and destruction by famine and
war, their reward for crucifying God; for they condemned the Lord of
Life to death, and paid no heed to God’s truth displayed in Him through
His glorious works. And thus the Truth of God destroyed them when He
rose again to resume the majesty of His Father’s Glory, and gave proof
of the truth of that perfect Divinity which He possessed.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p27"></span>12. Now in view of our repeated, nay
our unbroken assertion both that it was the Only-begotten Son of God Who
was uplifted on the cross, and that He was condemned to death Who is
eternal by virtue of the origin which is His by the nature which He
derives from the eternal Father, it must be clearly understood that He
was subjected to suffering of no natural necessity, but to accomplish
the mystery of man’s salvation; that He submitted to suffering of His
own Will, and not under compulsion. And although this suffering did not
belong to His nature as eternal Son, the immutability of God being proof
against the assault of any derogatory disturbance, yet it was freely
undertaken, and was intended to fulfil a penal function without,
however, inflicting the pain of penalty upon the sufferer: not that the
suffering in question was not of a kind to cause pain, but because the
divine Nature feels no pain. God suffered, then, by voluntarily
submitting to suffering; but although He underwent the sufferings in all
the fulness of their force, which necessarily causes pain to the
sufferers, yet He never so abandoned the powers of His Nature as to feel
pain.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p28"></span>13. For next there follows: *I will
sacrifice unto Thee freely*. The sacrifices of the Law, which consisted
of whole burnt-offerings and oblations of goats and of bulls, did not
involve an expression of free will, because the sentence of a curse was
pronounced on all who broke the Law. Whoever failed to sacrifice laid
himself open to the curse. And it was always necessary to go through the
whole sacrificial action because the addition of a curse to the
commandment forbad any trifling with the obligation of offering. It was
from this curse that our Lord Jesus Christ redeemed us, when, as the
Apostle says: *Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made
curse for us, for it is written: cursed is every one that hangeth on a
tree* <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) . Thus He offered
Himself to the death of the accursed that He might break the curse of
the Law, offering Himself voluntarily a victim to God the Father, in
order that by means of a voluntary victim the curse which attended the
discontinuance of the regular victim might be removed. Now of this
sacrifice mention is made in another passage of the <span
id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-Page_247"></span>Psalms: *Sacrifice and offering thou
wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared for Me* <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) ; that is, by offering to God the
Father, Who refused the legal sacrifices, the acceptable offering of the
body which He received. Of which offering the holy Apostle thus speaks:
*For this He did once for all when He offered Himself up* <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400) , securing complete salvation for
the human race by the offering of this holy, perfect victim.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p32"></span>14. Then He gives thanks to God the
Father for the accomplishment of all these acts: *I will give thanks
unto Thy name, O Lord, for it is good, for Thou hast delivered Me out of
all affliction*. He has assigned to each clause its strict fulfilment.
Thus at the beginning He had said: *Save Me, O God, by Thy name;* after
the prayers had been heard it was right that there should follow a
corresponding ascription of thanks, in order that confession might be
made to His name by Whose name He had prayed to be saved, and that
inasmuch as He had asked for help against the strangers that rose up
against Him, He might set on record that He had received it in the burst
of joy expressed in the words: *Thou hast delivered Me out of all
affliction*. Then in respect of the fact that the violent in seeking
after His soul did not set God before their eyes, He has declared His
eternal possession of unchangeable divinity in the words: *And Mine eye
hath looked down upon Mine enemies.* For the Only-begotten Son of God
was not cut off by death. It is true that in order to take the whole of
our nature upon Him He submitted to death, that is to the apparent
severance of soul and body, and made His way even to the realms below,
the debt which man must manifestly pay: but He rose again and abides for
ever and looks down with an eye that death cannot dim upon His enemies,
being exalted unto the glory of God and born once more Son of God after
becoming Son of Man, as He had been Son of God when He first became Son
of Man, by the glory of His resurrection. He looks down upon His enemies
to whom He once said: *Destroy this temple, and in three days I will
build it up* <span id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) . And so, now
that this temple of His body has been built again, He surveys from His
throne on high those who sought after His soul, and, set far beyond the
power of human death, He looks down from heaven upon those who wrought
His death, He who suffered death, yet could not die, the God-Man, our
Lord Jesus Christ, Who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p34"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[243:1388](2090029.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p5"></span> [Acts
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022), [1 Sam.
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[243:1389](2090029.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p6"></span> St. [Luke xxiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[243:1390](2090029.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p9"></span> [Psa.
51.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[243:1391](2090029.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p10"></span> [Is. xxix
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[244:1392](2090029.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p14"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[244:1393](2090029.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p15"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[244:1394](2090029.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p16"></span> [Rom. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[244:1395](2090029.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p18"></span> [Rom.
8.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[245:1396](2090029.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p20"></span> St. [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[245:1397](2090029.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p23"></span> *Diapsalmus*, see Suicer, s.v. and
Dict. of Bible, *Selah*.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[246:1398](2090029.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p26"></span> St. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[246:1399](2090029.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p29"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[247:1400](2090029.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p30"></span> [Psa.
40.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[247:1401](2090029.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p31"></span> [Heb. vii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[247:1402](2090029.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p33"></span> St. [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.ii-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily on Psalm CXXX. (CXXXI.).](2090030)
