[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090033)  [Next](2090035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span> <span id="page_viib">p. viib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_viib"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Prologue.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>From the Latin of the Edition of Michael
Lequien, as Given in Migne’s Patrology.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>After</span> the rules of Christian dialectic
and the review of the errors of ancient heresies comes at last the book
“Concerning the Orthodox Faith.” In this book, John of Damascus retains
the same order as was adopted by Theodoret in his “Epitome of Divine
Dogmas,” but takes a different method. For the former, by the sheer
weight of his own genius, framed various kinds of arguments against
heretics, adducing the testimony of the sacred page, and thus he
composed a concise treatise of Theology. Our author, however, did not
confine himself to Scripture, but gathered together also the opinions of
the holy Fathers, and produced a work marked with equal perspicuity and
brevity, and forming an unexhausted storehouse of tradition in which
nothing is to be found that has not been either sanctioned by the
œcumenical synods or accepted by the approved leaders of the Church.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>He followed, indeed, chiefly Gregory of
Nazianzus, who, from the great accuracy of his erudition in divine
matters, earned the title “The Theologian,” and who has left scarcely
any chapter of Christian learning untouched in his surviving works, and
is free from any taint or suspicion of the slightest error. John had
read his books with such assiduity that he seemed to hold them all in
the embrace of his faithful memory. Wherefore throughout this work you
may hear not so much John of Damascus as Gregory the Theologian
expounding the mysteries of the orthodox faith. John further made use of
Basil the great, of Gregory of Nyssa, and especially of Nemesius, bishop
of Emesa in Syria, the most beloved of all; likewise of Cyril of
Alexandria, Leo the Great, Leontius of Byzantium, the martyr Maximus:
also of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and, not to mention others,
that writer who took the name of Dionysius the Areopagite. Out of all
these he culled on every hand the flower of their opinions, and
concocted most sweet honey of soundest doctrine. For his aim was, not to
strike out views of his own or anything novel, but rather to collect
into one single theological work the opinions of the ancients which were
scattered through various volumes. And, indeed, in order that the reader
may more readily perceive the method of this most careful teacher, we
shall carefully note in the margin the names of the authors and of the
books from which he copied each separate opinion.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>To John of Damascus, therefore, belongs the
merit of being the first to compose a volume packed with the sentences
of catholic teachers. Accordingly his authority among theologians was
always weighty, not only in the East but even in the West and with the
Latins: all the more so after the translation into Latin of his book
“Concerning the Orthodox Faith,” by Burgundio, a citizen of Pisa, during
the Pontificate of Eugenius the Third. Further it was this translation
that was used by that master of sentences, St. Thomas, and other later
theologians, down till the time when at the beginning of the 16th
century Jacobus Faber Stapulensis attempted to produce a more perfect
translation than was the old one with its uncouth and barbarous diction.
But as this one, too, had many faults, Jacobus Billius, in the course of
the same century, completed a version of greater elegance but yet
lacking in carefulness and brevity. For, as Combefis remarked, “in
translating the Damascene Billius shewed the rawness of a recruit.”
Combefis himself, however, considered the translation of Billy of no
little worth; for when he was toiling at a new edition of the works of
John of Damascus, he did not think it necessary to make a new
translation once more, but was quite content to emend the earlier one.
For he was rightly aware that all the most learned interpreters of
lengthy tomes slip into many errors, and that it is much easier to
improve on the errors of others than to detect one’s own. Thus our
translation will represent that of Billius purged of its blemishes and
restored to a more concise style. but in order that our edition should
go forth in a more accurate shape than the rest, besides using the older
translations and various copies to the number of twenty or more codices,
collated by my own hand, I have moreover revised the Greek phraseology
and diction in those places of the Greek Fathers which the Damascene has
massed together. Nay, further, omitting both the shorter commentaries of
<span id="page_viiib">p. viiib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_viiib"></span>Faber on each chapter and also the longer
ones of Judocus Clictoveus of Neoportua, neither of whom contributes
much, if anything, to the intelligent understanding of the Greek
Fathers, I have attempted by fuller annotations to place before the eyes
of all a specimen of eastern theology, drawn alike from those teachers
whom the Damascene copied and from Greeks of later date whom I had the
privilege of consulting.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>The customary division among the Latins of
the work “Concerning the Orthodox Faith” into four books is found in no
Greek codex, nor in the Greek edition of Verona. And, further, that
division is not met with in the old manuscripts of the original Latin
translation, except as a chance note written in ink by a second and
later hand on the margins of some of them. Hence Marcus Hopperus appears
to be mistaken in ascribing in the dedicatory epistle of the Græco-Latin
edition of Basil the division into four books to the Latin translator:
that is, unless I am mistaken, to Faber, whose edition he published.
Traces of this, however, exist in the books of St. Thomas Aquinas. I
therefore hold that this mode of division was devised and introduced by
the Latins in imitation of the four books of “Sentences” of Peter
Lombard. Codex Regius *n.* 3445, and that is a very late one, alone
seems to divide the “De Fide Orthodoxa” into two parts, the first, or
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>περὶ τῆς
Θεολογίας</span>, dealing indeed with the one triune God, the Creator
and Provider, and the second, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii-p7.2"></span>περὶ τῆς οἰκονομίας</span>, with God Incarnate,
the Redeemer and Rewarder. But an objection to this division is the
clear connection between chapter 43, in which the Incarnation, or
“Œconomia Divina,” is discussed, and the words which immediately precede
it in the end of chapter 42, which is entitled “On Prædestination,”
making either chapter part of one continuous discussion. This fault
cannot be taken to the other division into four parts. But in order not
to startle the reader accustomed to the former division with too much
novelty, I have, following Hopperus, assigned indeed to the Greek
chapters the same numbers as were marked in the Greek codices, but I
have not hesitated to divide the Latin translation into four books.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>I have come across no edition of the old
Latin translation; but the version of Jacobius Faber was issued in Paris
by Judocus Clictoveus from the press of Henry Stephen in the year 1512,
along with commentaries. Next, in the year 1535, Henry Pet, the printer
of Basle, published the existing works of St. John of Damascus, and
amongst them the four books “Concerning the Orthodox Faith, as
translated by Jacobus Faber of Stapula,” but without any commentary.
After some years the same Henry in a second edition added the shorter
commentaries of Clictoveus, and again in the edition published in the
year 1537. In the preface to these editions there occurs among others
the following sentence, “Now for the first time are added the
annotations explaining all the difficulties and the hard and lofty
passages.” For a truth I know no older edition in which those
explanations, such as they are, are given. Further, the author of these
is asserted by Henricus Gravius, of the order of Preachers, in his own
Latin edition of the works of holy John of Damascus, which he brought
out at Cologne from the press of Peter Quentel, in the year 1546, to
have been Jacobus Faber, and of a surety indeed in certain places, and
in especial where the most holy mystery of the Eucharist is under
discussion, the annotations are somewhat frigid in character and do not
express with sufficient fulness the catholic faith. And this cannot be
said without pain, for the sake of a man whom otherwise I should look up
to as worthy of veneration, as almost one of my own house, had he not
proved himself a traitor to his ancestral religion or at least somewhat
too partial to innovators. As to the edition of our Gravius, learned as
he was in both Latin and Greek, he revised the translation, Jacobus
Faber’s translation, and compared it with the Greek text and illustrated
it with very short scholia, “for the sake of heretics,” as he said in
the dedicatory letter to Oswald, especially where they themselves try in
vain to shake the doctrine of the Church as stated by the Damascene.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span>The book “Concerning the Orthodox Faith”
Donatus Veronensis caused to be printed at Verona first in Greek only,
and presented it to Clement the Seventh in the year 1531. Not till the
year 1548 did he produce a version containing both the Greek and Latin,
and again in the year 1575. Next, in the year 1577, Jacobus Billy
published at Paris his own translation without the Greek text: and it
was printed again in that same city in the years 1603 and 1617.

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>Here it will not be superfluous to call to
mind that the great part of the first book, as they say, of the work
“Concerning the Orthodox Faith” exists as the sixth volume of the works
of Cyril of Alexandria, inscribed in that teacher’s name, a result to be
doubtless attributed to the carelessness of some copyist who found these
writings of the Damascus along with others of Cyril.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Exact Exposition of the Orthodox Faith.](2090035.md)
