[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090125)  [Next](2090127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Concerning our
Lord’s genealogy and concerning the holy Mother of God* <span
id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435) .

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span>Concerning the holy and much-lauded
ever-virgin one, Mary, the Mother of God, we have said something in the
preceding chapters, bringing forward what was most opportune, viz., that
strictly and truly she is and is called the Mother of God. Now let us
fill up the blanks. For she being pre-ordained by the eternal prescient
counsel of God and imaged forth and proclaimed in diverse images and
discourses of the prophets through the Holy Spirit, sprang at the
pre-determined time from the root of David, according to the promises
that were made to him. *For the Lord hath sworn, He saith in truth to
David, He will not turn from it: of the fruit of Thy body will I set
upon Thy throne* <span id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436) . And again,
*Once have I sworn by My holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His
seed shall endure for ever, and His throne as the sun before Me. It
shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven* <span id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437) . And Isaiah says:
*And there shall come out a rod out of the stem of Jesse and a branch
shall grow out of his roots* <span id="fr_2438"></span>[2439](#fn_2438)
.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p7"></span>But that Joseph is descended from the
tribe of David is expressly demonstrated by Matthew and Luke, the most
holy evangelists. But Matthew derives Joseph from David through Solomon,
while Luke does so through Nathan; while over the holy Virgin’s origin
both pass in silence.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p8"></span>One ought to remember that it was not
the custom of the Hebrews nor of the divine Scripture to give
genealogies of women; and <span id="page_85b">p. 85b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-Page_85b"></span>the law was to prevent one tribe
seeking wives from another <span id="fr_2439"></span>[2440](#fn_2439) .
And so since Joseph was descended from the tribe of David and was a just
man (for this the divine Gospel testifies), he would not have espoused
the holy Virgin contrary to the law; he would not have taken her unless
she had been of the same tribe <span
id="fr_2440"></span>[2441](#fn_2440) . It was sufficient, therefore, to
demonstrate the descent of Joseph.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p11"></span>One ought also to observe <span
id="fr_2441"></span>[2442](#fn_2441) this, that the law was that when a
man died without seed, this man’s brother should take to wife the wife
of the dead man and raise up seed to his brother <span
id="fr_2442"></span>[2443](#fn_2442) . The offspring, therefore,
belonged by nature to the second, that is, to him that begat it, but by
law to the dead.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p14"></span>Born then of the line of Nathan, the
son of David, Levi begat Melchi <span
id="fr_2443"></span>[2444](#fn_2443) and Panther: Panther begat
Barpanther, so called. This Barpanther begat Joachim: Joachim begat the
holy Mother of God <span id="fr_2444"></span>[2445](#fn_2444)  <span
id="fr_2445"></span>[2446](#fn_2445) . And of the line of Solomon, the
son of David, Mathan had a wife <span
id="fr_2446"></span>[2447](#fn_2446) of whom he begat Jacob. Now on the
death of Mathan, Melchi, of the tribe of Nathan, the son of Levi and
brother of Panther, married the wife of Mathan, Jacob’s mother, of whom
he begat Heli. Therefore Jacob and Heli became brothers on the mother’s
side, Jacob being of the tribe of Solomon and Heli of the tribe of
Nathan. Then Heli of the tribe of Nathan died childless, and Jacob his
brother, of the tribe of Solomon, took his wife and raised up seed to
his brother and begat Joseph. Joseph, therefore, is by nature the son of
Jacob, of the line of Solomon, but by law he is the son of Heli of the
line of Nathan.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p19"></span>Joachim then <span
id="fr_2447"></span>[2448](#fn_2447) took to wife that revered and
praiseworthy woman, Anna. But just as the earlier Anna <span
id="fr_2448"></span>[2449](#fn_2448) , who was barren, bore Samuel by
prayer and by promise, so also this Anna by supplication and promise
from God bare the Mother of God in order that she might not even in this
be behind the matrons of fame <span id="fr_2449"></span>[2450](#fn_2449)
. Accordingly it was grace (for this is the interpretation of Anna) that
bore the lady: (for she became truly the Lady of all created things in
becoming the Mother of the Creator). Further, Joachim <span
id="fr_2450"></span>[2451](#fn_2450) was born in the house of the
*Probatica* <span id="fr_2451"></span>[2452](#fn_2451) , and was brought
up to the temple. Then planted in the House of God and increased by the
Spirit, like a fruitful olive tree, she became the home of every virtue,
turning her mind away from every secular and carnal desire, and thus
keeping her soul as well as her body virginal, as was meet for her who
was to receive God into her bosom: for as He is holy, He finds rest
among the holy <span id="fr_2452"></span>[2453](#fn_2452) . Thus,
therefore, she strove after holiness, and was declared a holy and
wonderful temple fit for the most high God.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p26"></span>Moreover, since the enemy of our
salvation was keeping a watchful eye on virgins, according to the
prophecy of Isaiah, who said, *Behold a virgin shall conceive and bare a
Son and shall call His name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, ‘God
with us* <span id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453) ,’ in order that *he
who taketh the wise in their own craftiness* <span
id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454) may deceive him who always glorieth
in his wisdom, the maiden is given in marriage to Joseph by the priests,
a new book to him who is versed in letters <span
id="fr_2455"></span>[2456](#fn_2455) : but the marriage was both the
protection of the virgin and the delusion of him who was keeping a
watchful eye on virgins. But when the fulness of time was come, the
messenger of the Lord was sent to her, with the good news of our Lord’s
conception. And thus she conceived the Son of God, the hypostatic power
of the Father, *not of the will of the flesh nor of the will of
man* <span id="fr_2456"></span>[2457](#fn_2456) , that is to say, by
connection and seed, but by the good pleasure of the Father and
co-operation of the Holy Spirit. She ministered to the Creator in that
He was created, to the Fashioner in that He was fashioned, and to the
Son of God and God in that He was made flesh and became man from her
pure and immaculate flesh and blood, satisfying the debt of the first
mother. For just as the latter was formed from Adam without connection,
so also did the former bring forth the new Adam, who was brought forth
in accordance with the laws of parturition and above the nature of
generation.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p31"></span>For He who was of the Father, yet
without mother, was born of woman without a father’s co-operation. And
so far as He was born of woman, His birth was in accordance with the
laws of parturition, while so far as He had no father, His birth was
above the nature of generation: and in that it was at the usual time
(for He was born on the completion of the ninth month when the tenth was
just beginning), His birth was in accordance with the laws of
parturition, while in that it was painless it was above the laws of
generation. For, as pleasure did not precede <span id="page_86b">p.
86b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-Page_86b"></span>it, pain did not
follow it, according to the prophet who says, *Before she travailed, she
brought forth, and again, before her pain came she was delivered of a
man-child* <span id="fr_2457"></span>[2458](#fn_2457) . The Son of God
incarnate, therefore, was born of her, not a divinely-inspired <span
id="fr_2458"></span>[2459](#fn_2458) man but God incarnate; not a
prophet anointed with energy but by the presence of the anointing One in
His completeness, so that the Anointer became man and the Anointed God,
not by a change of nature but by union in subsistence. For the Anointer
and the Anointed were one and the same, anointing in the capacity of God
Himself as man. Must there not therefore be a Mother of God who bore God
incarnate? Assuredly she who played the part of the Creator’s servant
and mother is in all strictness and truth in reality God’s Mother and
Lady and Queen over all created things. But just as He who was conceived
kept her who conceived still virgin, in like manner also He who was born
preserved her virginity intact, only passing through her and keeping her
closed <span id="fr_2459"></span>[2460](#fn_2459) . The conception,
indeed, was through the sense of hearing, but the birth through the
usual path by which children come, although some tell tales of His birth
through the side of the Mother of God. For it was not impossible for Him
to have come by this gate, without injuring her seal in anyway.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p35"></span>The ever-virgin One thus remains
even after the birth still virgin, having never at any time up till
death consorted with a man. For although it is written, *And knew her
not till she had brought forth her first-born Son* <span
id="fr_2460"></span>[2461](#fn_2460) , yet note that he who is
first-begotten is first-born even if he is only-begotten. For the word
“first-born” means that he was born first but does not at all suggest
the birth of others. And the word “till” signifies the limit of the
appointed time but does not exclude the time thereafter. For the Lord
says, *And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world* <span id="fr_2461"></span>[2462](#fn_2461) , not meaning thereby
that He will be separated from us after the completion of the age. The
divine apostle, indeed, says, *And so shall we ever be with the
Lord* <span id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462) , meaning after the
general resurrection.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p39"></span>For could it be possible that she,
who had borne God and from experience of the subsequent events had come
to know the miracle, should receive the embrace of a man. God forbid! It
is not the part of a chaste mind to think such thoughts, far less to
commit such acts.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p40"></span>But this blessed woman, who was
deemed worthy of gifts that are supernatural, suffered those pains,
which she escaped at the birth, in the hour of the passion, enduring
from motherly sympathy the rending of the bowels, and when she beheld
Him, Whom she knew to be God by the manner of His generation, killed as
a malefactor, her thoughts pierced her as a sword, and this is the
meaning of this verse: *Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul
also* <span id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463)  <span
id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464) . But the joy of the resurrection
transforms the pain, proclaiming Him, Who died in the flesh, to be God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[84b:2436](2090126.htm#fr_2435) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span> In *Reg*. 2428 is added <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>καὶ ᾽Ιωσὴφ τοῦ
μνήστορος</span>.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[84b:2437](2090126.htm#fr_2436) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[84b:2438](2090126.htm#fr_2437) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p5"></span> [Psa.
89.35-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2438"></span>[84b:2439](2090126.htm#fr_2438) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p6"></span> [Is. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2439"></span>[85b:2440](2090126.htm#fr_2439) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p9"></span> [Num. xxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>
*seqq*.

<span id="fn_2440"></span>[85b:2441](2090126.htm#fr_2440) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>σκήπτρου</span>.

<span id="fn_2441"></span>[85b:2442](2090126.htm#fr_2441) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p12"></span> Cf. *Julius Afric., Ep. ad
Aristidem*, cited in *Eusebius, Hist. Eccles.* i. 7.

<span id="fn_2442"></span>[85b:2443](2090126.htm#fr_2442) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p13"></span> [Deut. xxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2443"></span>[85b:2444](2090126.htm#fr_2443) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p15"></span> See the note in Migne.

<span id="fn_2444"></span>[85b:2445](2090126.htm#fr_2444) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p16"></span> Text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p16.1"></span>τὴν ἅγιαν Θεοτόκον</span>. Variant,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p16.2"></span>τὴν ἅγιαν
῎Ανναν</span>.

<span id="fn_2445"></span>[85b:2446](2090126.htm#fr_2445) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p17"></span> St. [Luke iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p17.1"></span> *seqq*.

<span id="fn_2446"></span>[85b:2447](2090126.htm#fr_2446) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p18"></span> R. 2926 adds “Ethan,” the name
being taken from Julius Africanus.

<span id="fn_2447"></span>[85b:2448](2090126.htm#fr_2447) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p20"></span> *Epiph., Hæres*. 79.

<span id="fn_2448"></span>[85b:2449](2090126.htm#fr_2448) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p21"></span> [1 Sam. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2449"></span>[85b:2450](2090126.htm#fr_2449) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p22"></span> *Greg. Nyss., Orat. in nativ.
Dom*.: *Eustath. in Hexaëm.*

<span id="fn_2450"></span>[85b:2451](2090126.htm#fr_2450) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p23"></span> *Epiph., Hæres*. 79.

<span id="fn_2451"></span>[85b:2452](2090126.htm#fr_2451) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p24.1"></span>τῆς προβατικῆς</span>, *the Sheep-gate*.

<span id="fn_2452"></span>[85b:2453](2090126.htm#fr_2452) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p25"></span> [Ps.
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[85b:2454](2090126.htm#fr_2453) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p27"></span> [Isa.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), [Matt.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[85b:2455](2090126.htm#fr_2454) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p28"></span> [1 Cor.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019), [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2455"></span>[85b:2456](2090126.htm#fr_2455) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p29"></span> [Is. xxix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2456"></span>[85b:2457](2090126.htm#fr_2456) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p30"></span> St. [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2457"></span>[86b:2458](2090126.htm#fr_2457) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p32"></span> [Is. lxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2458"></span>[86b:2459](2090126.htm#fr_2458) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p33.1"></span>θεοφόρος</span>.

<span id="fn_2459"></span>[86b:2460](2090126.htm#fr_2459) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p34"></span> [Ezek. xliv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2460"></span>[86b:2461](2090126.htm#fr_2460) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p36"></span> St. [Matt. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2461"></span>[86b:2462](2090126.htm#fr_2461) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p37"></span> [Matt.
28.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[86b:2463](2090126.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p38"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[86b:2464](2090126.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p41"></span> St. [Luke ii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[86b:2465](2090126.htm#fr_2464) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p42"></span> In R. 2926 is added, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p42.1"></span>ὅπερ αὐτῇ προείρηκεν
ὁ Θεοδόχος Συμεὼν, τὸν Κύριον ἐναγκαλισάμενος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the honour due to the Saints and their
remains.](2090127)
