[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2090068)  [Next](2090070.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Concerning
Sensation.*

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p2"></span>Sensation is that faculty of the
soul whereby material objects can be apprehended or discriminated. And
the sensoria are the organs or members through which sensations are
conveyed. And the objects of sense are the things that come within the
province of sensation. And lastly, the subject of sense is the living
animal which possesses the faculty of sensation. Now there are five
senses, and likewise five organs of sense.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p3"></span>The first sense is sight: and the
sensoria or organs of sight are the nerves of the brain and the eyes.
Now sight is primarily perception of colour, but along with the colour
it discriminates the body that has colour, and its size and form, and
locality, and the intervening space and the number <span
id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833.md) : also whether it is in motion or
at rest, rough or smooth, even or uneven, sharp or blunt, and finally
whether its composition is watery or earthy, that is, wet or dry.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p5"></span>The second sense is hearing,
whereby voices and sounds are perceived. And it distinguishes these as
sharp or deep, or smooth or loud. Its organs are the soft nerves of the
brain, and the structure of the ears. Further, man and the ape are the
only animals that do not move their ears.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p6"></span>The third sense is smell, which is
caused by the nostrils transmitting the vapours to the brain: and it is
bounded by the extreme limits of the anterior ventricle of the brain. It
is the faculty by which vapours are perceived and apprehended. Now, the
most generic distinction between vapours is whether they have a good or
an evil odour, or form an intermediate class with neither a good nor an
evil odour. A good odour is produced by the thorough digestion in the
body of the humours. When they are only moderately digested the
intermediate class is formed, and when the digestion is very imperfect
or utterly wanting, an evil odour results.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p7"></span>The fourth sense is taste: it is
the faculty whereby the humours are apprehended or perceived, and its
organs of sense are the tongue, and more especially the lips, and the
palate (which the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>οὐρανίσκος</span> ), and in these are
nerves that come from the brain and are spread out, and convey to the
dominant part of the soul the perception or sensation they have
encountered <span id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834.md) . The so-called
gustatory qualities of the humours are these:—sweetness, pungency,
bitterness, astringency, acerbity, sourness, saltness, fattiness,
stickiness; for taste is capable of discriminating all these. But water
has none of these qualities, and is therefore devoid of taste. Moreover,
astringency is only a more intense and exaggerated form of acerbity.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p9"></span>The fifth sense is touch, which is
common to all living things <span id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835.md) .
Its organs are nerves which come from the brain and ramify all through
the body. Hence the body as a whole, including even the other organs of
sense, possesses the sense of touch. Within its scope come heat and
cold, softness and hardness, viscosity and brittleness <span
id="fr_1836"></span>[1837](#fn_1836.md) , heaviness and lightness: for it
is by touch alone that these qualities are discriminated. On the other
hand, roughness and smoothness, dryness and wetness, thickness and
thinness, up and down, place and size, whenever that is such as to be
embraced in a single application of the sense of touch, are all common
to touch and sight, as well as denseness and rareness, that is porosity,
and rotundity if it is small, and some other shapes. In like manner also
by the aid of memory and thought perception of the nearness of a body is
possible, and similarly perception of number up to two or three, and
such small and easily reckoned figures. But it is by sight rather than
touch that these things are perceived.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p12"></span>The Creator, it is to be noted,
fashioned <span id="page_35b">p. 35b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-Page_35b"></span>all the other organs of sense in
pairs, so that if one were destroyed, the other might fill its place.
For there are two eyes, two ears, two orifices of the nose, and two
tongues, which in some animals, such as snakes, are separate, but in
others, like man, are united. But touch is spread over the whole body
with the exception of bones, nerves, nails, horns, hairs, ligaments, and
other such structures.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p13"></span>Further, it is to be observed that
sight is possible only in straight lines, whereas smell and hearing are
not limited to straight lines only, but act in all directions. Touch,
again, and taste act neither in straight lines, nor in every direction,
but only when each comes near to the sensible objects that are proper to
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[34b:1834](2090069.htm#fr_1833.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p4"></span> *Nemes.,* ch. 71.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[34b:1835](2090069.htm#fr_1834.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p8"></span> *Nemes.,* ch. 9.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[34b:1836](2090069.htm#fr_1835.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p10"></span> *Ibid.*, ch. 8.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[34b:1837](2090069.htm#fr_1836.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>ξηρόν</span> is added in some <span
class="c12"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xviii-p11.2"></span>mss.</span> but
wrongly: for it is what is perceived by touch alone that is here spoken
of, whereas, below, we are told that dryness is recognised also by
sight; so also in Nemesius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Thought.](2090070.md)
