[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lgc06)  [Next](lgc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267T84E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cuchulain of Muirthemne*, by Lady Augusta Gregory, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

# IV.

### BRICRIU'S FEAST, AND THE WAR OF WORDS OF THE WOMEN OF ULSTER.

BRICRIU of the Bitter Tongue made a great feast one time for Conchubar,
son of Ness, and for all the chief men of Ulster. He was the length of a
year getting the feast ready, and he built a great house to hold it in
at Dun-Rudraige. He built it in the likeness of the House of the Red
Branch in Emain, but it was entirely beyond all the buildings of that
time in shape and in substance, in plan and in ornament, in pillars and
in facings, in doors and in carvings, so that it was spoken of in all
parts. It was on the plan of the drinking-hall at Emain it was made
inside, and it having nine divisions from hearth to wall, and every
division faced with bronze that was overlaid with gold, thirty feet
high. In the front part of the hail there was a royal seat made for
Conchubar, high above all the other seats of the house. It was set with
carbuncles and other precious stones of all colours, that shone like
gold and silver, so that they made the night the same as the day; and
round about it were the twelve seats of the twelve heroes of Ulster.

Good as the material was, the work done on it was as good. It took six
horses to bring home every beam, and the strength of six men to fix
every pole, and thirty of the best skilled men in Ireland were ordering
it and directing it.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Then Bricriu made a sunny parlour for himself, on a level with
Conchubar's seat and the seats of the heroes of valour, and it had every
sort of ornament, and windows of glass were put on every side of it, the
way he could see the hall from his seat, for he knew the men of Ulster
would not let him stop inside.

When he had finished building the hall and the sunny parlour, and had
furnished them with quilts and coverings, beds and pillows, and with a
full supply of meat and drink, so that nothing was wanting, he set out
for Emain Macha to see Conchubar and the chief men of Ulster.

It happened that day they were all gathered together at Emain Macha, and
they made him welcome, and they put him to sit beside Conchubar, and he
said to Conchubar and to them all, "Come with me to a feast I have made
ready." "I am willing to go," said Conchubar, "if the men of Ulster are
willing."

But Fergus, son of Rogh, and the others, said: "We will not go, for if
we do, our dead will be more than our living, after Bricriu has set us
to quarrel with one another." "It will be worse for you if you do not
come," said Bricriu. "What will you do if they do not go with you?" said
Conchubar. "I will stir up strife," said Bricriu, "between the kings and
the leaders, and the heroes of valour, and the swordsmen, till every one
makes an end of the other, if they will not come with me to use my
feast" "We will not go for the sake of pleasing you," said Conchubar. "I
will stir up anger between father and son, so that they will be the
death of one another," said Bricriu; "if I fail in doing that, I will
make a quarrel between mother and daughter; if that fails, I will put
the two breasts of every woman of Ulster striking one against the other,
and destroying one another." "It is better for us to go," said Fergus.
"Let us consult with the chief men of Ulster," said Sencha, son of
Ailell. "Some harm

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

will come of it," said Conchubar, "if we do not consult together against
this man.

On that, all the chief men met together in council, and it is what
Sencha advised: "It is best for you to get securities from Bricriu, as
you have to go along with him; and put eight swordsmen around him, to
make him leave the house as soon as he has laid out the feast for you."
So Ferbenn Ferbeson, son of Conchubar, brought the answer to Bricriu. "I
am satisfied to do that," said Bricriu. With that the men of Ulster set
out from Emain, host, troop, and company under king, chief, and leader,
and it was a good march they all made together to Dun-Rudraige.

Then Bricriu set himself to think how with the securities that were
given for him, he could best manage to set the men of Ulster one against
the other. After he had been thinking a while, he went over to Laegaire
Buadach, son of Connad, son of Iliath. "All good be with you, Laegaire,
Winner of Battles, you mighty mallet of Bregia, you hot hammer of Meath,
you flame-red thunderbolt, what hinders you from getting the
championship of Ireland for ever?" "If I want it I can get it," said
Laegaire. "You will be head of all the champions of Ireland," said
Bricriu, "if you do as I advise." "I will do that, indeed," said
Laegaire.

"Well," said Bricriu, "if you can get the Champion's Portion at the
feast in my house, the championship of Ireland will be yours for ever.
And the Champion's Portion of my house is worth fighting for," he said,
"for it is not the portion of a fool's house. There goes with it a vat
of good wine, with room enough in it to hold three of the brave men of
Ulster; with that a seven-year-old boar, that has been fed since it was
born on no other thing but fresh milk, and fine meal in spring-time,
curds and sweet milk in summer, the kernel of nuts and wheat

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

in harvest, beef and broth in the winter; with that a seven-year-old
bullock that never had in its mouth, since it was a sucking calf, either
heather or twig tops, but only sweet milk and herbs, meadow hay and
corn; along with that, five-score wheaten cakes made with honey. That is
the Champion's Portion of my house. And since you are yourself the best
hero among the men of Ulster," he said, "it is but right to give it to
you; and that is my wish, you to get it. And at the end of the day, when
the feast is spread out, let your chariot-driver rise up, and it is to
him the Champion's Portion will be given." "There will be dead men if
that is not done," said Laegaire. Then Bricriu laughed, for he liked to
hear that.

When he had done stirring up Laegaire Buadach, he went on till he met
with Conall Cearnach. "May good be with you, Conall," he said. "It is
you are the hero of fights and of battles; it is many victories you have
won up to this over the heroes of Ulster. By the time the men of Ulster
cross the boundary of a strange country, it is three days and three
nights in advance of them you are, over many a ford and river; it is you
who protect their rear coming back again, so that no enemy can get past
you or through you, or over you. What would hinder you from being given
the Champion's Portion of Emain to hold for ever?" Great as was his
treachery with Laegaire, he showed twice as much in what he said to
Conall Cearnach.

When he had satisfied himself that Conall was stirred up to a quarrel,
he went on to Cuchulain. "May all good be with you, Cuchulain, conqueror
of Bregia, bright banner of the Life, darling of Emain, beloved by wives
and by maidens. Cuchulain is no nickname for you to-day, for you are the
champion of the men of Ulster; it is you keep off their great quarrels
and disputes; it is you get justice for every man of them; it is you
have what all the men of Ulster are wanting in; all the men

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of Ulster acknowledge that your bravery, your valour, and your deeds are
beyond their own. Why, then, would you leave the Champion's Portion for
some other one of the men of Ulster, when not one of them would be able
to keep it from you?"

"By the god of my people," said Cuchulain, "whoever comes to try and
keep it from me will lose his head." With that Bricriu left them and
followed after the army, as if he had done nothing to stir up a quarrel
at all.

After that they came to the feasting-houses and went in, and every one
took his place, king, prince, landowner, swordsman, and young fighting
man. One half of the house was set apart for Conchubar and his
following, and the other half was kept for the wives of the heroes of
Ulster.

And there were attending on Conchubar in the front part of the house
Fergus, son of Rogh; Celthair, son of Uthecar; Eoghan, son of Durthact;
the two Sons of the king, Fiacha and Fiachaig; Fergus, son of Leti;
Cuscraid, the Stutterer of Macha; Sencha, son of Ailell; the three sons
of Fiachach, that is Rus and Dare and Imchad; Muinremar, son of
Geirgind; Errge Echbel; Amergin, son of Ecit; Mend, son of Salchah;
Dubthach Doel Uladh, the Beetle of Ulster; Feradach Find Fectnach;
Fedelmid, son of Ilair Cheting; Furbaide Ferbend; Rochad, son of
Fathemon; Laegaire Buadach; Conall Cearnach; Cuchulain; Conrad, son of
Mornai; Erc, son of Fedelmid; Iollan, son of Fergus; Fintan, son of
Nial; Cethern, son of Fintan; Factna, son of Sencad; Conla the False;
Ailell the Honey-Tongued; the chief men of Ulster, with the young men
and the song-makers.

While the feast was being spread out, the musicians and players made
music for them. As soon as Bricriu had spread the feast with its
well-tasting, savoury meats, he was ordered by his sureties to leave the
hall on the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

moment; and they rose up with their drawn swords in their hands to put
him out. So he and his followers went out, and when he was on the
threshold of the house he turned and called out: "The Champion's Portion
of my house is not the portion of a fool's house; let it be given to
whoever you think the best hero of Ulster." And with that he left them.

Then the distributers rose up to divide the food, and the chariot-driver
of Laegaire Buadach, Sedlang, son of Riangabra, rose up and said to
them, "Let you give the Champion's Portion to Laegaire, for he has the
best right to it of all the young heroes of Ulster."

Then Id, son of Riangabra, chariot-driver to Conan Cearnach, rose up,
and bade them to give it to his master. But Laeg, son of Riangabra,
said, "It is to Cuchulain it must be brought; and it is no disgrace for
all the men of Ulster to give it to him, for it is he is the bravest of
you all." "That is not true," said Conall, and Laegaire said the same.

With that they got up upon the floor, and put on their shields and took
hold of their swords, and they attacked and struck at one another till
the one half of the hall was as if on fire with the clashing of swords
and spears, and the other half was white as chalk with the whiteness of
the shields. There was fear on the whole gathering; all the men were put
from their places, and there was great anger on Conchubar himself and on
Fergus, son of Rogh, to see the injustice and the hardship of two men
fighting against one, Conall and Laegaire both together attacking
Cuchulain; but there was no one among the men of Ulster dared part them
till Sencha spoke to Conchubar. "It is time for you to part these men,"
he said.

With that, Conchubar and Fergus came between them, and the fighters let
their hands drop to their sides. "Will you do as I advise?" said Sencha.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "We will do it,"
they said. "Then my advice is," said Sencha, "for this night to divide
the Champion's Portion among the whole gathering, and after that to let
it be settled according to the judgment of Ailell, king of Connaught,
for it will be better for the men of Ulster, this business to be settled
in Cruachan."

So with that they sat down to the feast again, and gathered round the
fire and drank and made merry.

All this time Bricriu and his wife were in their upper room, and from
there he had seen how things were going on in the great hall. And he
began to search his mind how he could best stir up the women to quarrel
with one another as he had stirred up the men. When he had done
searching his mind, it just chanced as he could have wished, that Fedelm
of the Fresh Heart came from the hall with fifty women after her,
laughing and merry. Bricriu went to meet her. "All good be with you
to-night; wife of Laegaire Buadach. Fedelm of the Fresh Heart is no
nickname for you, with respect to your appearance and your wisdom and
your family. Conchubar, king of Ulster, is of your kindred; Laegaire
Buadach is your husband. I would not think well of it that any of the
women of Ulster should go before you into the hail, for it is at your
heel that all the other women of Ulster should walk. If you go first
into the hall to-night; you will be queen over them all for ever and
ever."

Fedelm went on after that, the length of three ridges from the hall.

After that there came out Lendabair, the Favourite, daughter of Eoghan,
son of Durthact, wife of Conall Cearnach.

Bricriu came over to her, and he said, "Good be with you, Lendabair; and
that is no nickname, for you are the favourite and the darling of the
men of the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

whole world, because of the brightness of your beauty. As far as your
husband is beyond the whole world in bravery and in comeliness, so far
are you before the women of Ulster." Great as his deceit was in what he
said to Fedelm, it was twice as great in what he said to Lendabair.

Then Emer came out and fifty women after her. "Health be with you, Emer,
daughter of Forgall Manach, wife of the best man in Ireland! Emer of the
Beautiful Hair is no nickname for you; the kings and princes of Ireland
are quarrelling with one another about you. So far as the sun outshines
the stars of heaven, so far do you outshine the women of the whole world
in form, and shape, and birth, in youth, and beauty, and nicety, in good
name, and wisdom, and speech." However great his deceit was towards the
other women, it was twice as much towards Emer.

The three women went on then till they met at one spot, three ridges
from the house, but none of them knew that Bricriu had been speaking to
the other. They set out then to go back to the house. Their walk was
even and quiet and easy on the first ridge; hardly did one of them put
her foot before the other. But on the next ridge their steps were closer
and quicker; and when they came to the ridge next the house, it was
hardly one of them could keep up with the other, so that they took up
their skirts nearly to their knees, each one trying to get first into
the hall, because of what Bricriu had said to them, that whoever would
be first to enter the house, would be queen of the whole province. And
such was the noise they made in their race, that it was like the noise
of forty chariots coming. The whole palace shook, and all the men
started up for their arms, striking against one another.

"Stop," said Sencha, "it is not enemies that are coming, it is Bricriu
has set the women quarrelling.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> By the god of my
people!" he said, "unless the hall is shut against them, those that are
dead among us will be more than those that are living." With that the
doorkeepers shut the doors. But Emer was quicker than the other women,
and outran them, and put her back against the door, and called to the
doorkeepers before the other women came up, so that the men rose up,
each of them to open the door before his own wife, so that she might be
the first to come within.

"It is a bad night this will be," said Conchubar; and he struck the
silver rod he had in his hand against the bronze post of the hall, and
they all sat down. "Quiet yourselves," said Sencha; "it is not a war of
arms we are going to have here, it is a war of words." Each woman then
put herself under the protection of her husband outside, and then there
followed the war of words of the women of Ulster.

Fedelm of the Fresh Heart was the first to speak, and it is what she
said:

"The mother who bore me was free, noble, equal to my father in rank and
in race; the blood that is in me is royal; I was brought up like one of
royal blood. I am counted beautiful in form and in shape and in
appearance; I was brought up to good behaviour, to courage, to mannerly
ways. Look at Laegaire, my husband, and what his red hand does for
Ulster. It was by himself alone its boundaries were kept from the
enemies that were as strong as all Ulster put together; he is a defence
and a protection against wounds; he is beyond all the heroes; his
victories are greater than their victories. Why should not I, Fedelm,
the beautiful, the lovely, the joyful, be the first to step into the
drinking-hall to-night?"

Then Lendabair spoke, and it is what she said:

"I myself have beauty too, and good sense and good

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

carriage; it is I should walk into the hall with free, even steps before
all the women of Ulster.

"For my husband is pleasant Conall of the great shield, the Victorious;
he is proud, going with brave steps up to the spears of the fight; he is
proud coming back to me after it, with the heads of his enemies in his
hands.

"He brings his hard sword into the battle for Ulster; he defends every
ford or he destroys it to keep out the enemy; he is a hero will have a
stone raised over him.

"The son of noble Amergin, who can speak against his courage or his
deeds? It is Conall who leads the heroes.

"All eyes look on the glory of Lendabair; why would she not go first
into the hall of the king?"

Then Emer spoke, and it is what she said:

"There is no woman comes up to me in appearance, in shape, in wisdom;
there is no one comes up to me for goodness of form, or brightness of
eye, or good sense, or kindness, or good behaviour.

"No one has the joy of loving or the strength of loving that I have; all
Ulster desires me; surely I am a nut of the heart. If I were a light
woman, there would not be a husband left to any of you to-morrow.

"And my husband is Cuchulain. It is he is not a hound that is weak;
there is blood on his spear, there is blood on his sword, his white body
is black with blood, his soft skin is furrowed with sword cuts, there
are many wounds on his thigh.

"But the flame of his eyes is turned westward; he is the strong
protector; his chariot is red, its cushions are red; he fights from over
the ears of horses, from over the breath of men; he leaps in the air
like a salmon when he makes his hero leap; he does strange feats, the
dark feat, the blind feat, the feat of nine; he breaks

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

down armies in the hard fight; he saves the life of proud armies; he
finds joy in the terror of the ignorant.

"Your fine heroes of Ulster are not worth a stalk of grass compared with
my husband, Cuchulain, letting on to have a woman's sickness on them; he
is like the clear red blood, they are like the scum and the leavings,
worth no more than a stalk of grass.

"Your fine women of Ulster, they are shaped like cows and led like cows,
when they are put beside the wife of Cuchulain."

When the men in the hail heard what the women said, Laegaire and Conall
made a rush at the wall, and broke a plank out of it at their own
height, to let their own wives in. But Cuchulain raised up that part of
the house that was opposite to his place, so that the stars and the sky
could be seen through the wan. By that opening Emer came in with the
fifty women that waited on her, and with them the women that waited on
the other two. None of the other women could be compared at all with
Emer, and no one at all could be compared with her husband. And then
Cuchulain let the wall he had lifted fall suddenly again, so that seven
feet of it went into the ground, and the whole house shook, and
Bricriu's upper room was laid flat in such a way that Bricriu himself
and his wife were thrown into the dirt among the dogs. "My grief," cried
Bricriu, "enemies are come in!" And he got up quickly and took a turn
round, and he saw that the hall was now crooked and leaning entirely to
one side. He clapped his hands together and went inside, but he was so
covered with dirt that none of the Ulster people could know him, it was
only by his way of speaking they made out who he was.

Then he said, from the middle of the floor, "It is a pity I ever made a
feast for you, men of Ulster.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My house is more
to me than everything else I have. I put *geasa,* that is, bonds, on
you, not to drink or eat or to sleep till you leave my house the same
way as you found it." At that; all the men of Ulster went out and tried
to pull the house straight, but they did not raise it by so much as a
hand's breadth.

"What are we to do?" they said. "There is nothing for you to do," said
Sencha, "but to ask the man that pulled it crooked to set it straight
again."

Upon that they bid Cuchulain to put the wall up straight again, and
Bricriu said, "O king of the heroes of Ireland, unless you can set it up
straight, there is no man in the world can do it." And all the men of
Ulster begged and prayed of Cuchulain to settle the matter. And that
they might not have to go without food or drink, Cuchulain rose up and
tried to lift the house with a tug, and he failed. Anger came on him
then, and the hero light shone about him, and he put out all his
strength, and strained himself till a man's foot could find place
between each of his ribs, and he lifted the house up till it was as
straight as it was before. After that they enjoyed the feast, with the
chief men on the one side round about Conchubar, High King of Ulster,
and their wives on the other side--Fedelm of the Nine Shapes (nine
shapes she could take on, and each shape more beautiful than the other),
and Findchaem, daughter of Cathbad, wife of Amergin of the Iron Jaw, and
Devorgill, wife of Lugaid of the Red Stripes, besides Emer, and Fedelm
of the Fresh Heart, and Lendabair; and it would be too long to count and
to tell of all the other noble women besides.

There was soon a buzzing of words in the hail again, with the women
praising their men, as if to stir up another quarrel between them. Then
Sencha, son of

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Ailell, got up and shook his bell branch, and they all stopped to listen
to him, and then to quiet the women he said:

"Have done with this word-fighting, lest you drive the men of Ulster to
grow white-faced in the anger and the pride of battle with one another.

"It is through the fault of women the shields of men are broken, heroes
go out to fight and struggle with one another in their anger.

"It is the folly of women brings men to do these things, to bruise what
they cannot bind up again, to strike down what they cannot raise up
again. Wives of heroes, keep yourself from this."

But Emer answered him, and it is what she said:

"It is right for me to speak, Sencha, and I the wife of the comely,
pleasant hero, who is beyond all others in beauty, in wisdom, in
speaking, since the learning that was easy to him is done with.

"No one can do his feats, the over-breath feat, the apple feat, the
ghost feat, the screw feat, the cat feat, the red-whirling feat, the
barbed-spear feat, the quick stroke, the fire of the mouth, the hem's
cry, the wheel feat, the sword-edge feat; no one can throw himself
against hard-spiked places the way he does.

"There is no one is his equal in youth, in form, in brightness, in
birth, in mind, in voice, in bravery, in boldness, in fire, in skill; no
one in his equal in hunting, in running, in strength, in victories, in
greatness. There is no man to be found who can be put beside Cuchulain."

"If it is truth you are speaking, Emer," said Conan Cearnach, "let this
lad of feats stand up, that we may see them."

"I will not," said Cuchulain. "I am tired and broken to-day, I will do
no more till after I have had food and sleep." It was true what he said,
for it was on

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

that morning he had met with the Grey of Macha by the side of the grey
lake at Slieve Fuad. When it came out of the lake, Cuchulain slipped his
hands round the neck of the horse, and the two of them struggled and
wrestled with one another, and in that way they went all round Ireland,
till late in the day he brought the horse home to Emain. It was in the
same way he got the Black Sainglain from the black lake of Sainglen.

And Cuchulain said: "To-day myself and the Grey of Macha have gone
through the great plains of Ireland, Bregia of Meath, the seashore marsh
of Muirthemne Macha, through Moy Medba, Currech Cleitech Cerna, Lia of
Linn Locharn, Fer Femen Fergna, Curros Domnand, Ros Roigne, and Eo. And
now I would sooner eat and sleep than do any other thing. But I swear by
the gods my people swear by," he said, "I would be ready to fight with
any man of you if I had but my fill of food and of sleep." "Well," said
Bricriu, "this has gone on long enough. Let food and drink be brought,
and let the women's war be put a stop to till the feast is done."

They did so, and it was a pleasant time they had till the end of three
days and three nights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Championship of Ulster](lgc08)
