[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lgc15)  [Next](lgc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267T84E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cuchulain of Muirthemne*, by Lady Augusta Gregory, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

# XIII.

### THE TWO BULLS

THIS, now, is the story of the two bulls, the Brown of Cuailgne, and the
White-horned of Cruachan Ai, and this is the way it was with them--for
they were not right bulls, but there was enchantment on them. In the
time long ago Bodb was king of the Sidhe of Munster, and it is in Femen,
of Slieve-na-man he was, and Ochall Ochne was king of the Sidhe of
Connaught, and it is in Cruachan he used to be. They used at one time to
be fighting one against the other, but afterwards they made peace, and
were good friends. Now Bodb had a swineherd, whose name was Friuch, and
Ochall had a swineherd whose name was Rucht, and they were friendly with
one another the same as their masters. And they had the knowledge of
enchantments, and could turn themselves to every shape. And when there
was a great plenty of mast in Munster, the swineherd from Connaught
would bring his lean swine to the south, and in the same way, when mast
was plentiful in Connaught, the swineherd would bring his swine
northward, and would bring them home again fat.

But after a while some bad feeling rose up between the two, for the men
of Connaught and the men of Munster began to set them one against the
other. So one year when there was great mast in Munster, and Rucht
brought his herd from Connaught, so soon as his comrade Friuch had bade
him welcome, he said: "The

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

people are all saying your power is greater than mine." "It is no less
any way," said Ochall's herd. "We will soon know that," said Friuch. "I
will put an enchantment on your swine, and even though they eat their
share of mast, they will not be fat, like mine will be." And so it
happened, he put an enchantment on the Connaught swine, and when Rucht
went home with them they could hardly walk at all, they were so thin and
so weak, and all the people were laughing at the state they were in. "It
was a bad day for you, you went to the South," they said, "for your
comrade has greater power than what you have." "That is not so," said
he. "Wait till it is our turn to have mast, and I will play the same
trick on him."

So the next year he did as he had said, and the Munster swine pined
away, so that every one said their power was the same. And when Bodb's
swineherd went back home to Munster with his lean swine, his master put
him out of the place. And Ochall put his herd out of his place as well,
because of the swine coming back in so bad a state from Munster.

One day, two full years after that, the men of Munster were gathered
together near Femen, and they took notice of two ravens that were making
a great cawing. "What a noise those birds have been making all through
the year!" they said. "They never stop scolding at one another." Just
then Findell, Ochall's steward from Cruachan, came towards them on the
hill, and they bade him welcome. "What a noise those birds are making!"
he said; "any one would think them to be the same two birds we had in
Cruachan last year." With that, they saw the two ravens change into the
shape of men, and they knew them to be the two swineherds, and they bade
them welcome. "It is not right you to welcome us," said Bodb's
swineherd, "for there will be many dead bodies of friends, and much
crying on

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

account of us two." "What has happened you all through this time?" they
asked. "Nothing good," he said. "Since we went from you we have been all
the time in the shape of birds, and you saw the way we were scolding at
one another all through this year. And we were quarrelling in the same
way the whole of last year at Cruachan, and the men of the North and of
the South have seen what our power is. And now," he said, "we will go
into the shape of water beasts, and be under the water for the length of
two years." And with that one of them went into the Sionnan, and the
other into the Suir, and they were seen for a year in the Suir, and for
a year in the Sionnan, and they devouring one another. And one day the
men of Connaught had a great gathering at Ednecha, on the Sionnan, and
they saw these two beasts in the river; each one of them looked to be as
big as the top of a hill, and they made such a furious attack on one
another that fiery swords seemed to be coming from their jaws, and the
people came round them on every side. They came out of the Sionnan then,
and as soon as they touched the shore, they changed again into the shape
of the two swineherds. Ochall bade them welcome. "Where have you been
wandering?" he asked them. "Indeed it is tired we are with our
wanderings," they said. "You saw what we were doing before your eyes,
and that is what we were doing through these two years, under seas and
waters. And now we must take new shapes on us, till we try one another's
strength again." And with that they went away.

It happened a good while after that there was a great gathering of the
men of Connaught at Loch Riach, for Bodb was coming on a friendly visit
to Ochall. And Bodb brought a great troop with him, the most splendid
ever seen; speckled horses they had, and green cloaks with silver
brooches, and shoes with clasps of red bronze,

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

and every one of them had a collar of gold, with a stone worth a
newly-calved cow set in it. When Ochall saw what grand clothes and
horses they had, he called to his people secretly, and asked could they
match Bodb's people in dress and in horses and aims, and they said they
could not. Then Ochall said: "That is a pity, and our great name is
lost." But just then a troop of men were seen coming from the North, and
black horses with them, that you would think had been cast up by the
sea, and bridle-bits of gold in their mouths. And the men bad black-grey
cloaks, and a gold brooch at the breast of each, and a white tunic with
crimson stripes, and fifty coils of bright gold round every man. And
every man of them had black hair, as smooth as if a cow had licked it.
And they stopped a little way off, and then the men of Connaught stood
up and gave up their place to them. There was a Druid from Britain
there, and when he saw them make way he said: "From this out, to the end
of life and time, the Connaught men will be under the yoke, attending on
hounds and on Sons of kings and queens for ever."

Then after they had been feasting for a while, Bodb asked could any
Connaught man be found that would fight against his champion Rinn, that
was with him, and that had a great name, but no one knew where he came
from. And at first there could no one be found, but then a strange
champion came out from among the men of Connaught, and he said, "I will
go against him." "That is no welcome news," said Rinn. Then they fought
against one another for three days and three nights, and before the end
of that time the two armies began to join into the fight, and a troop
came from Leinster and joined with Bodb, and another troop came from
Meath and joined with Ochall. And four kings were killed there, and
Ochall among them, and then Bodb went back to Slieve-na-man. But as to
the

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

two champions, they were seen no more, and it was known they were the
two swineherds. After that they were for two years with the appearance
of shadows, threatening one another, the way that many people died of
fright after seeing them.

And after that, they were in the shape of eels, and one went into the
river Cruind, in Cuailgne; and after a while a cow belonging to Daire,
son of Fachna, drank it down. And the other went into the Spring of
Uaran Garad, in Connaught; and one day Maeve went out to the spring, and
a small bronze vessel in her hand, and she dipped it in the water, and
the little eel went into it, and every colour was to be seen on him. And
she was a long time looking at him, she thought the colours so
beautiful. Then the water went away, and the eel was alone in the
vessel. "It is a pity you cannot speak to me," said Maeve. "What is it
you want to know?" said the eel. "I would like to know what way it is
with you in that shape of a beast," she said; "and I would like to know
what will happen me after I get the sway over Connaught." "Indeed it is
a tormented beast I am," he said, "and it is in many shapes I have been.
And as to yourself," he said, "handsome as you are, you should take a
good man to be with you in your sway." "I have no wish," said Maeve, "to
let a man of Connaught get the upper hand over me," and with that she
went home again.

But she married Ailell after that, and as for the eel, he was swallowed
down by one of Maeve's cows that came to drink at the spring.

And it was from that cow, and from the cow that belonged to Daire, son
of Fachna, the two bulls were born, the White-horned and the Brown. They
were the finest ever seen in Ireland, and gold and silver were put on
their horns by the men of Ulster and Connaught. In Connaught no bull
dared bellow before the White-horned,

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

and in Ulster no bull dared bellow before the Brown.

As to the Brown, he that had been Friuch, the Munster swineherd, his
lowing when he would be coming home every evening to his yard was good
music to the people of the whole of Cuailgne. And wherever he was,
neither Bocanachs nor Bananachs nor witches of the valley, could come
into the one place with him. And it was on account of him the great war
broke out.

Now, when Maeve saw at Ilgairech that the battle was going against her,
she sent eight of her own messengers to bring away the Brown Bull, and
his heifers. "For whoever goes back or does not go back," she said, "the
Brown Bull must go to Cruachan."

Now when the Brown Bull came into Connaught, and saw the beautiful
trackless country before him, he let three great loud bellowings out of
him. As soon as the White-horned heard that, he set out for the place
those bellowings came from, with his head high in the air.

Then Maeve said that the men of her army must not go to their homes till
they would see the fight between the two bulls.

And they all said some one must be put to watch the fight, and to give a
fair report of it afterwards. And it is what they agreed, that Bricriu
should be sent to watch it, because he had not taken any side in the
war; for he had been through the whole length of it under care of
physicians at Cruachan, with the dint of the wound he got the day he
vexed Fergus, and that Fergus drove the chessmen into his head. "I will
go willingly," said Bricriu. So he went out and took his place in a gap,
where he could have a good view of the fight.

As soon as the bulls caught sight of one another they pawed the earth so
furiously that they sent the sods flying, and their eyes were like balls
of fire in

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

their heads; they locked their horns together, and they ploughed up the
ground under them and trampled it, and they were trying to crush and to
destroy one another through the whole length of the day.

And once the White-horned went back a little way and made a rush at the
Brown, and got his horn into his side, and he gave out a great bellow,
and they rushed both together through the gap where Bricriu was, the way
he was trodden into the earth under their feet. And that is how Bricriu
of the bitter tongue, son of Cairbre, got his death.

Then when the night was coming on, Cormac Conloingeas took hold of a
spear-shaft, and he laid three great strokes on the Brown Bull from head
to tail, and he said: "This is a great treasure to be boasting of, that
cannot get the better of a calf of his own age." When the Brown Bull
heard that insult, great fury came on him, and he turned on the
White-horned again. And all through the night the men of Ireland were
listening to the sound of their bellowing, and they going here and
there, all through the country.

On the morrow, they saw the Brown Bull coming over Cruachan from the
west, and be carrying what was left of the White-horned on his horns.
Then Maeve's sons, the Maines, rose up to make an attack on him on
account of the Connaught bull he had destroyed. "Where are those men
going?" said Fergus. "They are going to kill the Brown Bull of
Cuailgne." "By the oath of my people," said Fergus, "if you do not let
the Brown Bull go back to his own country in safety, all he has done to
the White-horned is little to what I wilt do now to you."

Then the Brown Bull bellowed three times, and set out on his way. And
when became to the great ford of the Sionnan he stopped to drink, and
the two loins of the White-horned fell from his horns into the water.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And that place is
called Ath-luain, the ford of the loin, to this day. And its liver fell
in the same way into a river of Meath, and it is called Ath-Truim, the
ford of the liver to this day.

Then he went on till he came to the top of Slieve Breagh, and when be
looked from it he saw his own home, the hills of Cuailgne; and at the
sight of his own country, a great spirit rose up in him, and madness and
fury came on him, and he rushed on, killing everyone that came in his
way.

And when he got to his own place, he turned his back to a hilt and he
gave out a loud bellowing of victory. And with that his heart broke in
his body, and blood came bursting from his mouth, and he died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. The Only Jealously of Emer](lgc17)
