[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lgc11)  [Next](lgc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267T84E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cuchulain of Muirthemne*, by Lady Augusta Gregory, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

# IX. CRUACHAN

Now as to Cruachan, the home of Ailell and of Maeve, it is on the plain
of Magh Ai it was, in the province of Connaught.

And this is the way the plain came by its name. In the time long ago,
there was a king whose name was Conn, that had the Druid power, so that
when the Sidhe themselves came against him, he was able to defend
himself with enchantments as good as their own. And one time he went out
against them, and broke up their houses, and carried away their cattle,
and then, to hinder them from following after him, he covered the whole
province with a deep snow.

The Sidhe went then to consult with Dalach, the king's brother, that had
the Druid knowledge even better than himself; and it is what he told
them to do, to kill three hundred white cows with red ears, and to
spread out their livers on a certain plain. And when they had done this,
he made spells on them, and the heat the livers gave out melted the snow
over the whole plain and the whole province, and after that the plain
was given the name of Magh Ai, the Plain of the Livers.

Ailell was son of Ross Ruadh, king of Leinster, and Maeve was daughter
of Eochaid, king of Ireland, and her brothers were the Three Fair Twins
that rose up against

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

their father, and fought against him at Druim Criadh. And they were
beaten in the fight, and went back over the Sionnan, and they were
overtaken and their heads were cut off, and brought back to their
father, and he fretted after them to the end of his life.

Seven sons Ailell and Maeve had, and the name of every one of them was
Maine. There was Maine Mathremail, like his mother, and Maine Athremail,
like his father, and Maine Mo Epert, the Talker, and Maine Milscothach,
the Honey-Worded, and Maine Andoe the Quick, and Maine Mingor, the
Gently Dutiful, and Maine Morgor, the Very Dutiful. Their own people
they had, and their own place of living.

This now was the appearance of Cruachan, the Royal house of Ailell and
of Maeve, that some called Cruachan of the poets; there were seven
divisions in the house, with couches in them, from the hearth to the
wall; a front of bronze to every division, and of red yew with carvings
on it; and there were seven strips of bronze from the foundation to the
roof of the house. The house was made of oak, and the roof was covered
with oak shingles; sixteen windows with glass there were, and shutters
of bronze on them, and a bar of bronze across every shutter. There was a
raised place in the middle of the house for Ailell and Maeve, with
silver fronts and strips of bronze around it, and four bronze pillars on
it, and a silver rod beside it, the way Ailell and Maeve could strike
the middle beam and check their people.

And outside the royal house was the dun, with the walls about it that
were built by Brocc, son of Blar, and the great gate; and it is there
the houses were for strangers to be lodged.

And besides this, there was at Cruachan the Hill of the Sidhe, or, as
some called it, the Cave of Cruachan. It was there Midhir brought Etain
one time, and it is there

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

the people of the Sidhe lived; but it is seldom any living person had
the power to see them.

It is out of that hill a flock of white birds came one time, and
everything they touched in all Ireland withered up, until at last the
men of Ulster killed them with their slings. And another time enchanted
pigs came out of the hill, and in every place they trod, neither corn
nor grass nor leaf would sprout before the end of seven years, and no
sort of weapon would wound them. But if they were counted in any place,
or if the people so much as tried to count them, they would not stop in
that place, but they would go on to another. But however often the
people of the country tried to count them, no two people could ever make
out the one number, and one man would call out, "There are three pigs in
it," and another, "No, but there are seven," and another that it was
eleven were in it, or thirteen, and so the count would be lost. One time
Maeve and Ailell themselves tried to count them on the plain, but while
they were doing it, one of the pigs made a leap over Maeve's chariot,
and she in it. Every one called out, "A pig has gone over you, Maeve!"
"It has not," she said, and with that she caught hold of the pig by the
shank, but if she did, its skin opened at the head, and it made its
escape. And it is from that the place was called Magh-mucrimha, the
Plain of Swine-counting.

Another time Fraech, son of Idath, of the men of Connaught, that was son
of Boann's sister, Befind, from the Sidhe, came to Cruachan. He was the
most beautiful of the men of Ireland or of Alban, but his life was not
long. It was to ask Findabair for his wife he came, and before he set
out his people said: "Send a message to your mother's people, the way
they will send you clothing of the Sidhe." So he went to Boann, that was
at Magh Breagh, and he brought away fifty blue cloaks with four black
ears on each cloak, and a brooch of red gold

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

with each, and pale white shirts with looped beasts of gold around them;
and fifty silver shields with edges, and a candle of a king's house in
the hand of each of the men, knobs of carbuncle under them, and their
points of precious stones. They used to light up the night as if they
were sun's rays.

And he had with him seven trumpeters with gold and silver trumpets, with
many coloured clothing, with golden, silken, heads of hair, with
coloured cloaks; and three harpers with the appearance of a king on each
of them, every harper having the white skin of a deer about him and a
cloak of white linen, and a harp-bag of the skins of water-dogs.

The watchman saw them from the dun when they had come into the Plain of
Cruachan. "I see a great crowd," he said, "coming towards us. Since
Ailell was king and Maeve was queen, there never came and there never
will come a grander or more beautiful crowd than this one. It is like as
if I had my head in a vat of wine, with the breeze that goes over them."

Then Fraech's people let out their hounds, and the hounds found seven
deer and seven foxes and seven hares and seven wild boars, and hunted
them to Rath Cruachan, and there they were killed on the lawn of the
dun.

Then Ailell and Maeve gave them a welcome, and they were brought into
the house, and while food was being made ready, Maeve sat down to play a
game of chess with Fraech. It was a beautiful chess-board they had, all
of white bronze, and the chessmen of gold and silver, and a candle of
precious stones lighting them.

Then Ailell said: "Let your harpers play for us while the feast is being
made ready." "Let them play, indeed," said Fraech.

So the harpers began to play, and it was much that the people of the
house did not die with crying and

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

with sadness. And the music they played was the Three Cries of Uaithne.
It was Uaithne, the harp of the Dagda, that first played those cries the
time Boann's sons were born. The first was a song of sorrow for the
hardness of her pains, and the second was a song of smiling and joy for
the birth of her sons, and the third was a sleeping song after the
birth.

And with the music of the harpers, and with the light that shone from
the precious stones in the house, they did not know the night was on
them, till at last Maeve started up, and she said: "We have done a great
deed to keep these young men without food." "It is more you think of
chess-playing than of providing for them," said Ailell; "and now, let
them stop from the music," he said, "till the food is given out."

Then the food was divided. It was Lothar used to be sitting on the floor
of the house, dividing the food with his cleaver, and he not eating
himself, and from the time he began dividing, food never failed under
his hand.

After that, Fraech was brought into the conversation-house, and they
asked him what was it he wanted.

"A visit to yourselves," he said, but he said nothing of Findabair. So
they told him he was welcome, and he stopped with them for a while, and
every day they went out hunting, and all the people of Connaught used to
come and to be looking at them.

But all this time Fraech got no chance of speaking with Findabair, until
one morning at daybreak, he went down to the river for washing, and
Findabair and her young girls had gone there before him. And he took her
hand, and he said: "Stay here and talk with me, for it is for your sake
I am come, and would you go away with me secretly?" "I will not go
secretly," she said, "for I am the daughter of a king and of a queen."

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

So she went from him then, but she left him a ring to remember her by.
It was a ring her mother had given her.

Then Fraech went to the conversation-house to Ailell and to Maeve. "Will
you give your daughter to me?" he said. "We will give her if you will
give the marriage portion we ask," said Ailell, "and that is, sixty
black-grey horses with golden bits, and twelve milch cows, and a white
red-eared calf with each of them; and you to come with us with all your
strength and all your musicians at whatever time we go to war in
Ulster." "I swear by my shield and my sword, I would not give that for
Maeve herself," he said; and he went away out of the house.

But Ailell had taken notice of Findabair's ring with Fraech, and he said
to Maeve: "If he brings our daughter away with him, we will lose the
help of many of the kings of Ireland. Let us go after him and make an
end of him before he has time to harm us." "That would be a pity," said
Maeve, "and it would be a reproach on us." "It will be no reproach on
us, the way I will manage it," said he. And Maeve agreed to it, for
there was vexation on her that it was Findabair that Fraech wanted, and
not herself. So they went into the palace, and Ailell said: "Let us go
and see the hounds hunting until mid-day." So they did so, and at
mid-day they were tired, and they all went to bathe in the river. And
Fraech was swimming in the river, and Ailell said to him: "Do not come
back till you bring me a branch of the rowan-tree there beyond, with the
beautiful berries." For he knew there was a prophecy that it was in a
river Fraech would get his death.

So he went and broke a branch off the tree and brought it back over the
water, and it is beautiful he looked over the black water, his body
without fault,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

and his face so nice, and his eyes very grey, and the branch with the
red berries between the throat and white face. And then he threw the
branch to them out of the water. "It is ripe and beautiful the berries
are," said Ailell; "bring us more of them."

So he went off again to the tree, and the water-worm guarded the tree
caught a hold of him. "Let me have a sword," called out, but there was
not a man on the land would dare to give it to him, through fear of
Ailell and of Maeve. But Findabair made a leap to go into the water with
a gold knife she had in her hand but Ailell threw a sharp-pointed spear
from above, through her plaited hair, that held her; but she threw the
knife to Fraech, and he cut off the head of the monster, and brought it
with him to land, but he himself had got a deep wound. Then Ailell and
Maeve went back to the house. "It is a great deed we have done," said
Maeve. "It is a pity, indeed, what we have done to the man," said Ailell
"And let a healing-bath be made for him now," he said, "of the marrow of
pigs and of a heifer." Fraech was put in the bath then, and pleasant
music was played by the trumpeters, and a bed was made for him.

Then a sorrowful crying was heard on Cruachan, and they saw three times
fifty women with purple gowns, with green head-dresses, and pins of
silver on their wrists, and a messenger went and I asked them who was it
they were crying for "For Fraech, son of Idath," they said, "boy darling
of the king of the Sidhe of Ireland"

Then Fraech heard their crying, and he said: "Lift me out of this, for
that is the cry of my mother, and of the women of Boann." So they lifted
him out, and the women came round him and brought him away into the Hill
of Cruachan.

And the next day he came out, and he whole and

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

sound, and fifty women with him, and they with the appearance of women
of the Sidhe. And at the door of the dun they left him, and they gave
out their cry again, so that all the people that heard it could not but
feel sorrowful. It is from this the musicians of Ireland learned the
sorrowful cry of the women of the Sidhe.

And when he went into the house, the whole household rose up before him
and bade him welcome, as if it was from another world he was come. And
there was shame and repentance on Ailell and on Maeve for trying to harm
him, and peace was made, and he went away to his own place.

And it was after that he came to help Ailell and Maeve, and that he got
his death in a river as was foretold, at the beginning of the war for
the Brown Bull of Cuailgne.

And one time the Hill was robbed by the men of Cruachan, and this is the
way it happened.

One night at Samhain, Ailell and Maeve were in Cruachan with their whole
household, and the food was being made ready.

Two prisoners had been hanged by them the day before, and Ailell said:
"Whoever will put a gad round the foot of either of the two men on the
gallows, will get a prize from me."

It was a very dark night, and bad things would always appear on that
night of Samhain, and every man that went out to try came back very
quickly into the house. "I will go if I will get a prize," said Nera,
then. "I will give you this gold-hilted sword," said Ailell.

So Nera went out and he put a gad round the foot of one of the men that
had been hanged. Then the man spoke to him. "It is good courage you
have," he said, "and bring me with you where I can get a drink, for I
was very thirsty when I was hanged." So Nera brought him where he would
get a drink, and then he

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

put him on the gallows again, and went back to Cruachan.

But what he saw was the whole of the palace as if on fire before him,
and the heads of the people of it lying on the ground, and then he
thought he saw an army going into the Hill of Cruachan, and he followed
after the army. "There is a man on our track," the last man said. "The
track is the heavier," said the next to him, and each said that word to
the other from the last to the first. Then they went into the Hill of
Cruachan. And they said to their king: "What shall be done to the man
that is come in?" "Let him come here till I speak with him," said the
king. So Nera came, and the king asked him who it was had brought him
in. "I came in with your army," said Nera. "Go to that house beyond,"
said the king: "there is a woman there will make you welcome. Tell her
it is I myself sent you to her. And come every day," he said, "to this
house with a load of firing."

So Nera went where he was told, and the woman said: "A welcome before
you, if it is the king sent you." So he stopped there, and took the
woman for his wife. And every day for three days he brought a load of
firing to the king's house, and on each day he saw a blind man, and a
lame man on his back, coming out of the house before him. They would go
on till they were at the brink of a well before the Hill. "Is it there?"
the blind man would say. "It is, indeed," the lame man would say. "Let
us go away," the lame man would say then.

And at the end of three days, as he thought, Nera asked the Woman about
this. "Why do the blind man and the lame man go every day to the well?"
he said. "They go to know is the crown safe that is in the well. It is
there the king's crown is kept." "Why do these two go?" said Nera. "It
is easy to tell that," she said; "they are trusted by the king to visit
the crown, and

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

one of them was blinded by him, and the other was lamed. And another
thing," she said, "go now and give a warning to your people to mind
themselves next Samhain night, unless they will come to attack the hill,
for it is only at Samhain," she said, "the army of the Sidhe can go out,
for it is at that time all the hills of the Sidhe of Ireland are opened.
But if they will come, I will promise them this, the crown of Briun to
be carried off by Ailell and by Maeve."

"How can I give them that message," said Nera, "when I saw the whole dun
of Cruachan burned and destroyed, and all the people destroyed with it?"
"You did not see that, indeed," she said "It was the host of the Sidhe
came and put that appearance before your eyes. And go back to them now,"
she said, "and you will find them sitting round the same great pot, and
the meat has not yet been taken off the fire."

"How will it be believed that I have gone into the Hill?" said Nera.
"Bring flowers of summer with you," said the woman. So he brought wild
garlic with him, and primroses and golden fern.

So he went back to the palace, and he found his people round the same
great pot, and he told them all that had happened him, and the sword was
given to him, and he stopped with his people to the end of a year.

At the end of the year Ailell said to Nera: "We are going now against
the Hill of the Sidhe, and let you go back," he said, "if you have
anything to bring out of it." So he went back to see the woman, and she
bade him welcome. "Go now," she said, "and bring in a load of firing to
the king, for I went in myself every day for the last year with the load
on my back, and I said there was sickness on you." So he did that.

Then the men of Connaught and the black host of the exiles of Ulster
went into the Hill and robbed it and brought away the crown of Briun,
son of Smetra, that

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

was made by the smith of Angus, son of Umor, and that was kept in the
well at Cruachan, to save it from the Morrigu. And Nera was left with
his people in the hill, and he has not come out till now, and he will
not come out till the end of life and time.

Now one time the Morrigu brought away a cow from the Hill of Cruachan to
the Brown Bull of Cuailgne, and after she brought it back again its calf
was born. And one day it went out of the Hill, and it bellowed three
times. At that time Ailell and Fergus were playing draughts, for it was
after Fergus had come as an exile from Ulster, because of the death of
the sons of Usnach, and they heard the bellowing of the bull-calf in the
plain. Then Fergus said: "I do not like the sound of the calf bellowing.
There will be calves without cows," he said, "when the king goes on his
march."

But now Ailell's bull, Finbanach, the White-Horned, met the calf in the
plain of Cruachan, and they fought together, and the calf was beaten and
it bellowed. "What did the calf bellow?" Maeve asked her cow-herd
Buaigle. "I know that, my master, Fergus," said Bricriu. "It is the song
that you were singing a while ago." On that Fergus turned and struck
with his fist at his head, so that the five men of the chessmen that
were in his hand went into Bricriu's head, and it was a lasting hurt to
him. "Tell me now, Buaigle, what did the calf bellow?" said Maeve. "It
said indeed," said Buaigle, "that if its father the Brown Bull of
Cuailgne would come to fight with the White-Horned, he would not be seen
any more in Ai, he would be beaten through the whole plain of Ai on
every side." And it is what Maeve said: "I swear by the gods my people
swear by, I will not lie down on feathers, or drink red or white ale,
till I see those two bulls fighting before my face."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The Wedding of Maine Morgor](lgc13)
