[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lgc19)  [Next](lgc21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267T84E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cuchulain of Muirthemne*, by Lady Augusta Gregory, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

# XVII.

### BATTLE OF ROSNAREE

THERE was a time, now, after the war for the Bull of Cuailgne, when King
Conchubar got someway down-hearted, and there was a heaviness on his
mind.

And the men of Ulster thought it might be lonesome he was, and fretting
after Deirdre yet, and they searched about through the whole province
for a wife for him.

And at last they found a beautiful young girl of good race, whose name
was Luain, and they brought her to Emain Macha, and a great wedding was
made, and great feasting; and the king grew to be quiet and happy in his
mind. But among the men that came to the wedding were the two sons of
the poet Aithirne, that had such a bad name for covetousness and for
cruelty.

The two sons were poets as well, Cuingedach and Abhartach, and when they
saw Luain, Conchubar's queen, and she so beautiful, the two of them fell
in love with her there and then. And they stopped at Emain, and after a
while each of them tried to gain her secret love. But there was great
anger and displeasure on Luain at that, and she drove them from her.

They went home then to their father, Aithirne, and the three of them, to
avenge themselves on Luain, made

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

satires on her, that brought blotches out on her face. And when her face
that was so beautiful was spoiled like that, she went back and hid
herself in her father's house, and with the shame and the sorrow that
were on her, she died there.

Then great anger and rage came on Conchubar, and he sent the men of
Ulster to Aithirne's house, and they killed himself and his two sons,
and they pulled his house down to the ground.

But the rest of the poets of Ulster were not well pleased that Conchubar
should put such disrespect on one of themselves and do such a great
vengeance on him, and they gathered together and gave Aithirne a great
burial and keened him, and it was Amergin that made a lament over his
grave.

And then Conchubar stopped in Emain Macha, and the cloud of trouble came
on him again, and he used to be thinking of the war for the Bull of
Cuailgne, and of all that Maeve's army did when he was in his weakness;
and he did not sleep in the night, and there was no food that pleased
him.

And then the men of Ulster bid Cathbad, the Druid, go to Conchubar, and
rouse him out of his sickness.

So Cathbad went to him, and he cried tears down when he saw him, and he
said: "Tell me, Conchubar, what wound it is or what sickness has
weakened you and has made your face so pale?" "It is no wonder sickness
to be on me," said Conchubar, "when I think of the way the four
provinces of Ireland came and destroyed my forts and my duns and my
walled towns and the houses of my people, and when I think how Maeve
brought away cattle and gold and silver; and how she came as far as Dun
Sescind and Dun Sobairce, and brought away Daire's bull out of my own
province. And it is what vexes me, Maeve herself to have got away safe
from the battle; and it is time for me to go and

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

avenge that time on the men of Ireland," he said. "That is no right you
are saying," said Cathbad, "for the men of Ulster did a good vengeance
on the men of Ireland the time they gained the battle of Ilgairech." "I
do not count any battle to be a battle," said Conchubar, "unless a king
or a queen has fallen in it; and I swear by the oath of my people,
Cathbad," he said, "that kings and great men will be brought to their
death by me, or else I myself will go to my death."

"This is my advice to you," said Cathbad, "not to set out till the
winter is gone by; for at this time the winds are rough, and the roads
are heavy, and the rivers are full and flooded, and every windy gap is
cold. It is best to wait for the summer," he said, "till the fords are
shallow and the roads are smooth, till the thick leaves on the bushes
will be shelters, till every sod of grass will be a pillow, till our
colts will be strong, till the nights will be short for keeping watch
against an enemy. It is best to wait," he said, "till you can gather
together the men of Ulster, and till you can send messengers to your
friends among the Gall." "I am willing to do that," said Conchubar, "but
I give my word," he said, "let them come, or let them not come, I will
go myself to Teamhair to get satisfaction from Cairbre Niafer, my own
son-in-law, that did not come to help me at the gathering at Ilgairech,
and to Lugaid, son of Curoi, and to Eocha, son of Luchta, and to Maeve,
and to Ailell, till I throw down the stones over the graves of their
chief men, till I destroy and lay waste their country, the same way as
the men of Ireland destroyed my province."

So then Conchubar sent out messengers to Conall Cearnach, that was
raising his tribute in the islands of Leodus, and of Cadd, and of Orc,
and to the countries of the Gall, to Olaib, grandson of the king of
Norway, and to Baire of the Scigger islands, and to Siugraid Soga, king
of Sudiam; to the seven sons of Romra, and to the

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

son of the king of Alban, and to the king of the island of Orc.

And the first to answer the messengers, and to set out for Ulster Conall
Cearnach, for there was great anger on him when he heard of all that had
happened in Ulster in the war for the Bull of Cuailgne, and he not in
it. "And if I had been in it," he said, "the men of Connaught would not
have taken spoil from Ulster, without an equal vengeance being measured
to them again." And Olaib, grandson of the king of Norway, came with
him, and Baire, of the Scigger islands, and their men with them in their
ships, and they came through the green waves, and the seals and the
sword-fishes rising about them, towards Dundealgan, and the place where
they landed was at the Strand of Baile, son of Buan.

This, now, is the story of Baile that was buried at that strand.

He was of the race of Rudraige, and although he had but little land
belonging to him, he was the heir of Ulster, and every one that saw him
loved him, both man and woman, because he was so sweet-spoken; and they
called him Baile of the Honey-Mouth. And the one that loved him best was
Aillinn, daughter of Lugaidh, the King of Leinster's son. And one time
she herself and Bade settled to meet one another near Dundealgan, beside
the sea. Baile was the first to set out, and he came from Emain Macha,
over Slieve Fuad, over Muirthemne, to the strand where they were to
meet; and he stopped there, and his chariots were unyoked, and his
horses were let out to graze. And while he and his people were waiting
there they saw a strange, wild-looking man, coming towards them from the
South, as fast as a hawk that darts from a cliff or as the wind that
blows from off the green sea. "Go and meet him," said Bade to his
people, "and ask him news of where he is going,

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

and where he comes from, and what is the reason of his haste." So they
asked news of him, and he said: "I am going back now to Tuagh Inbhir,
from Slieve Suidhe Laighen, and this is all the news I have, that
Aillinn, daughter of Lugaidh, was on her way to meet Baile, son of Buan,
that she loved. And the young men of Leinster overtook her, and kept her
back from going to him, and she died of the heartbreak there and then.
For it was foretold by Druids that were friendly to them that they would
not come together in their life-time, but that after their death they
would meet, and be happy for ever after." And with that he left them,
and was gone again like a blast of wind, and they were not able to
hinder him.

And when Baile heard that news, his life went out from him, and he fell
dead there on the strand.

And at that time the young girl Aillinn was in her sunny parlour to the
south, for she had not set out yet. And the same strange man came in to
her, and the asked him where he came from. "I come from the North," he
said, "from Tuagh Inver, and I am going past this place to Slieve Suidhe
Laighen. And all the news I have," he said, "is that I saw the men of
Ulster gathered together on the strand near Dundealgan, and they raising
a stone, and writing on it the name of Baile, son of Buan, that died
there when he was on his way to meet the woman he had given his love to;
for it was not meant for them ever to reach one another alive, or that
one of them should see the other alive." And when he had said that he
vanished away, and as to Aillinn, her life went from her, and she died
the same way that Baile had died.

And an apple-tree grew out of her grave, and a yew tree out of Baile's
grave. And it was near that yew-tree Conall Cearnach landed, and Baire,
and the grandson of the king of Norway. And Cuchulain had made

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

ready a great feast for them, and for Conchubar that had come to meet
them, at bright-faced Dundealgan.

And the Hound bade them a kind, loving welcome, and he said: "Welcome to
those I know, and those I do not know, to the good and the bad, the
young and the old among you." And they stopped there a week, and
Conchubar was well pleased to see the whole strand full of his friends
that were come in their ships. And then he bade farewell to Emer,
daughter of Forgall, and he said to Cuchulain: "Go now to the three
fifties of old fighting men, that are resting in their age, under
Irgalach, son of Macclach, and say to them to come with me to this
gathering and to this war, the way I will have their help and their
advice." "Let them go to it if they have a mind," said Cuchulain; "but
it is not I that will go and ask it of them."

So then Conchubar himself went to the great house, where the old
fighting men used to be living that had laid by their arms. And when he
came in, they raised their heads from their places to look at the great
king. And then they leaped up, and they said: "What has brought you to
us to-day, our chief and our lord?" "Did you get no word," he said, "of
the way the four provinces of Ireland came against us, and how they
burned down our forts and our houses, and how they brought their makers
of poems and of stories along with them, that their deeds might be told,
and our disgrace might be the greater. And I am going out against them
now," he said, "to get satisfaction from them; and let you come with me,
and I will have your advice." Then the hearts of the old men rose in
them, and they caught their old horses and yoked their old chariots. And
they went on with the king to the mouth of the Water of Luachann that
night.

And the next day Conchubar set out with his own men and his friends from
beyond the sea, to Slieve

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Breagh, that is
near Rosnaree on the Boinne. And they made their camp at Cuanglas, the
green harbour, and lighted their fires, and music and merry songs were
made for them. But Cuchulain stopped behind in Dundealgan to gather his
own people, and to make provision for them on the march.

Now news had been brought to Cairbre Niafer at Teamhair, that Conchubar
was gathering his men to get satisfaction for all that had been done to
Ulster in the war for the Bull of Cuailgne, and that it was likely he
himself would be the first he would come against.

For there was some bad feeling between Cairbre and the men of Ulster,
since the time he drove the sons of Umor into Connaught, with the heavy
rent he put on them, and that after Conall Cearnach and Cuchulain giving
their own security for their good behaviour. They turned on their
securities after that, and fought with them, and Conall Cool, the son of
their chief, fell; and Cuchulain, and his father, and his friends,
raised the heap of stones over him that is called Cam Chonaill, in the
province of Connaught.

And Cairbre sent a message to Cruachan, to say to Ailell and to Maeve:
"If it is towards us Conchubar and the men of Ulster are coming, let you
come to our help; but if it is past us they go, into the fair-headed
province of Connaught, we will go to your help." So when Conchubar came
to Cuanglas, at Rosnaree, there was a good army gathered there to make a
stand against him; the three troops of the children of Deagha, and a
great troop of the Collamnachs, and of the men of Bregia, and of the
Gailiana. And he rose up early in the morning, and he could see the
moving of men and the shining of spears, and he heard the noise of a
great army, and he said: "We will send some one of our men to bring us
word about them."

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

And he sent out Feic, son of Follaman. And Feic went up to a lull beside
the Boinne, and he began to look at the army and to count it, and it
vexed him to see how many were in it. "If I go back now and tell this,"
he said, "the men of Ulster will come and will begin the battle, and
there will be no better chance for me to get a great name and do great
deeds than for any other man. And why would I not go and begin a fight
now by myself?" And with that he crossed the river.

But the men that were in front caught sight of him, and the whole army
began shouting around him, and he had not courage to go against them,
but he turned to cross the river again. But he gave a false leap, just
where the water was deepest, and a wave laughed over him, and he died.

It seemed a long time to Conchubar that he was away, and be said to the
men of Ulster: "What is your advice to us about this battle?" "It is
what we advise," they said, "to wait till our strong fighters and our
chief men are come. And they had not long to wait before they saw troops
coming, Cathbad with twelve hundred men, and Amergin with twelve hundred
men, and Eoghan, king of Fernmaighe, and Laegaire Buadach, and the three
sons of Conall Buide.

And then they saw another troop coming, and in the front of it a fierce,
brown man. Rough, dark hair he had, and a big nose and hollow cheeks,
and his talk was quick and hurried. A blue cloak about him, and a brooch
of silver as white as a bird, a heavy sword, and a shield with iron
rims. And this is who he was, Daire of Cuailgne, that was come to get
satisfaction for his bull and for his herds on the men of Ireland. "What
is delaying you here?" he said to Conchubar. "I have good reason for
delaying," said Conchubar, "for there is a great army under Cairbre
Niafer before us at Rosnaree, and there are not enough of us to go

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

against them. And it is not refusing a battle we are, but waiting till
we get our full number." "By my word," said Daire, "if you do not go out
against them, it is I will go against them by myself."

Then Conchubar put on his armour, and took his many-coloured shield, and
his sword, the Ochain. And all the men of Ulster gathered around him,
and they raised their spears and their shields, and it was like a great
river breaking from the side of a mountain, and breaking what it meets
of stones and trees before it, that they went to meet the men of
Leinster at Rosnaree on the Boinne.

And when Cairbre Niafer and his friends and his men saw them coming,
they made ready for them, and came towards the river.

And the men of Ulster crossed the river, and the two armies met, and
each of them took to hacking and destroying the other. And the Gailiana
pressed heavily on the men of Ulster, and came in to the middle of them,
and cut them down like trees are cut in a wood. And as for Conchubar he
did not give back, where he was, and Celthair on his right hand, and
Amergin the poet on his right hand again, and Eoghan, king of
Fernmaighe, on his left, and Daire of Cuailgne near him. These few stood
against the Gailiana, and fought against them, stout and proud. But as
to the young men and those that were never in a fight before, they
turned round and burst through the battle northwards.

It was just then Conall Cearnach was coming in his chariot, and when the
young men of Ulster saw the face of Conall, they came to a stop, and
Conan saw that they were beaten and running from the battle, and he
called out sharp words to them, for there was anger on him, they to have
left the fight, and with no sign of blood or of wounds upon them.

But they were ashamed then, and content to go back

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

to the battle, when they had Conall's hand to help them; and each one of
them tore a green branch off the oak trees that were near them, and held
it up, and they went with him; for they knew there would be no running
away in any place where Conall's face would be seen.

And it happened just at that time Conchubar, the High King, was taking
three backward steps out of the battle northward, but when he saw the
face of Conall coming towards him, he called to him to stop the army
from falling back. "I give my word," said Conall, "I think it easier to
fight the battle by myself than to stop the rout now."

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |     |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
| And just then the three royal poets of the king of Teamhair came in give him their help, Eochaid the Learned, and Diarment of the Songs, and Forgel the Just, and they went into the fight against Conall. And Conall looked at them and he said: "I give my true word," he said, "if you were not poets and men of learning, you would have got your death by me before this; and now that you are come fighting with your master," he said, "where is there any reason for sparing you?" And with that he made a blow at them with a heavy stick that was in his hand, that struck the three heads off them. |     |

Then Conall drew his sword out of its sheath, and he played the music of
his sword on the armies of Leinster, and the sound of it was heard on
every side; and when the men near him heard it their faces whitened, and
each one of them went back to his place in the battle. And at that time
Cuchulain came into the battle, and the men of the Gailiana gave wild
shouts at him, and anger came on him and he scattered them.

And strength came again into the hearts of the men of Ulster, and their
anger rose, and the earth shook under their feet, and there was clashing
of swords on both sides, and the shouting of young men, and the screams
of old men, and the groaning of chariot-fighters, and the crying of
ravens. And there were many lying in cold pools, the white soles of
their feet close together, and the red lips turning grey, and the bright
faces very pale, and darkness coming on their grey eyes, and confusion
on their clear wits.

It is then Cuchulain met with Cairbre Niafer, and he went against him,
and put his shield against his shield and there they were face to face.
And Cairbre said words of insult to Cuchulain, and Cuchulain answered
him back and said: "It is all I ask of you, to fight with me now alone."
"I will do that," said Cairbre Niafer, for I

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

am a king in my way of living, and a champion in battles."

Then each attacked the other, and it was hard for them to hold their
feet firm, or to strike with their hands, in the closeness of the fight
And Cairbre broke all his weapons, but nine of his men came and kept up
the fight against Cuchulain till more weapons could be brought to him.
And then Cuchulain's weapons were broken, and Cairbre and nine of his
men came and held up their shields before him till Laeg could bring him
his own right weapons, the Dubach, the grim one, his spear, and the
Cruaidin, his sword. And then they took to hitting at one another again,
and at last Cuchulain took his spear into his left hand, and struck at
Cairbre with it, and he lowered his shield to protect his body. And then
Cuchulain changed it to his right hand, and struck at him over the rim
of his shield, and it went through his heart; and before his body could
reach the ground, Cuchulain made a spring and struck his head off. And
then he held up the head, and shook it before the two armies.

Then Sencha, son of Ailell, rose up and shook the branch of peace, and
the men of Ulster stood still. As to the men of Leinster, when they saw
their king was killed, they fell back; but Iriel of the Great Knees, the
son of Conall Cearnach, followed after them, and did a great slaughter
on the Gailiana and on the rest of the army till they reached to the Rye
of Leinster.

And then the men of Ulster went back to their homes. And as to
Conchubar, he went back to Emain, and it was not till a good while after
that he got the wound in his head that Fintan sewed up with gold thread,
to match the colour of his hair, and that brought him to his death in
the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. The Only Son of Aoife](lgc21)
