[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Confucianism](../index) [Taoism](../../tao/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Ssuma Ch'ien

## \[Sima Qian\]

#### \[c. 145-90 B.C.E.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ssuma Ch'ien was one of the greatest historians in all of Chinese
history, and in fact the first great historian of that civilization. It
is telling that even at his early date his history was still thousands
of pages (and years) long. The entire corpus of his writings has still
not been translated into English, and the amount that is in the public
domain is apparently quite small. It is felt that at least some of
Ssuma's writings are relevent to sacred-texts due to the close
connections between the official Imperial cults and the philosophical
and historical labors of China's literati during the 2,000+ years of the
Empire. Also, the first three chapters of the work are directly
concerned with China's mythology and legendary history and in large part
recapitulate and expand on the documents of the
[Shu](../sbe03/index.htm#shu.md).

The first three chapters of Ssuma's history were translated by Herbert
J. Allen in 1894-5 for the expressed purpose of discrediting Ssŭma
Ch‘ien as a historian, the Shu Ching as a source document, and all of
ancient Chinese history as recorded by the Chinese. All of these are
considered valuable and valid sources to this day, and Allen's thesis of
Ssuma's forgery of portions of the Mencius and the Shu has been in no
way substantiated by modern research. But, while his work is tainted by
hostility, it is one of the only public domain sources for Ssuma, and
perhaps the only English-language translation of these early chapters.
The introductory chapter is in itself a valuable source for the meagre
field of Chinese creation mythology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Introductory Chapter](../../journals/jras/1894-10.md): includes the
Introductory chapter by Ssŭma Chêng \[c. 720 C.E.\], *Original Record of
the Three Sovereigns* and Ssŭma Ch‘ien's first chapter, *Original Record
of the Five Gods*.  
[Chapter II](../../journals/jras/1895-03.md): *The Hsia Dynasty.*  
[Chapter III](../../journals/jras/1895-17.md): *The Yin Dynasty*.  
   
[Anecdotes from Sze-ma Chien on Lao-Tze and Chuang-Tze](ltct.md), from *The
Sacred Books and Early Literature of the East, Volume XII: Medieval
China*, ed. Charles F. Horne, 1917, pp. 396-398, translator not stated.
