[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md) [Ssu-ma
Chien](index) [Taoism](../../tao/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span class="small">ANECDOTES FROM THE HISTORY OF</span> SZE-MA CHIEN

 

   Lao-Tze said to Confucius, "The men about whom you talk are dead, and
their bones are moldered to dust; only their words are left. Moreover,
when the superior man gets his opportunity, he mounts aloft; but when
the time is against him, he is carried along by the force of
circumstances. I have heard that a good merchant, though he have rich
treasures safely stored, appears as if he were poor; and that the
superior man, though his virtue be complete, is yet to outward seeming
stupid. Put away your proud air and many desires, your insinuating habit
and wild will. They are of no advantage to you — this is all I have to
tell you." Confucius said to his disciples after the interview: "I know
how birds can fly, fishes swim, and animals run. But the runner may be
snared, the swimmer hooked, and the flyer shot by the arrow. But there
is the dragon: I can not tell how he mounts on the wind through the
clouds, and rises to heaven. To-day I have seen Lao-Tze, and can only
compare him to the dragon."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Lao-Tze cultivated the Tao and its attributes, the chief aim of his
studies being how to keep himself concealed and remain unknown. He
continued to reside at the capital of Chau, but after a long time,
seeing the decay of the dynasty, he left it and went away to the
barrier-gate, leading out of the kingdom on the northwest. Yin Hsi, the
warden of the gate, said to him, "You are about to withdraw yourself out
of sight. Let me insist on your first composing for me a book." On this,
Lao-Tze wrote a book in two parts, setting forth his views on the Tao
and its attributes, in more than 5000 characters. He then went away, and
it is not known where he died. He was a superior man, who liked to keep
himself unknown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Those who attach themselves to the doctrine of Lao-Tze condemn that
of the Literati, and the Literati on their part condemn Lao-Tze,
verifying the saying, "Parties whose principles are different can not
take counsel together." Lao-Tze taught that by doing nothing others are
as a matter of course transformed, and that rectification in the same
way ensues from being pure and still.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Chuang-Tze had made himself well acquainted with all the literature
of his time, but preferred the views of Lao-Tze; and ranked himself
among his followers, so that of the more than ten myriads of characters
contained in his published writings the greater part are occupied with
metaphorical illustrations of Lao's doctrines. He made "The Old
Fisherman," "The Robber Chih," and "The Cutting open Satchels," to
satirize and expose the disciples of Confucius, and clearly exhibit the
sentiments of Lao. Such names and characters as "Wei-lei Hsu" and
"Khang-sang Tze" are fictitious, and the pieces where they occur are not
to be understood as narratives of real events.

   But Chuang was an admirable writer and skilful composer, and by his
instances and truthful descriptions hit and exposed the Mohists and
Literati. The ablest scholars of his day could not escape his satire nor
reply to it, while he allowed and enjoyed himself with his sparkling,
dashing style; and thus it was that the greatest men, even kings and
princes, could not use him for their purposes.

   King Wei of Chu, having heard of the ability of Chuang Chau, sent
messengers with large gifts to bring him to his court, and promising
also that he would make him his chief minister. Chuang-Tze, however,
only laughed and said to them, "A thousand ounces of silver are a great
gain to me; and to be a high noble and minister is a most honorable
position. But have you not seen the victim-ox for the border sacrifice?
It is carefully fed for several years, and robed with rich embroidery
that it may be fit to enter the Grand Temple. When the time comes for it
to do so, it would prefer to be a little pig, but it can not get to be
so. Go away quickly, and do not soil me with your presence. I had rather
amuse and enjoy myself in the midst of a filthy ditch than be subject to
the rules and restrictions in the court of a sovereign. I have
determined never to take office, but prefer the enjoyment of my own free
will."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md) [Ssu-ma
Chien](index) [Taoism](../../tao/index.md)
