[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits080) [Next](bits082.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 81. THE ADMISSION AND ORDINATION CEREMONIES.

<span class="small">Reprinted from a paper by J. F. Dickson, B. A., in
the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1874.</span>

   In May,1872, I was invited by my learned friend and pandit
Kewitiyâgala Unnânsê, of the Malwattê Monastery in Kandy, to be present
at an ordination service, held, according to custom, on the full-moon
day of Wesak, (May, June), being the anniversary of the day on which
Gautama Buddha attained Nirvâna, B. C. 543. I gladly availed myself of
this opportunity of witnessing the celebration of a rite of which
Englishmen have but little knowledge, and which has rarely, if ever,
been witnessed by any European in Ceylon.

   Nothing could be more impressive than the order and solemnity of the
proceedings. It was impossible not to feel that the ceremony was being
conducted precisely as it was more than two thousand years ago.

   The chapter house (Sinhalese, Poya-ge) is an oblong hall, with rows
of pillars forming an inner space and leaving broad aisles at the sides.
At the top of this inner space sat the aged Abbot (Sinhalese, Maha
Nâyaka), as president of the chapter; on either side of him sat the
elder priests, and down the sides sat the other priests in number
between thirty and

|                                   |                                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.1<sup>24</sup></span> |

forty. The chapter or assembly thus formed three sides of an oblong. The
president sat on cushions and a carpet; the other priests sat on mats
covered with white calico. They all sat cross-legged. On the fourth
side, at the foot, stood the candidates, behind the pillars on the right
stood the deacons, the left was given up to the visitors, and behind the
candidates at the bottom was a crowd of Buddhist laymen.

   To form a chapter for this purpose not less than ten duly ordained
priests are required, and the president must be not less than ten years'
standing from his Upasampadâ ordination. The priests attending the
chapter are required to give their undivided, unremitting, and devout
attention throughout the service. Every priest is instructed to join
heart and mind in the exhortations, responses, formulas, etc., and to
correct every error, lest the oversight of a single mistake should
vitiate the efficacy of the rite. Previously to the ordination the
candidates are subjected to a strict and searching examination as to
their knowledge of the discourses of Buddha, the duties of a priest,
etc. An examination and ordination is held on the full-moon day in
Wesak, and on the three succeeding Poya days, or days of quarters of the
moon.

   After witnessing the celebration of this rite, I read the
Upasampadâ-Kammavâcâ or book setting forth the form and manner of
ordering of priests and deacons, and I was subsequently induced to
translate it. This manual was translated into Italian in 1776, by Padre
Maria Percoto (missionary in Ava and Pegu), under the title of "Kammuva,
ossia trattato della ordinazione dei Talapoini del secondo ordine detti
Pinzi," and a portion of it was edited in 1841, in Pâli and Latin, by
Professor Spiegel. Clough translated it in 1834, and Hardy has given an
interesting summary of it in his Eastern Monachism; but neither the text
nor any complete translation is readily accessible, and I have therefore
thought that this edition might possibly be acceptable to those who
desire information respecting the practice of Buddhism in Ceylon, where,
as is well pointed out by Mr. Childers, in his Pâli Dictionary, (s.v.
Nibbânam,

|                                   |                                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.2<sup>32</sup></span> |

p\. 272, note), "Buddhism retains almost its pristine purity."

   With regard to the transliteration, I have used the system adopted
(after Fausböll) by Mr. Childers in his Dictionary. In the translation I
have placed in italics the rubrical directions in the text, and all
explanations and amplifications of the text I have placed in square
brackets. I have thus endeavoured to give a translation of the text as
it stands, and, at the same time, to set out the ordination service
fully and completely, precisely in the form in use in Ceylon at the
present time, as I have myself witnessed it. No one who compares this
form with that given in Article XV. of Hodgson's "Literature and
Religion of the Buddhists in Nepaul," can fail to be struck with the
purity and simplicity of the Ceylon rite as contrasted with that in use
among the Northern Buddhists.

|                                                         |          |
|:--------------------------------------------------------|---------:|
| <span class="small">   KANDY, 9th January, 1873.</span> | J. F. D. |

 

THE ORDINATION SERVICE.

<span class="small">Praise be to the Blessed One, the Holy One, to him
who has arrived at the knowledge of all Truth.</span>

   \[The candidate, accompanied by his Tutor, in the dress of a layman,
but having the yellow robes of a priest in his arms, makes the usual
obeisance and offering to the President of the chapter, and standing
says,\]

   Grant me leave to speak. Lord, graciously grant me admission to
deacon's orders. *Kneels down*. Lord, I pray for admission as a deacon.
Again, lord, I pray for admission as a deacon. A third time, lord, I
pray for admission as a deacon. In compassion for me, lord, take these
yellow robes, and let me be ordained, in order to the destruction of all
sorrow, and in order to the attainment of Nirvâna. *To be repeated three
times*. \[The President takes the bundle of robes.\] In compassion for
me, lord, give me those yellow robes, and let me be ordained, in order
to the destruction of all sorrow, and in order to the attainment of
Nirvâna. *To be repeated three times*. \[And the President

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.7<sup>4</sup></span> |

then gives the bundle of robes, the yellow band of which he ties round
the neck of the candidate, reciting the while the tacapañcakam, or
formula of meditation on the perishable nature of the human body, as
follows: kesâ lomâ nakhâ dantâ taco--taco dantâ nakhâ lomâ kesâ. Hair of
the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin--skin, teeth, nails, hair
of the body, hair of the head. The candidate then rises up, and retires
to throw off the dress of a layman, and to put on his yellow robes.
While changing his dress he recites the following: In wisdom I put on
the robes, as a protection against cold, as a protection against heat,
as a protection against gadflies and musquitoes, wind and sun, and the
touch of serpents, and to cover nakedness, *i.e.* I wear them in all
humility, for use only, and not for ornament or show. Having put on the
yellow robes, he returns to the side of his tutor, and says,\] Grant me
leave to speak. I make obeisance to my lord. Lord, forgive me all my
faults. Let the merit that I have gained be shared by my lord. It is
fitting to give me to share in the merit gained by my lord. It is good,
it is good. I share in it. Grant me leave to speak. Graciously give me,
lord, the three refuges and the precepts. \[He kneels down.\] Lord, I
pray for the refuges and the precepts.

   \[The tutor gives the three refuges and the ten precepts as follows,
the candidate still kneeling, and repeating them after him sentence by
sentence.

I.

THE THREE REFUGES.

> I put my trust in Buddha.  
> I put my trust in the Law.  
> I put my trust in the Priesthood.  
> Again I put my trust in Buddha.  
> Again I put my trust in the Law.  
> Again I put my trust in the Priesthood.  
> Once more I put my trust in Buddha.  
> Once more I put my trust in the Law.  
> Once more I put my trust in the Priesthood.  

|                                   |                                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.8<sup>23</sup></span> |

II\.

THE TEN PRECEPTS OR LAWS OF THE PRIESTHOOD.

> Abstinence from destroying life;  
> Abstinence from theft;  
> Abstinence from fornication and all uncleanness;  
> Abstinence from lying;  
> Abstinence from fermented liquor, spirits and strong drink which are a
> hindrance to merit;  
> Abstinence from eating at forbidden times;  
> Abstinence from dancing, singing, and shows;  
> Abstinence from adorning and beautifying the person by the use of;
> garlands, perfumes and unguents;  
> Abstinence from using a high or a large couch or seat;  
> Abstinence from receiving gold and silver;  
>                        are the ten means (of leading a moral life).  

   \[The candidate says,\]

   I have received these ten precepts. Permit me. \[He rises up, and
makes obeisance to his Tutor.\] Lord, I make obeisance. Forgive me all
my faults. May the merit I have gained be shared by my lord. Give me to
share in the merit of my lord. It is good, it is good. I share in it.

   \[This completes the ordination of a deacon, and the candidate
retires.\]

 

   \[The foregoing ceremony is gone through previous to the ordination
of a priest in all cases, even where the candidate has already been
admitted as a deacon. If the candidate is duly qualified for the
priestly office, he can proceed at once from deacon's to priest's
orders; otherwise he must pass a term of instruction as a deacon: but a
candidate who has received deacon's orders must solicit them again, and
go through the above ceremony when presented for priest's orders.

   The candidate being duly qualified, returns with his tutor, and goes
up to the President of the chapter, presenting an offering, and makes
obeisance, saying,\]

   Permit me to speak. Lord, graciously grant me your sanction and
support. *He kneels down*. Lord, I pray for

|                                   |                                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_398">p. 398</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.9<sup>22</sup></span> |

your sanction and support; a second time, lord, I pray for your sanction
and support; a third time, lord, I pray for your sanction and support.
Lord, be my superior. *This is repeated three times*. \[The President
says,\] It is well. \[And the candidate replies,\] I am content. *This
is repeated three times*. From this day forth my lord is my charge. I am
charge to my lord. \[This vow of mutual assistance\] *is repeated three
times*.

   \[The candidate rises up, makes obeisance, and retires alone to the
foot of the assembly, where his alms-bowl is strapped on his back. His
tutor then goes down, takes him by the hand, and brings him back,
placing him in front of the President. One of the assembled priests
stands up, and places himself on the other side of the candidate, who
thus stands between two tutors. The tutors say to the assembly,\] With
your permission, \[and then proceed to examine the candidate as to his
fitness to be admitted to priest's orders\]. Your name is Nâga? It is
so, lord. Your superior is the venerable Tissa? It is so, lord. \[The
two tutors together say,\] Praise be to the Blessed One, the Holy One,
to him who has arrived at the knowledge of all Truth. \[They then recite
the following commands of Buddha.\] First it is right to appoint a
superior. When the superior has been appointed, it is right to inquire
whether the candidate hall alms-bowl and robes \[which they do as
follows\]. Is this your alms-bowl? It is so, lord. Is this the stole? It
is so, lord. Is this the upper robe? It is so, lord. Is this the under
robe? It is so, lord. Go and stand there. \[The candidate here retires,
going backwards in a reverential posture, and stands at the lower corner
of the assembly. The tutors remain in front of the President, and one of
them says,\] Priests, hear me. The candidate desires ordination under
the venerable Tissa. Now is the time of the assembly of priests. I will
instruct the candidate. \[The tutors make obeisance to the President,
and go down to the foot of the assembly, and join the candidate, whom
they instruct and examine as follows.\] Listen, Nâga. This is the time
for you to speak the truth, to state what has occurred. When

|                                   |                                                       |
|:----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.10<sup>19</sup></span> |

asked concerning anything in the midst of the assembly, if it be true,
it is meet to say so; if it be not true, it is meet to say that it is
not. Do not hesitate. Conceal nothing. *They inquire of the candidate as
follows*. Have you any such diseases as these? Leprosy? No, lord. Boils?
No, lord. Itch? No, lord. Asthma? No, lord. Epilepsy? No, lord. Are you
a human being? Yes, lord. Are you a male? Yes, lord. Are you a free man?
Yes, lord. Are you free from debt? Yes, lord. Are you exempt from
military service? Yes, lord. Have you come with the permission of your
parents? Yes, lord. Are you of the full age of twenty years? Yes, lord.
Are your alms-bowl and robes complete? Yes, lord. What is your name?
Lord, I am called Nâga. What is the name of your superior? Lord, my
superior is called the venerable Tissa. \[The two tutors here go to the
top of the assembly, and make obeisance to the President, and one of
them says,\] Priests, hear me. The candidate desires ordination under
the venerable Tissa. He has been duly instructed by me. Now is the time
of the assembly of priests. If the candidate is here, it is right to
tell him to approach. \[One of the tutors says.\] Come hither. \[The
candidate comes up, and stands between the tutors, makes obeisance to
the assembly, and kneels down.\] Priests, I ask the assembly for
ordination. Priests, have compassion on me, and lift me up. A second
time, lords, I ask the assembly for ordination; lords, have compassion
on me, and lift me up. A third time, lords, I ask the assembly for
ordination. Lords, have compassion on me, and lift me up. \[The
candidate rises up, and makes obeisance. The tutors say,\] Priests, hear
me. This candidate desires ordination under the venerable Tissa. Now is
the time of the assembly of priests. I will examine the candidate
respecting the disqualifications for the priestly office. Listen, Nâga,
This is the time for you to speak the truth, to state what has occurred.
I will inquire of you concerning facts. If a thing is, it is right to
say it is; if a thing is not, it is right to say it is not. Have you any
such diseases as these? Leprosy? No, lord. Boils? No, lord. Itch? No,
lord. Asthma?

|                                   |                                                       |
|:----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_400">p. 400</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.11<sup>12</sup></span> |

No, lord. Epilepsy? No, lord. Are you a human being? Yes, lord. Are you
a male? Yes, lord. Are you free from debt? Yes, lord. Are you exempt
from military service? Yes, lord. Have you come with the permission of
your parents? Yes, lord. Are you of the full age of twenty years? Yes,
lord. Are your alms-bowl and robes complete? Yes, lord. What is your
name? Lord, I am called Nâga. What is the name of your superior? My
superior, lord, is called the venerable Tissa. \[Here ends the
examination in the midst of the assembly, and one of the tutors reports
the result as follows.\] This candidate desires ordination under the
venerable Tissa. He is free from disqualifications. He has his alms-bowl
and robes complete. The candidate asks the assembly for ordination under
his superior the venerable Tissa. The assembly gives the candidate
ordination under his superior the venerable Tissa. If any of the
venerable assembly approves the ordination of the candidate under the
venerable Tissa, let him be silent; if any objects, let him speak. A
second time I state this matter. Priests, hear me. This candidate
desires ordination under the venerable Tissa. He is free from
disqualifications for the priestly office. His alms-bowl and robes are
complete. The candidate asks the priesthood for ordination under his
superior the venerable Tissa. The assembly gives the candidate
ordination under his superior the venerable Tissa. If any of the
venerable assembly approve the ordination of the candidate under his
superior the venerable Tissa, let him be silent; if any objects, let him
speak. A third time I state this matter. Priests, listen. This candidate
desires ordination under the venerable Tissa. He is free from
disqualifications for the priestly office. His alms-bowl and robes are
complete. The candidate asks the priesthood for ordination under his
superior the venerable Tissa. The assembly gives the candidate
ordination under his superior the venerable Tissa. If any of the
venerable assembly approves the ordination of the candidate under his
superior the venerable Tissa, let him be silent; if any objects, let him
speak. \[The two tutors here again make obeisance to the

|                                   |                                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> | <span class="small">\[JRAS.vii.12<sup>4</sup></span> |

President, and say,\] The candidate has received ordination from the
priesthood under his superior the venerable Tissa. The assembly approves
the resolution: therefore it keeps silence. So I understand your wish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 82. The Serpent Who Wanted to Be a Priest](bits082.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
