[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits084) [Next](bits086)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_414">p. 414</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 85. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON.

<span class="small"><span id="85a">§ 85 *a*.--Translated from the
Mahâ-Vagga (iii.1<sup>1</sup>).</span></span>

   At that time The Buddha, The Blessed One, was dwelling at Râjagaha in
Bamboo Grove, which is in Kalandakanivâpa. Now at that time residence
during the rainy season had not been prescribed for the priests by The
Blessed One. And the priests went about on their wanderings, both in the
cold season, and in the hot season, and in the rainy season. And the
people were angered, annoyed, and spoke indignantly:

   "Pray, why should the Sakyaputta monks go about on their wanderings
both in the cold season, and in the hot season, and in the rainy season,
and crush the green grass, and injure beings having but one of the
organs of sense, and bring to destruction many small animals? Verily,
the followers of heretical sects, possessing but a poorly expounded
doctrine, must lie by and compose themselves for residence during the
rainy season. Verily, the birds must make their nests in the

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_415">p. 415</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.iii.1<sup>2</sup></span> |

tops of the trees, and lie by and compose themselves for residence
during the rainy season. But these Sakyaputta monks go about on their
wanderings, both in the cold season, and in the hot season, and in the
rainy season, and crush the green grass, and injure beings having but
one of the organs of sense, and bring to destruction many small
animals."

   And the priests heard that the people were angered, annoyed, and were
speaking indignantly; and the priests brought the matter to the notice
of The Blessed One.

   Then The Blessed One, on this occasion and in this connection, after
he had delivered a doctrinal discourse, addressed the priests as
follows:

   "I prescribe, O priests, that ye enter upon residence." Then it
occurred to the priests as follows:

   "At what time, pray, ought residence to begin? "And they brought the
matter to the notice of The Blessed One.

   "I prescribe, O priests, that ye enter upon residence at the time of
the annual rains."

   Then it occurred to the priests as follows:

   "How many, pray, are the days for beginning residence?" And they
brought the matter to the notice of The Blessed One.

   "There are two days, O priests, on which to begin residence, an
earlier and a later. The earlier one is the day after the full moon in
the month Âsâlhi, and the later is one month after the full moon in the
month Âsâlhi. These, O priests, are the two days for beginning
residence."

   And at that time the band of six priests entered upon residence, and
in the midst of their residence they went about on their wanderings. And
the people were angered, annoyed, and spoke indignantly:

   "Pray, why should the Sakyaputta monks go about on their wanderings,
both in the cold season, and in the hot season, and in the rainy season,
and crush the green grass, and injure beings having but one of the
organs of sense, and bring to destruction many small animals? Verily,
the followers of heretical sects, possessing but a poorly expounded
doctrine, must lie by and compose themselves for residence during the

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_416">p. 416</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.iii.3<sup>1</sup></span> |

rainy season. Verily, the birds must make their nests in the tops of the
trees, and lie by and compose themselves for residence during the rainy
season. But these Sakyaputta monks go about on their wanderings in the
cold season, and in the hot season, and in the rainy season, and crush
the green grass, and injure beings having but one of the organs of
sense, and bring to destruction many small animals."

   And the priests heard that the people were angered, annoyed, and
spoke indignantly; and those that were moderate were angered, annoyed,
and spoke indignantly:

   "Pray, why should the band of six priests, having once entered upon
residence, go about on their wanderings in the midst of the season for
residence?" And they brought the matter to the notice of The Blessed
One.

   Then The Blessed One, on this occasion and in this connection, after
he had delivered a doctrinal discourse, addressed the priests:

   "O priests, it is not allowed that ye go about on your wanderings
after having once entered upon residence, and not having finished either
the former or the latter period of three months. If anyone go about on
his wanderings, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor."

 

<span class="small"><span id="85b">§ 85 *b*.--Translated from the
Mahâ-Vagga (iv.1<sup>13</sup>).</span></span>

   "I prescribe, O priests, that at the end of residence, the priests
shall invite criticism in respect to three points; what has been seen,
or heard, or suspected. Thus shall ye live in accord with one another,
and be released from your offences, and keep the rules of discipline
before your eyes. And after this manner, O priests, shall ye invite
criticism: By a learned and competent priest shall the motion be brought
before the congregation:

   "'Reverend sirs, let the congregation hear me! This is the day of
inviting criticism. If the congregation is ready, let the congregation
invite criticism.'

   "Then the senior priest, throwing his cloak over one shoulder,
squatting on the ground, and holding forth his joined hands, shall say
to the congregation of the priests:

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.iv.1<sup>14</sup></span> |

   "'Brethren, I invite the criticism of the congregation with respect
to what has been seen, or heard, or suspected. Let the venerable
brethren have compassion and speak, and when I have seen my offence, I
will atone for it. Brethren, a second time . . . a third time I invite
the criticism of the congregation with respect to what has been seen, or
heard, or suspected. Let the venerable brethren have compassion and
speak, and when I have seen my offence, I will atone for it.'

   "Then each junior priest, throwing his cloak over one shoulder,
squatting on the ground, and holding forth his joined hands, shall say
to the congregation of the priests:

   "'Reverend sirs, I invite the criticism of the congregation with
respect to what has been seen, or heard, or suspected. . . . Reverend
sirs, a second time . . . a third time I invite the criticism of the
congregation with respect to what has been seen, or heard, or suspected.
Let the venerable brethren have compassion and speak, and when I have
seen my offence, I will atone for it.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 86. The Mendicant Ideal](bits086)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
