[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits005) [Next](bits007.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                 |                             |
|:--------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 6. THE GREAT RETIREMENT.

<span class="small">Translated from the Introduction to the Jâtaka
(i.58<sup>81</sup>).</span>

   N<span class="small">OW</span> on a certain day the Future Buddha
wished to go to the park, and told his charioteer to make ready the
chariot. Accordingly the man brought out a sumptuous and elegant
chariot, and adorning it richly, he harnessed to it four state-horses of
the Sindhava breed, as white as the petals of the white lotus, and
announced to the Future Buddha that everything was ready. And the Future
Buddha mounted the chariot, which was like to a palace of the gods, and
proceeded towards the park.

   "The time for the enlightenment of prince Siddhattha draweth nigh,"
thought the gods; "we must show him a sign:" and they changed one of
their number into a decrepit old man, broken-toothed, gray-haired,
crooked and bent of body, leaning on a staff, and trembling, and showed
him to the Future Buddha, but so that only he and the charioteer saw
him.

   Then said the Future Buddha to the charioteer, in the manner related
in the Mahâpadâna,--

   "Friend, pray, who is this man? Even his hair is not like that of
other men." And when he heard the answer, he said, "Shame on birth,
since to every one that is born old age must come." And agitated in
heart, he thereupon returned and ascended his palace.

   "Why has my son returned so quickly?" asked the king.

   "Sire, he has seen an old man," was the reply; "and

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.59<sup>12</sup></span> |

because he has seen an old man, he is about to retire from the world."

   "Do you want to kill me, that you say such things? Quickly get ready
some plays to be performed before my son. If we can but get him to
enjoying pleasure, he will cease to think of retiring from the world."
Then the king extended the guard to half a league in each direction.

   Again, on a certain day, as the Future Buddha was going to the park,
he saw a diseased man whom the gods had fashioned; and having again made
inquiry, he returned, agitated in heart, and ascended his palace.

   And the king made the same inquiry and gave the same orders as
before; and again extending the guard, placed them for three quarters of
a league around.

   And again on a certain day, as the Future Buddha was going to the
park, he saw a dead man whom the gods had fashioned; and having again
made inquiry, he returned, agitated in heart, and ascended his palace.

   And the king made the same inquiry and gave the same orders as
before; and again extending the guard, placed them for a league around.

   And again on a certain day, as the Future Buddha was going to the
park, he saw a monk, carefully and decently clad, whom the gods had
fashioned; and he asked his charioteer, "Pray, who is this man?"

   Now although there was no Buddha in the world, and the charioteer had
no knowledge of either monks or their good qualities, yet by the power
of the gods he was inspired to say, "Sire, this is one who has retired
from the world;" and he thereupon proceeded to sound the praises of
retirement from the world. The thought of retiring from the world was a
pleasing one to the Future Buddha, and this day he went on until he came
to the park. The repeaters of the Dîgha,<span
id="page_57_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_57_note_1.md) however, say that he went
to the park after having seen all the Four Signs on one and the same
day.

   When he had disported himself there throughout the day,

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.59<sup>32</sup></span> |

and had bathed in the royal pleasure-tank, he went at sunset and sat
down on the royal resting-stone with the intention of adorning himself.
Then gathered around him his attendants with diverse-colored cloths,
many kinds and styles of ornaments, and with garlands, perfumes, and
ointments. At that instant the throne on which Sakka was sitting grew
hot. And Sakka, considering who it could be that was desirous of
dislodging him, perceived that it was the time of the adornment of a
Future Buddha. And addressing Vissakamma, he said,--

   "My good Vissakamma, to-night, in the middle watch, prince Siddhattha
will go forth on the Great Retirement, and this is his last adorning of
himself. Go to the park, and adorn that eminent man with celestial
ornaments."

   "Very well," said Vissakamma, in assent; and came on the instant, by
his superhuman power, into the presence of the Future Buddha. And
assuming the guise of a barber, he took from the real barber the
turban-cloth, and began to wind it round the Future Buddha's head; but
as soon as the Future Buddha felt the touch of his hand, he knew that it
was no man, but a god.

   Now once round his head took up a thousand cloths, and the fold was
like to a circlet of precious stones; the second time round took another
thousand cloths, and so on, until ten times round had taken up ten
thousand cloths. Now let no one think, "How was it possible to use so
many cloths on one small head?" for the very largest of them all had
only the size of a sâma-creeper blossom, and the others that of
kutumbaka flowers. Thus the Future Buddha's head resembled a kuyyaka
blossom twisted about with lotus filaments.

   And having adorned himself with great richness,--while adepts in
different kinds of tabors and tom-toms were showing their skill, and
Brahmans with cries of victory and joy, and bards and poets with
propitious words and shouts of praise saluted him,--he mounted his
superbly decorated chariot.

   At this juncture, Suddhodana the king, having heard that

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.60<sup>20</sup></span> |

the mother of Râhula had brought forth a son, sent a messenger, saying,
"Announce the glad news to my son."

   On hearing the message, the Future Buddha said, "An impediment
\[râhula\] has been born; a fetter has been born."

   "What did my son say?" questioned the king; and when he had heard the
answer, he said, "My grandson's name shall be prince Râhula from this
very day."

   But the Future Buddha in his splendid chariot entered the city with a
pomp and magnificence of glory that enraptured all minds. At the same
moment Kisâ Gotamî, a virgin of the warrior caste, ascended to the roof
of her palace, and beheld tile beauty and majesty of the Future Buddha,
as he circumambulated the city; and in her pleasure and satisfaction at
the sight, she burst forth into this song of joy:--

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>271.</td>
<td>"Full happy now that mother is,<br />
Full happy now that father is,<br />
Full happy now that woman is,<br />
Who owns this lord so glorious!"<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   On hearing this, the Future Buddha thought, "In beholding a handsome
figure the heart of a mother attains Nirvana, the heart of a father
attains Nirvana, the heart of a wife attains Nirvana. This is what she
says. But wherein does Nirvana consist? "And to him, whose mind was
already averse to passion, the answer came: "When the fire of lust is
extinct, that is Nirvana; when the fires of hatred and infatuation are
extinct, that is Nirvana; when pride, false belief, and all other
passions and torments are extinct, that is Nirvana. She has taught me a
good lesson. Certainly, Nirvana is what I am looking for. It behooves me
this very day to quit the household life, and to retire from the world
in quest of Nirvana.<span id="page_59_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_59_note_1.md) I will send this lady a
teacher's fee." And

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.61<sup>10</sup></span> |

loosening from his neck a pearl necklace worth a hundred thousand pieces
of money, he sent it to Kisâ Gotamî. And great was her satisfaction at
this, for she thought, "Prince Siddhattha has fallen in love with me,
and has sent me a present."

   And the Future Buddha entered his palace in great splendor, and lay
on his couch of state. And straightway richly dressed women, skilled in
all manner of dance and song, and beautiful as celestial nymphs,
gathered about him with all kinds of musical instruments, and with
dance, song, and music they endeavored to please him. But the Future
Buddha's aversion to passion did not allow him to take pleasure in the
spectacle, and he fell into a brief slumber. And the women, exclaiming,
"He for whose sake we should perform has fallen asleep. Of what use is
it to weary ourselves any longer?" threw their various instruments on
the ground, and lay down. And the lamps fed with sweet-smelling oil
continued to burn. And the Future Buddha awoke, and seating himself
cross-legged on his couch, perceived these women lying asleep, with
their musical instruments scattered about them on the floor,--some with
their bodies wet with trickling phlegm and spittle; some grinding their
teeth, and muttering and talking in their sleep; some with their mouths
open; and some with their dress fallen apart so as plainly to

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.61<sup>25</sup></span> |

disclose their loathsome nakedness. This great alteration in their
appearance still further increased his aversion for sensual pleasures.
To him that magnificent apartment, as splendid as the palace of Sakka,
began to seem like a cemetery filled with dead bodies impaled and left
to rot; and the three modes of existence appeared like houses all
ablaze. And breathing forth the solemn utterance, "How oppressive and
stifling is it all!" his mind turned ardently to retiring from the
world. "It behooves me to go forth on the Great Retirement this very
day," said he; and he arose from his couch, and coming near the door,
called out,--

   "Who's there?"

   "Master, it is I, Channa," replied the courtier who had been sleeping
with his head on the threshold.<span
id="page_61_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_61_note_1.md)

   "I wish to go forth on the Great Retirement to-day. Saddle a horse
for me."

   "Yes, sire." And taking saddle and bridle with him, the courtier
started for the stable. There, by the light of lamps fed with
sweet-smelling oils, he perceived the mighty steed Kanthaka in his
pleasant quarters, under a canopy of cloth beautified with a pattern of
jasmine flowers. "This is the

|                                 |                                                 |
|:--------------------------------|------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.62<sup>6</sup></span> |

one for me to saddle to-day," thought he; and he saddled Kanthaka.

   "He is drawing the girth very tight," thought Kanthaka, whilst he was
being saddled;" it is not at all as on other days, when I am saddled for
rides in the park and the like. It must be that to-day my master wishes
to issue forth on the Great Retirement." And in his delight he neighed a
loud neigh. And that neigh would have spread through the whole town, had
not the gods stopped the sound, and suffered no one to hear it.

   Now the Future Buddha, after he had sent Channa on his errand,
thought to himself, "will take just one look at my son;" and, rising
from the couch on which he was sitting, he went to the suite of
apartments occupied by the mother of Rahula, and opened the door of her
chamber. Within the chamber was burning a lamp fed with sweet-smelling
oil, and the mother of Râhula lay sleeping on a couch strewn deep with
jasmine and other flowers, her hand resting on the head of her son. When
the Future Buddha reached the threshold, he paused, and gazed at the two
from where he stood.

   "If I were to raise my wife's hand from off the child's head, and
take him up, she would awake, and thus prevent my departure. I will
first become a Buddha, and then come back and see my son." So saying, he
descended from the palace.

   Now that which is said in the Jâtaka Commentary, "At that time Râhula
was seven days old, "is not found in the other commentaries. Therefore
the account above given is to be accepted.

   When the Future Buddha had thus descended from the palace, he came
near to his horse, and said,--

   "My dear Kanthaka, save me now this one night; and then, when thanks
to you I have become a Buddha, I will save the world of gods and men."
And thereupon he vaulted upon Kanthaka's back.

   Now Kanthaka was eighteen cubits long from his neck to his tail, and
of corresponding height; he was strong and swift, and white all over
like a polished conch-shell. If he neighed or stamped, the sound was so
loud as to spread

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.62<sup>29</sup></span> |

through the whole city; therefore the gods exerted their power, and
muffled the sound of his neighing, so that no one heard it; and at every
step he took they placed the palms of their hands under his feet.

   The Future Buddha rode on the mighty back of the mighty steed, made
Channa hold on by the tail, and so arrived at midnight at the great gate
of the city.

   Now the king, in order that the Future Buddha should not at any time
go out of the city without his knowledge, had caused each of the two
leaves of the gate to be made so heavy as to need a thousand men to move
it. But the Future Buddha had a vigor and a strength that was equal,
when reckoned in elephant-power, to the strength of ten thousand million
elephants, and, reckoned in man-power, to the strength of a hundred
thousand million men.

   "If," thought he, "the gate does not open, I will straightway grip
tight hold of Kanthaka with my thighs, and, seated as I am on Kanthaka's
back, and with Channa holding on by the tail, I will leap up and carry
them both with me over the wall, although its height be eighteen
cubits."

   "If," thought Channa, "the gate is not opened, I will place my master
on my shoulder, and tucking Kanthaka under my arm by passing my right
hand round him and under his belly, I will leap up and carry them both
with me over the wall."

   "If," thought Kanthaka, "the gate is not opened, with my master
seated as he is on my back, and with Channa holding on by my tail, I
will leap up and carry them both with me over the wall."

   Now if the gate had not opened, verily one or another of these three
persons would have accomplished that whereof he thought; but the
divinity that inhabited the gate opened it for them.

   At this moment came Mâra,<span id="page_63_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_63_note_1.md) with the intention of
persuading

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.63<sup>17</sup></span> |

the Future Buddha to turn back; and standing in the air, he said,--

   "Sir, go not forth! For on the seventh day from now the wheel of
empire will appear to you, and you shall rule over the four great
continents and their two thousand attendant isles. Sir, turn back!"

   "Who are you?"

   "I am Vasavatti."

   "Mâra, I knew that the wheel of empire was on the point of appearing
to me; but I do not wish for sovereignty. I am about to cause the ten
thousand worlds to thunder with my becoming a Buddha."

   "I shall catch you," thought Mâra, "the very first time you have a
lustful, malicious, or unkind thought." And, like an ever-present
shadow, he followed after, ever on the watch for some slip.

   Thus the Future Buddha, casting away with indifference a universal
sovereignty already in his grasp,--spewing it out as if it were but
phlegm,--departed from the city in great splendor on the full-moon day
of the month Âsâlhi,<span id="page_64_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_64_note_1.md) when the moon was in
Libra. And when he had gone out from the city, he became desirous of
looking back at it; but no sooner had the thought arisen in his mind,
than the broad earth, seeming to fear lest the Great Being might neglect
to perform the act of looking back, split and turned round like a
potter's wheel.<span id="page_64_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_64_note_2.md) When the Future Buddha
had stood a while facing the city and gazing upon it, and had indicated
in that place the spot for the "Shrine of the Turning Back of Kanthaka,"
he turned Kanthaka in the direction in which he meant to go, and
proceeded on his way in great honor and exceeding glory.

   For they say the deities bore sixty thousand torches in front of him,
and sixty thousand behind him, and sixty

|                                 |                                                 |
|:--------------------------------|------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.64<sup>3</sup></span> |

thousand on the right hand, and sixty thousand on the left hand. Other
deities, standing on the rim of the world, bore torches past all
numbering; and still other deities, as well as serpents and birds,
accompanied him, and did him homage with heavenly perfumes, garlands,
sandal-wood powder, and incense. And the sky was as full of coral
flowers as it is of pouring water at the height of the rainy season.
Celestial choruses were heard; and on every side bands of music played,
some of eight instruments, and some of sixty,--sixty-eight hundred
thousand instruments in all. It was as when the storm-clouds thunder on
the sea, or when the ocean roars against the Yugandhara rocks.

   Advancing in this glory, the Future Buddha in one night passed
through three kingdoms, and at the end of thirty leagues he came to the
river named Anomâ.

   But was this as far as the horse could go? Certainly not. For he was
able to travel round the world from end to end, as it were round the rim
of a wheel lying on its hub, and yet get back before breakfast and eat
the food prepared for him. But on this occasion the fragrant garlands
and other offerings which the gods and the serpents and the birds threw
down upon him from the sky buried him up to his haunches; and as he was
obliged to drag his body and cut his way through the tangled mass, he
was greatly delayed. Hence it was that he went only thirty leagues.

   And the Future Buddha, stopping on the river-bank, said to Channa,--

   "What is the name of this river?"

   "Sire, its name is Anomâ \[Illustrious\]."

   "And my retirement from the world shall also be called Anomâ,"
replied the Future Buddha. Saying this, he gave the signal to his horse
with his heel; and the horse sprang over the river, which had a breadth
of eight usabhas,<span id="page_65_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_65_note_1.md) and landed on the
opposite bank. And the Future Buddha, dismounting and standing on the
sandy beach that stretched away like a sheet of silver, said to
Channa,--

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.64<sup>24</sup></span> |

   "My good Channa, take these ornaments and Kanthaka and go home. I am
about to retire from the world."

   "Sire, I also will retire from the world."

   Three times the Future Buddha refused him, saying, "It is not for you
to retire from the world. Go now!" and made him take the ornaments and
Kanthaka.

   Next he thought, "These locks of mine are not suited to a monk; but
there is no one fit to cut the hair of a Future Buddha. Therefore I will
cut them off myself with my sword." And grasping a simitar with his
right hand, he seized his top-knot with his left hand, and cut it off,
together with the diadem. His hair thus became two finger-breadths in
length, and curling to the right, lay close to his head. As long as he
lived it remained of that length, and the beard was proportionate. And
never again did he have to cut either hair or beard.

   Then the Future Buddha seized hold of his top-knot and diadem, and
threw them into the air, saying,--

   "If I am to become a Buddha, let them stay in the sky; but if not,
let them fall to the ground."

   The top-knot and jewelled turban mounted for a distance of a league
into the air, and there came to a stop. And Sakka, the king of the gods,
perceiving them with his divine eye, received them in an appropriate
jewelled casket, and established it in the Heaven of the Thirty-three as
the "Shrine of the Diadem."

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>272.</td>
<td>"His hair he cut, so sweet with many pleasant scents,<br />
This Chief of Men, and high impelled it towards the sky;<br />
And there god Vâsava, the god with thousand eyes,<br />
In golden casket caught it, bowing low his head."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Again the Future Buddha thought, "These garments of mine, made of
Benares cloth, are not suited to a monk."

   Now the Mahâ-Brahma god, Ghatîkâra, who had been a friend of his in
the time of the Buddha Kassapa, and whose affection for him had not
grown old in the long interval. since that Buddha, thought to himself,--

   "To-day my friend has gone forth on the Great Retirement. I will
bring him the requisites of a monk."

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.65<sup>15</sup></span> |

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>273.</td>
<td>"Robes, three in all, the bowl for alms,<br />
The razor, needle, and the belt,<br />
And water-strainer,--just these eight<br />
Are needed by th' ecstatic monk."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Taking the above eight requisites of a monk, he gave them to him.

   When the Future Buddha had put on this most excellent vesture, the
symbol of saintship and of retirement from the world, he dismissed
Channa, saying,--

   "Channa, go tell my father and my mother from me that I am well."

   And Channa did obeisance to the Future Buddha; and keeping his right
side towards him, he departed.

   But Kanthaka, who had stood listening to the Future Buddha while he
was conferring with Channa, was unable to bear his grief at the thought,
"I shall never see my master any more." And as he passed out of sight,
his heart burst, and he died, and was reborn in the Heaven of the
Thirty-three as the god Kanthaka.

   At first the grief of Channa had been but single; but now he was
oppressed with a second sorrow in the death of Kanthaka, and came
weeping and wailing to the city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 7. The Great Struggle](bits007.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="page_57_note_1"></span>[1](#page_57_fr_1.md) Dîgha-Nikâya: see
[General Introduction](bit-gint.md).

<span id="footnotes_page_59">p. 59</span>

<span id="page_59_note_1"></span>[1](#page_59_fr_1.md) The Future Buddha
puns upon the word "happy" in Kisâ Gotamî's verses. The word in Pâli is
*nibbuta*, and is in form a past passive participle of a verb which
perhaps does not occur in Pâli in any finite form, but which appears in
Sanskrit as *nirvr*. Now there is a Pâli verb of which the third person
singular present indicative is *nibbâyati*, and from this verb is formed
the verbal noun *nibbâna* (Sanskrit, *Nirvâna*). *Nibbuta* is constantly
made to do duty as past passive participle to this verb, so that what
would be the true form (*nibbâta*) is never found. The Future Buddha
therefore puns when he pretends that Kisâ Gotamî was using *nibbuta* as
the participle of *nibbâyati*, and was urging him to Nirvana.

The verb *nibbâyati* means "to be extinguished," as the flame of a
candle; and, when used as a metaphysical term, refers to the fires of
lust, desire, etc. And as when fire is extinguished coolness results (a
consummation devoutly to be wished in a hot climate like India), the
verb acquires the further meaning of "be assuaged," "become happy." And
in like manner the verbal noun Nirvana (in Pâli *nibbâna*), meaning both
literally and metaphorically "becoming extinguished," comes to stand for
the *summum bonum*.

I add a retranslation of the passage, to show the punning meanings given
by the Future Buddha to the words, *nibbuta*, *nibbâyati*, and
Nirvana:--

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>"Nirvana hath that mother gained,<br />
Nirvana hath that father gained,<br />
Nirvana hath that woman gained,<br />
Who owns this lord so glorious!"<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

On hearing this, the Future Buddha thought, "In beholding a handsome
form the heart of a mother is made happy (*nibbâyati*), the heart of a
father is made happy, the heart of a wife is made happy. This is what
she says. But wherein does happiness (*nibbuta*) consist?" And to him
whose mind was already averse to passion, the answer came: "When the
fire of lust is assuaged (*nibbuta*), that is happiness (*nibbuta*);
when the fires of hatred and infatuation are assuaged, that is
happiness; when pride, false belief, and all other passions and torments
are assuaged, that is happiness. She has taught me a good lesson.
Certainly, happiness (Nirvana) is what I am looking for. It behooves me
this very day to quit the household life and to retire from the world in
quest of happiness. I will send this lady a teacher's fee."

<span id="footnotes_page_61">p. 61</span>

<span id="page_61_note_1"></span>[1](#page_61_fr_1.md) In India it is
customary to hang doors at the height of about two feet from the ground
for the sake of coolness and ventilation. The threshold is thus exposed
even when the door is shut.

<span id="footnotes_page_63">p. 63</span>

<span id="page_63_note_1"></span>[1](#page_63_fr_1.md) The Buddhists
recognize no real devil. Mâra, the ruler of the sixth and highest heaven
of sensual pleasure, approaches the nearest to our Satan. He stands for
the pleasures of sense, and hence is The Buddha's natural enemy.

<span id="footnotes_page_64">p. 64</span>

<span id="page_64_note_1"></span>[1](#page_64_fr_1.md) About the first of
July.

<span id="page_64_note_2"></span>[2](#page_64_fr_2.md) I think the
conception here is that a round portion of the earth, on which the
Future Buddha stood, turned around like a modern railroad turn-table,
thus detaching itself from the rest and turning the Future Buddha with
it.

<span id="footnotes_page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="page_65_note_1"></span>[1](#page_65_fr_1.md) An usabha is 140
cubits.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
