[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits023) [Next](bits025)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 24. INANIMATE NATURE.

<span class="small">Translated from the Visuddhi-Magga (chap.
xx.).</span>

   The forms of Nature are forms which have been coming into being since
the renovation of the world-cycle and exist without organs of sense or
mental faculties outside of ourselves, such as: iron, copper, tin, lead,
gold, silver, pearls, gems, cat's-eyes, shells, rocks, coral, rubies,
sapphires, earth, stones, mountains, grass, trees, vines, etc. This will
be made plain by instancing the bud of an Asoka tree. For the form of an
Asoka bud is at first of a delicate red; after the lapse of two or three
days, of a deep red; after the lapse of two or three more, of a dull
red; then of the color of a tender shoot, then of a mature twig, then of
a green leaf, and then of the color of a dark green leaf. In the course
of a year from the time of its being the color of a dark green leaf,
this form, in the series of forms belonging to its own nature, becomes a
yellow leaf, and breaking loose from its stalk falls to the ground. When
the meditative priest has grasped all this, he applies the Three
Characteristics, as follows:

   "The form that was in existence at the time of the delicate red color
perished without attaining to the time of the deep red color; the form
that was in existence at the time of the deep red color, without
attaining to the time of the dull red color; the form that was in
existence at the time of the

|                                   |                                     |
|:----------------------------------|------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xx</span> |

dull red color, without attaining to the time of the tender-shoot color;
the form that was in existence at the time of the tender-shoot color,
without attaining to the time of the mature-twig color; the form that
was in existence at the time of the mature-twig color, without attaining
to the time of the green-leaf color; the form that was in existence at
the time of the green-leaf color, without attaining to the time of the
dark-green-leaf color; the form that was in existence at the time of the
dark-green-leaf color, without attaining to the time of the yellow-leaf
color; the form that was in existence at the time of the yellow leaf
perished without attaining to the time of breaking loose from the stalk
and falling to the ground. Therefore is it transitory, evil, and without
subtantive reality."

   Having thus applied the Three Characteristics in this particular
instance, he then in the same way reflects on all other forms of Nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 25. The Middle Doctrine](bits025)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
