[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits086) [Next](bits088.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_420">p. 420</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 87. THE VALUE OF TRAINING IN RELIGION.

<span class="small">Translated from the Milindapañha
(264<sup>29</sup>).</span>

   "Bhante Nâgasena, you priests say, 'If a layman reach saintship,
there are two courses open to him, and none other: on the self-same day
he either retires from the world or passes into Nirvana; he cannot wait
until the morrow.' Now if, bhante Nâgasena, he should not succeed in
obtaining either professor or preceptor, or bowl and robes on that day,
would that man who had reached saintship retire from the world without
any assistance? or would he wait until another day? or would some other
saint come by magical power and receive him into the Order? or would he
pass into Nirvana?"

   "Your majesty, this layman who had attained to saintship, would not
retire from the world without assistance, or if he did so, he would be
guilty of theft, nor could he wait for another day; and whether anyone
who had attained to saintship came or not, he would pass into Nirvana
that self-same day."

   "In that case, bhante Nâgasena, saintship has forfeited all claim to
be a quiet haven, if it slaughters its possessor."

   "Your majesty, inferiority is characteristic of a layman; and it is
through this characteristic inferiority and weakness that a householder,
when he has attained to saintship, on the self-same day either retires
from the world or passes into Nirvana; and this weakness, your majesty,
is not a fault of saintship, it is a fault belonging to the lay state.
Just as food, your majesty, sustains the vital force, and preserves the
life of all beings, but kills, through its indigestibility, anyone who
has a poor stomach and a slow and weak digestion, yet this weakness of
digestion is not the fault of the food, but the fault of the stomach; in
exactly the same way, your majesty, it is through his characteristic
weakness and inferiority that a householder, when he has attained to
saintship, on the self-same day either retires from the world or passes
into Nirvana; and this characteristic weakness, your majesty, is not a
fault

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_421">p. 421</span> | <span class="small">\[Mil.265<sup>22</sup></span> |

of saintship, it is a fault belonging to the lay state. Or, again, your
majesty, as a small stalk of grass will break and double over if a heavy
stone be placed upon it; in exactly the same way, your majesty, a layman
who has attained to saintship, cannot, so long as he remains a layman,
sustain saintship, but on the self-same day he either retires from the
world or passes into Nirvana. Or, again, your majesty, just as a man who
is weak, feeble, of low extraction, and of few meritorious works, if he
succeeds to a large kingdom, falls at once, perishes, and breaks down,
and proves unable to sustain princely power; in exactly the same way,
your majesty, a layman who has attained to saintship, cannot, so long as
he stays a layman, sustain saintship. For this reason, then, on the
self-same day he either retires from the world or passes into Nirvana."

   "Well done, bhante Nâgasena! Thus it is, and you have my assent."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 88. The Colorless Life](bits088.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
