[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits027) [Next](bits029.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_182">p. 182</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 28. CONSCIOUSNESS.

<span class="small"><span id="28a">§ 28 *a*.--Translated from the
Milindapañha (62<sup>8</sup>).</span></span>

   "Bhante Nâgasena, what is consciousness?"

   "Your majesty, consciousness is the act of being conscious."

   "Give an illustration."

   "It is as if, your majesty, the city watchman were to take his seat
at the cross-roads in the middle of the city and were to behold every
man who approached from the eastern quarter, were to behold every man
who approached from the southern quarter, were to behold every man who
approached from the western quarter, were to behold every man who
approached from the northern quarter: in exactly the same way, your
majesty, whatever form a man beholds with the eye, of that he is
conscious with the consciousness; whatever sound he hears with the ear,
of that he is conscious with the consciousness; whatever odor he smells
with the nose, of that he is conscious with the consciousness; whatever
taste he tastes with the tongue, of that he is conscious with the
consciousness; whatever tangible thing he touches with the body, of that
he is conscious with the consciousness; whatever idea

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> | <span class="small">\[Mil.62<sup>20</sup></span> |

he is conscious of with the mind, of that he is conscious with the
consciousness. Thus, your majesty, is consciousness the act of being
conscious."

   "You are an able man, bhante Nâgasena."

 

<span class="small"><span id="28b">§ 28 *b*.--Translated from the
Majjhima-Nikâya (Sutta 38).</span></span>

   O priests, consciousness is named from that in dependence on which it
comes into being. The consciousness which comes into being in respect of
forms in dependence on the eye is called eye-consciousness. The
consciousness which comes into being in respect of sounds in dependence
on the ear is called ear-consciousness. The consciousness which comes
into being in respect of odors in dependence on the nose is called
nose-consciousness. The consciousness which comes into being in respect
of tastes in dependence on the tongue is called tongue-consciousness.
The consciousness which comes into being in respect of things tangible
in dependence on the body is called body-consciousness. The
consciousness which comes into being in respect of ideas in dependence
on the mind is called mind-consciousness.

   Just as, O priests, fire is named from that in dependence on which it
burns. The fire which burns in dependence on logs of wood is called a
log-fire. The fire which burns in dependence on chips is called a
chip-fire. The fire which burns in dependence on grass is called a
grass-fire. The fire which burns in dependence on cow-dung is called a
cow-dung fire. The fire which burns in dependence on husks is called a
husk-fire. The fire which burns in dependence on rubbish is called a
rubbish-fire. In exactly the same way, O priests, consciousness is named
from that in dependence on which it comes into being. The consciousness
which comes into being in respect of forms in dependence on the eye is
called eye. consciousness. The consciousness which comes into being in
respect of sounds in dependence on the ear is called ear-consciousness.
The consciousness which comes into being in respect of odors in
dependence on the nose is called nose-consciousness. The consciousness
which comes into being in respect of tastes in dependence on the tongue
is called

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.260<sup>2</sup></span> |

tongue-consciousness. The consciousness which comes into being in
respect of things tangible in dependence on the body is called
body-consciousness. The consciousness which comes into being in respect
of ideas in dependence on the mind is called mind-consciousness.

 

<span class="small"><span id="28c">§ 28 *c*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xvii.).</span></span>

   In the proposition, *On karma depends consciousness*, consciousness
is sixfold, eye-consciousness etc.

   Here eye-consciousness is twofold, being either a meritorious or a
demeritorious fruition--likewise ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness,
tongue-consciousness, and body-consciousness. Mind-consciousness is the
two minds, namely, the meritorious fruition-mind as well as the
demeritorious fruition-mind, the three mind-consciousnesses without a
cause, the eight fruition-thoughts belonging to the realm of sensual
pleasure and possessing a cause, the five thoughts belonging to the
realm of form, and the four belonging to the realm of formlessness,
making twenty-two divisions. Thus in the six consciousnesses are
included all the thirty-two worldly fruition-consciousnesses. The
consciousnesses, however, which transcend the world are not included as
they are not pertinent in a discussion of rebirth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 29. Name and Form](bits029.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
