[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits025) [Next](bits027.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 26. IGNORANCE.

<span class="small"><span id="26a">§ 26 *a*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xvii.).</span></span>

   According to the Sutta-Pitaka, ignorance is want of knowledge
concerning four matters, namely, misery etc.; according to the
Abhidhamma-Pitaka, concerning eight, namely, in addition to the above,
anteriority etc.

   For it has been said as follows:

   "What is ignorance? Want of knowledge concerning misery, want of
knowledge concerning the origin of misery, want of knowledge concerning
the cessation of misery, want of knowledge concerning the path leading
to the cessation of misery, want of knowledge concerning anteriority,
want of knowledge concerning posteriority, want of knowledge concerning
anteriority and posteriority, want of knowledge concerning definite
dependence and of the elements of being sprung from dependence."

   In the above quotation ignorance is only considered in its aspect as
a concealer of the verities cited, although, except in the case of the
two transcendent truths \[*i.e.* the truth concerning the cessation of
misery and the truth concerning the path leading to the cessation of
misery\], it also comes into being with reference to objects of sense.
Having come into being, it conceals the truth concerning misery, and
does not allow of the comprehension of its essential elements and
characteristics, as also it conceals the origin of misery, the cessation
of misery, the path, the five groups of the past, otherwise called
anteriority, the five groups of the future otherwise called
posteriority, both sets of groups otherwise called anteriority and
posteriority, and both definite dependence and the elements of being
sprung from dependence, and does not allow of the comprehension of their
essential elements and characteristics,

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

so that one can discriminate and say, "This is ignorance; this is
karma," and so on. Thus is it said to be "want of knowledge concerning
misery, . . . want of knowledge concerning both definite dependence and
the elements of being sprung from dependence."

 

<span class="small"><span id="26b">§ 26 *b*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xvii.).</span></span>

   But why is ignorance put at the beginning? Is it because ignorance,
like the *natura naturans* of the Sankhya philosophers, is the causeless
primary cause of the world? It is not causeless. For in the quotation,
"On the arising of the depravities depends the arising of ignorance,"
the cause of ignorance is declared. But there is an occasion when
ignorance may be said to be a primary cause. What is that occasion? When
it is made the starting-point of a discourse concerning the round of
rebirth.

   For The Blessed One in his discourses on the round of rebirth was
accustomed to choose from Dependent Origination two of the factors of
being as his starting-points: either, on the one hand, ignorance, as
when he says, "As I have told you, O priests, the first beginning of
ignorance cannot be discerned, nor can one say, 'Before a given point of
time there was no ignorance, it came into being afterwards.'
Nevertheless, O priests, it can be discerned that ignorance possesses a
definite dependence;" or, on the other hand, desire for existence, as
when he says, "As I have told you, O priests, the first beginning of
desire for existence cannot be discerned, nor can one say, 'Before a
given point of time there was no desire for existence, it came into
being afterwards.' Nevertheless, O priests, it can be discerned that
desire for existence possesses a definite dependence."

   But why was The Blessed One in his discourses on the round of rebirth
accustomed to choose these two factors of being as his starting-points?
Because they constitute the difference between the karma which conducts
to blissful states of existence and the karma which conducts to unhappy
states of existence. For the cause of the karma which conducts to
unhappy states of existence is ignorance. And why

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

do I say so? Because, just as a cow about to be slaughtered, overcome by
weariness due to fiery heat and to blows of the stick, will, as the
result of that exhaustion, drink water that is hot, although it is
unpleasant and does her harm; so the unconverted man, overcome by
ignorance, will take life and perform many other kinds of karma which
conduct to unhappy states of existence, although such karma is
unpleasant on account of the fiery heat of the corruptions, and does him
harm by casting him into unhappy states of existence.

   But the cause of the karma which conducts to blissful states of
existence is desire for existence. And why do I say so? Because, just as
the cow described above will thirstily drink cold water, and the drink
will be pleasant to her and remove her weariness; so the unconverted
man, overcome by desire for existence, ridding himself of the fiery heat
of the corruptions, will cease from taking life and perform many other
kinds of karma which conduct to blissful states of existence, and such
karma will be pleasant, as it conducts to blissful states of existence
and removes the weariness of the misery of unhappy states of existence.

   Now in his discourses on the round of rebirth The Blessed One
sometimes sets out from only one of these factors, as when he says,
"Thus, O priests, ignorance causes karma; karma causes consciousness,"
etc.; or, "When a man lives, O priests, absorbed in the fascinations of
objects of attachment, then does desire increase, and on desire depends
attachment," etc.; sometimes from both, as when he says, "0 priests, it
is because the fool is blinded by ignorance and joined to desire that
thus his body has come to be. Such is the origin not merely of one's own
body, but also of name and form existing outside. Verily it is in
dependence on these two, ignorance and desire, that arise contact and
the six organs of sense, and that the fool experiences happiness and
misery," etc.

 

<span class="small"><span id="26c">§ 26 *c*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xvii.).</span></span>

   Whereas, however, sorrow etc. are mentioned last, they constitute the
fruition of the ignorance mentioned in the

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_173">p. 173</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

Wheel of Existence's opening phrase, "On ignorance depends karma." And
it is to be understood that this Wheel of Existence constantly and
continuously rolls onward, without known beginning, without a personal
cause or passive recipient and empty with a twelvefold emptiness.

   If it be asked: How do sorrow etc. constitute the fruition of
ignorance? How is the Wheel of Existence without known beginning? How is
it without a personal cause or passive recipient? How is it empty with a
twelvefold emptiness?--we reply:--

   Of him who is not free from ignorance there is sorrow, grief, and
despair, and of him who is infatuated there is lamentation. Thus it is
when sorrow etc. have ripened that ignorance attains to fruition.

   Moreover, it has been said, "Ignorance springs from the depravities."
Sorrow etc. also spring from the depravities. And how? Sorrow springs
from the depravity of sensual pleasure as soon as the object of sensual
desire is removed. As it is said:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>"The man who lives for sensual joys,<br />
And findeth his delight therein,<br />
When joys of sense have taken flight,<br />
Doth smart as if with arrows pierced."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

And as it is said:

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| "From sensual pleasure sorrow springs." |

   Also sorrow etc. all spring from the depravity of heresy. As it is
said:

   "When he has become possessed with the notion, 'I am form; form
belongs to the I,' then through the changing and alteration of form
arise sorrow, misery, grief, and despair."

   And just as they spring from the depravity of heresy, so also do they
spring from the depravity of desire for existence, as occurs in the case
of the gods when frightened by the fear of death on perceiving the five
omens. As it is said:

   "Also the gods long-lived, handsome, and dwelling long ages in lofty
palaces in a plenitude of bliss, they also on hearing

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

the doctrinal instruction of The Tathâgata become afraid, alarmed, and
agitated."

   And just as they spring from the depravity of desire for existence,
so also do they spring from the depravity of ignorance. As it is said:

   "The foolish man, O priests, experiences even in the present life a
threefold misery and grief."

   Thus, inasmuch as sorrow etc. spring from the depravities, therefore
in ripening they accomplish the fruition of the depravities, which are
the causes of ignorance. Thus it is when the depravities have ripened
that ignorance attains to fruition, as it is one of them.

   After this manner, therefore, is to be understood the clause: *If
Ignorance attains to fruition in sorrow etc.*

   Inasmuch, however, as when ignorance has thus attained to fruition in
sorrow etc., as being one of their causes, there is then no end to the
succession of cause and effect, "On ignorance depends karma; on karma
depends consciousness," etc.; therefore we have a twelve-membered Wheel
of Existence without known beginning, continuing to exist by virtue of a
concatenation of cause and effect.

   If it be objected--"In that case it is contradictory to say, 'On
ignorance depends karma,' and to call this the beginning," -we reply -"
This is not the beginning; this merely enunciates the chief of the
elements of being." For ignorance is chief in the three rounds. For when
the fool seizes hold of it, then the rounds of corruption, of karma, and
of the fruition of karma, coil themselves about him; just as when a man
seizes the head of a serpent all the rest of the body coils itself about
his arm. But when the annihilation of ignorance has been effected,
deliverance is thereby gained; just as when the serpent's head has been
cut off the arm becomes delivered of the coils. As it is said:

   "On the complete fading out and cessation of ignorance ceases karma;"
and so forth.

   Thus, inasmuch as ignorance is the imprisonment of him who seizes it,
and the deliverance of him who lets it go, it is the chief but not the
beginning.

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

   Thus is to be understood the clause: *The Wheel of Existence is
without known beginning*.

   Now inasmuch as the factors of being, karma etc., exist by reason of
their own causes, ignorance etc., therefore is this same Wheel of
Existence wanting in any other cause for the round of rebirth, such as
Brahma etc., conceived of under the names of Brahma, Great Brahma, The
Chief, The Victorious One, and is also wanting in any Ego passively
recipient of happiness and misery, conceived of as "This I that talks
and feels." Thus is to be understood the phrase: *Without a personal
cause or passive recipient*.

   Inasmuch, however, as ignorance is empty of stability from being
subject to a coming into existence and a disappearing from existence,
and is empty of loveliness from being corrupted and one of the
corruptions, and is empty of happiness from being harassed by coming
into existence and disappearing from existence, and is empty of a
self-determining Ego from being subject to dependence,--and similarly
with reference to karma and the remaining terms; or, in other words,
inasmuch as ignorance is not an Ego, belongs to no Ego, is comprised in
no Ego, possesses no Ego, and similarly with reference to karma and the
rest,--therefore is it to be understood of the Wheel of Existence that
it is *empty with a twelvefold emptiness*.

   When he has learned this, he next perceives that ignorance and desire
are its root; that the past etc. are its three times; and that these
contain two, eight, and two members respectively.

   Respecting this Wheel of Existence it is to be understood that the
two factors *ignorance and desire are its root*; and that this root is
twofold: the root ignorance, deriving from the past and ending with
sensation; and the root desire, continuing into the future and ending
with old age and death. Here the first of these two roots is specified
with reference to him who is inclined to heresy, the latter with
reference to him who is inclined to desire. For the ignorance of those
who are inclined to heresy, and the desire of those who are inclined to
desire, conduct to the round of rebirth. Or again,

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_176">p. 176</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

the first is designed to destroy the heresy of the annihilation of
existences, by showing that the causes for the springing up of fruit are
never annihilated; the second to destroy the heresy of the persistence
of existences, by showing that those causes which have sprung up are
subject to old age and death. Or again, the first is to show the gradual
coming into existence of such beings as are born from the womb, the
latter the instantaneous coming into complete existence of apparitional
existences.

   The past, the present, and the future *are its three times*. As
touching the question which those members are which are stated by the
text to occur in each of these *respectively*,-- ignorance and karma are
the *two* which belong to past time; those which belong to present time
are the *eight* which begin with consciousness and end with existence;
while birth and old-age-and-death are the *two* which belong to future
time.

   Again it is to be understood that this Wheel of Existence has three
connections of cause and effect and of cause and a predecessor: that it
has four divisions, twenty component spokes, three rounds, and
incessantly revolves.

   Here between karma and rebirth-consciousness is one connection of
cause and effect; between sensation and desire is a connection of effect
and cause; and between existence and birth a connection of cause and
effect. Thus is to be understood the phrase *this Wheel of Existence has
three connections of cause and effect and of cause and a predecessor*.

   Its four divisions begin and end at these connections, namely:
ignorance and karma form one division; consciousness, name-and-form, the
six organs of sense, contact, and sensation, the second; desire,
attachment, and existence, the third; birth and old age the fourth. Thus
is to be understood the statement that this Wheel of Existence *has four
divisions*.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>Five causes are there in the past<br />
And five fruitions now at hand.<br />
Five causes are there now at hand<br />
And five fruitions yet to come.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

   With these twenty spokes called component is to be understood that it
has twenty component spokes. Of the causes mentioned in the phrase *five
causes are there in the past*, two, ignorance and karma, have been
mentioned above; but inasmuch as the ignorant man has strong desires and
having strong desires attaches himself, and on attachment depends
existence, therefore desire, attachment, and existence are also
included. Therefore has it been said,

   "In a former-karma-existence, infatuation-ignorance, initiatory
karma, longing desire, approximating attachment, and thought-existence,
these five factors were the dependence for conception into this
existence."

   Here by the phrase in a former-karma-existence is meant a former
karma-existence;<span id="page_177_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_177_note_1.md) the sense is a
karma-existence taking place in a previous birth.

   *Infatuation-ignorance* means the ignorance belonging to that
previous birth which consists of infatuation in respect of the truths
concerning misery etc., under the influence of which the infatuated man
produces karma.

   *Initiatory karma* consists of the antecedent thoughts of the one who
performs that karma, as for instance the antecedent thoughts of him who
gets ready objects to give away in alms, in order that he may give them
away a month or a year later. The thoughts, however, of him who places a
gift in the hands of a recipient is thought-existence. Or again, thought
in the six swiftnesses containing one contemplation is initiatory karma.
The seventh thought is existence. Or again, any thought is existence;
the conjoined thought is initiatory karma.

   *Longing desire* is that desire on the part of him who performs karma
which consists in a longing or aspiration for its fruition in a
rebirth-existence.

   *Approximating attachment*:--This attachment is any approximating,
seizing hold of, or affectation that has become the dependence of
karma-existence, as, for instance, "This action will yield sensual
pleasure in such and such a grade of being;" or again, "I shall be
annihilated."

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

   *Thought-existence* is thought-existence as explained at the end of
Initiatory Karma. Thus are these expressions to be understood.

   Now as to the phrase, *and five fruitions now at hand*, these are the
five beginning with consciousness and ending with sensation. As it has
been said,

   "Rebirth-consciousness, the descent of name and form, the
sensitiveness of the organs of sense, the contact experienced, the
sensation felt, these five factors belonging to the
originating-existence of the present time depend on the karma of a
previous existence."

   Here by *rebirth-consciousness* is meant the consciousness called
rebirth, inasmuch as it springs into being by a process of rebirth into
another existence.

   *The descent of name and form* consists in the descent of the
elements of being into the womb not only of those with form but also of
those without, as it were, their coming and entering.

   *The sensitiveness of the senses*:--By this are meant the five organs
of sense, eye etc.

   *The contact experienced*:--The contact which arises from contact
experienced when in contact with an object of sense.

   *The sensation felt* consists in the fruition-sensation that springs
into being in company with either the rebirth-consciousness or the
contact which depends on the six organs of sense. Thus are these
expressions to be understood.

*Five causes are there now at hand*:--These are desire, attachment, and
existence as mentioned in the text above; but when existence has been
obtained, then karma, either that which is antecedent to existence or
conjoined with it, is included; and that ignorance which, in the taking
up of desire and attachment, is conjoined with these two factors, or
that whereby the infatuated man performs karma, that also is included.
Thus there are five.

   Therefore has it been said,

   "When the senses have matured, then infatuation-ignorance, initiatory
karma, longing desire, approximating attachment, and thought-existence,
these five factors of a

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

present karma-existence are the dependence of rebirth in the future."

   Here by the phrase when the senses have matured is shown the
infatuation which occurs at the time of the performance of karma in the
case of one who has his senses matured. The meaning of the rest is
plain.

   By *five fruitions yet to come* are meant the five, conscious-ness
etc. These are all included in speaking of birth; and old age and death
are the old age and death of them alone. Therefore has it been said,

   "The rebirth-consciousness, the descent of name and form, the
sensitiveness of the organs of sense, the contact experienced, the
sensation felt, these five factors belonging to the
originating-existence of a future life depend on the karma performed in
this one."

   After this manner, therefore, has this Wheel of Existence *twenty
component spokes*.

   *And incessantly revolves*:--Here it is to be understood that karma
and existence form the round of karma; ignorance, desire, and attachment
form the round of the corruptions; and consciousness, name and form, the
six organs of sense, contact, and sensation form the round of fruition.
And it is through these three that this Wheel of Existence is said to
have three rounds; and as long as the round of corruptions is
uninterrupted, because its dependence has not been cut off, the Wheel of
Existence is *incessant*; and inasmuch as it turns over and over again,
it *revolves*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 27. Karma](bits027.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_177">p. 177</span>

<span id="page_177_note_1"></span>[1](#page_177_fr_1.md) That is, *not*
former-karma existence.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
