[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits003) [Next](bits005.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                 |                             |
|:--------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 4. THE BIRTH OF THE BUDDHA.

<span class="small">Translated from the Introduction to the Jâtaka
(i.47<sup>21</sup>).</span>

   Now while the Future Buddha was still dwelling in the city of the
Tusita gods, the "Buddha-Uproar," as it is called, took place. For there
are three uproars which take place in the world,--the Cyclic-Uproar, the
Buddha-Uproar, and the Universal-Monarch-Uproar. They occur as
follows:--

   When it is known that after the lapse of a hundred thousand years the
cycle is to be renewed, the gods called Loka-byûhas, inhabitants of a
heaven of sensual pleasure, wander about through the world, with hair
let down and flying in the wind, weeping and wiping away their tears
with their hands, and with their clothes red and in great disorder. And
thus they make announcement:--

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.47<sup>27</sup></span> |

   "Sirs, after the lapse of a hundred thousand years, the cycle is to
be renewed; this world will be destroyed; also the mighty ocean will dry
up; and this broad earth, and Sineru, the monarch of the mountains, will
be burnt up and destroyed,--up to the Brahma heavens will the
destruction of the world extend. Therefore, sirs, cultivate
friendliness; cultivate compassion, joy, and indifference; wait on your
mothers; wait on your fathers; and honor your elders among your
kinsfolk."

   This is called the Cyclic-Uproar.

   Again, when it is known that after a lapse of a thousand years an
omniscient Buddha is to arise in the world, the guardian angels of the
world wander about, proclaiming:

   "Sirs, after the lapse of a thousand years a Buddha will arise in the
world."

   This is called the Buddha-Uproar.

   And lastly, when they realize that after the lapse of a hundred years
a Universal Monarch is to arise, the terrestrial deities wander about,
proclaiming:--

   "Sirs, after the lapse of a hundred years a Universal Monarch is to
arise in the world."

   This is called the Universal-Monarch-Uproar. And these three are
mighty uproars.

   When of these three Uproars they hear the sound of the Buddha-Uproar,
the gods of all ten thousand worlds come together into one place, and
having ascertained what particular being is to be The Buddha, they
approach him, and beseech him to become one. But it is not till after
omens have appeared that they beseech him.

   At that time, therefore, having all come together in one world, with
the Catûm-Mahârâjas, and with the Sakka, the Suyâma, the Santusita, the
Paranimmita-Vasavatti, and the Mahâ-Brahma of each several world, they
approached the Future Buddha in the Tusita heaven, and besought him,
saying,--

   "Sir, it was not to acquire the glory of a Sakka, or of a Mâra, or of
a Brahma, or of a Universal Monarch, that you fulfilled the Ten
Perfections; but it was to gain omniscience

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.48<sup>20</sup></span> |

in order to save the world, that you fulfilled them. Sir, the time and
fit season for your Buddhaship has now arrived."

   But the Great Being, before assenting to their wish, made what is
called the five great observations. He observed, namely, the time, the
continent, the country, the family, and the mother and her span of life.

   In the first of these observations he asked himself whether it was
the right time or no. Now it is not the right time when the length of
men's lives is more than a hundred thousand years. And why is it not the
right time? Because mortals then forget about birth, old age, and death.
And if The Buddhas, who always include in their teachings the Three
Characteristics, were to attempt at such a time to discourse concerning
transitoriness, misery, and the lack of substantive reality, men would
not think it worth while listening to them, nor would they give them
credence. Thus there would be no conversions made; and if there were no
conversions, the dispensation would not conduce to salvation. This,
therefore, is not the right time.

   Also it is not the right time when men's lives are less than a
hundred years. And why is it not the right time? Because mortals are
then exceedingly corrupt; and an exhortation given to the exceedingly
corrupt makes no impression, but, like a mark drawn with a stick on the
surface of the water, it immediately disappears. This, therefore, also
is not the right time.

   But when the length of men's lives is between a hundred years and a
hundred thousand years, then is it the right time. Now at that time
men's lives were a hundred years; accordingly the Great Being observed
that it was the right time for his birth.

   Next he made the observation concerning the continent. Looking over
the four continents with their attendant isles, he reflected: "In three
of the continents the Buddhas are never born; only in the continent of
India are they born." Thus he decided on the continent.

   Next he made the observation concerning the place. "The continent of
India is large," thought he, "being ten

|                                 |                                                 |
|:--------------------------------|------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.49<sup>6</sup></span> |

thousand leagues around. In which of its countries are The Buddhas
born?" Thus he decided on the Middle Country.

   The Middle Country is the country defined in the Vinaya as follows:--

   "It lies in the middle, on this side of the town Kajañgala on the
east, beyond which is Mahâ-Sâla, and beyond that the border districts.
It lies in the middle, on this side of the river Salalavatî on the
southeast, beyond which are the border districts. It lies in the middle,
on this side of the town Setakannika on the south, beyond which are the
border districts. It lies in the middle, on this side of the Brahmanical
town Thûna on the west, beyond which are the border districts. It lies
in the middle, on this side of the hill Usîraddhaja on the north, beyond
which are the border districts."

   It is three hundred leagues in length, two hundred and fifty in
breadth, and nine hundred in circumference. In this country are born The
Buddhas, the Private Buddhas,<span id="page_41_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_41_note_1.md) the Chief Disciples, the
Eighty Great Disciples, the Universal Monarch, and other eminent ones,
magnates of the warrior caste, of the Brahman caste, and the wealthy
householders. "And in it is this city called Kapilavatthu," thought he,
and concluded that there he ought to be born.

   Then he made the observation concerning the family. "The Buddhas,"
thought he, "are never born into a family of the peasant caste, or of
the servile caste; but into one of the warrior caste, or of the Brahman
caste, whichever at the time is the higher in public estimation. The
warrior caste is now the higher in public estimation. I will be born
into a warrior family, and king Suddhodana shall be my father." Thus he
decided on the family.

   Then he made the observation concerning the mother. "The mother of a
Buddha," thought he, "is never a wanton, nor a drunkard, but is one who
has fulfilled the perfections through a hundred thousand cycles, and has
kept the five precepts unbroken from the day of her birth. Now this
queen Mahâ-Mâyâ is such a one; and she shall be my mother."--

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.49<sup>28</sup></span> |

"But what shall be her span of life?"<span
id="page_42_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_42_note_1.md) continued he. And he
perceived that it was to be ten months and seven days.

   Having thus made the five great observations, he kindly made the gods
the required promise, saying,--

   "Sirs, you are right. The time has come for my Buddhaship."

   Then, surrounded by the gods of the Tusita heaven, and dismissing all
the other gods, he entered the Nandana Grove of the Tusita capital,--for
in each of the heavens there is a Nandana Grove. And here the gods said,
"Attain in your next existence your high destiny," and kept reminding
him that he had already paved the way to it by his accumulated merit.
Now it was while he was thus dwelling, surrounded by these deities, and
continually reminded of his accumulated merit, that he died, and was
conceived in the womb of queen Mahâ-Mâyâ. And in order that this matter
may be fully understood, I will give the whole account in due order.

   It is related that at that time the Midsummer Festival had been
proclaimed in the city of Kapilavatthu, and the multitude were enjoying
the feast. And queen Mahâ-Mâyâ, abstaining from strong drink, and
brilliant with garlands and perfumes, took part in the festivities for
the six days previous to the day of full moon. And when it came to be
the day of full moon, she rose early, bathed in perfumed water, and
dispensed four hundred thousand pieces of money in great largess. And
decked in full gala attire, she ate of the choicest food; after which
she took the eight vows, and entered her elegantly furnished chamber of
state. And lying down on the royal couch, she fell asleep and dreamed
the following dream:--

   The four guardian angels came and lifted her up, together with her
couch, and took her away to the Himalaya Mountains. There, in the
Manosilâ table-land, which is sixty leagues in extent, they laid her
under a prodigious sal-tree,

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.50<sup>12</sup></span> |

seven leagues in height, and took up their positions respectfully at one
side. Then came the wives of these guardian angels, and conducted her to
Anotatta Lake, and bathed her, to remove every human stain. And after
clothing her with divine garments, they anointed her with perfumes and
decked her with divine flowers. Not far off was Silver Hill, and in it a
golden mansion. There they spread a divine couch with its head towards
the east, and laid her down upon it. Now the Future Buddha had become a
superb white elephant, and was wandering about at no great distance, on
Gold Hill. Descending thence, he ascended Silver Hill, and approaching
from the north, he plucked a white lotus with his silvery trunk, and
trumpeting loudly, went into the golden mansion. And three times he
walked round his mother's couch, with his right side towards it, and
striking her on her right side, he seemed to enter her womb. Thus the
conception took place in the Midsummer Festival.

   On the next day the queen awoke, and told the dream to the king. And
the king caused sixty-four eminent Brahmans to be summoned, and spread
costly seats for them on ground festively prepared with green leaves,
Dalbergia flowers, and so forth. The Brahmans being seated, he filled
gold and silver dishes with the best of milk-porridge compounded with
ghee, honey, and treacle; and covering these dishes with others, made
likewise of gold and silver, he gave the Brahmans to eat. And not only
with food, but with other gifts, such as new garments, tawny cows, and
so forth, he satisfied them completely. And when their every desire had
been satisfied, he told them the dream and asked them what would come of
it.

   "Be not anxious, great king!" said the Brahmans; "a child has planted
itself in the womb of your queen, and it is a male child and not a
female. You will have a son. And he, if he continue to live the
household life, will become a Universal Monarch; but if he leave the
household life and retire from the world, he will become a Buddha, and
roll back the clouds of sin and folly of this world."

   Now the instant the Future Buddha was conceived in the

|                                 |                                                 |
|:--------------------------------|------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.51<sup>4</sup></span> |

womb of his mother, all the ten thousand worlds suddenly quaked,
quivered, and shook. And the Thirty-two Prognostics appeared, as
follows: an immeasurable light spread through ten thousand worlds; the
blind recovered their sight, as if from desire to see this his glory;
the deaf received their hearing; the dumb talked; the hunchbacked became
straight of body; the lame recovered the power to walk; all those in
bonds were freed from their bonds and chains; the fires went out in all
the hells; the hunger and thirst of the Manes was stilled; wild animals
lost their timidity; diseases ceased among men; all mortals became
mild-spoken; horses neighed and elephants trumpeted in a manner sweet to
the ear; all musical instruments gave forth their notes without being
played upon; bracelets and other ornaments jingled; in all quarters of
the heavens the weather became fair; a mild, cool breeze began to blow,
very refreshing to men; rain fell out of season; water burst forth from
the earth and flowed in streams; the birds ceased flying through the
air; the rivers checked their flowing; in the mighty ocean the water
became sweet; the ground became everywhere covered with lotuses of the
five different colors; all flowers bloomed, both those on land and those
that grow in the water; trunk-lotuses bloomed on the trunks of trees,
branch-lotuses on the branches, and vine-lotuses on the vines; on the
ground, stalk-lotuses, as they are called, burst through the overlying
rocks and came up by sevens; in the sky were produced others, called
hanging-lotuses; a shower of flowers fell all about; celestial music was
heard to play in the sky; and the whole ten thousand worlds became one
mass of garlands of the utmost possible magnificence, with waving
chowries, and saturated with the incense-like fragrance of flowers, and
resembled a bouquet of flowers sent whirling through the air, or a
closely woven wreath, or a superbly decorated altar of flowers.

   From the time the Future Buddha was thus conceived, four angels with
swords in their hands kept guard, to ward off all harm from both the
Future Buddha and the Future Buddha's mother. No lustful thought sprang
up in the mind of the Future Buddha's mother; having reached the

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.51<sup>31</sup></span> |

pinnacle of good fortune and of glory, she felt comfortable and well,
and experienced no exhaustion of body. And within her womb she could
distinguish the Future Buddha, like a white thread passed through a
transparent jewel. And whereas a womb that has been occupied by a Future
Buddha is like the shrine of a temple, and can never be occupied or used
again, therefore it was that the mother of the Future Buddha died when
he was seven days old, and was reborn in the Tusita heaven.

   Now other women sometimes fall short of and sometimes run over the
term of ten lunar months, and then bring forth either sitting or lying
down; but not so the mother of a Future Buddha. She carries the Future
Buddha in her womb for just ten months, and then brings forth while
standing up. This is a characteristic of the mother of a Future Buddha.
So also queen Mahâ-Mâyâ carried the Future Buddha in her womb, as it
were oil in a vessel, for ten months; and being then far gone with
child, she grew desirous of going home to her relatives, and said to
king Suddhodana,--

   "Sire, I should like to visit my kinsfolk in their city Devadaha."

   "So be it," said the king; and from Kapilavatthu to the city of
Devadaha he had the road made even, and garnished it with plantain-trees
set in pots, and with banners, and streamers; and, seating the queen in
a golden palanquin borne by a thousand of his courtiers, he sent her
away in great pomp.

   Now between the two cities, and belonging to the inhabitants of both,
there was a pleasure-grove of sal-trees, called Lumbini Grove. And at
this particular time this grove was one mass of flowers from the ground
to the topmost branches, while amongst the branches and flowers hummed
swarms of bees of the five different colors, and flocks of various kinds
of birds flew about warbling sweetly. Throughout the whole of Lumbini
Grove the scene resembled the Cittalatâ Grove in Indra's paradise, or
the magnificently decorated banqueting pavilion of some potent king.

   When the queen beheld it she became desirous of disporting

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.52<sup>21</sup></span> |

herself therein, and the courtiers therefore took her into it. And going
to the foot of the monarch sal-tree of the grove, she wished to take
hold of one of its branches. And the sal-tree branch, like the tip of a
well-steamed reed, bent itself down within reach of the queen's hand.
Then she reached out her hand, and seized hold of the branch, and
immediately her pains came upon her. Thereupon the people hung a curtain
about her, and retired. So her delivery took place while she was
standing up, and keeping fast hold of the sal-tree branch.

   At that very moment came four pure-minded Mahâ-Brahma angels bearing
a golden net; and, receiving the Future Buddha on this golden net, they
placed him before his mother and said,--

   "Rejoice, O queen! A mighty son has been born to you."

   Now other mortals on issuing from the maternal womb are smeared with
disagreeable, impure matter; but not so the Future Buddha. He issued
from his mother's womb like a preacher descending from his
preaching-seat, or a man coming down a stair, stretching out both hands
and both feet, unsmeared by any impurity from his mother's womb, and
flashing pure and spotless, like a jewel thrown upon a vesture of
Benares cloth. Notwithstanding this, for the sake of honoring the Future
Buddha and his mother, there came two streams of water from the sky, and
refreshed the Future Buddha and his mother.

   Then the Brahma angels, after receiving him on their golden net,
delivered him to the four guardian angels, who received him from their
hands on a rug which was made of the skins of black antelopes, and was
soft to the touch, being such as is used on state occasions; and the
guardian angels delivered him to men who received him on a coil of fine
cloth; and the men let him out of their hands on the ground, where he
stood and faced the east. There, before him, lay many thousands of
worlds, like a great open court; and in them, gods and men, making
offerings to him of perfumes, garlands, and so on, were saying,--

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.53<sup>13</sup></span> |

   "Great Being! There is none your equal, much less your superior."

   When he had in this manner surveyed the four cardinal points, and the
four intermediate ones, and the zenith, and the nadir, in short, all the
ten directions in order, and had nowhere discovered his equal, he
exclaimed, "This is the best direction," and strode forward seven paces,
followed by Mahâ-Brahma holding over him the white umbrella, Suyâma
bearing the fan, and other divinities having the other symbols of
royalty in their hands. Then, at the seventh stride, he halted, and with
a noble voice, he shouted the shout of victory, beginning,--

"The Chief am I in all the world."

   Now in three of his existences did the Future Buddha utter words
immediately on issuing from his mother's womb: namely, in his existence
as Mahosadha; in his existence as Vessantara; and in this existence.

   As respects his existence as Mahosadha, it is related that just as he
was issuing from his mother's womb, Sakka, the king of the gods, came
and placed in his hand some choice sandal-wood, and departed. And he
closed his fist upon it, and issued forth.

   "My child," said his mother, "what is it you bring with you in your
hand?"

   "Medicine, mother," said he.

   Accordingly, as he was born with medicine in his hand, they gave him
the name of Osadha-Dâraka \[Medicine-Child\]. Then they took the
medicine, and placed it in an earthenware jar; and it was a sovereign
remedy to heal all the blind, the deaf, and other afflicted persons who
came to it. So the saying sprang up, "This is a great medicine, this is
a great medicine!" And thus he received the name of Mahosadha \[Great
Medicine-Man\].

   Again, in the Vessantara existence, as he was issuing from his
mother's womb, he stretched out his right hand, and said,--

   "Pray, mother, is there anything in the house? I want to give alms."

|                                 |                                                  |
|:--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> | <span class="small">\[J.i.53<sup>32</sup></span> |

   Then, after he had completely issued forth, his mother said,--

   "It's a wealthy family, my son, into which you are born;" and putting
his hand in her own, she had them place in his a purse containing a
thousand pieces of money.

   Lastly, in this birth he shouted the shout of victory
above-mentioned.

   Thus in three of his existences did the Future Buddha utter words
immediately on issuing from his mother's womb. And just as at the moment
of his conception, so also at the moment of his birth appeared the
Thirty-two Prognostics.

   Now at the very time that our Future Buddha was born in Lumbini Grove
there also came into existence the mother of Râhula, and Channa the
courtier, Kâludâyi the courtier, Kanthaka the king of horses, the Great
Bo-tree, and the four urns full of treasure. Of these last, one was a
quarter of a league in extent, another a half-league, the third three
quarters of a league, and the fourth a league. These seven<span
id="page_48_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_48_note_1.md) are called the Connate
Ones.

   Then the inhabitants of both cities took the Future Buddha, and
carried him to Kapilavatthu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 5. The Young Gotamid Prince](bits005.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="page_41_note_1"></span>[1](#page_41_fr_1.md) See index, s.v.

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_1"></span>[1](#page_42_fr_1.md) That is, "How long
is she to live after conceiving me?" And the answer is, "Ten lunar
\[that is, the nine calendar\] months of my mother's pregnancy, and
seven days after my birth."

<span id="footnotes_page_48">p. 48</span>

<span id="page_48_note_1"></span>[1](#page_48_fr_1.md) In making up this
number the Future Buddha is to be counted as number 1, and the four urns
of treasure together as number 7.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
