[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits059) [Next](bits061.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 60. THE FORTY SUBJECTS OF MEDITATION.

<span class="small">Translated from the Visuddhi-Magga (chap.
iii.).</span>

   Therefore in respect of what we have said: "Must adopt from the forty
subjects of meditation some one adapted to his character"--it is to be
understood that these subjects of meditation can be catalogued in ten
different ways, namely, in respect to their names, in respect to whether
they fall short of the trances or attain them, in respect to the
particular trance induced, . . .

   *In respect to their names*. There are forty subjects of meditation.
As it has been said:

   "The following make forty subjects of meditation: ten kasinas, ten
impurities, ten reflections, four sublime states, four formless states,
one perception, and one analysis."

   Here the ten kasinas are the earth-kasina, the water-kasina,

|                                   |                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_292">p. 292</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.iii</span> |

the fire-kasina, the wind-kasina, the dark-blue kasina, the yellow
kasina, the blood-red kasina, the white kasina, the light kasina, the
limited-aperture kasina.

   The ten impurities are: a bloated corpse, a purple corpse, a putrid
corpse, a hacked-to-pieces corpse, a gnawed-to-pieces corpse, a
scattered-in-pieces corpse, a beaten-and-scattered-in-pieces corpse, a
bloody corpse, a worm-infested corpse, a skeleton-corpse.

   The ten reflections are: reflection on The Buddha, reflection on the
Doctrine, reflection on the Order, reflection on conduct, reflection on
liberality, reflection on the gods, the contemplation of death, the
contemplation of the body, the contemplation of breathing, reflection on
quiescence.

   The four sublime states are: friendliness, compassion, joy, and
indifference.

   The four formless states are: the realm of the infinity of space, the
realm of the infinity of consciousness, the realm of nothingness, and
the realm of neither perception nor yet non-perception.

   The one perception is the perception of the loathsomeness of
nutriment.

   The one analysis is the analysis into the four elements.

   Thus are they to be catalogued in respect to their names.

   *In respect to whether they fall short of the trances or attain
them*. With the exception of the contemplation of the body and of the
contemplation of breathing, the remaining eight reflections with the
perception of the loathsomeness of nutriment and the analysis into the
four elements are the ten subjects of meditation which fall short of the
trances; all the others attain them. Thus in respect to whether they
fall short of the trances or attain them.

   *In respect to the particular trance induced*. Of those that lead to
attainment, the ten kasinas and the contemplation of breathing induce
all the four trances; the ten impurities and the contemplation of the
body, the first trance; the first three sublime states, the first three
trances; while the fourth sublime state and the four formless states
induce all four. Thus in respect to the particular trance induced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 61. The Earth-Kasina](bits061.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
