[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits099) [Next](bits101)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_448">p. 448</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.vi.34<sup>1</sup></span> |

#### 

§ 100. A FAMILY OF MAGICIANS.

<span class="small">Translated from the Mahâ-Vagga
(vi.34<sup>1</sup>).</span>

   Now at that time there dwelt in the city of Bhaddiya a householder
named Mendaka. And his magical power was such that if he bathed his
head, had his granary swept out, and sat outside by the door, a shower
of grain would fall from the sky and fill the granary. Of his wife the
magical power was such that if she sat down by a pint-pot of boiled rice
and a dish of sauce and curry, she could serve a meal to the slaves and
serving-men; and as long as she did not get up, the food was not
exhausted. Of the son the magical power was such that with only a purse
of a thousand pieces of money he could pay six months' wages to the
slaves and serving-men; and as long as the purse was in his hand, the
money was not exhausted. Of the daughter-in-law the magical power was
such that if she sat down by a four-bushel basket, she could give six
months' rations of rice to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as
she did not get up, the rice was not exhausted. Of the slave the magical
power was such that with one plow he could plow seven furrows at once.

   And it came to the ears of Seniya Bimbisâra, king of Magadha:

   "They say that in the city of Bhaddiya, which is in our territory,
there dwells a householder named Mendaka. And his magical power is such
that if he bathes his head, has his granary swept out, and sits outside
by the door, a shower of grain will fall from the sky and fill the
granary. Of his wife the magical power is such that if she sits down by
a pint-pot of boiled rice, and a dish of sauce and curry, she can serve
a meal to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as she does not get
up, the food is not exhausted. Of the son the magical power is such that
with only a purse of a thousand pieces of money he can pay six months'
wages to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as the purse is in his
hand, the money is

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_449">p. 449</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.vi.34<sup>3</sup></span> |

not exhausted. Of the daughter-in-law the magical power is such that if
she sits down by a four-bushel basket, she can give six months' rations
of rice to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as she does not get
up, the rice is not exhausted. Of the slave the magical power is such
that with one plow he can plow seven furrows at once."

   Then Seniya Bimbisâra, king of Magadha, said to a certain minister
who had charge of general affairs:

   "Look you now! They say that in the city of Bhaddiya, which is in our
territory, there dwells a householder named Mendaka. And his magical
power is such that if he bathes his head, has his granary swept out, and
sits outside by the door, a shower of grain will fall from the sky and
fill the granary. Of his wife the magical power is such that if she sits
down by a pint-pot of boiled rice and a dish of sauce and curry, she can
serve a meal to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as she does not
get up, the food is not exhausted. Of the son the magical power is such
that with only a purse of a thousand pieces of money he can pay six
months' wages to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as the purse is
in his hand, the money is not exhausted. Of the daughter-in-law the
magical power is such that if she sits down by a four-bushel basket, she
can give six months' rations of rice to the slaves and serving-men; and
as long as she does not get up, the rice is not exhausted. Of the slave
the magical power is such that with one plow he can plow seven furrows
at once. Look you now! Go and find out about this. When you have seen
this magical power, it will be as if I myself had seen it."

   "Yes, sire," said the minister to Seniya Bimbisâra, king of Magadha,
in assent, and set out with a fourfold army in the direction of
Bhaddiya. And going from place to place, he drew near to Bhaddiya, and
to where Mendaka the house-holder was; and having drawn near, he spoke
to Mendaka the householder as follows:

   "I, O householder, have been commanded by the king, as follows: 'Look
you now! They say that in the city of Bhaddiya, which is in our
territory, there dwells a householder

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.vi.34<sup>6</sup></span> |

named Mendaka. And his magical power is such that if he bathes his head,
has his granary swept out, and sits outside by the door, a shower of
grain will fall from the sky and fill the granary. Of his wife the
magical power is such that if she sits down by a pint-pot of boiled rice
and a dish of sauce and curry, she can serve a meal to the slaves and
serving-men; and as long as she does not get up, the food is not
exhausted. Of the son the magical power is such that with only a purse
of a thousand pieces of money he can pay six months' wages to the slaves
and serving-men; and as long as the purse is in his hand, the money is
not exhausted. Of the daughter-in-law the magical power is such that if
she sits down by a four-bushel basket, she can give six months' rations
of rice to the slaves and serving-men; and as long as she does not get
up, the rice is not exhausted. Of the slave the magical power is such
that with one plow he can plow seven furrows at once. Look you now! Go
and find out about this. When you have seen this magical power, it will
be as if I myself had seen it.' Let us see, O householder, your magical
power."

   Then Mendaka the householder bathed his head, had his granary swept
out, and sat outside by the door, and a shower of grain fell from the
sky and filled the granary.

   "We have seen, O householder, your magical power. We will see that of
your wife."

   Then Mendaka the householder commanded his wife:

   "Serve, then, the fourfold army with food."

   Then the wife of Mendaka the householder sat down by a pint-pot of
boiled rice and a dish of sauce and curry, and served a meal to the
fourfold army; and as long as she did not get up, the food was not
exhausted.

   "We have seen, O householder, the magical power of your wife. We will
see that of your son."

   Then Mendaka the householder commanded his son:

   "Pay, then, my child, six months' wages to the army."

   Then the son of Mendaka, with only a purse of a thousand pieces of
money, paid six months' wages to the fourfold army; and as long as the
purse was in his hand, the money was not exhausted.

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.vi.34<sup>8</sup></span> |

   "We have seen, O householder, the magical power of your son. We will
see that of your daughter-in-law."

   Then Mendaka the householder commanded his daughter-in-law:

   "Give, then, six months' rations of rice to the fourfold army."

   Then the daughter-in-law of Mendaka the householder sat down by a
four-bushel basket, and gave six months' rations of rice to the fourfold
army; and as long as she did not get up, the rice was not exhausted.

   "We have seen, O householder, the magical power of your
daughter-in-law. We will see that of your slave."

   "Sir, the magical power of my slave is to be seen in the field."

   "Enough, O householder; we have seen the magical power of your
slave."

   Then the minister returned to Râjagaha with the fourfold army, and
drew near to where Seniya Bimbisâra, king of Magadha, was; and having
drawn near, he told the matter to Seniya Bimbisâra, king of Magadha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 101. The Story of Visâkhâ](bits101)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
