[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wov32)  [Next](wov34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VLT8O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Buddha's Way of Virtue*, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders,
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### APPENDIX

### THE BUDDHIST IDEAL

#### (<span class="smallcaps">Arahatship Or Nirvāna</span>)

#### <span class="small">AS DEPICTED IN THE DHAMMAPADA</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> "ambrosial (or deathless) path,"
Nirvāna, is the prize which these stanzas hold out to the strenuous:
this is at once the goal of effort and its cessation, a calm haven after
strenuous voyaging. <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6) The seer speaks
with a quiet rapture and a serene assurance which convince us as we
read, that whether it is Gautama himself who speaks, or whether it is
the collective voice of his followers, here is in any case the utterance
of a real experience of the soul. Can it be that these men entered
behind the veil of sense and time, and that their voices ring down the
ages from that mysterious Beyond to which the mystics of all ages have
aspired?

We cannot say; yet it is very clear that if the metaphysical Nirvāna is
a fantasy, the ethical Nirvāna is real enough: and Gautama was above all
things an ethical teacher. That

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

we shall understand Nirvāna from a perusal of those pages is not likely;
that it will attract Western thinkers is not wholly to be desired; but
we can at least study the ethical experience of which Nirvāna is but the
description and the attempted explanation: and a grasp of what
Arahatship means is essential to the understanding of Buddhism. The
Arahat is one who, through obedience to the preaching of Buddha, has
reached that calm state when the will no longer struggles, but is
unified and at rest.

As the eagle, after long strain of upward flight, stays poised in
mid-air, so the seer reaches the calm and severe heights of character.
This is Nirvāna in the present world: and Nirvāna hereafter may be more
mysterious, but it must be of the same kind.

Very much as the Christian, experiencing "the peace that passes
understanding," interprets in the light of this experience the serenity
and calm of the Hereafter, so the Buddhist "saint," having known the
quiet and serenity of the unified will, projects this experience into
the future.

To both alike this future is "ineffably sublime"; words fail men when
they attempt to speak of the Beyond: and yet we can piece together a
picture of their inmost thoughts from such fragmentary descriptions of
their experience as they let fall.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

Arahatship and Nirvāna, then, form one ideal, and it is with this that
the Dhammapada is concerned.

We have seen that Nirvāna is ineffable (stanza 218 and note); but we
have also to remember that it can be experienced here and now. In stanza
402 we read:

<span class="small">"He is the Brahmin who in this very world knows the
end of sorrow, who has laid the burden aside and is free."</span> <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7)

For whilst "the burden" is ultimately bodily existence, yet it is the
sinfulness and egoism and pride of the flesh which make that burden so
intolerable: the body is in fact a good servant but a bad master, and he
who masters his body is already as it were freed from it.

<span class="small">"Happy is he," says the Dīgha Nikāya, "who is free
of lust and beyond its power: the highest bliss is freedom from pride
and self-will."</span>

<span class="small">"There is no sorrow like existence, no bliss like
Nirvāna," says the Dhammapada.</span>

<span class="small">"The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, cries St. Paul…Unhappy man that I am! Who
shall deliver me from this body of death?"</span>

These and similar passages are a cry for deliverance; and both teachers
insist upon the same great truth, that man's bodily life, in so far as
it is dominated by self-will and lust, is an evil

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

to be escaped at any cost. Neither is Manichean: it is not the body that
is evil, but the body enslaved by the tyranny of evil desires.

And for both teachers it is the perversity of the "flesh" that shapes
the ideal of escape; though the one longs after the life of dissolution,
and the other believes that he will be "clothed upon" with a "glorified
body" hereafter. <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8)

The salient feature of the Buddhist ideal is freedom:

<span class="small">"Him I call Brahmin who has cut the bonds, who
thirsts not for pleasure, who has left behind the hindrances."</span>

<span class="small">(See 397 and note on 398.)</span>

The phrase "highest freedom" occurs more than once in these stanzas as a
synonym for Nirvāna, and, as Mrs. Rhys Davids has shown, it is this
aspect of Nirvāna which is most frequently hymned in the *Psalms of the
Sisters,* that remarkable collection of verses attributed to the
women-elders of the Sangha. <span id="fr_9"></span>[†](#fn_9) (*Cf.*
Dhammapada, 90, 92, 93, 96, etc.)

Inasmuch as this "highest freedom" is escape from lust and other
"bonds," it is an

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

ideal for this life: inasmuch as it is escape from the round of rebirths
it is an ideal for the future: here Arahatship passes over into
Nirvāna. <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10)

And in both alike the way of escape lies in the mind of man:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"All that we are by Mind is wrought,  
Fashioned and fathered by our Thought." <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_10)

</div>

The Arahat has mastered his mind (that "frail and fickle thing" that in
the worldling "leaps hither and thither, like a monkey seeking fruit)";
and therefore he is already free from the tyranny of the flesh (*cf.*
89). For it is the mental "bonds"—lust, pride, self-will—which have
bound him through the long waste of years to one body after another; and
it is "knowledge" which sets him free:

<span class="small">"He is the Brahmin indeed who… has reached the end
of rebirths, the sage whose knowledge is perfect, and who is perfect
with all perfection."</span>

This freedom of Nirvāna is envisaged as Rest: and there is in these
stanzas a cry for rest which runs through all the Buddhist books like
some pathetic fugue: a desire so passionate as to be almost
unintelligible to Western minds.

But to men obsessed heart and spirit with the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

"weary weight of the intolerable years," life after life of suffering
and care, it is a real longing which here finds rhythmic expression:

<span class="small">"All is fleeting, all is unreal, all is sorrowful."
(277-9.)</span>  
<span class="small">"There is no sorrow, like to existence: no bliss
like Nirvāna, the Supreme Rest." (202.)</span>

Worldly existence is wholly evil; but every man is free to cultivate the
"otherworldly" frame of mind, and be at peace. For Buddhism is in a
sense eudaemonistic; it does not flout man's desire to be happy: only it
defines this happiness in terms of inward peace and self-control.

Section XV of the Dhammapada is the Buddhist analogue of the Beatitudes
of Jesus, and, as an ideal of the Happy Life, ranks high indeed.

It is an ideal of kindliness and serenity, of peace and unity, which is
very winsome: it would be hard to pick a quarrel with the exponents of
such a life!

To the Christian it seems none the less an ideal more passive and
stoical, less loving and mystical than that of Jesus; and yet we cannot
but rejoice that the East has had this ideal so long before it. To the
Karma-haunted millions of India it has shone with a steady and alluring
radiance, in time past more potent than to-day, but even now embedded in
their subconsciousness.

Its calm and cool attractiveness is beautifully

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

symbolised in the poetic imagery of the Dhammapada:

<span class="small">"The good man shines like the moon escaped from
clouds, he is pure as some unruffled lake." (95.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the company of
such a leader with his disciples is

<span class="small">"As the moon following the path of the stars."
(208.)</span>

Another lovely moonlit scene embodies and symbolises the spirit of this
ideal:

The Buddha's six chief disciples are in a park, and as they sit in the
tropical moonlight they ask one another what quality in the Bhikkhu
could add to the beauty of the scene. Amongst the answers are three
which throw light upon the meaning of Arahatship:

<span class="small">"The peace and insight of moral victory," says
one,</span>  
<span class="small">"The joy and insight of Emancipation," says
another;</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> and Sāriputta wins
the Master's approval by his reply:

<span class="small">"When a Bhikkhu masters his heart *(cittam)* and
does not let it master him."</span>

"Hear from me," says Gautama. "Hear from me what kind of Bhikkhu could
add a lustre to the wood; one who, sitting serene and controlled,
resolves: "Till my heart is freed from the ferments of lust I shall not
quit my seat." <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_11)

This scene is most suggestive, for it throws

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

into strong contrast Buddhist and Christian Ethics, and further it leads
us into the heart of a vexed and difficult problem.

With regard to the first point, it is sufficient to say here that
Buddhism teaches a rigorous and calm self-mastery, Christianity demands
a passionate self-surrender.

With regard to the second, we may state the problem thus: Is Nirvāna a
social ideal? Or is it an ideal of solitude and forgetfulness? The
answer seems to be that Buddhism holds out no promise of the reunion of
emancipated "souls"; Nirvāna is the cessation of all personal existence:
yet the experience of the peace and joy of Noble Companionship—such
companionship and communion of soul as is here depicted—is too good not
to be desired. And this desire has tinged the ideal picture of the
Beyond: in spite of metaphysics the ethical, asserts itself

<span class="small">"Good is the Vision of the Noble" (i.e. Arahats).  
"Good is their company." (206.)</span>  
<span class="small">"A loyal friend is the truest kinsman:  
Nirvāna is the greatest Bliss." (204.)</span>

To sum up the Buddhist position upon the question of "Society and
Solitude" is no easy task; but we may express it tentatively thus: At
first solitude is essential:

<span class="small">"Alone man lives like Brahma: in twos men live like
gods: in threes they are as a village. More than this is a mob."</span>

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And as the
Dhammapada says,

<span class="small">"Even for great benefit to another let no man
imperil his own benefit." (166.)</span>

But if an Arahat is to be found, his society can do nothing but good:
let the Bhikkhu resort to him. If there are a company of Arahats, let
them rejoice in communion and fellowship. And hereafter

<span class="small">Nirvāna is "the unknown shore." (323.)</span>  
<span class="small">It is "the solitude which it is hard to love."
(88.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> With all his
kindliness and even geniality Buddha does not disguise the fact that
victory will be purchased at a heavy cost:

<span class="small">"One is the road leading to wealth: another is that
leading to Nirvāna."</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To win to the goal
will mean asceticism all along the line:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Cut out the bonds…  
Play the man…  
Travel stoutly alone…"

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such are his
rallying-cries.

For the "Path of Safety" is beset with "evil beasts." And to win across
"the torrent" to the safety of the "other side" needs courage and
strenuous effort. And, having won through, men will find a great
solitude, a peace, a freedom, only to be purchased by ceasing to be.
Such is Nirvāna in the fullest sense.

Freedom; Safety; Rest: Calmness; Kindliness;

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Self-control:
Solitary effort or the company of the select few. Above all, Bliss,
ineffable yet traceable to its seat in the unified will. Such is
Arahatship, or Nirvāna in this present life. It is a lofty ideal, and
though no Buddhist now strives to realise Nirvāna, yet there are men in
all Buddhist lands gazing into the remote future to see Arahatship
shining afar off like some dim yet lovely star. And because it is
ethical, therefore it is attainable:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"I ought, therefore I can."

</div>

In the days of Gautama it is clear that men reached the goal of
Arahatship, and knew the peace and joy of a mind and conscience at rest.
For the contagion of his enthusiasm and the magnetism of his personality
went far to energise ideals which are real enough beneath a tropic sun,
and, in so far as they are ethical ideals, vital enough in all lands.
And to-day Buddhists look wistfully to a Coming One, Maitri, who shall
spur them on to victory: or they put their trust in the grace of an
Amida who demands only faith in his saving power.

The Christian will see in these aspirations and yearnings the promise of
a speedy fulfilment, when men see the Majesty and the Love of God
revealed in Christ: and he will welcome the teachings of Gautama the
Buddha as the utterance of a prophet and a seer.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Note</span>

Nirvāna is thus explained in the Abhidhammattha-Sangaha, translated by
Mr. Shwe Zan Aung, and published by the Pali Text Society under the
title *Compendium of* *Philosophy.*

### OF NIBBĀNA

#### Now Nibbāna, which is reckoned as beyond these worlds, is to be realised through the knowledge belonging to the Four Paths. It is the object of those Paths, and of their Fruits. It is called Nibbāna, in that it is a "departure" from that craving which is called Vāna, lusting. This Nibbāna is in its nature single, but for purposes of logical treatment it is twofold, namely, the element of Nibbāna, wherewith is yet remaining stuff of life, and the element without that remainder. So, too, when divided into modes, it is threefold—namely, Void, Signless, and Absolute Content.

 

                            MNEMONIC

#### 

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Great Seers, wholly from Vāna—lust set free,  
Declare Nibbāna such a path to be:—  
Past death, past end (it goes, this blessed way),  
Uncauséd, having no beyond, they say.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Thus, as fourfold, Tathāgatas  
The ultimate kinds of things we know and feel:—  
Mind first, and next, concomitants of mind,  
Body as third, Nibbāna last in kind.

</div>

<span class="small">*Printed by Hazel, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and
Aylesbury, England.*</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[102:\*](wov33.htm#fr_6) *Upasama* implies both
the idea of Peace and the idea that there has been a struggle to win it.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[104:\*](wov33.htm#fr_7) *cf.* stanza 32: where
"near to Nirvāna" should probably be rendered "in the very presence of
Nirvāna." (<span class="smallcaps">Rhys Davids</span>.)

<span id="fn_8"></span>[105:\*](wov33.htm#fr_8) From a more positive
point of view we may say that for the Buddhist, Peace is an ideal of
equilibrium now and of unconsciousness hereafter: for the Christian,
Peace is an ideal of conscious fellowship with God begun now and
hereafter consummated.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[105:†](wov33.htm#fr_9) This collection,
published by the Pali Text Society, will go far to prove how real and
deep was the ethical experience of the early Buddhists.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[106:\*](wov33.htm#fr_11) In technical
phraseology the *ethical* Nirvāna is called Savupādisesanibbānam, or
Nirvāna, in which the five skandhas or elements of being remain; and the
*metaphysical* Nirvāna is called Anupādisesanibbanam, or Nirvāna, in
which they cease to exist. (See Note at end.)

<span id="fn_11"></span>[108:\*](wov33.htm#fr_12) Majjhima Nikāya, 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements](wov34)
