[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub17) 
[Next](jub19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Fall of the Angels and their Punishment; the Deluge foretold (v. 1-20; cf. Gen. vi. 1-12).

V. And it came to pass when the children of men began to multiply on the
face of the earth and daughters were born unto them, that the angels of
God <span id="fr_185"></span>[4](#fn_185) saw them on a certain year of
this jubilee, that they were

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

beautiful to look upon; and they took themselves wives of all whom they
chose, and they bare unto them sons and they were giants. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186) 2. And lawlessness increased on the
earth and all flesh corrupted its way, <span
id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_187) alike men and cattle and beasts and
birds and everything that walketh on the earth-all of them corrupted
their ways and their orders, and they began to devour <span
id="fr_188"></span>[3](#fn_188) each other, and lawlessness increased on
the earth and every imagination of the thoughts of all men (was) thus
evil continually. <span id="fr_189"></span>[4](#fn_189) 3. And God
looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, and all flesh had
corrupted its orders, and all that were upon the earth <span
id="fr_190"></span>[5](#fn_190) had wrought all manner of evil before
His eyes. 4. And He said: "I shall destroy man and all flesh upon the
face of the earth which I have created." 5. But Noah found grace before
the eyes of the Lord. <span id="fr_191"></span>[6](#fn_191) 6. And
against the angels whom He had sent upon the earth, He was exceedingly
wroth, and He gave commandment to root them out of all their dominion,
and He bade us to bind them in the depths of the earth, and behold they
are bound in the midst of them, and are (kept) separate. 7. And against
their sons went forth a command from before His face that they should be
smitten with the sword, and be removed from under heaven. 8. And He said
"Thy spirit will not always abide <span id="fr_192"></span>[7](#fn_192)
on man; for they also are flesh and their days shall be one hundred and
twenty years." 9. And He sent His sword into their midst that each
should slay his neighbour, and they began to slay each other till they
all fell by the sword and were destroyed from the earth. 10. And their
fathers were witnesses (of their destruction), and after this they were
bound in the depths of the earth for ever, until the day of the great
condemnation <span id="fr_193"></span>[8](#fn_193) when judgment is
executed on all those who have corrupted their ways and their works
before

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the Lord. 11. And He †destroyed† all from their places, and there †was†
not left one of them whom He judged not according to all their
wickedness. 12. And He †made† for all His works a new and righteous
nature, <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194) so that they should not
sin in their whole nature for ever, but should be all righteous each in
his kind alway. 13. And the judgment of all is ordained and written on
the heavenly tables in righteousness--even (the judgment of) all who
depart from the path which is ordained for them to walk in; and if they
walk not therein judgment is written down for every creature and for
every kind. 14. And there is nothing in heaven or on earth, or in light
or in darkness, or in Sheol or in the depth, or in the place of darkness
(which is not judged); and all their judgments are ordained and written
and engraved. 15. In regard to all He will judge, the great according to
his greatness, and the small according to his smallness, and each
according to his way. 16. And He is not one who will regard the person
(of any), nor is He one who will receive gifts, if He saith that He will
execute judgment on each: if one gave everything that is on the earth,
He will not regard the gifts or the person (of any), nor accept anything
at his hands, for He is a righteous judge. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195) \[17. And of the children of Israel it
hath been written and ordained: If they turn to Him in righteousness, He
will forgive all their transgressions and pardon all their sins. 18. It
is written and ordained that He will show mercy to all who turn from all
their guilt once each year.\] <span id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_196) 19.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And as for all those who corrupted their ways
and their thoughts before the flood, no man's person was accepted save
that of Noah alone; for his person was accepted in behalf of his sons,
whom (God) saved from the waters of the flood on his account; for his
heart was righteous in all his ways, according as it was commanded
regarding him, and he had not departed from aught that was ordained for
him. 20. And the Lord said that He would destroy everything which was
upon the earth, both men and cattle, and beasts, and fowls of the air,
and that which moveth on the earth. <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[56:4](jub18.htm#fr_185) This is the LXX
rendering of Gen, vi. 2 (R.V. "sons of God"). and represents the older
Jewish exegesis, which was later given up.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[57:1](jub18.htm#fr_186) *Giants*, *i. e.*
"Nephilim."

<span id="fn_187"></span>[57:2](jub18.htm#fr_187) Cf. Gen. vi. 12.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[57:3](jub18.htm#fr_188) Cf. 1 Enoch vii. 5.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[57:4](jub18.htm#fr_189) Cf. Gen. vi. .5.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[57:5](jub18.htm#fr_190) Cf. Gen. vi. 12.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[57:6](jub18.htm#fr_191) Cf. Gen. vi. 7, 8.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[57:7](jub18.htm#fr_192) Cf. Gen. vi. 3, R.V.
marg.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[57:8](jub18.htm#fr_193) Cf. 1 Enoch x. 12.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[58:1](jub18.htm#fr_194) 10-12, as Charles has
shown, describe the *final* judgment. The tenses must be altered from
past to future. Render: "until the day of the great condemnation, when
judgment *shall be* executed. . . . And He *shall* destroy . . . and
there *shall not* be left one of them whom He *shall* not have judged. .
. . And He *shall* make," etc.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[58:2](jub18.htm#fr_195) Cf. xl. 8; Deut. x.
17; 2 Chron. xix. 7.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[58:3](jub18.htm#fr_196) The bracketed clauses
have been either transposed here or interpolated from xxxiv. 18-19. The
reference is to the Day of Atonement which takes place on the 10th of
the 7th month. For "once each year," cf. Heb. ix. 7.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[59:1](jub18.htm#fr_197) Cf. Gen. vi. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Building of the Ark; the Flood (v. 21-32)](jub19)
