[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub16) 
[Next](jub18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Patriarchs from Adam to Noah (cf. Gen. v.); Life of Enoch; Death of Adam and Gain (iv. 13-33).

|              |
|--------------|
| 309-315 A.M. |

13. <span id="fr_154"></span>[7](#fn_154) And in the seventh jubilee in
the third week Enos took Nôâm his sister to be his wife, and she bare

|          |
|----------|
| 325 A.M. |

him a son in the third year of the fifth week, and he called his name
Kenan. 14. And at the close of the

|              |
|--------------|
| 386-392 A.M. |

eighth jubilee Kenan took Mûalêlêth <span
id="fr_155"></span>[8](#fn_155) his sister to be his wife, and she bare
him a son in the ninth jubilee,

|          |
|----------|
| 395 A.M. |

in the first week in the third year of this week, and

|              |
|--------------|
| 449-455 A.M. |

he called his name Mahalalel. 15. And in the second week of the tenth
jubilee Mahalalel took unto him to wife Dînâh, the daughter of Barâkî’êl
the daughter of his father's brother, and she bare him a son in the
third

|          |
|----------|
| 461 A.M. |

week in the sixth year, and he called his name Jared; <span
id="fr_156"></span>[9](#fn_156) for in his days the angels of the Lord
descended on

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the earth, <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157) those who are named the
Watchers, <span id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_158) that they should
instruct the children of men, <span id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_159) and
that they should do judgment and uprightness on the earth. 16. And in
the eleventh jubilee Jared took to himself

|              |
|--------------|
| 512-518 A.M. |

a wife, and her name was Bâraka, the daughter of Râsûjâl, a daughter of
his father's brother, in the fourth week of this jubilee, and she bare
him a son in the fifth week, in the fourth year of the jubilee,

|          |
|----------|
| 522 A.M. |

and he called his name Enoch. <span id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_160) 17.
And he <span id="fr_161"></span>[5](#fn_161) was the first among men
that are born on earth who learnt writing and knowledge and wisdom <span
id="fr_162"></span>[6](#fn_162) and who wrote down the signs of heaven
according to the order of their months in a book, <span
id="fr_163"></span>[7](#fn_163) that men might know the seasons of the
years according to the order of their separate months. 18. And he was
the first to write a testimony, and he testified to the sons of men
among the generations of the earth, and recounted the weeks of the
jubilees, and made known to them the days of the years, <span
id="fr_164"></span>[8](#fn_164) and set in order the months and
recounted

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the Sabbaths of the years as we made (them) known to him. 19. And what
was and what will be he saw in a vision <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) of his sleep, as it will happen to the
children of men throughout their generations until the day of judgment;
he <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) saw and understood everything,
and wrote his testimony, and placed the testimony on earth for all the
children of men and

|              |
|--------------|
| 582-588 A.M. |

for their generations. 20. And in the twelfth jubilee, in the seventh
week thereof, he took to himself a wife, and her name was Ednî, <span
id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) the daughter of Dânêl,

|         |
|---------|
| 587 AM. |

the daughter of his father's brother, and in the sixth year in this week
she bare him a son and he called his name Methuselah. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_168) 21. And he was moreover with the angels
of God these six jubilees of years, and they showed him everything which
is on earth <span id="fr_169"></span>[5](#fn_169) and in the heavens,
the rule of the sun, and he wrote down everything. 22. And he testified
to the Watchers, who had sinned with the daughters of men; for these had
begun to unite themselves, so as to be defiled, with the daughters of
men, and Enoch testified against (them) all. 23. And he was taken from
amongst the children of men, and we conducted him into the Garden of
Eden <span id="fr_170"></span>[6](#fn_170) in majesty and honour, and
behold there he writeth down the condemnation and judgment of the world,
and all the wickedness of the children of men. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[7](#fn_171) 24. And on account of it (God) brought
the waters of the flood <span id="fr_172"></span>[8](#fn_172) upon all
the land of Eden; for there he was set as a sign and that he should
testify against all the children of men, that he should recount all the
deeds of the generations until the day of

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

condemnation. <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173) 25. And he burnt the
incense of the sanctuary, (even) sweet spices, <span
id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174) acceptable before the Lord on the Mount.
26. For the Lord hath four places <span id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_175)
on the earth, the Garden of Eden, and the Mount of the East, <span
id="fr_176"></span>[4](#fn_176) and this mountain on which thou art this
day, Mount Sinai, and Mount Zion (which) will be sanctified in the new
creation for a sanctification of the earth; through it will the earth be
sanctified from all (its) guilt and its uncleanness throughout the
generations of the world. <span id="fr_177"></span>[5](#fn_177) 27. And
in the fourteenth

|          |
|----------|
| 652 A M. |

jubilee Methuselah took unto himself a wife, Ednâ the daughter of
’Âzrîâl, the daughter of his father's brother, in the third week, in the
first year of this week, and he begat a son and called his name
Lamech. <span id="fr_178"></span>[6](#fn_178) 28. And in the fifteenth
jubilee in the third week

|              |
|--------------|
| 701-707 A.M. |

Lamech took to himself a wife, and her name was Bêtênôs the daughter of
Bârâkî’îl, the daughter of his father's brother, and in this week she
bare him a son and he called his name Noah, saying, "This one will
comfort me for my trouble and all my work, and for the ground which the
Lord hath cursed." <span id="fr_179"></span>[7](#fn_179) 29. And at the
close of the nineteenth jubilee, in the seventh week in the sixth year
thereof, Adam died, and all

|          |
|----------|
| 930 A.M. |

his sons buried him in the land of his creation, <span
id="fr_180"></span>[8](#fn_180) and he was the first to be buried <span
id="fr_181"></span>[9](#fn_181) in the earth. 30. And he lacked seventy
years of one thousand years; for one thousand years are as one day in
the testimony

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of the heavens and therefore was it written concerning the tree of
knowledge: "On the day that ye eat thereof ye will die." <span
id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182) For this reason he did not complete the
years of this day; for he died during it. 31. At the close of this
jubilee Cain was killed after him in the same year; for his house fell
upon him and he died in the midst of his house, and he was killed by its
stones, for with a stone he had killed Abel, and by a stone was he
killed in righteous judgment. 32. For this reason it was ordained on the
heavenly tables: "With the instrument with which a man killeth his
neighbour with the same shall he be killed; after the manner that he
wounded him, in like manner shall they deal with him." <span
id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183) 33. And in

|           |
|-----------|
| 1205 A.M. |

the twenty-fifth jubilee Noah took to himself a wife, and her name was
’Ĕmzârâ, the daughter of Râkê’êl, the daughter of his father's brother,
in the first year

|           |
|-----------|
| 1207 A.M. |

in the fifth week: and in the third year thereof she

|           |
|-----------|
| 1209 A.M. |

bare him Shem, in the fifth year thereof she bare him

|           |
|-----------|
| 1212 A.M. |

Ham, and in the first year in the sixth week she bare him Japheth. <span
id="fr_184"></span>[3](#fn_184)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[52:7](jub17.htm#fr_154) For 13-14 cf. Gen. v.
9, 12.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[52:8](jub17.htm#fr_155) A fem. form = "she who
praises God."

<span id="fn_156"></span>[52:9](jub17.htm#fr_156) Cf. Gen. v. 15.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[53:1](jub17.htm#fr_157) This last line looks
like a quotation from 1 Enoch vi. 6 ("who descended in the days of
Jared"). Note the play in Hebrew on the name *Jared* (*yāred*) and
"descended" (Heb. *yārĕdû*). The myth of the descent of the angels was
based on Gen. vi. 1-4, but was rejected by the Rabbis, who rendered
"sons of God" (*i. e.* angels) "sons of the judges."

<span id="fn_158"></span>[53:2](jub17.htm#fr_158) This name is given to
angels in Dan. iv. 13, 17, 23; in 1 Enoch it is applied especially to
the fallen angels (cf. 1 Enoch i. 5, x. 9, 15 and often).

<span id="fn_159"></span>[53:3](jub17.htm#fr_159) This statement is
interesting. It describes what was probably the original commission by
God to the angelic watchers, who, however, fell when they descended to
the earth. According to 1 Enoch, Enoch acquired his supernatural
knowledge from the instruction of angels.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[53:4](jub17.htm#fr_160) Cf. Gen. v. 18.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[53:5](jub17.htm#fr_161) The passage that
follows about Enoch (17-23) implies knowledge on the part of the author
of Enochic writings. Charles infers that these were 1 Enoch vi-xvi.,
xxiii.-xxxvi., and lxxii.-xc.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[53:6](jub17.htm#fr_162) Cf. the phrase "Scribe
of righteousness" applied to Enoch in 1 Enoch xii. 4, xv . 1.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[53:7](jub17.htm#fr_163) Probably a reference
to 1 Enoch lxxii.-lxxxii. ("The Book of the courses of the Heavenly
Luminaries ").

<span id="fn_164"></span>[53:8](jub17.htm#fr_164) There is nothing in 1
or 2 Enoch about "jubilees," etc. This statement is probably due solely
to the author of *Jubilees*, who wished to invest the institution with a
spurious antiquity.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[54:1](jub17.htm#fr_165) The reference is
probably to the "Dream-Visions" (1 Enoch lxxxiii.-xc.).

<span id="fn_166"></span>[54:2](jub17.htm#fr_166) *i. e.* Enoch. The
writings of Enoch are mentioned elsewhere (1 Enoch, *Test. XII.
Patriarchs*).

<span id="fn_167"></span>[54:3](jub17.htm#fr_167) *Edna* in 1 Enoch
lxxxv. 3.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[54:4](jub17.htm#fr_168) Cf. Gen. V. 21.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[54:5](jub17.htm#fr_169) 1 Enoch xxiii.-xxxvi.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[54:6](jub17.htm#fr_170) Cf. 1 Enoch lxx. 1-3.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[54:7](jub17.htm#fr_171) Cf. 1 Enoch xii. 3 f.,
xiv. i. The title ("Scribe of the Knowledge of the Most High") is
conferred upon Ezra in 4 Ezra xiv. 50 (Syriac text).

<span id="fn_172"></span>[54:8](jub17.htm#fr_172) Cf. 2 Enoch xxxiv. 3.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[55:1](jub17.htm#fr_173) Cf. x. 17.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[55:2](jub17.htm#fr_174) Cf. Exod. xxx. 7.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[55:3](jub17.htm#fr_175) Three of these places
are connected with critical events in the history of the world; Eden
(with Adam), Sinai (with Moses), Zion (with David).

<span id="fn_176"></span>[55:4](jub17.htm#fr_176) The exact
identification is uncertain; possibly the mount above Eden, where the
Scthites live, is meant. Other suggestions are Mt. Ephraim, which would
imply a Samaritan authorship, and Lubar, on Ararat, which would connect
well with the history of Noah.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[55:5](jub17.htm#fr_177) Cf. i. 29.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[55:6](jub17.htm#fr_178) Cf. Gen. v. 25.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[55:7](jub17.htm#fr_179) Cf. Gen. v. 29.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[55:8](jub17.htm#fr_180) Cf. iii. 32.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[55:9](jub17.htm#fr_181) This implies the view
that Abel's body was not buried before Adam's. According to *Pirḳe de R.
Eliezer* (xxi.), Adam was at first uncertain what to do, but then buried
Abel's corpse.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[56:1](jub17.htm#fr_182) Cf. Gen. ii. 14.
Notice that "day" here is interpreted as = 1000 years--a belief early
current among Jews and Christians (cf. *Ber. rabba* xix. on Gen. iii.
8), 2 Pet. iii. 8. Justin Martyr, *Trypho.* lxxxi; cf. also *Pirḳe de R.
Eliezer* xviii.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[56:2](jub17.htm#fr_183) The *lex talionis*;
cf. Exod. xxi. 24 ("eye for eye, tooth for tooth"); Lev. xxiv. 19.
Similar examples are given in 2 Macc. v. 19 f., xv. 32 f. The rigorous
application of this "law" was upheld by the Sadducees, as against the
Pharisees.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[56:3](jub17.htm#fr_184) Cf. Gen. V. 22. Note
that Shem is represented as the eldest; cf. Gen. x. 21 (R.V.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fall of the Angels and their Punishment; the Deluge foretold
(v. 1-20)](jub18)
