[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub13) 
[Next](jub15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Angel dictates to Moses the Primæval History: the Creation of the World and Institution of the Sabbath (ii. 1-33; cf. Gen. i.-ii. 3).

II\. And the angel of the presence spake to Moses according to the word
of the Lord, saying: Write the complete history of the creation, how in
six days the Lord God finished all His works and all that He created,
and kept Sabbath on the seventh day and hallowed it for all ages, and
appointed it as a sign

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

for all His works. 2. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) For on the
first day He created the heavens which are above and the earth and the
waters and all the spirits which serve before Him--the angels <span
id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85) of the presence, and the angels of
sanctification, <span id="fr_86"></span>[3](#fn_86) and the angels \[of
the spirit of fire and the angels\] of the spirit of the winds, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[4](#fn_87) and the angels of the spirit of the
clouds, and of darkness, and of snow and of hail and of hoar
frost, <span id="fr_88"></span>[5](#fn_88) and the angels of the
voices <span id="fr_89"></span>[6](#fn_89) and of the thunder and of the
lightning, <span id="fr_90"></span>[7](#fn_90) and the angels of the
spirits of cold and of heat, and of winter and of spring and of autumn
and of summer, <span id="fr_91"></span>[8](#fn_91) and of all the
spirits of His creatures which are in the heavens and on the earth, (He
created) the abysses and the darkness, eventide (and night), and the
light, dawn and day, which He hath prepared in the knowledge of His
heart. 3. And thereupon we saw His works, and praised Him, and lauded
before Him on account of all His works; for seven great works did He
create on the first day. 4. And on the second

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

day <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) He created the firmament in the
midst of the waters, and the waters were divided on that day--half of
them went up above and half of them went down below the firmament (that
was) in the midst over the face of the whole earth. And this was the
only work (God) created on the second day. 5. And on the third day <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93) He commanded the waters to pass from off
the face of the whole earth into one place, and the dry land to appear.
6. And the waters did so as He commanded them, and they retired from off
the face of the earth into one place outside of this firmament, and the
dry land appeared. 7. And on that day He created for them all the seas
according to their separate gathering-places, and all the rivers, and
the gatherings of the waters in the mountains and on all the earth, and
all the lakes, and all the dew of the earth, and the seed which is sown,
and all sprouting things, and fruit-bearing trees, and trees of the
wood, and the garden of Eden, in Eden, and all (plants after their
kind). These four great works God created on the third day. 8. And on
the fourth day <span id="fr_94"></span>[3](#fn_94) He created the sun
and the moon and the stars, and set them in the firmament of the heaven,
to give light upon all the earth, and to rule over the day and the
night, and divide the light from the darkness. 9. And God appointed the
sun <span id="fr_95"></span>[4](#fn_95) to be a great sign on the earth
for days and for sabbaths and for months and for feasts and for years
and for sabbaths of years and for jubilees and for all seasons of the
years. 10. And it divideth the light from the darkness \[and\] for

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

prosperity, that all things may prosper which shoot and grow on the
earth. These three kinds He made on the fourth day. 11. And on the fifth
day <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) He created great sea monsters in
the depths of the waters, for these were the first things of flesh that
were created by His hands, the fish and everything that moves in the
waters, and everything that flies, the birds and all their kind. 12. And
the sun rose above them to prosper (them), and above everything that was
on the earth, everything that shoots out of the earth, and all
fruit-bearing trees, and all flesh. These three kinds He created on the
fifth day. 13. And on the sixth day <span id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97)
He created all the animals of the earth, and all cattle, and everything
that moves on the earth. 14. And after all this He created man, a man
and a woman created He them, and gave him dominion over all that is upon
the earth, and in the seas, and over everything that flies, and over
beasts and over cattle, and over everything that moves on the earth, and
over the whole earth, and over all this He gave him dominion. And these
four kinds He created on the sixth day. 15. And there were altogether
two and twenty kinds. <span id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98) 16. And He
finished all His work on the sixth <span id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_99)
day--all that is in the heavens and on the earth, and in the seas and in
the abysses, and in the light and in the darkness, and in everything.
17. And He gave us a great sign, the Sabbath day, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[5](#fn_100) that we should work six days, but keep
Sabbath on the seventh day from all work. 18. And all the angels of the
presence, and all the angels of sanctification, these two great
classes--He hath hidden us

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

to keep the Sabbath with Him <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) in
heaven and on earth. 19. And He said unto us: "Behold, I will separate
unto Myself <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102) a people from among
all the peoples, and these will keep the Sabbath day, and I will
sanctify them unto Myself as My people, and will bless them; as I have
sanctified the Sabbath day and do sanctify (it) unto Myself, even so
shall I bless them, and they will be My people and I shall be their God.
20 . And I have chosen the seed of Jacob <span
id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103) from amongst all that I have seen, and
have written him down as My firstborn son, <span
id="fr_104"></span>[4](#fn_104) and have sanctified him unto Myself for
ever and ever; and I will teach them the Sabbath day, that they may keep
Sabbath thereon from all work." 21. And thus He created therein a
sign <span id="fr_105"></span>[5](#fn_105) in accordance with which they
should keep Sabbath with us <span id="fr_106"></span>[6](#fn_106) on the
seventh day, to eat and to drink, and to bless Him <span
id="fr_107"></span>[7](#fn_107) who hath created all things as He hath
blessed and sanctified unto Himself a peculiar people <span
id="fr_108"></span>[8](#fn_108) above all peoples, and that they should
keep Sabbath together with us. 22. And He caused His commands to ascend
as a sweet savour <span id="fr_109"></span>[9](#fn_109) acceptable
before Him all the days. . . . 23. There (were) two and twenty heads of
mankind from Adam to Jacob, and two and twenty kinds of work were
made <span id="fr_110"></span>[10](#fn_110) until

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the seventh day; this <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111) is blessed
and holy; and the former <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112) also is
blessed and holy; and this one serves with that one for sanctification
and blessing. 24. And to this (Jacob and his seed) it was granted that
they should always be the blessed and holy ones of the first testimony
and law, even as He had sanctified and blessed the Sabbath day on the
seventh day. 25. He created heaven and earth and everything that He
created in six days, and God made the seventh day holy, for all His
works; therefore He commanded on its behalf that, whoever doth any work
thereon shall die, <span id="fr_113"></span>[3](#fn_113) and that he who
defileth it shall surely die. 26. Wherefore do thou command the children
of Israel to observe this day that they may keep it holy <span
id="fr_114"></span>[4](#fn_114) and not do thereon any work, and not to
defile it, as it is holier than all other days. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[5](#fn_115) 27. And whoever profaneth it shall
surely die, and whoever doeth thereon any work shall surely die
eternally, that the children of Israel may observe this day throughout
their generations, and not be rooted out of the land; for it is a holy
day and a blessed day. 28. And every one who observeth it and keepeth
Sabbath thereon from all his work, will be holy and blessed throughout
all days like unto us. 29. Declare and say to the children of Israel the
law of this day both that they should keep Sabbath thereon, and that
they should not forsake it in the error of their hearts; (and) that it
is not lawful to do any work thereon which is unseemly, to do thereon
their own pleasure, <span id="fr_116"></span>[6](#fn_116) and that they
should not prepare thereon anything to be eaten or drunk. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[7](#fn_117) †and (that it is not lawful) to draw
water, or bring in or take out thereon through their gates any
burden,† <span id="fr_118"></span>[8](#fn_118) which they had not

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

prepared for themselves on the sixth day <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) in their dwellings. 30. And they shall
not bring in nor take out from house to house <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120) on that day; for that day is more holy
and blessed than any jubilee day of the jubilees: on this we kept
Sabbath in the heavens before it was made known to any flesh to keep
Sabbath thereon on the earth. 31. And the Creator of all things blessed
it, <span id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_121) but He did not sanctify all
peoples and nations to keep Sabbath thereon, but Israel alone: them
alone He permitted to eat and drink and to keep Sabbath thereon on the
earth. 32. And the Creator of all things blessed this day which He had
created for a blessing and a sanctification and a glory above all days.
33. This law and testimony was given to the children of Israel as a law
for ever unto their generations. <span id="fr_122"></span>[4](#fn_122)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[41:1](jub14.htm#fr_84) 2-3 record the creations
of the first day, seven in number, viz. heaven, earth, the waters,
spirits, the abysses, darkness, light. According to *Pirḳe de R.
Eliezer* iii., "eight things were created on the first day: namely,
heaven, earth, the light, darkness, Tohu (chaos), Bohu (void), wind (or
spirit), water." Perhaps *Tohu* and *Bohu* here = *abysses*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[41:2](jub14.htm#fr_85) According to our Book
the angels were created on the first day, and this probably represents
the view of earlier Judaism. This was opposed by later Judaism, which
objected to the idea that angels assisted in the work of creation on the
days following the first. *Pirḳe de R. Eliezer* placed the creation of
angels in the *second* day; some Rabbis on the *fifth* (cf. *Gen. rabb.*
i. 5).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[41:3](jub14.htm#fr_86) Cf. ii. 18, xv. 27,
xxxi. 14. These are the two chief orders of angels. The "angels of
sanctification" sing praises to God.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[41:4](jub14.htm#fr_87) The various classes of
angels that follow constitute the third or lowest order. They preside
over the elements and natural phenomena; cf. 1 Enoch lx. 12-21, lxxv.,
lxxx.; 2 Enoch xix. 1-4, For the "angels of the winds," cf. Rev. vii. 1
f.; 1 Enoch xviii. 1-5, xxxiv.-xxxvi., lxxvi.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[41:5](jub14.htm#fr_88) Cf. x Enoch lx. 17-18.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[41:6](jub14.htm#fr_89) Cf. Rev. iv. .5, xi. 19,
xvi. 18.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[41:7](jub14.htm#fr_90) Cf. 1 Enoch IX. 13-15.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[41:8](jub14.htm#fr_91) Cf. 1 Enoch lxxxii.
13-20.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[42:1](jub14.htm#fr_92) Cf. Gen. i. 6-7; 2,
Enoch xxvi.-xxvii. According to *Pirḳe de R. Eliezer* iv. the following
were created on the second day: the firmament, angels, fire for flesh
and blood, and the fire of Gehinnom.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[42:2](jub14.htm#fr_93) Cf. Gen. i. 9-13 (dry
land, seas, herbage, fruit trees = 3 works). Our Book adds a fourth, the
Garden of Eden (so also the Midrash *Bereshith rabb.* xv.; 2 Enoch xxx.
i). Another view was that Paradise (? the Heavenly Paradise) was created
before the world; cf. 4 Ezra iii. 6 (note).

<span id="fn_94"></span>[42:3](jub14.htm#fr_94) Cf. Gen. i. 14-19; 2
Enoch xxx. 2-6.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[42:4](jub14.htm#fr_95) Note the intentional
omission of the moon. The writer objected to a calendar based upon the
changes of the moon.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[43:1](jub14.htm#fr_96) Cf. Gen. i. 20-23; 2
Enoch xxx. 7; 4 Ezra vi. 47 ff. According to our Book the three works of
the fifth day were the great sea-monsters, fish and birds; according to
*Pirḳe de R. Eliezer* ix. birds, fish and locusts.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[43:2](jub14.htm#fr_97) Cf. Gen. i. 24-28; 2
Enoch xxx. 8 f.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[43:3](jub14.htm#fr_98) Cf. ii. 23 (below).

<span id="fn_99"></span>[43:4](jub14.htm#fr_99) This is possibly the
right reading of Gen. ii. 2*a* (so Sam. text, LXX, Syr.). It implies a
severer view of Sabbath observance. The Masoretic text has "seventh."

<span id="fn_100"></span>[43:5](jub14.htm#fr_100) Cf. Exod. xxxi. 13.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[44:1](jub14.htm#fr_101) The two chief orders
of angels observe the Sabbath with God (and Israel). The third order and
the Gentiles are denied this privilege.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[44:2](jub14.htm#fr_102) Cf. 1 Kings viii. 53.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[44:3](jub14.htm#fr_103) Cf. Isa. xli. 8 ("
Jacob whom I have chosen "), xliv. 1, 2.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[44:4](jub14.htm#fr_104) Cf. Exod. iv. 22; Ps.
lxxxix. 27.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[44:5](jub14.htm#fr_105) For the Sabbath day as
a sign between God and Israel, cf. Exod. xxxi. 13, 17; Ezek. xx. 12.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[44:6](jub14.htm#fr_106) *i. e.* with God and
the superior angels.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[44:7](jub14.htm#fr_107) The Sabbath is to be a
delight.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[44:8](jub14.htm#fr_108) Cf. Deut. vii. 6.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[44:9](jub14.htm#fr_109) Cf. 2 Cor. ii. 15;
Eph. v. 2.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[44:10](jub14.htm#fr_110) It is probable that
at end of 22 above there is a lacuna in the text (indicated by the
dotted line). Charles restores the missing words as follows: *As there
were two and twenty letters, and two and twenty (sacred) books* \[viz.
in the Old Testament\], *and two and twenty heads of mankind from Adam
to Jacob, so there were made two and twenty kinds of work*, etc.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[45:1](jub14.htm#fr_111) viz. the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[45:2](jub14.htm#fr_112) viz. Jacob.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[45:3](jub14.htm#fr_113) Cf. Exod. xxxi. 14,
15, xxxv. 2; Num. xv. 32 f.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[45:4](jub14.htm#fr_114) Cf. Exod. xx. 8.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[45:5](jub14.htm#fr_115) Cf. ii. 30.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[45:6](jub14.htm#fr_116) Cf. Isa. lviii. 13.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[45:7](jub14.htm#fr_117) Deduced from Exod.
xvi. 23, 25.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[45:8](jub14.htm#fr_118) The obelized words
should either be omitted or read *after their own pleasure* above. For
the law about "bringing in or taking out . . . any burden" on the
Sabbath, cf. ii. 30, l. 8; Jer. xvii. 21 f.; Neh. xiii. 19; John v. 10.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[46:1](jub14.htm#fr_119) This is in accordance
with Rabbinic law which forbids anything being eaten on the Sabbath
unless it had been prepared beforehand for that purpose on a week-day.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[46:2](jub14.htm#fr_120) This was relaxed later
by the Rabbinic law of *erub*, which was based on Exod. xvi. 29. See
*JE.* v. 203 f. (s.v. Erub).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[46:3](jub14.htm#fr_121) *i.e.* Israel.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[46:4](jub14.htm#fr_122) Cf. Exod. xxvii, 21,
etc., for the phrase.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paradise and the Fall (iii. 1-35)](jub15)
