[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub34) 
[Next](jub36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Feast of First-fruits Circumcision instituted. The Promise of Isaac's Birth. Circumcision ordained for all Israel (xv. 1-34; cf. Gen. xvii.).

XV\. And in the fifth year of the †fourth† <span
id="fr_442"></span>[1](#fn_442) week of this jubilee, in the third
month, in the middle of the month, <span id="fr_443"></span>[2](#fn_443)
Abram celebrated the feast of the first-fruits <span
id="fr_444"></span>[3](#fn_444) of the grain harvest. 2. And he offered
new offerings on the altar, the first-fruits of the produce, unto the
Lord, an heifer and a goat and a sheep on the altar as a burnt sacrifice
unto the Lord; their fruit-offerings and their drink-offerings he
offered upon the altar with frankincense. <span
id="fr_445"></span>[4](#fn_445) 3. And the Lord appeared to Abram, and
said unto him: "I am God Almighty; approve thyself before Me and be thou
perfect. 4. And I will make My covenant between

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Me and thee, and I will multiply thee
exceedingly." <span id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_446) 5. <span
id="fr_447"></span>[2](#fn_447) And Abram fell on his face, and God
talked with him, and said:

6\. "Behold My ordinance is with thee,  
And thou wilt be the father of many nations.

7\. Neither will thy name any more be called Abram,  
But thy name from henceforth, even for ever, shall be Abraham.  
For the father of many nations have I made thee.

8\. And I shall make thee very great,  
And I shall make thee into nations,  
And kings will come forth from thee.

\[paragraph continues\] 9. And I shall establish My covenant between Me
and thee, and thy seed after thee, throughout their generations, for an
eternal covenant, so that I may be a God unto thee, and to thy seed
after thee. 10. (And I shall give to thee and to thy seed after
thee) <span id="fr_448"></span>[3](#fn_448) the land where thou hast
been a sojourner, the land of Canaan, that thou mayst possess it for
ever, and I shall be their God." 11. <span
id="fr_449"></span>[4](#fn_449) And the Lord said unto Abraham: "And as
for thee, do thou keep My Covenant, thou and thy seed after thee, and
circumcise ye every male among you, and circumcise your foreskins, and
it will be a token of an eternal covenant between Me and you. 12. And
the child on the eighth day <span id="fr_450"></span>[5](#fn_450) ye
will circumcise, every male throughout your generations, him that is
born in the house, or whom ye have bought with money from any stranger,
whom ye have acquired who is not of thy seed. 13. He that is born in thy
house will surely be circumcised, and those whom thou hast bought with
money will be circumcised, and My covenant will be in your

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

flesh for an eternal ordinance. 14. <span
id="fr_451"></span>[1](#fn_451) And the uncircumcised male who is not
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin on the eighth day, <span
id="fr_452"></span>[2](#fn_452) that soul will be cut off from his
people, for he hath broken My covenant." 15. <span
id="fr_453"></span>[3](#fn_453) And God said unto Abraham: "As for Sarai
thy wife, her name will no more be called Sarai, but Sarah will be her
name. 16. And I shall bless her, and give thee a son by her, and I shall
bless him, <span id="fr_454"></span>[4](#fn_454) and he will become a
nation, and kings of nations will proceed from him." 17. And Abraham
fell on his face, and rejoiced, and said in his heart: "Shall a son be
born to him that is a hundred years old, and shall Sarah, who is ninety
years old, bring forth?" 18. And Abraham said unto God: "O that Ishmael
might live before thee!" 19. And God said: "Yea, and Sarah also will
bear thee a son, and thou wilt call his name Isaac, and I shall
establish My covenant with him, an everlasting covenant, and for his
seed after him. 20. And as for Ishmael also have I heard thee, and
behold I shall bless him, and make him great, and multiply him
exceedingly, and he will beget twelve princes, and I shall make him a
great nation. 21. But My covenant shall I establish with Isaac, whom
Sarah will bear to thee, in these days, in the next year." 22. And He
left off speaking with him, and God went up from Abraham. 23. <span
id="fr_455"></span>[5](#fn_455) And Abraham did according as God had
said unto him, and he took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in
his house, and whom he had bought with his money, every male in his
house, and circumcised the flesh of their

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

foreskin. 24. And on the selfsame day <span
id="fr_456"></span>[1](#fn_456) was Abraham circumcised, and all the men
of his house, (and those born in the house), and all those, whom he had
bought with money from the children of the stranger, were circumcised
with him. 25. This law is for all the generations for ever, and there is
no circumcision of the days, <span id="fr_457"></span>[2](#fn_457) and
no omission of one day out of the eight days; <span
id="fr_458"></span>[3](#fn_458) for it is an eternal ordinance, ordained
and written on the heavenly tables. 26. And every one that is born, the
flesh of whose foreskin is not circumcised on <span
id="fr_459"></span>[4](#fn_459) the eighth day, belongeth not to the
children of the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham, but to the
children of destruction; nor is there, moreover, any sign on him that he
is the Lord's, but (he is destined) to be destroyed and slain from the
earth, and to be rooted out of the earth, for he hath broken the
covenant of the Lord our God. 27. For all the angels of the presence and
all the angels of sanctification <span id="fr_460"></span>[5](#fn_460)
have been so created <span id="fr_461"></span>[6](#fn_461) from the day
of their creation, and before the angels of the presence and the angels
of sanctification He hath sanctified Israel, that they should be with
Him and with His holy angels. 28. And do thou command the children of
Israel and let them observe the sign of this covenant for their
generations as an eternal ordinance, and they will not be rooted out of
the land. 29. For the command is ordained for a covenant, that they
should observe it for ever among all the children of Israel. 30. For
Ishmael and his sons and his brothers and Esau, the Lord did not cause
to approach Him, and he chose them not because they are the children of
Abraham, because He knew them, but He chose Israel to be His people. 31.
And He

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

sanctified it, and gathered it from amongst all the children of
men <span id="fr_462"></span>[1](#fn_462); for there are many nations
and many peoples, and all are His, and over all hath He placed spirits
in authority to lead them astray <span id="fr_463"></span>[2](#fn_463)
from Him. 32. But over Israel He did not appoint any angel or spirit,
for He alone is their ruler, and He will preserve them and require them
at the hand of His angels and His spirits, and at the hand of all His
powers in order that He may preserve them and bless them, and that they
may be His and He may be theirs from henceforth for ever. 33. And now I
announce unto thee that the children of Israel will not keep true to
this ordinance, and they will not circumcise their sons according to all
this law; for in the flesh of their circumcision they will omit this
circumcision of their sons, and all of them, sons of Beliar, <span
id="fr_464"></span>[3](#fn_464) will leave their sons uncircumcised as
they were born. <span id="fr_465"></span>[4](#fn_465) 34. And there will
be great wrath from the Lord against the children of Israel, because
they have forsaken His covenant and turned aside from His word, and
provoked and blasphemed, inasmuch as they do not observe the ordinance
of this law; for they have treated their members like the Gentiles, so
that they may be removed and rooted out of the land. And there will no
more be pardon or forgiveness unto them \[so that there should be
forgiveness and pardon\] for all the sin of this eternal error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_442"></span>[98:1](jub35.htm#fr_442) Read "third."

<span id="fn_443"></span>[98:2](jub35.htm#fr_443) *i. e.* the 15th of
Sivan.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[98:3](jub35.htm#fr_444) *i. e.* the Feast of
Weeks. The Pharisees celebrated this feast not on Sivan 15th, but on
Sivan 6th. See further Introduction.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[98:4](jub35.htm#fr_445) Cf. xiv. 9. The
offerings prescribed for this festival in Lev. xxiii. 118-20 are
different.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[99:1](jub35.htm#fr_446) For 3-4 cf. Gen. xvii.
1 f.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[99:2](jub35.htm#fr_447) For 5-10 cf. Gen.
xvii. 3-8.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[99:3](jub35.htm#fr_448) The bracketed words
(lost through homoioteleuton) are restored from Gen. xvii. 8.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[99:4](jub35.htm#fr_449) For 11-13 cf. Gen.
xvii. 9-13.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[99:5](jub35.htm#fr_450) MT has "and the child
of eight days." Our text here may be a deliberate alteration.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[100:1](jub35.htm#fr_451) For 14 cf. Gen. xvii.
14.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[100:2](jub35.htm#fr_452) The words *on the
eighth day* are absent from the text of Gen. xvii. 14, in MT, Syr. and
Vulg., but are attested by the LXX and Sam. The strict rule about the
eighth day was later relaxed among the Jews, but is still practised by
the Samaritans.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[100:3](jub35.htm#fr_453) For 15-22 cf. Gen.
xvii. 15-22.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[100:4](jub35.htm#fr_454) So LXX, Sam., Syr.
and Vulg. of Gen. xvii. 22. But MT makes the text refer to Sarah ("yea,
I will bless her, \[and she shall be a mother of nations: kings of
peoples shall be of her\]," R.V.).

<span id="fn_455"></span>[100:5](jub35.htm#fr_455) For 23-24 cf. Gen.
xvii. 23-27.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[101:1](jub35.htm#fr_456) *i. e.* the 15th of
Sivan.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[101:2](jub35.htm#fr_457) *i. e.*? of the days
preceding the eighth day.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[101:3](jub35.htm#fr_458) Only on the eighth
day is the rite to be performed.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[101:4](jub35.htm#fr_459) Ethiop. MSS. and Lat.
have "till."

<span id="fn_460"></span>[101:5](jub35.htm#fr_460) The two highest
orders of angels, who share with Israel the privilege of observing the
Sabbath (cf. ii. 18-21), and of being circumcised.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[101:6](jub35.htm#fr_461) *i. e.* have been
created circumcised.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[102:1](jub35.htm#fr_462) Israel is God's
portion; cf. Deut. xxxii. 8-9 in the LXX form of which "angels" is read
instead of "children of Israel"; cf. also Ecclus. xvii. 17. The "seventy
nations of the earth were placed under the dominion of seventy angels";
but in Dan. x. 13, 20, 21, xii. 1, Michael is referred to as Israel's
angel-prince.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[102:2](jub35.htm#fr_463) This describes the
result, not the original purpose of their appointment.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[102:3](jub35.htm#fr_464) In i. 20 (see note).
Beliar is clearly a Satanic being. This meaning may possibly be present
in the use of the expression here. "Sons of Belial" is common in the
O.T. (cf. *e.g.* 1 Sam. ii. 12).

<span id="fn_465"></span>[102:4](jub35.htm#fr_465) Apparently such
apostasy was widely spread when our author wrote.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Angelic Visitation of Abraham in Hebron; Promise of Isaac's Birth
repeated. The Destruction of Sodom and Lot's Deliverance (xvi.
1-9)](jub36)
