[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub85) 
[Next](jub87) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Regulations regarding the Passover (xlix. 1-23; cf. Exod. xii.).

XLIX\. Remember the commandment which the Lord commanded thee concerning
the passover, that thou shouldst celebrate it in its season on the
fourteenth of the first month, that thou shouldst kill it before it is
evening, and that they should eat it by night on the evening <span
id="fr_916"></span>[4](#fn_908) of the fifteenth from the time of the
setting of the sun. 2. For on this night--the beginning of the festival
and the beginning of the joy--ye were eating the passover in Egypt, when
all the powers of Mastêmâ <span id="fr_917"></span>[5](#fn_909) had been
let loose to slay all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh to the first-born of the captive

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

maidservant in the mill, and to the cattle. 3. And this is the sign
which the Lord gave them: Into every house on the lintels of which they
saw the blood of a lamb of the first year, into (that) house they should
not enter to slay, but should pass by (it), that all those should be
saved that were in the house because the sign of the blood was on its
lintels. 4. And the powers of the Lord did everything according as the
Lord commanded them, and they passed by all the children of Israel, and
the plague came not upon them to destroy from amongst them any soul
either of cattle, or man, or dog. 5. And the plague was very grievous in
Egypt, and there was no house in Egypt where there was not one dead, and
weeping and lamentation. 6. And all Israel was eating the flesh of the
paschal lamb, and drinking the wine, <span
id="fr_918"></span>[1](#fn_910) and was lauding and blessing, and giving
thanks to the Lord God of their fathers, and was ready to go forth from
under the yoke of Egypt; and from the evil bondage. 7. And remember thou
this day all the days of thy life, and observe it from year to year all
the days of thy life, once a year, on its day, according to all the law
thereof, and do not adjourn (it) from day to day, or from month to
month. 8. For it is an eternal ordinance, and engraven on the heavenly
tables regarding all the children of Israel that they should observe it
every year on its day once a year, throughout all their
generations; <span id="fr_919"></span>[2](#fn_911) and there is no limit
of days, for this is ordained for ever. 9. And the man who is free from
uncleanness, and doth not come to observe it on occasion of its day, so
as to bring an acceptable offering before the Lord, and to eat and to
drink before the Lord on the day of its festival, that man who is clean
and close at hand will be cut off; because he offered not the oblation
of the Lord in its appointed season, he will

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

take the guilt upon himself. <span id="fr_920"></span>[1](#fn_912) 10.
Let the children of Israel come and observe the passover on the day of
its fixed time, on the fourteenth day of the first month, between the
evenings, from the third part of the day to the third part of the night,
for two portions of the day are given to the light, and a third part to
the evening. <span id="fr_921"></span>[2](#fn_913) 11. That is that
which the Lord commanded thee that thou shouldst observe it between the
evenings. 12. And it is not permissible to slay it during any period of
the light, but during the period bordering on the evening, <span
id="fr_922"></span>[3](#fn_914) and let them eat it at the time of the
evening until the third part of the night, <span
id="fr_923"></span>[4](#fn_915) and whatever is leftover of all its
flesh from the third part of the night and onwards, let them burn it
with fire. 13. And they shall not cook it with water, nor shall they eat
it raw, but roast on the fire: <span id="fr_924"></span>[5](#fn_916)
they shall eat it with diligence, <span id="fr_925"></span>[6](#fn_917)
its head with the inwards thereof <span id="fr_926"></span>[7](#fn_918)
and its feet they shall roast with fire, and not break any bone
thereof; <span id="fr_927"></span>[8](#fn_919) for †of the children of
Israel no bone shall be crushed†. <span id="fr_928"></span>[9](#fn_920)
14. For this reason the Lord commanded the children of Israel to observe
the passover on the day of its fixed time, and they shall not break a
bone thereof; for it is a festival day, and a day commanded, and

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

there may be no passing over from day to day, and month to month, but on
the day of its festival let it be observed. 15. And do thou command the
children of Israel to observe the passover throughout their days, every
year, once a year on the day of its fixed time, and it will come for a
memorial well pleasing before the Lord, and no plague will come upon
them to slay or to smite <span id="fr_929"></span>[1](#fn_921) in that
year in which they celebrate the passover in its season in every respect
according to His command. 16. And they shall not eat it outside the
sanctuary <span id="fr_930"></span>[2](#fn_922) of the Lord, but before
the sanctuary of the Lord, and all the people of the congregation of
Israel shall celebrate it in its appointed season. 17. And every man who
hath come upon its day shall eat it in the sanctuary of your God before
the Lord from twenty years old <span id="fr_931"></span>[3](#fn_923) and
upward; for thus is it written and ordained that they should eat it in
the sanctuary of the Lord. 18. And when the children of Israel come into
the land which they are to possess, into the land of Canaan, and set up
the tabernacle of the Lord in the midst of the land in one of their
tribes until the sanctuary of the Lord hath been built in the land, let
them come and celebrate the passover in the midst of the tabernacle of
the Lord, and let them slay it before the Lord from year to year. 19.
And in the days when the house hath been built in the name of the Lord
in the land of their inheritance, they shall go there and slay the
passover in the evening, at sunset, at the third part of the day. 20.
And they will offer its blood on the threshold of the altar, and shall
place its fat on the fire which is upon the altar, and they shall eat
its flesh roasted with fire in the court of the house <span
id="fr_932"></span>[4](#fn_924) which hath been sanctified in

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the name of the Lord. 21. And they may not celebrate the passover in
their cities, <span id="fr_933"></span>[1](jub87.htm#fn_925) nor in any
place save before the tabernacle of the Lord, or before His house where
His name hath dwelt; and they will not go astray from the Lord. 22. And
do thou, Moses, command the children of Israel to observe the ordinances
of the passover, as it was commanded unto thee; declare thou unto them
every year †and the day of its days, and† <span
id="fr_934"></span>[2](jub87.htm#fn_926) the festival of unleavened
bread, that they should eat unleavened bread seven days, (and) that they
should observe its festival, and that they bring an oblation every day
during those seven days of joy before the Lord on the altar of your God.
23. For ye celebrated this festival with haste <span
id="fr_935"></span>[3](jub87.htm#fn_927) when ye went forth from Egypt
till ye entered into the wilderness of Shur; <span
id="fr_936"></span>[4](jub87.htm#fn_928) for on the shore of the sea ye
completed it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_908"></span>[207:4](jub86.htm#fr_916) Cf. Exod. xii. 6.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[207:5](jub86.htm#fr_917) In Exod. xii. 29 it
is Jahveh Himself who smites all the first-born.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[208:1](jub86.htm#fr_918) The use of wine at
the Passover feast is attested here for the first time. For the later
prescriptions about the four cups of wine drunk at the feast see Mishna,
*Pesaḥim* x.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[208:2](jub86.htm#fr_919) For 7-8 cf. vi. 20,
22.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[209:1](jub86.htm#fr_920) Cf. Num. ix. 13.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[209:2](jub86.htm#fr_921) The Jews divided the
night into three parts, or watches (6-10 p.m., 10 P.M.-2 a.m., 2-6
a.m.). The corresponding parts of the day would be 6-10 a.m., 10 a.m.-2
p.m., and 2 p.m.-6 p.m. Our text says the last of these was "given" to
the evening.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[209:3](jub86.htm#fr_922) This is an
interpretation of the Biblical phrase "between the two evenings" (Exod.
xii. 6; cf. R.V. marg.). This was interpreted by the Sadducees and
Samaritans to mean between sunset and complete darkness (and may
possibly have that meaning here), but by the Pharisees it was understood
to refer to the earlier afternoon (3-6).

<span id="fn_915"></span>[209:4](jub86.htm#fr_923) *i. e.* any time
between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. The Rabbis limited the eating to midnight.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[209:5](jub86.htm#fr_924) Cf. Exod. xii. 9.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[209:6](jub86.htm#fr_925) Cf. LXX (σπουδαίωσ):
Heb. (Exod. xii. ii), "in haste."

<span id="fn_918"></span>[209:7](jub86.htm#fr_926) Cf. Exod. xii. 9.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[209:8](jub86.htm#fr_927) Cf. Exod. xii. 46.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[209:9](jub86.htm#fr_928) The Latin, which is
to be preferred, reads: "There shall be no tribulation among the sons of
Israel on this day."

<span id="fn_921"></span>[210:1](jub86.htm#fr_929) Cf. Exod. xii. 13.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[210:2](jub86.htm#fr_930) Cf. 20 below.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[210:3](jub86.htm#fr_931) *i. e.* the age when
maturity is first attained; cf. Exod. xxx. 14; Num. i. 32.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[210:4](jub86.htm#fr_932) Cf. Deut. xvi. 7. In
later times the Passover lamb was slaughtered in the Temple, but eaten
at home, *i. e.* in a house in Jerusalem. The vast numbers of pilgrims
present necessitated this extension (cf. Josephus, *War*, vi. 9,3. ii.
14, 3).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Laws regarding the Jubilees and the Sabbath (l. 1-13)](jub87)
