[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub84) 
[Next](jub86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

### From the Flight of Moses to the Exodus (xlviii. 1-19; cf. Exod. ii. 15 ff., iv. 19-24, vii-xiv.).

XLVIII\. And in the sixth year of the third week

|           |
|-----------|
| 2372 A.M. |

of the forty-ninth jubilee thou didst depart and dwell in the land of
Midian <span id="fr_904"></span>[1](#fn_896) five weeks and one year.
And thou didst return into Egypt <span id="fr_905"></span>[2](#fn_897)
in the second week in the second year in the fiftieth jubilee. 2.

|           |
|-----------|
| 2410 A.M. |

And thou thyself knowest what He spake unto thee on Mount Sinai, and
what prince Mastêmâ <span id="fr_906"></span>[3](#fn_898) desired to do
with thee when thou wast returning into Egypt on the way when thou didst
meet him at the lodging-place. 3. Did he not with all his power seek to
slay thee and deliver the Egyptians out of thy hand when he saw that
thou wast sent to execute judgment and vengeance on the Egyptians? <span
id="fr_907"></span>[4](#fn_899) 4. And I delivered thee out of his hand,
and thou didst perform the signs and wonders which thou wast sent to
perform in Egypt against Pharaoh, and against all his house, and against
his servants and his people. 5. And the Lord executed a great vengeance
on them for Israel's sake, and smote them through (the plagues of) blood
and frogs, lice and dog-flies, and malignant boils breaking forth in
blains; and their cattle by death; and by hail-stones, thereby He
destroyed everything that grew for them; and by locusts which devoured
the residue which had been left by the hail, and by darkness; and (by
the death) of the first-born of men and animals, and on all their idols
the Lord took vengeance and burned them with fire. <span
id="fr_908"></span>[5](#fn_900) 6. And everything was sent through thy
hand,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

that thou shouldst declare (these things) before they were done, and
thou didst speak with the king of Egypt before all his servants and
before his people. 7. And everything took place according to thy words;
ten great and terrible judgments came on the land of Egypt that thou
mightest execute vengeance on it for Israel. 8. And the Lord did
everything for Israel's sake, and according to His covenant, which He
had ordained with Abraham that He would take vengeance on them as they
had brought them by force into bondage. <span
id="fr_909"></span>[1](#fn_901) 9. And the prince of the Mastêmâ stood
up against thee, and sought to cast thee into the hands of Pharaoh, and
he helped the Egyptian sorcerers, and they stood up and wrought before
thee. 10. The evils indeed we permitted them to work, but the remedies
we did not allow to be wrought by their hands. 11. And the Lord smote
them with malignant ulcers, and they were not able to stand <span
id="fr_910"></span>[2](#fn_902) for we destroyed them so that they could
not perform a single sign. 12. And notwithstanding all (these) signs and
wonders the prince of the Mastêmâ was not put to shame because he took
courage and cried to the Egyptians to pursue after thee with all the
powers of the Egyptians, with their chariots, and with their horses, and
with all the hosts of the peoples of Egypt. <span
id="fr_911"></span>[3](#fn_903) 13. And I stood between the Egyptians
and Israel, and we delivered Israel out of his hand, and out of the hand
of his people, and the Lord brought them through the midst of the sea as
if it were dry land. 14. And all the peoples whom he brought to pursue
after Israel, the Lord our God cast them into the midst of the sea, into
the depths of the abyss beneath the children of Israel, even as the
people of Egypt had cast their children into the river. <span
id="fr_912"></span>[4](#fn_904) He took vengeance on 1,000,000 of them,
and one thousand strong and energetic men were

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

destroyed on account of one suckling of the children of thy people which
they had thrown into the river. <span id="fr_913"></span>[1](#fn_905)
15. And on the fourteenth day and on the fifteenth and on the sixteenth
and on the seventeenth and on the eighteenth the prince of the Mastêmâ
was bound and imprisoned behind the children of Israel that he might not
accuse them. 16. And on the nineteenth we let them loose that they might
help the Egyptians and pursue the children of Israel. 17. And he <span
id="fr_914"></span>[2](#fn_906) hardened their hearts and made them
stubborn, and the device was devised by the Lord our God that He might
smite the Egyptians and cast them into the sea. 18. And on the
fourteenth we bound him that he might not accuse the children of Israel
on the day when they asked the Egyptians for vessels and garments,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of bronze, in order
to despoil the Egyptians <span id="fr_915"></span>[3](#fn_907) in return
for the bondage in which they had forced them to serve. 19. And we did
not lead forth the children of Israel from Egypt empty handed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_896"></span>[205:1](jub85.htm#fr_904) Cf. Exod. ii. 15.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[205:2](jub85.htm#fr_905) Cf. Exod. iv. 19.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[205:3](jub85.htm#fr_906) Notice here the
substitution of Satanic agency where the original text of Scripture
ascribes the action directly to Jahveh (cf. Exod. iv. 24); another
instance in our Book is xvii. 16. The same tendency can be illustrated
from 1 Chron. xxi. 1 compared with 2 Sam. xxiv. 1.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[205:4](jub85.htm#fr_907) This explanation of
the incident described in Exod. iv. 24 ff. seems to be peculiar to our
author, the real explanation being that Moses had failed to circumcise
his son (so Targ. Ps.-Jon. *in loc.*).

<span id="fn_900"></span>[205:5](jub85.htm#fr_908) An enumeration of the
ten plagues.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[206:1](jub85.htm#fr_909) Cf. Gen. xv. 13, 14.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[206:2](jub85.htm#fr_910) Cf. Exod. ix. 11.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[206:3](jub85.htm#fr_911) Cf. Ex. xiv. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[206:4](jub85.htm#fr_912) Another example of
the *lex talionis* (cf. iv 31), though a distinction may be drawn
between 'eye for eye' (a principle of human justice) and 'measure for
measure' (a theory of divine retribution); cf. Abrahams, *Studies in
Pharisaism and the Gospels*, p. 154 (series i).

<span id="fn_905"></span>[207:1](jub85.htm#fr_913) Cf. Wisdom xviii. 5.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[207:2](jub85.htm#fr_914) *i. e.* the prince of
the Mastêmâ (substituted for Jahveh in Exod. xiv. 8).

<span id="fn_907"></span>[207:3](jub85.htm#fr_915) Cf. Exod. xii. 35 f.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Regulations regarding the Passover (xlix. 1-23)](jub86)
