[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Laws regarding the Jubilees and the Sabbath (l. 1-13).

L. And after this law I made known to thee the days of the Sabbaths in
the desert of Sin\[ai\], which is between Elim and Sinai. <span
id="fr_937"></span>[5](#fn_929) 2. And I told thee of the Sabbaths of
the land on Mount Sinai, and I told thee of the jubilee years <span
id="fr_938"></span>[6](#fn_930) in the sabbaths of years: but the year
thereof have I not told thee till ye enter the land which ye are to
possess. 3. And the land also will keep its sabbaths while they dwell
upon it, <span id="fr_939"></span>[7](#fn_931) and they will know the
jubilee year. 4. Wherefore I have ordained for thee the year-weeks <span
id="fr_940"></span>[8](#fn_932) and the years and the jubilees: there
are forty-nine jubilees from the days of Adam until this day, and one
week

|           |
|-----------|
| 2410 A.M. |

and two years and there are yet forty years to come (lit. "distant for
learning the commandments of

|           |
|-----------|
| 2450 A.M. |

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the Lord, until they pass over into the land of Canaan, crossing the
Jordan to the west. 5. And the jubilees will pass by, until Israel is
cleansed from all guilt of fornication, and uncleanness, and pollution,
and sin, and error, and dwelleth with confidence in all the land, and
there will be no more a Satan or any evil one, and the land will be
clean from that time for evermore. <span id="fr_941"></span>[1](#fn_933)

6\. And behold the commandment regarding the Sabbaths--I have written
(them) down for thee and all the judgments of its laws. 7. Six days wilt
thou labour, but on the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord your
God. <span id="fr_942"></span>[2](#fn_934) In it ye shall do no manner
of work, ye and your sons, and your men-servants and your maid-servants,
and all your cattle and the sojourner also who is with you. 8. And the
man that doeth any work on it shall die: <span
id="fr_943"></span>[3](#fn_935) whoever desecrateth that day, whoever
lieth with (his) wife <span id="fr_944"></span>[4](#fn_936) or whoever
saith he will do something on it, that he will set out on a journey
thereon <span id="fr_945"></span>[5](#fn_937) in regard to any buying or
selling: <span id="fr_946"></span>[6](#fn_938) and whoever draweth water
thereon <span id="fr_947"></span>[7](#fn_939) which he had not prepared
for himself on the sixth day, and whoever taketh up any burden to carry
it out of his tent <span id="fr_948"></span>[8](#fn_940) or out of his
house shall die. 9. Ye shall do no work whatever on the Sabbath day save
that ye have prepared for yourselves on the sixth day, so as to eat, and
drink, and rest, and keep Sabbath from all work on that day, and to
bless the Lord your God, who has given you a day of festival, and a holy
day: and a day of the holy kingdom for all Israel is this day among
their days for ever. 10. For great is the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

honour which the Lord hath given to Israel that they should eat and
drink and be satisfied on this festival day, and rest thereon from all
labour <span id="fr_949"></span>[1](#fn_941) which belongeth to the
labour of the children of men, save burning frankincense and bringing
oblations and sacrifices before the Lord for days and for Sabbaths. 11.
This work alone shall be done on the Sabbath-days <span
id="fr_950"></span>[2](#fn_942) in the sanctuary of the Lord your God;
that they may atone for Israel with sacrifice continually from day to
day for a memorial well-pleasing before the Lord, and that He may
receive them always from day to day according as thou hast been
commanded. 12. And every man who doeth any work thereon, or goeth a
journey, or tilleth (his) farm, <span id="fr_951"></span>[3](#fn_943)
whether in his house or any other place, <span
id="fr_952"></span>[4](#fn_944) and whoever lighteth a fire, <span
id="fr_953"></span>[5](#fn_945) or rideth on any beast, <span
id="fr_954"></span>[6](#fn_946) or travelleth by ship on the sea, and
whoever striketh or killeth anything, or slaughtereth <span
id="fr_955"></span>[7](#fn_947) a beast or a bird, or whoever catcheth
an animal or a bird or a fish, or whoever fasteth or maketh war on the
Sabbaths: <span id="fr_956"></span>[8](#fn_948) 13. The man who doeth
any of these things on the Sabbath shall die, so that the children of
Israel shall observe the Sabbaths according to the commandments
regarding the Sabbaths of the land, as it is written in the tables,
which He gave into my hands that I should write out for thee the laws of
the seasons, and the seasons according to the division of their days.

 

Herewith is completed the account of the division of the days.
