[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11003)  [Next](cc11005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>PSALM 96

<span id="v-p2"></span>This psalm contains an exhortation to praise God,
an exhortation which is directed not only to the Jews, but to all
nations. We must infer from this, that it has reference to the kingdom
of Christ. God’s name could not be called upon in any other part of the
world than Judea, until it had been revealed; and the heathen nations
were at that time necessarily altogether incapacitated for any such
exercise.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) Yet it is evident that
the Holy Spirit stirred up the saints who were under the Law to
celebrate the Divine praises, till the period should arrive when Christ,
by the spread of the Gospel, should fill the whole earth with his glory.

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
96:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Sing to Jehovah a new song, sing unto
Jehovah, all the earth. **2.** Sing unto Jehovah, bless his name; show
forth his salvation from day to day. **3.** Declare his glory among the
heathen; his wonders among all people.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p4"></span><span id="v.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**1** *Sing unto Jehovah a new song* This
commencement shows that, as I have already observed, the Psalmist is
exhorting the whole world, and not the Israelites merely, to the
exercise of devotion. Nor could this be done, unless the gospel were
universally diffused as the means of conveying the knowledge of God. The
saying of Paul must necessarily hold true,

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>“How shall they call upon him in whom they have
not believed?” (<span id="v.i-p6.1"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="v.i-p6.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>The same Apostle proves the calling of the
Gentiles, by adducing in testimony of it, “Praise the Lord, ye Gentiles,
with his people” — from which it follows, that fellowship in the faith
stands connected with the joint celebration of praise, (<span
id="v.i-p7.1"></span>[Ro 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#011)<span
id="v.i-p7.1"></span>.) Besides, the Psalmist requires a *new song,*
 <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) not one which was common, and had
formerly been raised. He must therefore refer to some unusual and
extraordinary display of the Divine goodness. Thus, when Isaiah speaks
of the restoration of the Church, which was wonderful and incredible, he
says, “Sing unto the Lord a new song,” (<span id="v.i-p8.5"></span>[Isa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)<span id="v.i-p8.5"></span>.) The
Psalmist intimates accordingly, that the time was come when God would
erect his kingdom in the world in a manner altogether unlooked for. He
intimates still more clearly as he proceeds, that all nations would
share in the favor of God. He calls upon them everywhere to show forth
his salvation, and, in desiring that they should celebrate it from day
to day, would denote that it was not of a fading or evanescent nature,
but such as should endure for ever.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span><span id="v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>**3** *Declare his glory among the heathen*
Additional terms are adduced to commend the salvation spoken of. It is
called *his glory* and *his wonders;* which is equivalent to saying that
it was glorious and admirable. By such titles the Psalmist would
distinguish it from any deliverances which had formerly been granted, as
indeed there can be but one opinion, that when God appeared as Redeemer
of all the world, he gave a display of his mercy and of his favor, such
as he never vouchsafed before. This salvation it was impossible, as I
have said, that the Gentile nations could have celebrated, had they been
left without it. The words teach us that we can never be said to have
rightly apprehended the redemption wrought out by Christ, unless our
minds have been raised to the discovery of something incomparably
wonderful about it.

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
96:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**4**. For Jehovah is great, and greatly to be
praised; he is terrible above all gods.  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) **5.** For all the gods of the nations
are vanities;  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) but Jehovah made the
heavens. **6.** Strength and honor are before him; power and glory are
in his sanctuary.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span><span id="v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>**4.** *For Jehovah is great, and greatly to
be praised.* He particularly describes that God, whom he would have men
to celebrate, and this because the Gentile nations were prone to merge
into error upon this subject. That the whole world might abjure its
superstitions, and unite in the true religion, he points out the one
only God who is worthy of universal praise. This is a point of the
greatest importance. Unless men are restrained by a due respect to it,
they can only dishonor him the more that they attempt to worship him. We
must observe this order if we would not profane the name of God, and
rank ourselves amongst unbelieving men, who set forth gods of their own
invention. By *gods* in the verse may be meant, as I observed already,
(<span id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
95:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#003)<span id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>,)
either angels or idols. I would still be of opinion that the term
comprehends whatever is, or is accounted deity. As God, so to speak,
sends rays of himself through all the world by his angels, these reflect
some sparks of his Divinity.  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) Men,
again, in framing idols, fashion gods to themselves which have no
existence. The Psalmist would convince them of its being a gross error
to ascribe undue honor either to the angels or to idols, thus detracting
from the glory of the one true God. He convicts the heathen nations of
manifest infatuation, upon the ground that their gods are vanity and
nought, for such is the meaning of the Hebrew word <span
id="v.ii-p9.4"></span>אלילים*, elilim,*  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) which is here applied to idols in
contempt. The Psalmist’s great point is to show, that as the Godhead is
really and truly to be found in none but the one Maker of the world,
those religions are vain and contemptible which corrupt the pure worship
of him. Some may ask, Are angels then to be accounted nothing and
vanity, merely because many have been deceived in thinking them gods? I
would reply, that we do injury to the angels when we give them that
honor which is due to God only; and, while we are not on this account to
hold that they are nothing in themselves, yet whatever imaginary glory
has been attached to them must go for nothing.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) But the Psalmist has in his eye the gross
delusions of the heathen, who impiously fashioned gods to themselves.

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>Before refuting their absurd notions, he very
properly remarks of God that he is *great, and greatly to be praised* —
insinuating that his glory as the infinite One far excels any which they
dreamt of as attaching to their idols. We cannot but notice the
confidence with which the Psalmist asserts the glory of the true God, in
opposition to the universal opinion which men might entertain. The
people of God were at that time called to maintain a conflict of no
inconsiderable or common description with the hosts and prodigious mass
of superstitions which then filled the whole world. The true God might
be said to be confined within the obscure corner of Judea. Jupiter was
the god every where received — and adored throughout the whole of Asia,
Europe, and Africa. Every country had its own gods peculiar to itself,
but these were not unknown in other parts, and it was the true God only
who was robbed of that glory which belonged to him. All the world had
conspired to believe a lie. Yet the Psalmist, sensible that the vain
delusions of men could derogate nothing from the glory of the one God,
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) looks down with indifference upon
the opinion and universal suffrage of mankind. The inference is plain,
that we must not conclude that to be necessarily the true religion which
meets with the approbation of the multitude; for the judgment formed by
the Psalmist must have fallen to the ground at once, if religion were a
thing to be determined by the suffrages of men, and his worship depended
upon their caprice. Be it then that ever so many agree in error, we
shall insist after the Holy Ghost that they cannot take from God’s
glory; for man is vanity himself, and all that comes of him is to be
mistrusted.  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) Having asserted the
greatness of God, he proves it by reference to the formation of the
world, which reflects his perfections.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) God must necessarily exist of himself,
and be self-sufficient, which shows the vanity of all gods who made not
the world. The *heavens* are mentioned — a part for the whole — as the
power of God is principally apparent in them, when we consider their
beauty and adornment.

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span><span id="v.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>**6** *Strength and honor are before him* I
translate the Hebrew word <span id="v.ii-p19.1"></span>הוד*, hod,* by
*strength,* and think those interpreters who render it *glory* have not
duly considered the context. It is evident that the next member of the
verse is a repetition, and there it reads, *Power and Glory are in his
sanctuary.* The Psalmist means that we cannot be said to know God if we
have not discovered that there is in him an incomparable glory and
majesty. He first takes notice of his power and strength, as that in
which his glory consists. There, as God is invisible, he directs the
thoughts of his people to the sanctuary, which we have already seen to
be the symbol of his presence. Such is the weakness of our minds that we
rise with difficulty to the contemplation of his glory in the heavens.
The Psalmist reminds us that we have no reason to say that his glory is
obscure, since there were emblems of his presence in the temple, the
sacrifices, and the ark of the covenant. Let us endeavor, when we make
mention of God, to conceive of this glory which shines before him —
otherwise, if we do not apprehend his power, it is rather a dead than a
living God whom we worship.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
96:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**7.** Give to Jehovah, O ye assemblies of
peoples! give to Jehovah glory and strength.  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) **8.** Give to Jehovah the glory of his
name; bring an offering,  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) and come
into his courts. **9.** Worship before Jehovah in the beauty of the
sanctuary;  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) let the whole earth
tremble before his face.

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span><span id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span>**7** *Give to Jehovah, etc.* Since praise
waited for God in Zion, (<span id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)<span id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>,)
and that was the place devoted to the celebration of his worship, and
the posterity of Abraham were alone invested with the privilege of
priesthood, we cannot doubt that the Psalmist refers here to that great
change which was to take place in the Church upon the advent of Christ.
An opposition or distinction is intended between God’s ancient people
and the Gentile tribes, which were to be afterwards adopted into the
same fellowship. To declare *his glory and strength,* is the same with
declaring the *glory of his strength* And to show that man can boast
nothing of his own, and in refusing to celebrate God, impiously despoils
him of his just honors, he subjoins, *Give unto the Lord the glory of
his name;* an expression which denotes that God borrows nothing from
without, but comprehends all that is worthy of praise in himself. He
calls upon the Gentile nations in so many words to render unto God the
same worship which the Jews did; not that we must worship God now
according to the outward ritual which was prescribed under the Law, but
he signifies that there would be one rule and form of religion in which
all nations should accord. Now, unless the middle wall of partition had
been broken down, the Gentiles could not have entered along with God’s
children into the courts of the sanctuary. So that we have here a clear
prediction of the calling of the Gentiles, who needed to have their
uncleanness taken away before they could be brought into the holy
assembly. The *mincha,* or oblation, was only one kind of sacrifice, but
it is here taken to denote the whole worship of God, because it was a
part of divine service more ordinarily practiced. We see from this, and
other passages, that the inspired penmen describe the inward worship of
God under symbols common in the age when they lived. God would not have
meat-offerings presented to him after Christ had come; but the words
which the Psalmist employs intimate that the doors of the temple, once
shut, were now to be opened for the admission of the Gentiles. The
Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span
id="v.iii-p8.2"></span>[Heb 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii-p8.2"></span>) tells us what are those sacrifices with which
God will now be worshipped. Hence the absurdity of the Papists, who
would adduce such passages in support of the mass and their other
fooleries. We may very properly learn from the words, however, that we
ought not to come empty-handed into the presence of God, enjoined as we
are to present ourselves and all that we have as a reasonable service
unto Him, (<span id="v.iii-p8.3"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="v.iii-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="v.iii-p8.4"></span>[1Pe
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="v.iii-p8.4"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span><span id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>**9** *Worship before Jehovah* The Psalmist
prosecutes the same train of sentiment. In requiring oblations of his
people, God was not to be considered as standing in need of the services
of the creature, but as giving them an opportunity of professing their
faith. The true reason, therefore, is here mentioned why the oblation
was enjoined, That his people might prostrate themselves before him, and
acknowledge that they and all belonging to them were his. Mention is
made of *the beauty of the temple,* referring to the fact that the
Gentiles should be raised to a new honor, in being associated into one
body with God’s chosen people.  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) At
the time when this psalm was written, it was generally deemed scarcely
credible that the heathen nations would be admitted into the temple in
company with the holy seed of Abraham. This should make us think all the
more highly of our calling as Gentiles, which seemed then so incredible
and impracticable a thing. We may be convinced that God only could have
opened for us the door of salvation. The *beauty of the temple* is an
expression intended to beget a reverential view of the temple, that men
may approach it with humble fear, instead of rushing without
consideration into God’s presence. The clause which follows in the verse
is inserted for the same purpose — *tremble before his face,* intimating
that we should prostrate ourselves as suppliants before him when we
consider his awful majesty. Not that he would deter worshippers from
drawing near to God. They should esteem it their greatest pleasure and
enjoyment to seek his face. But he would have us humbled to the right
and serious worship of God. I may add, that the beauty or glory of the
sanctuary did not consist in silver and gold, in the preciousness of the
material of which it was made, nor in polished stones, nor in any
splendor and decoration of this kind, but in the representation of the
heavenly pattern which was shown to Moses on the mount, (<span
id="v.iii-p11.2"></span>[Ex 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#009)<span
id="v.iii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
96:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>**10.** Say among the heathen, Jehovah
reigneth; also the world shall be established, it shall not be moved: he
shall judge the peoples  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) in
righteousness, \[literally, in righteousnesses.\] **11.** Let the
heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea thunder, and the
fullness thereof. **12.** Let the field be joyful, and all that is
therein; likewise let all the trees of the wood rejoice.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) **13.** Before Jehovah; for he cometh,
for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with his truth.  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span> 

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span><span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span>**10.** *Say among the heathen, Jehovah
reigneth* His language again implies that it is only where God rules and
presides that he can be worshipped. The Gentiles could not possibly
profess the worship of God, so long as his throne was only in the small
corner of Judea, and they were not acknowledging his government.
Accordingly, the Psalmist speaks of his extending his kingdom to all
parts of the world, with the view of gathering unto himself in one,
those who had formerly been divided and scattered. The expression, *Say
among the heathen,* signifies that God would enlarge the boundaries of
his kingdom by his word and doctrine. What is said of the *world being
established,* is particularly worthy of our observation. So far as the
order of nature is concerned, we know that it has been Divinely
established, and fixed from the beginning; that the same sun, moon, and
stars, continue to shine in heaven; that the wicked and the unbelieving
are sustained with food, and breathe the vital air, just as do the
righteous. Still we are to remember that so long as un-godliness has
possession of the minds of men, the world, plunged as it is in darkness,
must be considered as thrown into a state of confusion, and of horrible
disorder and misrule; for there can be no stability apart from God. The
world is very properly here said therefore to be established, that it
should not shake, when men are brought back into a state of subjection
to God. We learn this truth from the passage, That though all the
creatures should be discharging their various offices, no order can be
said to prevail in the world, until God erect his throne and reign
amongst men. What more monstrous disorder can be conceived of, than
exists where the Creator himself is not acknowledged? Wicked and
unbelieving men may be satisfied with their own condition, but it is
necessarily most insecure, most unstable; and destitute as they are of
any foundation in God, their life may be said to hang by a thread.
 <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) We are to recollect what we have
seen taught, (<span id="v.iv-p12.2"></span>[Ps
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span id="v.iv-p12.2"></span>)
“God is in the midst of the holy city, she shall not be moved.” Very
possibly there may be an indirect allusion to the imperfect and
uncompleted state of things under the Law, and a contrast may have been
intended between the perfect condition of things which should obtain
under Christ, and the prelude to it under the former period. Next he
predicts that the kingdom to be introduced should be distinguished by
righteousness, according to what we have seen, (<span
id="v.iv-p12.3"></span>[Ps 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)<span
id="v.iv-p12.3"></span>) “A scepter of righteousness is the scepter of
thy kingdom.” The term *judging,* in the Hebrew, includes government of
any kind. If God’s method of governing men be to form and regulate their
lives to righteousness, we may infer, that however easily men may be
satisfied with themselves, all is necessarily wrong with them, till they
have been made subject to Christ. And this righteousness of which the
Psalmist speaks has not reference merely to the outward actions. It
comprehends a new heart, commencing as it does in the regeneration of
the Spirit, by which we are formed again into the likeness of God.

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span><span id="v.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span>**11** *Let the heavens rejoice, and let the
earth be glad.* With the view of giving us a more exalted conception of
the display of God’s goodness in condescending to take all men under his
government, the Psalmist calls upon the irrational things themselves,
the trees, the earth, the seas, and the heavens, to join in the general
joy. Nor are we to understand that by *the heavens* he means the angels,
and by *the earth* men;  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) for he
calls even upon the dumb fishes of the deep to shout for joy. The
language must therefore be hyperbolical, designed to express the
desirableness and the blessedness of being brought unto the faith of
God. At the same time, it denotes to us that God does not reign with
terror, or as a tyrant, but that his power is exercised sweetly, and so
as to diffuse joy amongst his subjects. The wicked may tremble when his
kingdom is introduced, but the erection of it is only the cause of their
fear indirectly.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) We might notice
also, that the hyperbole here employed does not want a certain
foundation of a more literal kind. As all elements in the creation groan
and travail together with us, according to Paul’s declaration, (<span
id="v.iv-p16.2"></span>[Ro 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv-p16.2"></span>) they may reasonably rejoice in the restoration
of all things according to their earnest desire. The words teach us how
infatuated that joy is, which is wantonly indulged in by men who are
without God. From the close of the psalm, we learn that it is impossible
to experience the slightest measure of true joy, as long as we have not
seen the face of God, *Rejoice before the Lord, because he cometh* And
if the very sea and land mourn so long as God is absent, may we not ask
what shall become of us, who are properly the subjects of God’s dreadful
curse? The Psalmist, to remove all doubt regarding an event which might
seem incredible, repeats his assertion of it, and states, at the same
time, in what that rectitude consists, which he had formerly mentioned,
when he adds, that *God shall govern the world with righteousness and
truth.* This shows us that it is only by the light of God’s
righteousness and truth that the wickedness and hypocrisy of men can be
removed and dispelled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc11004.htm#fr_73) <span
id="v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v-p3"></span> “<span id="v-p3.1"></span>Mutae erant ac
surdae.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc11004.htm#fr_74) <span
id="v.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p8"></span> We meet with a psalm very similar to this, in
<span id="v.i-p8.1"></span>[1 Chronicles
16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#000)<span id="v.i-p8.1"></span>,
delivered by David to Asaph, to be sung on occasion of the removing of
the ark from the house of Obed-edom to Zion. But the ode, as it stands
in <span id="v.i-p8.2"></span>[1 Chronicles
16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#000)<span id="v.i-p8.2"></span>, is
considerably longer, extending from the 8th verse to the 36th \[<span
id="v.i-p8.3"></span>[1Ch 16:8-36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#008)<span
id="v.i-p8.3"></span>\]; and this is only the part of it from the 23rd
to the 33rd verse \[<span id="v.i-p8.4"></span>[1Ch
16:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#023)<span id="v.i-p8.4"></span>\].
It has been supposed that this part was extracted from the psalm above
mentioned, and, with a few inconsiderable alterations, adapted to the
solemnity of the dedication of the second temple. This opinion is
founded upon the inscription of the psalm in the Septuagint, Vulgate,
Æthiopic, and Arabic versions, which is, “A song of David when the house
was built after the captivity.” Consequently, strictly speaking, this is
not a *new song*. But it may be called *new*, from its having been
adapted to a new purpose — from its having been intended to celebrate
new mercies conferred upon the Jews, and to lead the mind forward to the
glorious era of the coming of the Messiah, and the establishment of his
kingdom, which probably was the matter of more general expectation among
the chosen people, at the period when the temple was rebuilt, than when
the ark was brought to Mount Zion from the house of Obed-edom. It may be
observed, that the first verse is not in the original poem, as recorded
in the book of Chronicles, but appears to have been added for the new
occasion to which this shorter psalm was adapted.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc11004.htm#fr_75) <span
id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> The original word for *gods* is <span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>אלהים, *elohim* Dr Adam Clarke, who doubts whether
this word is ever by fair construction applied to false gods or idols,
reads —

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>“Jehovah is great, and greatly to be
praised.  
Elohim is to be feared above all.”

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc11004.htm#fr_76) <span
id="v.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>Ou, idoles.” —
*Fr*. *marg*. “Or, idols.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc11004.htm#fr_77) <span
id="v.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>Quia Deus per
angelos irradiat totum mundum, in illis refulgent Deitatis scintillae.”
— *Lat*. “<span id="v.ii-p9.2"></span>Pource que Dieu jette comme ses
rayons sur tout le monde par les anges, des estincelles de Divinite
reluisent en iceux.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc11004.htm#fr_78) <span
id="v.ii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span> <span id="v.ii-p10.2"></span>אליל, *elil*,
signifies *a thing of nought*; as if from <span
id="v.ii-p10.3"></span>אל, *not*, the <span id="v.ii-p10.4"></span>ל
being doubled to denote extreme nothingness. Thus a false vision or
prophecy, on which no dependence can be placed, is called <span
id="v.ii-p10.5"></span>אליל, *elil*, “a thing of nought,” <span
id="v.ii-p10.6"></span>[Jer 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014)<span
id="v.ii-p10.6"></span>, and a shepherd that leaves the flock, and
instead of visiting, healing and feeding them, devours and tears them in
pieces, is called in <span id="v.ii-p10.7"></span>[Zech.
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016)<span id="v.ii-p10.7"></span>, “a
pastor, <span id="v.ii-p10.8"></span>האליל, *haelil*, *of no value*.” In
this sense the word is used of the false gods of the heathen. Instead of
being <span id="v.ii-p10.9"></span>אלהים, *elohim*, *gods*, they are
<span id="v.ii-p10.10"></span>אלילים, *elilim*, *mere nothings*
Accordingly, Paul, in <span id="v.ii-p10.11"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="v.ii-p10.11"></span>,
speaks of an idol as being “nothing in the world.”

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc11004.htm#fr_79) <span
id="v.ii-p10.12"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>Sed quicquid
imaginarium illis affingitur, nihilum esse.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc11004.htm#fr_80) <span
id="v.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p13.1"></span>Quia eorum
vanitas nihil derogat unis Dei gloriae.” — *Ib*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc11004.htm#fr_81) <span
id="v.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p14.1"></span>Car tout ainsi
qu’ils sont vanite aussi tout ce qui procede d’eux est vain et plein de
deception.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc11004.htm#fr_82) <span
id="v.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span> “The argument of God’s superiority over all
other beings, drawn from his creation of the world, is sublimely
expressed in the following lines ascribed by Justin Martyr (*de
Monarchid*. page 159, ed. Oxon. 1703) to Pythagoras, —

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span>Εἴ τις ἐρεῖ, Θεός εἰμι πάρεξ ἑνὸς, οὗτος
ὀφείλει  
Κόσμον ἴσον τούτῳ στήσας εἰπεῖν ἐμὸς οὗτος.

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span>*“One God our hearts confess: whoe’er
beside  
Aspires with Him our homage to divide,  
A world as beauteous let him first design,  
And say, its fabric finished, ‘This is mine.’”  
* — *Merrick’s Annotations.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc11004.htm#fr_83) <span
id="v.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="v.ii-p20.1"></span>Car ceux qui
separent de luy sa puissance, imaginent plustost une essence morte,
qu’une Divinite vive.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc11004.htm#fr_84) <span
id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span> The original word for *strength* is <span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>עז, *oz*, which is derived from <span
id="v.iii-p3.2"></span>עזז, *azaz*, *he was strong* “The same word,”
says Hammond, “signifies what the Greeks call <span
id="v.iii-p3.3"></span>ἐξουσία, *power*, *dominion*, *empire* In the
notion of *strength* or *valour* it may probably be used in verse 6,
where as *beauty* so *strength* is said to be in his sanctuary; *beauty*
in respect of the glory of the divine presence, by the guard of angels
that attend there, and *strength* in respect of the assistance that is
by God provided and furnished there to all that seek it by prayer. But
the other notion is fitter for this place, where the word is joined with
*glory* and attributed to God; and so in <span
id="v.iii-p3.4"></span>[1Pe 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii-p3.4"></span>, which seems to be taken from hence, it is <span
id="v.iii-p3.5"></span>αὐτῷ ἡ δόξα καὶ τὸ κράτος, ‘to him be glory and
dominion;’ and hence God’s title of <span
id="v.iii-p3.6"></span>παντοκράτωρ is best rendered, not ‘almighty,’ or
‘he that hath all strength’ but ‘he that hath the <span
id="v.iii-p3.7"></span>עז or, <span id="v.iii-p3.8"></span>κράτος,
dominion or empire over all.’”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc11004.htm#fr_85) <span
id="v.iii-p3.9"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> Horsley reads, “Take an offering.” “A
*mincha*,” says he, “an offering of bread and flour, not of flesh.”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc11004.htm#fr_86) <span
id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span> The words <span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>בהדרת-קדש, which Calvin renders, “in the beauty
of the sanctuary,” are rendered in our English Bible “in the beauty of
holiness.” The Septuagint reads, <span id="v.iii-p5.2"></span>αὐλὢ ἁγια
αὐτου, “in the court of his holiness;” from which it has been thought
probable that the text originally stood <span
id="v.iii-p5.3"></span>בחצר-קוו. See this word at the end of the
preceding verse. In <span id="v.iii-p5.4"></span>[Ps
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002)<span id="v.iii-p5.4"></span>, the
same sentence occurs. The version of Calvin, and that of Jerome, which
is precisely the same, <span id="v.iii-p5.5"></span>*in decore
sanctuarii*, partake both of the Hebrew and Septuagint reading.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc11004.htm#fr_87) <span
id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="v.iii-p11.1"></span>Pour
monstrer que les Gentils devoyent estre receus a un honneur nouveau,
qu’ils feront un mesme corps avec le peuple eleu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc11004.htm#fr_88) <span
id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span> “*The peoples*. The Hebrew word is plural,
and it is rendered plurally by all the ancient versions. It is not *one
people* only, but *all the nations upon earth*, that God will judge.” —
*Street*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc11004.htm#fr_89) <span
id="v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span> The Hebrew verb <span
id="v.iv-p4.1"></span>רננו, *rannenu*, here rendered *rejoice*,
“expresses,” says Mant, “the vibratory motion either of a dancer’s feet,
or of a singer’s lips. Hence it signifies, to wave to and fro’ as
trees.” In support of this sense of the word he refers to Bishop
Horsley’s note on <span id="v.iv-p4.2"></span>[Ps
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008)<span id="v.iv-p4.2"></span>, and
Parkhurst’s Lexicon on <span id="v.iv-p4.3"></span>רנן, 1:2.
Accordingly, he translates the verse —

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>“Be glad, ye fields, and fruits, the fields
that spread;  
Wave high, ye woods, in worship wave the head;”

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>which, he observes, will remind the reader of
Adam and Eve’s morning hymn: —

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>*“— and wave your tops, ye pines,  
With every plant, in sign of worship wave.”  
*Paradise Lost, v.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc11004.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span> This psalm has been admired for its grandeur
and magnificence. The three last verses in particular have been
frequently quoted as a specimen of sublimity in sentiment and language,
which cannot be surpassed. “Nothing can excel in this respect,” remarks
Bishop Lowth, “that noble exultation of universal nature in the 96th
Psalm, which has been so often commended, where the whole animate and
inanimate creation unite in the praises of their Maker. Poetry here
seems to assume the highest tone of triumph and exultation, and to
revel, if I may so express myself, in all the extravagance of joy.” —
*Lectures on Sacred Poetry*, volume 1, page 378.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc11004.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p12.1"></span>Semper tamen
fluctuari necesse est, et vitam eoram pendere de filo, quia in Deo
fundatus non est eorum status.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc11004.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p15.1"></span>Neque enim
metonymice de angelis vel hominibus loquitur.” — *Lat*. “<span
id="v.iv-p15.2"></span>Il ne faut pas penser que ce soit yci la figure
nommee Metonymie, et que par les Cieux il entende les Anges, par la
Terre les hommes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc11004.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.iv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="v.iv-p16.1"></span>C’est une
chose accidentale.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 97](cc11005)
