[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11002)  [Next](cc11004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>PSALM 95

<span id="iv-p2"></span>The inspired penman of this psalm, whoever he
was,  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) in exhorting the Jews to
praise God in solemn assembly, states two grounds why God should be
praised; the one, that he sustains by his power the world which he
created, the other, that he had of his free grace adopted the Church
into a gracious relationship with himself. As many take God’s praises
into their lips in a hypocritical manner, he exhorts the people at the
same time to be sincere, serious, and devoted in the service, and to
show by the tenor of their life that they had not been chosen in vain.
The more effectually to guard them against hypocrisy, he mentions that
their fathers from the beginning had been of a stubborn spirit, and
chargeable with ingratitude to God; and he takes notice of the dreadful
punishment which fell upon them, and which might well deter their
children from following in the footsteps of their rebelliousness.

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
95:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Come, let us rejoice before Jehovah;
let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our salvation.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) **2**. Let us come before his face with
praise, In psalms let us shout for joy unto him. **3**. For Jehovah is a
great God, And a great King, above all gods. **4**. For in his hand are
the deep places of the earth,  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) And
the heights of the mountains are his. **5**. For his is the sea, and he
made it; And the dry land his hands formed.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span><span id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>**1.** *Come, let us rejoice before Jehovah*.
This psalm is suited for the Sabbath, when we know that the religious
assemblies were more particularly convened for the worship of God. It is
not individuals among the godly whom he exhorts to celebrate the divine
praises in private; he enjoins these to be offered up in the public
meeting. By this he showed that the outward worship of God principally
consisted in the sacrifice of praise, and not in dead ceremonies. He
enjoins haste upon them; by which they might testify their alacrity in
this service. For the Hebrew word <span id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>קדם,
*kadam*, in the second verse, which I have rendered, *let us come
before*, etc., means to *make haste*. He calls upon them to speed into
the presence of God; and such an admonition was needed, considering how
naturally backward we are when called by God to the exercise of
thanksgiving. This indirect charge of indolence in the exercise, the
Psalmist saw it necessary to prefer against God’s ancient people; and we
should be made aware that there is just as much need of a stimulus in
our own case, filled as our hearts are with similar ingratitude. In
calling them *to come before God’s face*, he uses language which was
also well fitted to increase the ardor of the worshippers; nothing being
more agreeable than to offer in God’s own presence such a sacrifice as
he declares that he will accept. He virtually thus says, in order to
prevent their supposing the service vain, that God was present to
witness it. I have shown elsewhere in what sense God was present in the
sanctuary.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>**3.** *For Jehovah is a great God*. By these
words the Psalmist reminds us what abundant grounds we have for praising
God, and how far we are from needing to employ the lying panegyric with
which rhetoricians flatter earthly princes. First, he extols the
greatness of God, drawing a tacit contrast between him and such false
gods as men have invented for themselves. We know that there has always
been a host of gods in the world, as Paul says,

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>“There are many on the earth who are called
gods,”  
(<span id="iv.i-p13.2"></span>[1Co
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005)<span id="iv.i-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>We are to notice the opposition stated
between the God of Israel and all others which man has formed in the
exercise of an unlicensed imagination. Should any object, that “an idol
is nothing in the world,” (<span id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>,) it
is enough to reply, that the Psalmist aims at denouncing the vain
delusions of men who have framed gods after their own foolish device. I
admit, however, that under this term he may have comprehended the
angels, asserting God to be possessed of such excellence as exalted him
far above all heavenly glory, and whatever might be considered Divine,
as well as above the feigned deities of earth.  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) Angels are not indeed gods, but the name
admits of an improper application to them on account of their being next
to God, and still more, on account of their being accounted no less than
gods by men who inordinately and superstitiously extol them. If the
heavenly angels themselves must yield before the majesty of the one God,
it were the height of indignity to compare him with gods who are the
mere fictions of the brain. In proof of his greatness, he bids us look
to his formation of the world, which he declares to be *the work of
God’s hands,* and subject to his power. This is one general ground why
God is to be praised, that he has clearly shown forth his glory in the
creation of the world, and will have us daily recognize him in the
government of it. When it is said, that *the depths of the earth are in
his hand,* the meaning is, that it is ruled by his providence, and
subject to his power. Some read, *the bounds of the earth,* but the word
means *abysses* or *depths*, as opposed to *the heights of the
mountains.* The Hebrew word properly signifies *searching.*

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
95:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**6**. Come ye, let us worship, and bow down;
 <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) let us kneel before the face of
Jehovah our Maker. **7**. Because he is our God, and we the people of
his pastures, and the flock of his hand; to-day, if ye will hear his
voice.

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>**6.** *Come ye, let us worship* Now that the
Psalmist exhorts God’s chosen people to gratitude, for that pre-eminency
among the nations which he had conferred upon them in the exercise of
his free favor, his language grows more vehement. God supplies us with
ample grounds of praise when he invests us with spiritual distinction,
and advances us to a pre-eminency above the rest of mankind which rests
upon no merits of our own. In three successive terms he expresses the
one duty incumbent upon the children of Abraham, that of an entire
devotement of themselves to God. The worship of God, which the Psalmist
here speaks of, is assuredly a matter of such importance as to demand
our whole strength; but we are to notice, that he particularly
condescends upon one point, the paternal favor of God, evidenced in his
exclusive adoption of the posterity of Abraham unto the hope of eternal
life. We are also to observe, that mention is made not only of inward
gratitude, but the necessity of an outward profession of godliness. The
three words which are used imply that, to discharge their duty properly,
the Lord’s people must present themselves a sacrifice to him publicly,
with kneeling, and other marks of devotion. *The face of the Lord* is an
expression to be understood in the sense I referred to above, — that the
people should prostrate themselves before the Ark of the Covenant, for
the reference is to the mode of worship under the Law. This remark,
however, must be taken with one reservation, that the worshippers were
to lift their eyes to heaven, and serve God in a spiritual manner.
 <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span><span id="iv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span>**7** *Because he is our God* While it is
true that all men were created to praise God, there are reasons why the
Church is specially said to have been formed for that end, (<span
id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Isa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii-p9.1"></span>.) The Psalmist was entitled to require this
service more particularly from the hands of his chosen people. This is
the reason why he impresses upon the children of Abraham the invaluable
privilege which God had conferred upon them in taking them under his
protection. God may indeed be said in a sense to have done so much for
all mankind. But when asserted to be the Shepherd of the Church, more is
meant than that he favors her with the common nourishment, support, and
government which he extends promiscuously to the whole human family; he
is so called because he separates her from the rest of the world, and
cherishes her with a peculiar and fatherly regard. His people are here
spoken of accordingly as the *people of his pastures,* whom he watches
over with peculiar care, and loads with blessings of every kind. The
passage might have run more clearly had the Psalmist called them *the
flock of his pastures,* and *the people of his hand;*  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) or, had he added merely — *and his flock*
 <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) — the figure might have been
brought out more consistently and plainly. But his object was less
elegancy of expression than pressing upon the people a sense of the
inestimable favor conferred upon them in their adoption, by virtue of
which they were called to live under the faithful guardianship of God,
and to the enjoyment of every species of blessings. They are called *the
flock of his hand,* not so much because formed by his hand as because
governed by it, or, to use a French expression, *le Troupeau de sa
conduite.*  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) The point which some
have given to the expression, as if it intimated how intent God was upon
feeding his people, doing it himself, and not employing hired shepherds,
may scarcely perhaps be borne out by the words in their genuine meaning;
but it cannot be doubted that the Psalmist would express the very
gracious and familiar kind of guidance which was enjoyed by this one
nation at that time. Not that God dispensed with human agency,
intrusting the care of the people as he did to priests, prophets, and
judges, and latterly to kings. No more is meant than that in discharging
the office of shepherd to this people, he exercised a superintendence
over them different from that common providence which extends to the
rest of the world.

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span>*To-day, if you will hear his voice*  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) According to the Hebrew expositors, this
is a conditional clause standing connected with the preceding sentence;
by which interpretation the Psalmist must be considered as warning the
people that they would only retain possession of their privilege and
distinction so long as they continued to obey God.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) The Greek version joins it with the verse
that follows — *to-day,* if ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts*,* and it reads well in this connection. Should we adopt the
distribution of the Hebrew expositors, the Psalmist seems to say that
the posterity of Abraham were the flock of God’s hand, inasmuch as he
had placed his Law in the midst of them, which was, as it were, his
crook, and had thus showed himself to be their shepherd. The Hebrew
particle <span id="iv.ii-p15.4"></span>אם, *im,* which has been rendered
*if*, would in that case be rather expositive than conditional, and
might be rendered *when,*  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) the
words denoting it to be the great distinction between the Jews and the
surrounding nations, that God had directed his voice to the former, as
it is frequently noticed he had not done to the latter, (<span
id="iv.ii-p16.3"></span>[Ps
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)<span id="iv.ii-p16.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii-p16.4"></span>[Deut.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii-p16.4"></span>.)
Moses had declared this to constitute the ground of their superiority to
other people, saying, “What nation is there under heaven which hath its
gods so nigh unto it?” The inspired writers borrow frequently from
Moses, as is well known, and the Psalmist, by the expression *to-day,*
intimates how emphatically the Jews, in hearing God’s voice, were his
people, for the proof was not far off, it consisted in something which
was present and before their eyes. He bids them recognize God as their
shepherd, inasmuch as they heard his voice; and it was an instance of
his singular grace that he had addressed them in such a condescending
and familiar manner. Some take the adverb to be one of exhortation, and
read, *I* *would that they would hear my voice,* but this does violence
to the words. The passage runs well taken in the other meaning we have
assigned to it. Since they had a constant opportunity of hearing the
voice of God — since he gave them not only one proof of the care he had
over them as shepherd, or yearly proof of it, but a continual
exemplification of it, there could be no doubt that the Jews were chosen
to be his flock.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
95:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**8**. Harden not your heart, as in Meribah,
as in the day of Massah in the wilderness.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) **9**. When your fathers tempted me, they
proved me, though yet they had seen my work. **10**. Forty years, I
strove with this generation,  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) and
said, They are a people that err in heart,  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) and they have not known my ways. **11**.
Wherefore I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest:
 <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span><span id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>**8.** *Harden not your heart, as in
Meribah* The Psalmist, having extolled and commended the kindness of God
their Shepherd, takes occasion, as they were stiffnecked and
disobedient, to remind them of their duty, as his flock, which was to
yield a pliable and meek submission; and the more to impress their
minds, he upbraids them with the obstinacy of their fathers. The term
<span id="iv.iii-p11.2"></span>מריבה*, Meribah,* may be used
appellatively to mean *strife* or *contention;* but as the Psalmist
evidently refers to the history contained in <span
id="iv.iii-p11.3"></span>[Ex
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii-p11.3"></span>,
 <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) I have preferred understanding it
of the place — and so of <span id="iv.iii-p12.4"></span>מסה*, Massah.*
 <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) In the second clause, however, the
place where the temptation happened may be thought sufficiently
described under the term *wilderness,* and should any read, *according
to the day of temptation* (instead of *Massah*) *in the wilderness,*
there can be no objection. Some would have it, that Massah and Meribah
were two distinct places, but I see no ground to think so; and, in a
matter of so little importance, we should not be too nice or curious. He
enlarges in several expressions upon the hardness of heart evinced by
the people, and, to produce the greater effect, introduces God himself
as speaking.  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) By hardness of heart,
he no doubt means, any kind of contempt shown to the word of God, though
there are many different kinds of it. We find that when proclaimed, it
is heard by some in a cold and slighting manner; that some fastidiously
put it away from them after they had received it; that others proudly
reject it; while again there are men who openly vent their rage against
it with despite and blasphemy.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) The
Psalmist, in the one term which he has employed, comprehends all these
defaulters, the careless — the fastidious — such as deride the word, and
such as are actuated in their opposition to it by frenzy and passion.
Before the heart can be judged soft and pliable to the hearing of God’s
word, it is necessary that we receive it with reverence, and with a
disposition to obey it. If it carry no authority and weight with it, we
show that we regard him as no more than a mere man like ourselves; and
here lies the hardness of our hearts, whatever may be the cause of it,
whether simply carelessness, or pride, or rebellion. He has
intentionally singled out the odious term here employed, to let us know
what an execrable thing contempt of God’s word is; as, in the Law,
*adultery* is used to denote all kinds of fornication and uncleanness,
and *murder* all kinds of violence, and injury, hatreds, and enmities.
Accordingly, the man who simply treats the word of God with neglect, and
fails to obey it, is said here to have a hard and stony heart, although
he may not be an open despiser. The attempt is ridiculous which the
Papists have made to found upon this passage their favorite doctrine of
the liberty of the will. We are to notice, in the first place, that all
men’s hearts are naturally hard and stony; for Scripture does not speak
of this as a disease peculiar to a few, but characteristic in general of
all mankind, (<span id="iv.iii-p15.2"></span>[Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)<span id="iv.iii-p15.2"></span>.)
It is an inbred pravity; still it is voluntary; we are not insensible in
the same manner that stones are,  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)
and the man who will not suffer himself to be ruled by God’s word, makes
that heart, which was hard before, harder still, and is convinced as to
his own sense and feeling of obstinacy. The consequence by no means
follows from this, that softness of heart — a heart flexible
indifferently in either direction, is at our command.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) The will of man, through natural
corruption, is wholly bent to evil; or, to speak more properly, is
carried headlong into the commission of it. And yet every man, who
disobeys God therein, hardens himself; for the blame of his wrong doing
rests with none but himself.

<span id="iv.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p19"></span>**9** *When your fathers tempted me, they
proved me* The Psalmist insinuates, as I have already remarked, that the
Jews had been from the first of a perverse and almost intractable
spirit. And there were two reasons which made it highly useful to remind
the children of the guilt chargeable upon their fathers. We know how apt
men are to follow the example of their predecessors; custom begets a
sanction; what is ancient becomes venerable, and such is the blinding
influence of home example, that whatever may have been done by our
forefathers passes for a virtue without examination. We have an instance
in Popedom, of the audacity with which the authority of the fathers is
opposed to God’s word. The Jews were of all others most liable to be
deceived upon this side, ever accustomed as they were to boast of their
fathers. The Psalmist accordingly would detach them from the fathers, by
taking notice of the monstrous ingratitude with which they had been
chargeable. A second reason, and one to which I have already adverted,
is, that he would show them the necessity in which they stood of being
warned upon the present subject. Had their fathers not manifested a
rebellions spirit, they might have retorted by asking the question, Upon
what ground he warned them against hardness of heart, their nation
having hitherto maintained a character for docility and tractableness?
The fact being otherwise — their fathers having from the first been
perverse and stubborn, the Psalmist had a plain reason for insisting
upon the correction of this particular vice.

<span id="iv.iii-p20"></span>There are two ways of interpreting the
words which follow. As *tempting God* is nothing else than yielding to a
diseased and unwarrantable craving after proof of his power,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) we may consider the verse as connected
throughout, and read, *They tempted me and proved me, although they had
already seen my work* God very justly complains, that they should insist
upon new proof, after his power had been already amply testified by
undeniable evidences. There is another meaning, however, that may be
given to the term *proved,* — according to which, the meaning of the
passage would run as follows: — Your fathers tempted me in asking where
God was, notwithstanding all the benefits I had done them; and they
proved me, that is, they had actual experience of what I am, inasmuch as
I did not cease to give them open proofs of my presence, and
consequently they saw my work. Whatever sense we adopt, the Psalmist’s
design is plainly to show how inexcusable the Jews were in desiring a
discovery of God’s power, just as if it had been hidden, and had not
been taught them by the most incontestable proofs.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) Granting that they had received no
foregoing demonstration of it, they would have evinced an unbecoming
spirit in demanding of God why he had failed to provide them with meat
and drink; but to doubt his presence after he had brought them from
Egypt with an outstretched hand, and evidenced his nearness to them by
most convincing testimonies, — to doubt his presence in the same manner
as if it had never been revealed, was a degree of perverse forgetfulness
which aggravated their guilt. Upon the whole, I consider the following
to be the sense of the passage — Your fathers tempted me, although they
had abundantly proved — perceived by clear and undeniable evidences,
that I was their God — nay, although my works had been clearly set
before them. The lesson is one which is equally applicable to ourselves;
for the more abundant testimonies we may have had of the power and
loving-kindness of the Lord, the greater will our sin be, if we insist
upon receiving additional proofs of them. How many do we find in our own
day demanding miracles, while others murmur against God because he does
not indulge their wishes? Some may ask why the Psalmist singles out the
particular case of Meribah, when there were many other instances which
he might have adduced. They never ceased to provoke God from the moment
of their passing the Red Sea; and in bringing this one charge only
against them, he might seem by his silence on other points to justify
their conduct. But the figure synecdoche is common in Scripture, and it
would be natural enough to suppose that one case is selected for many.
At the same time, another reason for the specification may have been,
that, as plainly appears from Moses, the ingratitude and rebellion of
the people reached its greatest height on this occasion, when they
murmured for water. I am aware that interpreters differ upon this. Such,
however, was the fact. They then crowned their former impiety; nor was
it until this outcry was made, as the consummating act of all their
preceding wickedness, that they gave open proof of their obstinacy being
incurable.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="iv.iii-p24"></span><span id="iv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p25"></span>**10.** *Forty years I strove with this
generation*  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) The Psalmist brings it
forward as an aggravation of their perverse obstinacy, that God strove
with them for so long a time without effect. Occasionally it will happen
that there is a violent manifestation of perversity which soon subsides;
but God complains that he had constant grounds of contention with his
people, throughout the whole forty years. And this proves to us the
incurable waywardness of that people. The word *generation* is used with
the same view. The word <span id="iv.iii-p26.2"></span>דור, *dor,*
signifies an age, or the allotted term of human life; and it is here
applied to the men of an age, as if the Psalmist had said, that the
Israelites whom God had delivered were incorrigible, during the whole
period of their lives. The verb <span id="iv.iii-p26.3"></span>אקוט,
*akut,* which I have rendered *I strove,* is, by some, translated
*contemned,* and in the Septuagint it reads, <span
id="iv.iii-p26.4"></span>προσωχθισα,  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) *I was incensed,* or *enraged;* but
Hebrew interpreters retain the genuine meaning, That God strove with
them in a continual course of contention. This was a remarkable proof of
their extreme obstinacy; and God is introduced in the verse as formally
pronouncing judgment upon them, to intimate, that after having shown
their ungodliness in so many different ways, there could be no doubt
regarding their infatuation. *Erring in heart,* is an expression
intended not to extenuate their conduct, but to stamp it with folly and
madness, as if he had said, that he had to do with beasts, rather than
men endued with sense and intelligence. The reason is subjoined, that
they would not attend to the many works of God brought under their eyes,
and more than all, to his word; for the Hebrew term <span
id="iv.iii-p27.8"></span>דרך, *derech,* which I have rendered *ways,*
comprehends his law and repeated admonitions, as well as his miracles
done before them. It argued amazing infatuation that when God had
condescended to dwell in such a familiar manner amongst them, and had
made such illustrious displays of himself, both in word and works, they
should have shut their eyes and overlooked all that had been done. This
is the reason why the Psalmist, considering that they wandered in error
under so much light as they enjoyed, speaks of their stupidity as
amounting to madness.

<span id="iv.iii-p28"></span><span id="iv.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p29"></span>**11.** *Wherefore I have sworn in my
wrath* I see no objection to the relative <span
id="iv.iii-p29.1"></span>אשר, *asher,* being understood in its proper
sense and reading — *To* *whom I have sworn.* The Greek version, taking
it for a mark of similitude, reads, As *I have sworn* But I think that
it may be properly considered as expressing an inference or conclusion;
not as if they were then at last deprived of the promised inheritance
when they tempted God, but the Psalmist, having spoken, in the name of
God, of that obstinacy which they displayed, takes occasion to draw the
inference that there was good reason for their being prohibited, with an
oath, from entering the land. Proportionally as they multiplied their
provocations, it became the more evident that, being incorrigible, they
had been justly cut off from God’s rest.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) The meaning would be more clear by
reading in the pluperfect tense — *I* *had sworn;* for God had already
shut them out from the promised inheritance, having foreseen their
misconduct; before he thus strove with them. I have elsewhere adverted
to the explanation which is to be given of the elliptical form in which
the oath runs.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) The land of Canaan
is called God’s *rest* in reference to the promise. Abraham and his
posterity had been wanderers in it until the full time came for entering
upon the possession of it. Egypt had been a temporary asylum, and, as it
were, a place of exile. In preparing to plant the Jews, agreeably to his
promise, in their rightful patrimony of Canaan, God might very properly
call it his rest. The word must be taken, however, in the active sense;
this being the great benefit which God bestowed, that the Jews were to
dwell there, as in their native soil, and in a quiet habitation. We
might stop a moment here to compare what the Apostle states in the third
and fourth chapters of his Epistle to the Hebrews, with the passage now
before us. That the Apostle follows the Greek version, need occasion no
surprise.  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) Neither is he to be
considered as undertaking professedly to treat this passage. He only
insists upon the adverb *To-day,* and upon the word *Rest* And first, he
states that the expression *to-day,* is not to be confined to the time
when the Law was given, but properly applies to the Gospel, when God
began to speak more openly. The fuller and more perfect declaration of
doctrine demanded the greater share of attention. God has not ceased to
speak: he has revealed his Son, and is daily inviting us to come unto
him; and, undoubtedly, it is our incumbent duty, under such an
opportunity, to obey his voice. The Apostle next reasons from the
*rest,* to an extent which we are not to suppose that the words of the
Psalmist themselves warrant.  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) He
takes it up as a first position, that since there was an implied promise
in the punishment here denounced, there must have been some better rest
promised to the people of God than the land of Canaan. For, when the
Jews had entered the land, God held out to his people the prospect of
another rest, which is defined by the Apostle to consist in that
renouncing of ourselves, whereby we rest from our own works while God
worketh in us. From this, he takes occasion to compare the old Sabbath,
or rest, under the Law, which was figurative, with the newness of
spiritual life.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) When his said that
he *swore in his wrath,* this intimates that he was in a manner freed to
inflict this punishment, that the provocation was of no common or slight
kind, but that their awful obstinacy inflamed his anger, and drew from
him this oath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc11003.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p3"></span> This psalm has no inscription, but the
Septuagint, Vulgate, Æthiopic, Arabic, and Syriac versions, and the
apostle Paul in <span id="iv-p3.1"></span>[Heb
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007)<span id="iv-p3.1"></span>, ascribe
it to David; so that there can be no doubt that it is one of the
compositions of the sweet singer of Israel.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc11003.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span> Horsley reads the second clause, “Let us
raise the loud peal of melody to the Rock of our salvation;” on which he
has the following note: “The verb <span id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>הריע
signifies to make a loud sound of any sort, either with the voice or
with instruments. In the Psalms it generally refers to the mingled din
of voices and various instruments, in the temple-service. This wide
sense of the word cannot be expressed otherwise in the English language
than by a peripharasis.” Bishop Mant, acting on this notion, has
ventured, conformably to it, to specify in his version some of the
instruments commonly used in the temple-worship: —

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>“Come, let us sing Jehovah’s praise!  
To him the pealing chorus raise,  
With trump, and harp, and cymbals ring;  
The rock on which our hopes are placed!”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc11003.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.i-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span> “The deep places of the earth,” which are
opposed to the “heights of the mountains,” plainly mean the deepest and
most retired parts of the terraqueous globe, which are explored by the
eye of God, and by his only. Horsely reads the verse thus, —

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>“The God in whose hand are the nethermost
recesses of the earth,  
Whose also are the inaccessible summits of the mountains.”

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>“This, and the following verse,” says he, “are
expositive of the greatness of the Godship of Jehovah, generally
mentioned in the lst verse. ‘The God, in whose hand.’ Thus, I have
endeavoured to preserve the full force of the Hebrew phrase <span
id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>אשר בידו.” Bythner’s version of the last member
is, “And the strength of the mountains is his.” He derives the noun
<span id="iv.i-p7.2"></span>ותועפות, *vethoaphoth*, which he renders
*strength*, from the verb <span id="iv.i-p7.3"></span>יעף, *yaaph*, *was
wearied*; and observes, that this is “a noun plural feminine,
*weariness*, — by antiphrasis, *strength*: is read four times in
Scripture, and is said of mountains, silver, and the unicorn, the
weariness and difficulty in overcoming which, denote their great
strength.” Pagninus gives a similar rendering. Montanus has <span
id="iv.i-p7.4"></span>*cacumina*, *the tops*, which the Septuagint seems
to agree, reading <span id="iv.i-p7.5"></span>τὰ ὕ ψη τῶν ὀρέων.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc11003.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>Deum ita
excellere, ut longe emineat supra omnem coelestem gloriam et quicquid
divinum est, non minus quam supra omne terrenum figmentum.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc11003.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span> “That is, so as to touch the floor with the
forehead, while the worshipper is prostrate on his hands and knees. —
See <span id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>[2Ch
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii-p3.1"></span>.” —
*Fry*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc11003.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="iv.ii-p7.1"></span>Il faut
neantmoins tousjours adjoustor ceste exception, que les fideles eslevans
les yeux au ciel, adorent Dieu spirituellement.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc11003.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span> Hammond, after making a similar remark,
adds — “But it is more reasonable to take the explanation from the
different significations of <span id="iv.ii-p10.1"></span>רעה, \[the
word which Calvin renders *pasture*,\] as for *feeding*, so for
*governing*, equally applicable to men and cattle; from whence it is but
analogy, that <span id="iv.ii-p10.2"></span>מרעה, which signifies *a
pasture*, where cattle are fed, should also signify *dominion* or
*kingdom*, or any kind of <span id="iv.ii-p10.3"></span>πολιτεία,
wherein a *people* are *governed* And then the other part, *the sheep of
his hand*, will be a fit, though figurative, expression; the shepherd
that feeds, and rules, and leads the *sheep*, doing it by his *hand*,
which manageth the rod and staff, <span id="iv.ii-p10.4"></span>[Ps
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii-p10.4"></span>.
The Jewish Arab reads, ‘the people of his feeding, or flock, and the
sheep of his guidance.’”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc11003.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.ii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span> The text reads, “<span
id="iv.ii-p11.1"></span>Si tantum nomen Legis posuisset.” This is
evidently a mistake of the printer for <span
id="iv.ii-p11.2"></span>*Gregis*. The French version reads — “<span
id="iv.ii-p11.3"></span>Le Troupeau.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc11003.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.ii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span> The flock under his conduct or guidance.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc11003.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span> The ancient Jewish writers frequently apply
these words to the Messiah: and they have argued from them, that if all
Israel would repent but one day the Messiah would come; because it is
said, “To-day, if ye will hear his voice.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc11003.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p15"></span> Hammond observes, that the particle <span
id="iv.ii-p15.1"></span>אם, *im*, here rendered *if*, is in other places
often used in an optative signification, as in <span
id="iv.ii-p15.2"></span>[Ex 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ii-p15.2"></span>, “If thou wilt” for “O that thou wouldst
forgive them;” and that therefore the rendering here may be, “O that
to-day ye would hear his voice;” — a reading, he adds, which “may be
thought needful to the making the sense complete in this verse, which
otherwise is thought to hang (though not so fitly) on the 8th verse, and
not to be finished without it.” He then goes on to say, “But it may be
considered also, whether this verse be not more complete in itself by
rendering <span id="iv.ii-p15.3"></span>אם, *if*, thus: ‘Let us worship
and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker; for he is our God,
and we are the people of his pasture, and sheep of his hand, if ye will
hear his voice to-day,’ *i* *e*., speedily, — if ye will speedily
perform obedience to him, — setting the words in form of a conditional
promise, thereby to enforce the performance of the condition on our
part. The condition to the performance of which they are exhorted,
(verse 6,) is paying God the worship and lowly obedience due to him; and
the promise secured to them in this performance, that *he* will be their
*God*, and they *the people of his pasture*, *etc*., *i* *e*., that God
will take the same care of them that a shepherd does of his sheep;
preserve them from all enemies, Midianites, Philistines, Canaanites,
etc.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc11003.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.ii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.ii-p16.1"></span>Non erit
proprie conditionalis, sed expositiva; vel pro temporis adverbio
sumetur.” — *Lat*. — “<span id="iv.ii-p16.2"></span>Ne sera pas
proprement conditionnelle, mais expositive; ou bien elle sera prinse
pour *Quand*.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc11003.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span> That is, in the wilderness of Midian, into
which the people entered after passing through the Red Sea. In their way
towards Horeb, their fourth station was at Rephidim, where they were
chargeable with the sinful conduct here referred to.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc11003.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span> Paul, in quoting this passage in <span
id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>[Heb 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>, joins the words *forty years* to the
concluding part of the preceding verse: “When your fathers tempted me,
proved me, and saw my works forty years;” whereas, in the Hebrew text,
and as Calvin connects them, they form the commencement of the 10th
verse. But this depends on the punctuation system of the Masorites,
which the Apostle has not followed. It is of little consequence whether
the words *forty years* are connected with the close of the 9th verse or
the beginning of the 10th; the sense in either case being substantially
the same. If the Israelites tempted God forty years, he strove with them
during that period; and if he strove with them for so long a time, it
was because they tempted him. The Apostle shows that either of these
readings may be indifferently adopted, when, in the 17th verse of that
chapter, instead of speaking of the forty years as the space of time
during which the Israelites tempted God, he speaks of them as the period
during which God was grieved by that rebellious people. “But with whom
was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose
carcasses fell in the wilderness?”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc11003.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span> <span id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>עם תעי לבב,
*am toe lebab*, “a nation wandering of heart.” <span
id="iv.iii-p5.2"></span>תעי, *toe*, is from <span
id="iv.iii-p5.3"></span>תעה, *taah*, *he wandered*, *deviated* The LXX.,
whom Paul follows in <span id="iv.iii-p5.4"></span>[Heb
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii-p5.4"></span>,
have <span id="iv.iii-p5.5"></span>ἀεὶ πλανωνται; from which Reeves
conjectures, that instead of <span id="iv.iii-p5.6"></span>עם תעי, <span
id="iv.iii-p5.7"></span>*populus erratium*, “a people that do err;” they
might have read,<span id="iv.iii-p5.8"></span>עלם תעי “always erring.”
The phrase, *erring in heart*, is emphatic, indicating the great stress
which God lays on the state of the heart. Moses Stuart, in his
commentary on this passage, as quoted in <span
id="iv.iii-p5.9"></span>[Heb 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii-p5.9"></span>, understands *the heart* as pleonastic; so that
the phrase imports simply, *They always err*, *i* *e*., they are
continually departing from the right way. But the phrase, we think, is
intended to convey another idea, — that God, in judging of the character
and conduct of men, has a special regard to the state of the heart. It
is the heart which he principally requires in our obedience; and this he
chiefly looks to in men’s disobedience. When it is upright as to its
general frame, design, and principle, he will bear with many failings
and shortcomings. When it is insincere, he will set no value whatever on
any outward professions or actions, however good in themselves. We
ourselves act upon the same principle, and are justified in doing so. If
a man discovers that he has just ground to suspect that the hearts of
those with whom he has intimate intercourse, are false and deceitful
towards him, he ceases to respect and love them, whatever may be their
professions of friendship. The lines of the Greek poet, though
inconsistent with the subdued feeling and tone of Christian benevolence,
which, in this case, instead of hatred to the person, produces regret
and grief; yet show that men universally, from their very nature, take
into account the state of the heart in estimating the professions and
conduct of others towards them: —

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span>*“*Ecqov gar moi ceinov ojmwv ai\`dao
pulhsin  
Ov c eJteron men ceuqei eni fresin, allo de bazei*”*

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>“I hate him like the gates of hell, who,
pretending fairly to me,  
reserves other things in his mind.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc11003.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span> The oath to which God here refers is
recorded in <span id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>[Num.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#020),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc11003.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.iii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span> This remarkable part of Jewish history is
alluded to in other places, and for various purposes. Sometimes to
reproach the Israelites on account of their sins, as in <span
id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>[De 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii-p12.1"></span>, “And at Massah ye provoked the Lord to
wrath;” sometimes to warn them against falling into the like sins, as in
<span id="iv.iii-p12.2"></span>[De
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii-p12.2"></span>,
“Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God as ye tempted him in Massah;” and,
at other times, as an instance of the faithfulness of the Levites who
clave to God in these circumstances of trial, <span
id="iv.iii-p12.3"></span>[De 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii-p12.3"></span>, “And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy
Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with
whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc11003.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.iii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span> In our English Bible it is, “in the
provocation — in the day of temptation.” But the most eminent critics
agree with Calvin in thinking that it is better to retain the terms
*Meribah* and *Massah* than to translate them. The places called by
these names were so designated from the Israelites provoking and
tempting God at them; and the retaining of the proper names gives more
effect and liveliness to the allusion. See <span
id="iv.iii-p13.2"></span>[Psalm
81:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii-p13.2"></span>,
volume 3, page 316, n. 2.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc11003.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.iii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span> Mant and Walford suppose that it is at the
second part of verse 7, “To-day, if ye will hear his voice,” where God
is introduced as speaking. “By an almost imperceptible transition,”
remarks the former critic, “the person is here \[last clause of verse
7th\] changed; Jehovah becomes the speaker; and with a corresponding
change of topic, the Ode, which had commenced with a spiritual
exhortation to exult in the blessings of the Gospel, concludes with a
solemn, affectionate, and impressive admonition of the danger of
disobedience to it; leaving the warning upon the mind with an abruptness
peculiarly well calculated to excite attention and to produce the
desired effect.” Dimock conjectures, that, as God is introduced as
speaking in the last clause of the 7th verse, we should read with Mudge,
<span id="iv.iii-p14.1"></span>בקולי, for <span
id="iv.iii-p14.2"></span>בקלו, (or, as 37 MSS. and two others at first,
<span id="iv.iii-p14.3"></span>בקולו,) “Oh that you may hear *my voice*
this day: that you may not harden your hearts,” etc.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc11003.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.iii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p15.1"></span>Ab aliis
frigide audiri, et contemptim; ab aliis fastidiose respui; ab aliis
superbe rejici; ab aliis etiam furiose non sine probro et blasphemia
proscindi.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc11003.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.iii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p16.1"></span>Combien
qu’une telle perversite nous soit naturelle, toutesfois pource qu’elle
est volontaire, et que nous ne sommes pas insensibles comme les
pierres.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc11003.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p17.1"></span>Il ne
s’ensuit pas neantmoins qu’il soit en nostre puissance d’amollir nostre
coeur, ou de le flechir en l’une et l’autre part.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc11003.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p21"></span> “When the Scriptures speak of men as
*tempting* God, the meaning is, that men do that which puts the divine
patience, forbearance, goodness, etc., to a trial; *i*.*e*., makes it
difficult, as it were, to preserve a strict regard to these.” — *Stuart*
on <span id="iv.iii-p21.1"></span>[Heb
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc11003.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p22.1"></span>D’autant
qu’ils ont desire que la vertu de Dieu, laquelle leur estoit declaree
par tant d’experiences, leur fust manifestee, comme s’ils ne l’eussent
jamais cognue.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc11003.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p23.1"></span>Solus ille
strepitus, quasi omnium actionum catastrophe, palam ostenderit
insanabilem esse eorum pervicaciam.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc11003.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p26"></span> “*The men of that age*, or, as we say in
English, *the generation* then upon the stage.” — *Stuart* on <span
id="iv.iii-p26.1"></span>[Heb
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc11003.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.iii-p26.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p27.1"></span>προσωχθιζα
*I was indignant*, *was offended at* The word is Helenistic. The Greeks
use <span id="iv.iii-p27.2"></span>ὀχθέω and <span
id="iv.iii-p27.3"></span>ὀχθίζω According to etymology, it consists of
<span id="iv.iii-p27.4"></span>πρός, *to*, *against*, *upon*, and <span
id="iv.iii-p27.5"></span>ὀχθη, *bank*, *shore* It is applied primarily
to a ship infringing upon the shore, or, as we say, running aground. It
answers to the Hebrew <span id="iv.iii-p27.6"></span>מאס קוט קו, etc.” —
*Stuart* on <span id="iv.iii-p27.7"></span>[Heb
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii-p27.7"></span>

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc11003.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p30.1"></span>Satis
superque innotuit, quia corrigi nullo modo poterant, non temere fuisse
abdicatos a requie Dei.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc11003.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p31"></span> See Commentary, <span
id="iv.iii-p31.2"></span>[Psalm
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii-p31.2"></span>,
and 89:35. “The Hebrews used <span id="iv.iii-p31.4"></span>אם, in the
latter clause of an oath, which ran thus: *God do so to me*, if (<span
id="iv.iii-p31.5"></span>אם) *I do thus*, etc. See the full form in
<span id="iv.iii-p31.6"></span>[1Sa
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#017)<span id="iv.iii-p31.6"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p31.7"></span>[2Sa
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#035)<span id="iv.iii-p31.7"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p31.8"></span>[2Ki
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#031)<span id="iv.iii-p31.8"></span>.
The former part of this oath was sometimes omitted, and <span
id="iv.iii-p31.9"></span>אם had then the force of a strong negative; see
<span id="iv.iii-p31.10"></span>[2Sa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii-p31.10"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p31.11"></span>[1Sa
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#045)<span id="iv.iii-p31.11"></span>,
<span id="iv.iii-p31.12"></span>*alibi*; *vide* Ges. Heb. Lex. under
<span id="iv.iii-p31.13"></span>אם, number 6. So in <span
id="iv.iii-p31.14"></span>[Ps
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii-p31.14"></span>,
<span id="iv.iii-p31.15"></span>אם יבאון, contains a strong negative,
which the LXX., and Paul after them, (<span
id="iv.iii-p31.16"></span>[Heb
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii-p31.16"></span>,)
have rendered <span id="iv.iii-p31.17"></span>εἰ εἰσελεύσονται, *they
shall not enter*.” — *Stuart* on <span id="iv.iii-p31.18"></span>[Heb
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii-p31.18"></span>.
“The expression,” says Dr Owen, “is imperfect, and relates to the oath
of God, wherein he sware by himself. As if he had said, ‘Let me not
live, or not be God, if they enter,’ which is the greatest and highest
asseveration that they should not enter. And the concealment of the
engagement is not, as some suppose, from a <span
id="iv.iii-p31.19"></span>παθος, causing an abruptness of speech, but
from the reverence of the person spoken of. The expression is perfectly
and absolutely negative. So <span id="iv.iii-p31.20"></span>[Mr
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii-p31.20"></span>,
with <span id="iv.iii-p31.21"></span>[Mt
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii-p31.21"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p31.22"></span>[1Sa
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044)<span id="iv.iii-p31.22"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii-p31.23"></span>[1Ki
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii-p31.23"></span>.” — *Commentary* on <span
id="iv.iii-p31.24"></span>[Hebrews
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii-p31.24"></span>.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc11003.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.iii-p31.25"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p32"></span> See volume 1, page 103, note.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc11003.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iv.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p33.1"></span>Subtilius
disputat quam ferant Prophetae verba.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc11003.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="iv.iii-p34.1"></span>Vetus et
legale Sabbathum quod umbratile tantum erat, cum spirituali vitae
novitate.” — *Lat*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 96](cc11004)
