[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11009)  [Next](cc11011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>PSALM 102

<span id="xi-p2"></span>This prayer seems to have been dictated to the
faithful when they were languishing in captivity in Babylon. Sorrowful
and humbled, they first bewail their afflictions. In the next place,
they plead with God for the restoration of the holy city and temple. To
encourage themselves to come before him in prayer with the greater
confidence, they call to remembrance the Divine promises in reference to
the happy renovation both of the kingdom and of the priesthood; and they
not only assure themselves of deliverance from captivity, but also
beseech God to bring kings and nations in subjection to himself. In the
close of the psalm, after having interposed a brief complaint concerning
their distressing and afflicted condition, they draw consolation from
the eternity of God; for, in adopting his servants to a better hope, he
has separated them from the common lot of men.

<span id="xi-p3"></span>A prayer for the afflicted, when he shall be
shut up, and shall pour out his meditation before Jehovah.

<span id="xi-p4"></span>Whoever of the prophets composed this psalm, it
is certain that he dictated it to the faithful as a form of prayer for
the re-establishment of the temple and the city. Some limit it to the
time when, after the return of the Jews from Babylon, the building of
the temple was hindered by the neighboring nations; but with this I
cannot agree. I am rather of opinion that the poem was written before
the return of the people, when the time of their promised deliverance
was just at hand; for then the prophets began to be more earnest in
lifting up the hearts of the godly according to these words of Isaiah,
(<span id="xi-p4.1"></span>[Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)<span id="xi-p4.1"></span>)
“Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.”  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) The design of the sacred poet was, not
only to inspire the people with courage, but also to excite in them
greater care about the welfare of the Church. The title of the psalm
indicates the end and purpose which it was intended to serve. Those who
translate the verbs in the past tense, *A prayer for the afflicted, when
he was in distress, and poured out his meditation,*  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) seem to give an incorrect view of the
mind of the prophet. He rather intended to relieve the sorrow of those
whose hearts he saw depressed; as if he had said, Although you may be
afflicted with anguish and despair, you must not on that account desist
from prayer. Some translate the verb <span id="xi-p6.2"></span>עטף,
*ataph, when he shall hide himself,* and conceive that this is a
metaphorical expression of the gesture of a man engaged in prayer, when,
on account of his grief, unable to lift up his face, he, as it were,
hides himself, and keeps his head wrapped up in his bosom. But there
appears to me to be an elegant play upon the words, when the distresses
of the mind, and its being *shut up,* are spoken of, on the one hand,
and *the pouring out* of prayers on the other; teaching us that, when we
are so shut up by grief as to shun the light and presence of men, the
gate is so far from being shut against our prayers, that then in truth
is the most proper season for engaging in prayer, for it is a singular
alleviation of our sorrows when we have opportunity freely to pour out
our hearts before God. The verb <span id="xi-p6.3"></span>שוח, *suach,*
often denotes *to pray;* but, as it also signifies *to meditate,* the
noun derived from it properly means, in this place, *meditation.* It is,
moreover, to be observed that, by these words, the Psalmist admonishes
the Israelites as to the frame of mind with which it became them to use
this form of prayer at the throne of grace; as if he had said, that he
prescribed it to those only who were distressed on account of the
desolate condition of the Church.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah! hear my prayer, and let my
cry come to thee. **2.** Hide not thy face from me in the day of my
affliction; incline thy ear to me: in the day when I cry make haste,
answer me.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span><span id="xi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**1** *O Jehovah! hear my prayer* This
earnestness shows, again, that these words were not dictated to be
pronounced by the careless and light-hearted, which could not have been
done without grossly insulting God. In speaking thus, the captive Jews
bear testimony to the severe and excruciating distress which they
endured, and to the ardent desire to obtain some alleviation with which
they were inflamed. No person could utter these words with the mouth
without profaning the name of God, unless he were, at the same time,
actuated by a sincere and earnest affection of heart. We ought
particularly to attend to the circumstance already adverted to, that we
are thus stirred up by the Holy Spirit to the duty of prayer in behalf
of the common welfare of the Church. Whilst each man takes sufficient
care of his own individual interests, there is scarcely one in a hundred
affected as he ought to be with the calamities of the Church. We have,
therefore, the more need of incitements, even as we see the prophet here
endeavoring, by an accumulation of words, to correct our coldness and
sloth. I admit that the heart ought to move and direct the tongue to
prayer; but, as it often flags or performs its duty in a slow and
sluggish manner, it requires to be aided by the tongue. There is here a
reciprocal influence. As the heart, on the one hand, ought to go before
the words, and frame them, so the tongue, on the other, aids and
remedies the coldness and torpor of the heart. True believers may indeed
often pray not only earnestly but also fervently, while yet not a single
word proceeds from the mouth. There is, however, no doubt that by
*crying* the prophet means the vehemence into which grief constrains us
to break forth.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span><span id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**2** *Hide not thy face from me in the day of
my affliction* The prayer, that God would not hide his face, is far from
being superfluous. As the people had been languishing in captivity for
the space of nearly seventy years, it might seem that God had for ever
turned away his favor from them. But they are, notwithstanding,
commanded, in their extreme affliction, to have recourse to prayer as
their only remedy. They affirm that they cry *in the day of their
affliction,* not as hypocrites are accustomed to do, who utter their
complaints in a tumultuous manner, but because they feel that they are
then called upon by God to cry to him.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>*Make haste, answer me* Having elsewhere
spoken more fully of these forms of expression, it may suffice, at
present, briefly to observe, that when God permits us to lay open before
him our infirmities without reserve, and patiently bears with our
foolishness, he deals in a way of great tenderness towards us. To pour
out our complaints before him after the manner of little children would
certainly be to treat his Majesty with very little reverence, were it
not that he has been pleased to allow us such freedom. I purposely make
use of this illustration, that the weak, who are afraid to draw near to
God, may understand that they are invited to him with such gentleness as
that nothing may hinder them from familiarly and confidently approaching
him.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For my days are consumed like smoke
 <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) and my bones are burnt up as a
hearth.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) **4.** My heart is
smitten, and withered like grass, because I have forgotten to eat my
bread. **5.** By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to
my flesh.  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) **6.** I have become
like a pelican  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) of the
wilderness; I have become like an owl  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) of the deserts. **7.** I have watched,
and have been like a sparrow which is alone upon the house-top.  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span><span id="xi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>**3** *For my days are consumed like smoke*
These expressions are hyperbolical, but still they show how deeply the
desolation of the Church ought to wound the hearts of the people of God.
Let every man, therefore, carefully examine himself on this head. If we
do not prefer the Church to all the other objects of our solicitude, we
are unworthy of being accounted among her members. Whenever we meet with
such forms of expression as these, let us remember that they reproach
our slothfulness in not being affected with the afflictions of the
Church as we ought. The Psalmist compares his days *to smoke,* and *his
bones to the stones of the hearth,* which, in the course of time, are
consumed by the fire. By *bones* he means the strength of man. And, were
not men devoid of feeling, such a melancholy spectacle of the wrath of
God would assuredly have the effect of drying up their bones, and
wasting away their whole rigor.

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span><span id="xi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span>**4** *My heart is smitten, and dried up
like grass* Here he employs a third similitude, declaring that his heart
is withered, and wholly dried up like mown grass. But he intends to
express something more than that his heart was withered, and his bones
reduced to a state of dryness. His language implies, that as the grass,
when it is cut down, can no longer receive juice from the earth, nor
retain the life and rigor which it derived from the root, so his heart
being, as it were, torn and cut off from its root, was deprived of its
natural nourishment. The meaning of the last clause, *I have forgotten
to eat my bread,* is, My sorrow has been so great, that I have neglected
my ordinary food. The Jews, it is true, during their captivity in
Babylon, did eat their food; and it would have been an evidence of their
having fallen into sinful despair, had they starved themselves to death.
But what he means to say is, that he was so afflicted with sorrow as to
refuse all delights, and to deprive himself even of food and drink. True
believers may cease for a time to partake of their ordinary food, when,
by voluntary fasting, they humbly beseech God to turn away his wrath,
but the prophet does not here speak of that kind of abstinence from
bodily sustenance. He speaks of such as is the effect of extreme mental
distress, which is accompanied with a loathing of food, and a weariness
of all things. In the close of the verse, he adds, that his body was, as
it were, consuming or wasting away, so that his bones clave to his skin.

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span><span id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span>**6** *I have become like a pelican of the
wilderness* Instead of rendering the original word by *pelican,* some
translate it *bittern,* and others the *cuckoo.* The Hebrew word here
used for *owl* is rendered by the Septuagint <span
id="xi.ii-p17.1"></span>νυκτικοραξ, which signifies *a bat.*  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) But as even the Jews are doubtful as
to the kind of birds here intended, let it suffice us simply to know,
that in this verse there are pointed out certain melancholy birds, whose
place of abode is in the holes of mountains and in deserts, and whose
note, instead of being delightful and sweet to the ear, inspires those
who hear it with terror. I am removed, as if he had said, from the
society of men, and am become almost like a wild beast of the forest.
Although the people of God dwelt in a well cultivated and fertile
region, yet the whole country of Chaldea and Assyria was to them like a
wilderness, since their hearts were bound by the strongest ties of
affection to the temple, and to their native country from which they had
been expelled. The third similitude, which is taken from *the sparrow,*
denotes such grief as produces the greatest uneasiness. The word <span
id="xi.ii-p18.2"></span>צפור, *tsippor,* signifies in general any kind
of bird; but I have no doubt that it is here to be understood of the
sparrow. It is described as *solitary* or *alone,* because it has been
bereaved of its mate; and so deeply affected are these little birds when
separated from their mates, that their distress exceeds almost all
sorrow.  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141)

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#008)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**8.** My enemies have reviled me daily; and
those who are mad against me have sworn by me.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) **9.** For I have eaten ashes like
bread, and mingled my drink with weeping, \[or, with my tears,\] **10.**
On account of thy indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up,
and cast me down. **11.** My days are like a shadow which declineth; and
I am dried up like the grass.

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span><span id="xi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span>**8.** *My enemies have reviled me daily*
The faithful, to excite the compassion of God towards them, tell him
that they are not only objects of mockery to their enemies, but also
that they swore by them. The indignity complained of is, that the
ungodly so shamefully triumphed over God’s chosen people, as even to
borrow from their calamities a form of swearing and imprecation. This
was to regard the fate of the Jews as a signal pattern in uttering the
language of imprecation. When, therefore, at the present day the
ungodly, in like manner, give themselves loose reins in pouring forth
against us contumelious language, let us learn to fortify ourselves with
this armor, by which such kind of temptation, however sharp, may be
overcome. The Holy Spirit, in dictating to the faithful this form of
prayer, meant to testify that God is moved by such revilings to succor
his people; even as we find it stated in <span
id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023)<span id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>,

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span>“Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed,
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice? even against the Holy One
of Israel;”

<span id="xi.iii-p10"></span>and in the verse immediately preceding the
prophet had said, “He hath despised thee, O daughter of Zion! against
thee hath he shaken the head, O daughter of Jerusalem!” It is surely an
inestimable comfort that the more insolent our enemies are against us,
the more is God incited to gird himself to aid us. In the second clause
the inspired writer expresses more strongly the cruelty of his enemies,
when he speaks of their being *mad against him* As the verb <span
id="xi.iii-p10.1"></span>הלל, *halal,* which we have rendered *mad,*
generally signifies *to praise,* it might here be understood as having,
by the figure antiphrasis, a sense the very opposite — *those who
dispraised* or *reproached me.* But it is better to follow the commonly
received interpretation. Some maintain that they are called *mad,*
because they manifested their own folly, making it evident from the
manner in which they acted, that they were worthless persons; but this
opinion does too much violence to the text. The more satisfactory sense
is, that the people of God charge revilers with cruelty or furious
hatred.

<span id="xi.iii-p11"></span><span id="xi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p12"></span>**9** *For I have eaten ashes like bread*
Some think that the order is here inverted, and that the letter <span
id="xi.iii-p12.1"></span>כ, *caph,* the sign of similitude, which is put
before <span id="xi.iii-p12.2"></span>לחם, *lechem,* the word for
*bread,* ought to be placed before <span id="xi.iii-p12.3"></span>אפר,
*epher,* the word for *ashes;* as if it had been said, I find no more
relish for my bread than I do for ashes; and the reason is, because
sorrow of heart produces loathing of food. But the simpler meaning is,
that lying prostrate on the ground, they licked, as it were, the earth,
*and so did eat ashes instead of bread.* It was customary for those who
mourned to stretch themselves at full length with their faces on the
ground. The prophet, however, intended to express a different idea — to
intimate, that when he partook of his meals, there was no table set
before him, but his bread was thrown upon the ground to him in a foul
and disgusting manner. Speaking, therefore, in the person of the
faithful, he asserts that he was so fixed to the ground that he did not
even rise from it to take his food. The same sentiment is expressed in
the last part of the verse*, I have mingled my drink with weeping;* for
while mourners usually restrain their sorrow during the short time in
which they refresh themselves with food, he declares that his mourning
was without intermission. Some, instead of reading in the first clause,
*as bread,* read, *in bread;*  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143)
and as the two letters, <span id="xi.iii-p13.5"></span>כ, *caph,* and
<span id="xi.iii-p13.6"></span>ב, *beth,* nearly resemble each other, I
prefer reading *in bread,* which agrees better with the second clause.

<span id="xi.iii-p14"></span><span id="xi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p15"></span>**10.** *On account of thy anger and thy
wrath* He now declares that the greatness of his grief proceeded not
only from outward troubles and calamities, but from a sense that these
were a punishment inflicted upon him by God. And surely there is nothing
which ought to wound our hearts more deeply, than when we feel that God
is angry with us. The meaning then amounts to this — O Lord! I do not
confine my attention to those things which would engage the mind of
worldly men; but I rather turn my thoughts to thy wrath; for were it not
that thou art angry with us, we would have been still enjoying the
inheritance given us by thee, from which we have justly been expelled by
thy displeasure. When God then strikes us with his hand, we should not
merely groan under the strokes inflicted upon us, as foolish men usually
do, but should chiefly look to the cause that we may be truly humbled.
This is a lesson which it would be of great advantage to us to learn.

<span id="xi.iii-p16"></span>The last clause of the verse, *Thou hast
lifted me up, and cast me down,* may be understood in two ways. As we
lift up what we intend to throw down with greater violence against the
ground, the sentence may denote a violent method of casting down, as if
it had been said, Thou hast crushed me more severely by throwing me down
headlong from on high, than if I had merely fallen from the station
which I occupied.  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) But this
seems to be another amplification of his grief, nothing being more
bitter to an individual than to be reduced from a happy condition to
extreme misery, the prophet mournfully complains that the chosen people
were deprived of the distinguished advantages which God had conferred
upon them in time past, so that the very remembrance of his former
goodness, which should have afforded consolation to them, embittered
their sorrow. Nor was it the effect of ingratitude to turn the
consideration of the divine benefits, which they had formerly received,
into matter of sadness; since they acknowledged that their being reduced
to such a state of wretchedness and degradation was through their own
sins. God has no delight in changing, as if, after having given us some
taste of his goodness, he intended forthwith to deprive us of it. As his
goodness is inexhaustible, so his blessing would flow upon us without
intermission, were it not for our sins which break off the course of it.
Although, then, the remembrance of God’s benefits ought to assuage our
sorrows, yet still it is a great aggravation of our calamity to have
fallen from an elevated position, and to find that we have so provoked
his anger, as to make him withdraw from us his benignant and bountiful
hand. Thus when we consider that the image of God, which distinguished
Adam, was the brightness of the celestial glory; and when, on the
contrary, we now see the ignominy and degradation to which God has
subjected us in token of his wrath, this contrast cannot surely fail of
making us feel more deeply the wretchedness of our condition. Whenever,
therefore, God, after having stripped us of the blessings which he had
conferred upon us, gives us up to reproach, let us learn that we have so
much the greater cause to lament, because, through our own fault, we
have turned light into darkness.

<span id="xi.iii-p18"></span><span id="xi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p19"></span>**11.** *My days are like the shadow which
declineth*  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) When the sun is
directly over our heads, that is to say, at mid-day, we do not observe
such sudden changes of the shadows which his light produces; but when he
begins to decline towards the west the shadows vary almost every moment,
This is the reason why the sacred writer expressly makes mention of *the
shadow which declineth* What he attributes to the afflicted Church seems
indeed to be equally applicable to all men; but he had a special reason
for employing this comparison to illustrate the condition of the Church
when subjected to the calamity of exile. It is true, that as soon as we
advance towards old age, we speedily fall into decay. But the complaint
here is, that this befell the people of God in the very flower of their
age. By the term *days* is to be understood the whole course of their
life; and the meaning is, that the captivity was to the godly as the
setting of the sun, because they quickly failed. In the end of the verse
the similitude of *withered grass,* used a little before, is repeated,
to intimate that their life during the captivity was involved in many
sorrows which dried up in them the very sap of life. Nor is this
wonderful, since to live in that condition would have been worse than a
hundred deaths had they not been sustained by the hope of future
deliverance. But although they were not altogether overwhelmed by
temptation, they must have been in great distress, because they saw
themselves abandoned by God.

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**12.** And thou, O Jehovah! shalt dwell for
ever; and the memorial of thee from generation to generation. **13.**
Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion; for the time to pity her,
for the appointed time, is come. **14.** For thy servants take pleasure
in her stones, and will have compassion upon her dust.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**12.** *And thou, O Jehovah! shalt dwell for
ever* When the prophet, for his own encouragement, sets before himself
the eternity of God, it seems, at first sight, to be a far-fetched
consolation; for what benefit will accrue to us from the fact that God
sits immutable on his heavenly throne, when, at the same time, our frail
and perishing condition does not permit us to continue unmoved for a
single moment? And, what is more, this knowledge of the blessed repose
enjoyed by God enables us the better to perceive that our life is a mere
illusion. But the inspired writer, calling to remembrance the promises
by which God had declared that he would make the Church the object of
his special care, and particularly that remarkable article of the
covenant, “I will dwell in the midst of you,” (<span
id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>[Ex 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008)<span
id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>) and, trusting to that sacred and indissoluble
bond, has no hesitation in representing all the godly languishing,
though they were in a state of suffering and wretchedness, as partakers
of this celestial glory in which God dwells. The word *memorial* is also
to be viewed in the same light. What advantage would we derive from this
eternity and immutability of God’s being, unless we had in our hearts
the knowledge of him, which, produced by his gracious covenant, begets
in us the confidence arising from a mutual relationship between him and
us? The meaning then is, “We are like withered grass, we are decaying
every moment, we are not far from death, yea rather, we are, as it were,
already dwelling in the grave; but since thou, O God! hast made a
covenant with us, by which thou hast promised to protect and defend
thine own people, and hast brought thyself into a gracious relation to
us, giving us the fullest assurance that thou wilt always dwell in the
midst of us, instead of desponding, we must be of good courage; and
although we may see only ground for despair if we depend upon ourselves,
we ought nevertheless to lift up our minds to the heavenly throne, from
which thou wilt at length stretch forth thy hand to help us.” Whoever is
in a moderate degree acquainted with the sacred writings, will readily
acknowledge that whenever we are besieged with death, in a variety of
forms, we should reason thus: As God continues unchangeably the same —
“without variableness or shadow of turning” — nothing can hinder him
from aiding us; and this he will do, because we have his word, by which
he has laid himself under obligation to us, and because he has deposited
with us his own memorial, which contains in it a sacred and indissoluble
bond of fellowship.

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span><span id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>**13.** *Thou shalt arise, and have mercy
upon Zion*. We have here the conclusion drawn from the truth stated in
the preceding verse — God is eternal, and therefore he will have
compassion upon Zion. God’s eternity is to be considered as impressed
upon the memorial, or word, by which he has brought himself under
obligation to maintain our welfare. Besides, as he is not destitute of
the power, and as it is impossible for him to deny himself, we ought not
to entertain any apprehension of his failing to accomplish, in his own
time, what he has promised. We have observed, in another place, that,
the verb *to arise* refers to what is made apparent to the eye of sense;
for although he continues always immutable, yet, in putting forth his
power, he manifests his majesty by the external act, as it is termed.

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span>When the prophet treats of the restoration of
the Church, he sets forth the divine mercy as its cause. He represents
this mercy under a twofold aspect, and therefore employs different
words. In the first place, as in the matter under consideration, the
good deserts of men are entirely out of the question, and as God cannot
be led from any cause external to himself to build up his Church, the
prophet traces the cause of it solely to the free goodness of God. In
the second place, he contemplates this mercy as connected with the
Divine promises. *Thou shalt have mercy upon Zion, for the time
appointed, according to thy good pleasure, is come* Meanwhile, it is to
be observed that, in magnifying the Divine mercy, his design was to
teach true believers that their safety depended on it alone. But we must
now attend to what time is alluded to. The word <span
id="xi.iv-p8.1"></span>מועד, *moed,* signifies all kind of fixed or
appointed days. There is, then, beyond all doubt, a reference to the
prophecy of Jeremiah, recorded in <span id="xi.iv-p8.2"></span>[Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="xi.iv-p8.2"></span>,
and repeated in the last chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, at
the 21st verse. That the faithful might not sink into despondency,
through the long continuance of their calamities, they needed to be
supported by the hope that an end to their captivity had been appointed
by God, and that it would not extend beyond seventy years. Daniel was
employed in meditating on this very topic, when “he set his face unto
the Lord God, to seek, by prayer and supplications,” the
re-establishment of the Church, (<span id="xi.iv-p8.3"></span>[Da
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002)<span id="xi.iv-p8.3"></span>) In
like manner, the object now aimed at by the prophet was to encourage
both himself and others to confidence in prayer, putting God in mind of
this remarkable prophecy, as an argument to induce him to bring to a
termination their melancholy captivity. And surely if, in our prayers,
we do not continually remember the Divine promises, we only cast forth
our desires into the air like smoke. It is, however, to be observed,
that although the time of the promised deliverance was approaching, or
had already arrived, yet the prophet does not cease from the exercise of
prayer, to which God stirs us up by means of his word. And although the
time was fixed, yet he calls upon God, for the performance of his
covenant, in such a manner, as that he is still betaking himself to his
free goodness alone; for the promises by which God brings himself under
obligation to us do not, in any degree, obscure his grace.

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span><span id="xi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span>**14.** *For thy servants take pleasure in
her stones* To restrict this to Cyrus and Darius is altogether
unsuitable. It is not at all wonderful to find the Jewish doctors
hunting, with excessive eagerness, after foolish subtilties; but I am
surprised that some of our modern commentators subscribe to such a poor
and cold interpretation. I am aware that, in some places, the
unbelieving and the wicked are called the servants of God, as in <span
id="xi.iv-p10.1"></span>[Jer 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009)<span
id="xi.iv-p10.1"></span>, because God makes use of them as instruments
for executing his judgments. Nay, I admit that Cyrus is called by name
God’s chosen servant, (<span id="xi.iv-p10.2"></span>[Isa
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028)<span id="xi.iv-p10.2"></span>)
but the Holy Spirit would not have bestowed so honorable a title, either
on him or Darius, without some qualification. Besides, it is probable
that this psalm was composed before the edict was published, which
granted the people liberty to return to their native country. It
therefore follows, that God’s people alone are included in the catalogue
of his servants, because it is their purpose, during the whole of their
life, to obey his will in all things. The prophet, I have no doubt,
speaks in general of the whole Church, intimating that this was not the
wish entertained merely by one man, but was shared by the whole body of
the Church. The more effectually to induce God to listen to his prayer,
he calls upon all the godly, who were then in the world, to join with
him in the same request. It, unquestionably, very much contributes to
increase the confidence of success, when supplications are made by all
the people of God together, as if in the person of one man, according to
what the Apostle Paul declares,

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span>“Ye also, helping together by prayer for us,
that, for the gift bestowed upon us, by the means of many persons,
thanks may be given by many on our behalf.” (<span
id="xi.iv-p11.1"></span>[2Co 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)<span
id="xi.iv-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span>Farther, when the deformed materials which
remained of the ruins of the temple and city are emphatically termed
*the stones of Zion,* this is designed to intimate, not only that the
faithful in time past were affected with the outward splendor of the
temple, when, besides attracting the eyes of men, it had power to ravish
with admiration all their senses, but also, that although the temple was
destroyed, and nothing was to be seen where it stood but hideous
desolation, yet their attachment to it continued unalterable, and they
acknowledged the glory of God, in its crumbling stones and decayed
rubbish. As the temple was built by the appointment of God, and as he
had promised its restoration, it was, doubtless, proper and becoming
that the godly should not withdraw their affections from its ruins.
Meanwhile, as an antidote against the discouraging influence of the
taunting mockery of the heathen, they required to look into the Divine
word for something else than what presented itself to their bodily eyes.
Knowing that the very site of the temple was consecrated to God, and
that that sacred edifice was to be rebuilt on the same spot, they did
not cease to regard it with reverence, although its stones lay in
disorder, mutilated and broken, and heaps of useless rubbish were to be
seen scattered here and there. The sadder the desolation is to which the
Church has been brought, the less ought our affections to be alienated
from her. Yea, rather, this compassion which the faithful then
exercised,  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) ought to draw from
us sighs and groans; and would to God that the melancholy description in
this passage were not so applicable to our own time as it is! He, no
doubt, has his churches erected in some places, where he is purely
worshipped; but, if we cast our eyes upon the whole world, we behold his
word every where trampled under foot, and his worship defiled by
countless abominations. Such being the case, his holy temple is
assuredly every where demolished, and in a state of wretched desolation;
yea, even those small churches in which he dwells are torn and
scattered. What are these humble erections, when compared with that
splendid edifice described by Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Zechariah? But no
desolation ought to prevent us from loving the very stones and dust of
the Church. Let us leave the Papists to be proud of their altars, their
huge buildings, and their other exhibitions of pomp and splendor; for
all that heathenish magnificence is nothing else but an abomination in
the sight of God and his angels, whereas the ruins of the true temple
are sacred.

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#015)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**15.** And the nations shall fear the name of
Jehovah,  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) and all the kings of
the earth thy glory. **16.** For Jehovah hath built up Zion, and hath
appeared in his glory. **17.** He hath regarded the prayer of the
solitary,  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) and hath not despised
their prayers.  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) **18.** This
shall be registered for the generation that is to come: and the people
to be created shall praise him.  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150)

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span><span id="xi.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>**15.** *And the nations shall fear the name
of Jehovah* The prophet here describes the fruit which would result from
the deliverance of the ancient tribes; which is, that thereby God’s
glory would be rendered illustrious among nations and kings. He tacitly
intimates, that when the Church is oppressed, the Divine glory is at the
same time debased; even as the God of Israel was, no doubt, at the
period referred to, derided by the ungodly, as if he had been destitute
of the power to succor his people. It is therefore declared, that if he
redeem them, it will afford such a remarkable proof of his power as to
constrain the Gentiles to reverence him whom they contemned.

<span id="xi.v-p12"></span><span id="xi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p13"></span>The concluding part of the 16th verse, *He
hath appeared in his glory,* refers to the manifestation which God made
of himself when he brought forth his Church from the darkness of death;
even as it is said in another place concerning her first deliverance,
“Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominions” (<span
id="xi.v-p13.1"></span>[Ps 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002)<span
id="xi.v-p13.1"></span>) In like manner in the present passage, by again
gathering to himself his people who were dispersed, and by raising his
Church, as it were, from death to life, he appeared in his glory. It is
surely no ordinary consolation to know that the love of God towards us
is so great, that he will have his glory to shine forth in our
salvation. It is true, that when the pious Jews were in the midst of
their afflictions, the working of divine power was hidden from them; but
they nevertheless always beheld it by the eye of faith, and in the
mirror of the divine promises.

<span id="xi.v-p14"></span><span id="xi.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p15"></span>**17** *He hath regarded the prayer of the
solitary* It is worthy of notice, that the deliverance of the chosen
tribes is ascribed to the prayers of the faithful. God’s mercy was
indeed the sole cause which led him to deliver his Church, according as
he had graciously promised this blessing to her; but to stir up true
believers to greater earnestness in prayer, he promises that what he has
purposed to do of his own good pleasure, he will grant in answer to
their requests. Nor is there any inconsistency between these two truths,
that God preserves the Church in the exercise of his free mercy, and
that he preserves her in answer to the prayers of his people; for as
their prayers are connected with the free promises, the effect of the
former depends entirely upon the latter. When it is said, that *the
prayers of the solitary* were heard, it is not to be understood of one
man only, (for in the clause immediately following, the plural number is
used;) but all the Jews, so long as they remained ejected from their own
country, and lived as exiles in a strange land, are called *solitary,*
because, although the countries of Assyria and Chaldea were remarkably
fertile and delightful, yet these wretched captives, as I have
previously observed, wandered there as in a wilderness. And as at that
time this solitary people obtained favor by sighing, so now when the
faithful are scattered, and are without their regular assemblies, the
Lord will hear their groanings in this desolate dispersion, provided
they all with one consent, and with unfeigned faith, earnestly breathe
after the restoration of the Church.

<span id="xi.v-p16"></span><span id="xi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p17"></span>**18.** *This shall be registered for the
generation that is to come* The Psalmist magnifies still more the fruit
of the deliverance of his people, for the purpose of encouraging himself
and others in the hope of obtaining the object of their prayers. He
intimates, that this will be a memorable work of God, the praise of
which shall be handed down to succeeding ages. Many things are worthy of
praise, which are soon forgotten; but the prophet distinguishes between
the salvation of the Church, for which he makes supplication, and common
benefits. By the word *register,* he means that the history of this
would be worthy of having a place in the public records, that the
remembrance of it might be transmitted to future generations. There is
in the words a beautiful contrast between the new creation of the people
and the present destruction; of which interpreters improperly omit to
take any notice. When the people were expelled from their country, the
Church was in a manner extinguished. Her very name might seem to be
dead, when the Jews were mingled among the heathen nations, and no
longer constituted a distinct and united body. Their return was
accordingly as it were a second birth. Accordingly, the prophet with
propriety expects a new creation. Although the Church had perished, he
was persuaded that God, by his wonderful power, would make her rise
again from death to renovated life. This is a remarkable passage,
showing that the Church is not always so preserved, as to continue to
outward appearance to survive, but that when she seems to be dead, she
is suddenly created anew, whenever it so pleases God. Let no desolation,
therefore, which befalls the Church, deprive us of the hope, that as God
once created the world out of nothing, so it is his proper work to bring
forth the Church from the darkness of death.

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**19.** For he hath looked down from the high
place of his holiness;  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) Jehovah
hath looked down from the heavens unto the earth, **20.** To hear the
groaning of the prisoner; to release the sons of death;  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) **21.** That the name of Jehovah may
be declared in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem; **22.** When the
peoples \[or the nations\] shall be gathered together, and the kingdoms
to serve Jehovah.

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span><span id="xi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span>**19.** *For he hath looked down from the
high place of his holiness* Now the prophet contemplates the deliverance
after which he breathes with anxious desire, as if it had been already
accomplished. That the malignity of men might not attempt to obscure
such a signal blessing of Heaven, he openly and in express terms claims
for God his rightful praise; and the people were constrained in many
ways to acknowledge therein the divine hand. Long before they were
dragged into captivity, this calamity had been foretold, that when it
took place the judgment of God might be clearly manifested; and at the
same time deliverance had been promised them, and the time specified to
be after the lapse of seventy years. The ingratitude of men therefore
could not devise or invent any other cause to which to ascribe their
return but the mere goodness of God. Accordingly, it is said, that *God
looked down from heaven,* that the Jews might not attribute to the grace
and favor of Cyrus the deliverance which evidently proceeded from
Heaven. *The high place of his holiness* or *sanctuary* is here
equivalent to heaven. As the temple, in some parts of Scripture, (<span
id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span>[Ps 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)<span
id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span> and <span id="xi.vi-p7.2"></span>[Ps
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)<span id="xi.vi-p7.2"></span>) is
called “the habitation of God,” in respect of men, so, that we may not
imagine that there is any thing earthly in God, he assigns to himself a
dwelling-place in heaven, not because he is shut up there, but that we
may seek him above the world.

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span><span id="xi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span>**20.** *To hear the groaning of the
prisoner* Here the prophet repeats once more what he had previously
touched upon concerning prayer, in order again to stir up the hearts of
the godly to engage in that exercise, and that after their deliverance
they might know it to have been granted to their faith, because,
depending on the divine promises, they had sent up their groanings to
heaven. He calls them *prisoners;* for although they were not bound in
fetters, their captivity resembled a most rigorous imprisonment. Yea, he
affirms a little after *that they were devoted to death,* to give them
to understand that their life and safety would have been altogether
hopeless, had they not been delivered from death by the extraordinary
power of God.

<span id="xi.vi-p10"></span><span id="xi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p11"></span>**21** *That the name of Jehovah may be
declared in Zion* Here is celebrated a still more ample and richer fruit
of this deliverance than has been previously mentioned, which is, that
the Jews would not only be united into one body to give thanks to God,
but that, when brought back to their own country, they would also gather
kings and nations into the same unity of faith, and into the same divine
worship with themselves. At that time it was a thing altogether
incredible, not only that the praises of God should within a short
period resound, as in the days of old, in that temple which was burnt
and completely overthrown,  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) but
also that the nations should resort thither from all quarters, and be
associated together in the service of God with the Jews, who were then
like a putrefied carcase. The prophet, to inspire the people with the
hope of returning to their own land, argues that it was impossible that
the place which God had chosen for himself should be left in perpetual
desolation; and declares, that so far from this being the case there
would be new matter for praising God, inasmuch as His name would be
worshipped by all nations, and the Church would consist not of one
nation only, but of the whole world. This we know has been fulfilled
under the administration of Christ, as was announced in prophecy by the
holy patriarch,

<span id="xi.vi-p13"></span>“The scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and *unto him
shall the gathering of the Gentiles be,*” (<span
id="xi.vi-p13.1"></span>[Ge 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="xi.vi-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.vi-p14"></span>But as the prophets are wont, in celebrating
the deliverance from the Babylonish captivity, to extend it to the
coming of Christ, the inspired bard in this place does not lay hold on
merely a part of the subject, but carries forward the grace of God, even
to its consummation. And although it was not necessary that all who were
converted to Christ should go up to Jerusalem, yet following the manner
of expression usual with the prophets, he has laid down the observance
of the divine worship which was appointed under the law, as a mark of
true godliness. Farther, we may learn from this passage, that the name
of God is never better celebrated than when true religion is extensively
propagated, and when the Church increases, which on that account is
called,

<span id="xi.vi-p15"></span>“The planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified,” (<span id="xi.vi-p15.1"></span>[Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)<span id="xi.vi-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
102:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#023)<span
id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>**23.** He hath afflicted my strength in the
way; and shortened my days. **24.** I said, O my God! Cut me not off in
the midst of my days: for  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) thy
years are from generation to generation. **25.** Thou hast aforetime
founded the earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands. **26.**
They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: and all of them shall wax old
like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be
changed: **27.** But thou art the same,  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) and thy years shall not fail.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) **28.** The children of thy servants
shall dwell, and their seed shall be established before thee.

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.vii-p7"></span><span id="xi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p8"></span>**23.** *He hath afflicted my strength in
the way* Some improperly restrict this complaint to the time when the
Jews were subjected to much annoyance after the liberty granted them to
return to their own land. We are rather to understand the word *journey*
or *way* in a metaphorical sense. As the manifestation of Christ was the
goal of the race which God’s ancient people were running, they justly
complain that they are afflicted and weakened in the midst of their
course.  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) Thus they set before
God his promise, telling him, that although they had not run at random,
but had confided in his protection, they were nevertheless broken and
crushed by his hand in the midst of their journey. They do not indeed
find fault with him, as if he had disappointed their hope; but fully
persuaded, that he does not deal deceitfully with those who serve him,
by this complaint they strengthen themselves in the hope of a favorable
issue. In the same sense they add, that *their days were shortened,*
because they directed their view to the fullness of time, which did not
arrive till Christ was revealed.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) It accordingly follows, — (verse 24,)
*Cut me not off in the midst of my days.* They compare the intervening
period until Christ should appear to the middle of life; for, as has
been already observed, the Church only attained to her perfect age at
his coming. This calamity, no doubt, had been foretold, but the nature
of the covenant which God had entered into with his ancient people
required that he should take them under his protection, and defend them.
The captivity, therefore, was as it were a violent rupture, on which
account the godly prayed with the greater confidence, that they might
not be prematurely taken away in the midst of their journey. By speaking
in this manner, they did not fix for themselves a certain term of life;
but as God, in freely adopting them, had given them the commencement of
life, with the assurance that he would maintain them even to the advent
of Christ, they might warrantably bring forward and plead this promise.
Lord, as if they had said, thou hast promised us life, not for a few
days, or for a month or for a few years, but until thou shouldst renew
the whole world, and gather together all nations under the dominion of
thine Anointed One.

<span id="xi.vii-p11"></span><span id="xi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p12"></span>What then does the prophet mean when he
prays, *Let us not perish in the midst of our course?*  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) The reason stated in the clause
immediately following, *Thy years are from generation to generation,*
seems to be quite inapplicable in the present case. Because God is
everlasting, does it therefore follow that men will be everlasting too?
But on <span id="xi.vii-p13.2"></span>[Psalm
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)<span id="xi.vii-p13.2"></span>,
we have shown how we may with propriety bring forward his eternity, as a
ground of confidence in reference to our salvation; for he desires to be
known as eternal, not only in his mysterious and incomprehensible
essence, but also in his word, according to the declaration of the
Prophet Isaiah,

<span id="xi.vii-p14"></span>“All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness
thereof is as the flower of the field; but the word of our God shall
stand for ever.”  
<span id="xi.vii-p14.2"></span>[Isa
40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="xi.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p15"></span>Now since God links us to himself by means
of his word, however great the distance of our frail condition from his
heavenly glory, our faith should nevertheless penetrate to that blessed
state from which he looks down upon our miseries. Although the
comparison between his eternal existence and the brief duration of human
life is introduced also for another purpose, yet when he sees that men
pass away as it were in a moment, and speedily evanish, it moves him to
compassion, as shall presently be declared at greater length.

<span id="xi.vii-p16"></span><span id="xi.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p17"></span>**25** *Thou hast aforetime founded the
earth* Here the sacred writer amplifies what he had previously stated,
declaring, that compared with God the whole world is a form which
quickly vanishes away; and yet a little after he represents the Church
as exempted from this the common lot of all sublunary things, because
she has for her foundation the word of God, while her safety is secured
by the same word. Two subjects are therefore here brought under our
consideration. The first is, that since the heavens themselves are in
the sight of God almost as evanescent as smoke, the frailty of the whole
human race is such as may well excite his compassion; and the second is,
that although there is no stability in the heavens and the earth, yet
the Church shall continue steadfast for ever, because she is upheld by
the eternal truth of God. By the first of these positions, true
believers are taught to consider with all humility, when they come into
the divine presence, how frail and transitory their condition is, that
they may bring nothing with them but their own emptiness. Such
self-abasement is the first step to our obtaining favor in the sight of
God, even as He also affirms that he is moved by the sight of our
miseries to be merciful to us. The comparison taken from the heavens is
a very happy illustration; for how long have they continued to exist,
when contrasted with the brief span of human life, which passes or
rather flies away so swiftly? How many generations of men have passed
away since the creation, while the heavens still continue as they were
amidst this continual fluctuation? Again, so beautiful is their
arrangement, and so excellent their frame-work, that the whole fabric
proclaims itself to be the product of *God’s hands*  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) And yet neither the long period during
which the heavens have existed, nor their fair embellishment, will
exempt them from perishing. What then shall become of us poor mortals,
who die when we are as yet scarcely born? for there is no part of our
life which does not rapidly hasten to death.

<span id="xi.vii-p19"></span>Interpreters, however, do not all explain
these words, *The heavens shall perish,* in the same way. Some
understand them as expressing simply the change they shall undergo,
which will be a species of destruction; for although they are not to be
reduced to nothing, yet this change of their nature, as it may be
termed, will destroy what is mortal and corruptible in them, so that
they shall become, in a manner, different and new heavens. Others
explain the words conditionally, and make the supplement, “If it so
please God,” regarding it as a thing absurd to say that the heavens are
subject to corruption. But first, there is no necessity for introducing
these supplementary words, which obscure the sense instead of making it
plainer. In the next place, these expositors improperly attribute an
immortal state to the heavens, of which Paul declares that they “groan
and travail in pain,” like the earth and the other creatures, until the
day of redemption, (<span id="xi.vii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022)<span id="xi.vii-p19.1"></span>)
because they are subject to corruption; not indeed willingly, or in
their own nature, but because man, by precipitating himself headlong
into destruction, has drawn the whole world into a participation of the
same ruin. Two things are to be here attended to; first, that the
heavens are actually subject to corruption in consequence of the fall of
man; and, secondly, that they shall be so renewed as to warrant the
prophet to say that *they shall perish;* for this renovation will be so
complete that they shall not be the same but other heavens. The amount
is, that to whatever quarter we turn our eyes, we will see everywhere
nothing but ground for despair till we come to God. What is there in us
but rottenness and corruption? and what else are we but a mirror of
death? Again, what are the changes which the whole world undergoes but a
kind of presage, yea a prelude of destruction? If the whole frame-work
of the world is hastening to its end, what will become of the human
race? If all nations are doomed to perish, what stability will there be
in men individually considered? We ought therefore to seek stability no
where else but in God.

<span id="xi.vii-p20"></span><span id="xi.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p21"></span>**28.** *The children of thy servants shall
dwell*. By these words the prophet intimates that he does not ask the
preservation of the Church, because it is a part of the human race, but
because God has raised it above the revolutions of the world. And
undoubtedly, when He adopted us as his children, his design was to
cherish us as it were in his own bosom. The inference of the inspired
bard is not, therefore, far-fetched, when, amidst innumerable storms,
each of which might carry us away, he hopes that the Church will have a
permanent existence. It is true, that when through our own fault we
become estranged from God, we are also as it were cut off from the
fountain of life; but no sooner are we reconciled to Him than he begins
again to pour down his blessings upon us. Whence it follows that true
believers, as they are regenerated by the incorruptible seed, shall
continue to live after death, because God continues unchangeably the
same. By the word *dwell,* is to be understood an abiding and
everlasting inheritance.

<span id="xi.vii-p22"></span>When it is said that the seed of God’s
servants shall be established *before his face,* the meaning is, that it
is not after the manner of the world, or according to the way in which
the heavens and the earth are established, that the salvation of true
believers is made steadfast, but because of the holy union which exists
between them and God. By *the seed* and *children* of the godly, is to
be understood not all their descendants without exception — for many who
spring from them according to the flesh become degenerate — but those
who do not turn aside from the faith of their parents. Successive
generations are expressly pointed out, because the covenant extends even
to future ages, as we shall again find in the subsequent psalm. If we
firmly keep the treasure of life intrusted to us, let us not hesitate,
although we may be environed with innumerable deaths, to cast the anchor
of our faith in heaven, that the stability of our welfare may rest in
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc11010.htm#fr_132) <span
id="xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xi-p5"></span> “This plaintive poem was written by some pious
exile towards the expiration of the seventy years of captivity during
which the people of Israel were detained in Babylon. \[...\] The author
of the psalm had most probably been carried away captive in early youth.
He had survived nearly to the end of the term, and now, worn with cares
and anxieties, he was earnest with God that deliverance might speedily
arrive, lest he should sink into the grave without revisiting the
delightful scenes by which his imagination was enraptured, without
witnessing the fulfillment of the hopes which the prophets of God had
excited by the predictions which they had delivered relative to the
returning prosperity of his beloved country.” — *Walford*. Hammond
thinks that the psalm was written by Nehemiah, after the return of Ezra
with commission for rebuilding the temple. See <span
id="xi-p5.1"></span>[Ne 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003)<span
id="xi-p5.1"></span>, etc. Others ascribe it to Jeremiah or Daniel.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc11010.htm#fr_133) <span
id="xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi-p6"></span> “<span id="xi-p6.1"></span>Sa plainte.” — *Fr*.
“His complaint.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc11010.htm#fr_134) <span
id="xi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span> Hammond reads, “My days are consumed in the
smoke.” “The Syriac,” says he, “read, *in smoke*, and so the sense will
best bear, either *my days* or *time* of my life, <span
id="xi.ii-p3.1"></span>כלו, *consume* and wither *in smoke*, as <span
id="xi.ii-p3.2"></span>[Ps 119:83](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#083)<span
id="xi.ii-p3.2"></span>, *a bottle in the smoke*, afflictions have had
the same effect on me as smoke on those things which are hung in it,
dried me up, and deformed me: or perhaps <span
id="xi.ii-p3.3"></span>כלו, *end* or *fail*, or consume in smoke, (as
when any combustible matter is consumed, smoke is all that comes from
it, and so it *ends* in that;) and to that the latter part of the verse
may seem to incline it, ‘And my bones, *or* members, *or* body, are
burnt up,’ that being all one with *consumed*.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc11010.htm#fr_135) <span
id="xi.ii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> Hammond reads, “are burnt up as dry wood.”
“As for <span id="xi.ii-p4.1"></span>כמוקד, that is added,” says he,
“the interpreters differ in the understanding of it. The word coming
from <span id="xi.ii-p4.2"></span>יקד, <span
id="xi.ii-p4.3"></span>*accensus est*, may be either the place where the
fire is, or the pot which is heated by the flame of the fire, or the
wood which is set on fire. The Syriac seems to take it in the first
notion, rendering it, ‘my bones are grown white as the hearth,’ for so
the chimney or hearth doth with the fire constantly burning on it. The
Chaldee reads, ‘as one of the stones that is set under the pot *or*
caldron.’ But the LXX. read, <span id="xi.ii-p4.4"></span>ὡσεί φρύχιον,
‘as dry wood,’ and the Latin, <span id="xi.ii-p4.5"></span>*sicut
cremium*, ‘as dry combustible wood,’ and that is most applicable to the
matter in hand; the bones or members of the body, their being burnt up
as dry wood denotes the speedy exhausting of the radical moisture, which
soon ends in the consumption of the whole. And then the whole verse
fitly accords, ‘My days are withered away in the smoke,’ or perhaps ‘end
in smoke, my bones are burnt up like dry wood.’”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc11010.htm#fr_136) <span
id="xi.ii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>Tienent a ma
peau.” — *Fr*. “Cleave to my skin.” *Flesh* is more literal; but see
<span id="xi.ii-p5.2"></span>[Ps
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120)<span id="xi.ii-p5.2"></span>,
and <span id="xi.ii-p5.3"></span>[Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)<span id="xi.ii-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc11010.htm#fr_137) <span
id="xi.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span> The pelican is a bird of the desert, to
which frequent allusion is made by the sacred writers. Its Hebrew name
<span id="xi.ii-p6.1"></span>קאת, *kaath*, literally means, *the
vomiter*, being derived from the verb <span id="xi.ii-p6.2"></span>קוא,
*ko*, *to vomit* It has a large pouch, or bag, suspended from its bill
and throat, which serves both as a repository for its food, and as a net
for catching it. In feeding its young ones, whether this bag is loaded
with water, or more solid food, it squeezes the contents of it into
their mouths, by strongly compressing it upon its breast with its bill,
an action which might well explain the origin of the name given to it by
the Hebrews. It is a bird of solitary habits, and is said by Isidore to
live “in the solitude of the river Nile:” indeed, it generally builds
its nest in mossy, turfy places, in the islands of rivers or lakes, far
from the abode of man. It is here described as living in the wilderness,
a circumstance not inconsistent with its natural fondness for water; for
lakes, as well as fountains, are to be found in the most desert parts.
And although a water-fowl, it sometimes retires to a great distance from
the water, where, in some remote and concealed situation, it may hatch
its young with greater security. Its huge pouch, which is said to be
capable of containing near the size of a man’s head, seems to be given
to it for the purpose of its being provided with a supply of food for
itself and its young ones when at a distance from the water. Bochart
thinks that <span id="xi.ii-p6.3"></span>קאת, *kaath*, here means *the
bittern* His chief reason for this opinion is, that the Psalmist
compares himself to the two birds specified, on account of his groaning,
and that, therefore, both of them should have a mournful cry. But he
finds that natural historians make no mention of this as a property of
the pelican, whereas they all agree that the bittern, by inserting its
bill in the mud of the marsh, or plunging it under water, utters a most
disagreeable cry, like the roaring of a bull, or the sound of distant
thunder. But the Psalmist may not so much compare his groaning to the
plaintive cry of these birds, as compare his situation to their solitary
condition. Sorrow, when pungent, drives the sufferer to solitude, and,
on this occasion, the inspired bard, under the overwhelming pressure of
grief, seems to have become weary of society, and, like the pelican, or
the owl, to have contracted a relish for deep retirement. *Shaw*’*s
Travels*, volume 2, page 302; *Paxton*’*s Illustrations of Scripture*,
volume 2, pages 247-250.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc11010.htm#fr_138) <span
id="xi.ii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span> The *owl*, it is highly probable, is the
bird here intended. The original word <span id="xi.ii-p7.1"></span>כוס,
*kos*, which is evidently derived from the verb <span
id="xi.ii-p7.2"></span>כסה, *kasah*, *to hide*, is applied, with much
propriety, to denote that bird, which constantly hides itself in the
day-time, and comes abroad only in the evening, or at night. <span
id="xi.ii-p7.3"></span>כוס, *kos*, is followed in construction by <span
id="xi.ii-p7.4"></span>חרבות, *charaboth*, which comes from <span
id="xi.ii-p7.5"></span>חרב, *charab*, *to be destroyed*, or *laid
waste*; (<span id="xi.ii-p7.6"></span>[Isa
60:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#012)<span id="xi.ii-p7.6"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p7.7"></span>[Jer
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008)<span id="xi.ii-p7.7"></span>;
<span id="xi.ii-p7.8"></span>[Zep
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#006)<span id="xi.ii-p7.8"></span>) and
signifies a waste or desolate place, as the ruins of an uninhabited
house. The proper translation, then, should be, not *the owl of the
desert*, but *the owl of the desolate* or *ruined buildings*, which
exactly corresponds with the habits of this bird; for such ruinous
places, as is well known, are its ordinary haunt, where, in undisturbed
solitude, it may utter its melancholy howlings. The allusion in Gray’s
celebrated Elegy may illustrate the language of the text, —

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>“Save that from yonder ivy mantled tower,  
The moping owl does to the night complain,” etc.

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>The habit of the owl in shunning the light of
day, and delighting in solitude, well describes the sensitiveness with
which the Psalmist, through the greatness of his grief, shrunk from
society, and courted seclusion. Bochart contends that <span
id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>כוס here signifies, not *the owl*, but *the
ostrich*, and, if the Psalmist is comparing himself to the two birds
specified, on account of his groaning, this seems to favor that
translation; for the female ostrich has a most dismal and mournful
voice, very much resembling the lamentation of a human being in deep
distress. But, as has been before observed, the Psalmist seems to refer,
not so much to the mournful voice of these birds, as to their solitary
condition.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc11010.htm#fr_139) <span
id="xi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span> There is here a reference to the flat roof
of the eastern houses, a usual place of retirement, in ancient times,
and even at this day, to the inhabitants of these countries.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc11010.htm#fr_140) <span
id="xi.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p18.1"></span>La
translation Grecque ha Nicticorax qui est Chauvesouris.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc11010.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xi.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p19"></span> Although Calvin expresses himself as having
no doubt that the sparrow is here intended, the most eminent expositors
are of a different opinion, contending that it is difficult to reconcile
with the nature of the sparrow the ideas of *wakefulness* and *solitude*
which the Psalmist represents as characteristic of the bird to which he
compares himself. The sparrow is not a solitary moping bird which sits
mournfully on the housetop, nor so timid as to betake itself to the
darkest corners for concealment, and to spend the live long night in
sleepless anxiety. It is gregarious, is commonly found chirping and
fluttering about in the crowd, a pert, loquacious, and bustling
creature, and builds its nest in the habitations of men. Every part of
the description leads to the supposition that some nocturnal bird is to
be understood, which from instinct hates the light, and comes forth from
its hiding-place only when the shadows of the evening fall to hunt its
prey, and from amidst the fragments, of some mouldering ruin to attract
the attention of mankind by its mournful voice. Accordingly, it has been
thought that the Psalmist refers to some species of the owl,
distinguished for its plaintive cry and solitary disposition. —
*Paxton*’*s Illustrations of Scripture*, volume 2, pages 355-357. “But,”
says Merrick, “as *chos*, mentioned in the preceding verse, seems also
to signify an *owl*, we are perhaps to suppose two sorts of *owls*
intended, one of which confines itself to deserts or ruinous places, and
the other sometimes approaches cities or villages, and according to
Virgil’s description, (which Bochart quotes as conformable to that of
the Psalmist,) *sits* *alone on the house-top*.

<span id="xi.ii-p20"></span>*‘*<span id="xi.ii-p20.1"></span>Solaque
culminibus ferali carmine bubo Visa queri, et longas in fletum ducere
voces.’  
*Æneid,* lib. 4. 50. 462.

<span id="xi.ii-p21"></span>I doubt whether the Psalmist would in two
verses together compare his situation to that of the very same bird,
with no other difference than that of its sitting in the desert in one
verse, and on the house-top in the other.” Bochart thinks that the
*screech-owl* is intended. The reason which Calvin assigns for the
sparrow being called solitary, namely, because of the extreme sorrow
which she feels when deprived of her mate, does not agree with the
natural history of that bird; for, unlike the turtle, who, on losing her
spouse, remains in a state of inconsolable widowhood, she accepts
without reluctance the first companion that solicits her affections.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc11010.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> Horsley renders the concluding sentence, —

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span>“And the profligate make me their standard
of execration.”

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span>“Houbigant,” says he, “rightly observes,
that the verb <span id="xi.iii-p5.1"></span>נשבע, governing its objects
by the prefix <span id="xi.iii-p5.2"></span>ב, signifies *to swear by*,
not *to swear against*. For <span id="xi.iii-p5.3"></span>נשבעו,
therefore, he would substitute another word; which, however, bears not
the sense he would impose upon it. Archbishop Secker attempts to explain
the text as it stands, but, in my judgment, unsuccessfully, unless <span
id="xi.iii-p5.4"></span>נשבע may signify *to execrate* one’s self or
another. I find no example of this use of the verb. But the \[use\] of
the noun in <span id="xi.iii-p5.5"></span>[Nu
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021)<span id="xi.iii-p5.5"></span>,
and <span id="xi.iii-p5.6"></span>[Isa
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015)<span id="xi.iii-p5.6"></span>,
may seem, in some degree, to countenance the Archbishop’s
interpretation. The other passages to which he refers are little to the
purpose.” Rosenmüller gives a similar interpretation. “*They* *swear by
me*; they derive their arguments and examples from my calamities; when
they mean to imprecate evil on themselves as the persons swearing, or on
another as the object of their malediction, they use my name as a form
of execration, as if they said, ‘Let our fate be that of these miserable
Jews, if we speak what is false.’ — See <span
id="xi.iii-p5.7"></span>[Isa
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015)<span id="xi.iii-p5.7"></span>;
<span id="xi.iii-p5.8"></span>[Jer
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#022)<span id="xi.iii-p5.8"></span>.”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc11010.htm#fr_143) <span
id="xi.iii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p13"></span> Supposing the reading to be <span
id="xi.iii-p13.1"></span>בלחם, *balechem*, instead of <span
id="xi.iii-p13.2"></span>כלחם, *calechem*; and from the similarity in
form between the letters <span id="xi.iii-p13.3"></span>ב and <span
id="xi.iii-p13.4"></span>כ, transcribers might readily have mistaken the
latter for the former.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc11010.htm#fr_144) <span
id="xi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p17"></span> “What is meant by <span
id="xi.iii-p17.1"></span>נשאתני, ‘thou hast lifted me up,’ etc., is to
be judged by the immediate antecedents, *indignation* and *wrath*; by
these is meant vehement displeasure and anger, and in God, in whom anger
is not found, effects that bear analogy with those which proceed from
angry men. To such it is ordinary *to cast to the ground* any thing that
they are displeased with, and where the displeasure is vehement, *to
lift it up* first as high as they can, that they may *cast it down* with
more violence, and dash it in pieces by the fall. And this is the
meaning of the phrase here, and so is a pathetical expression of his
present affliction, heightened by the dignity of the public office
wherein Nehemiah was at the time of writing this mournful psalm, (<span
id="xi.iii-p17.2"></span>[Ne 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)<span
id="xi.iii-p17.2"></span> and <span id="xi.iii-p17.3"></span>[Ne
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001)<span id="xi.iii-p17.3"></span>.)
The greater his place was at Shushan, the deeper his sorrow for his
countrymen and for Jerusalem (<span id="xi.iii-p17.4"></span>[Ne
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003)<span id="xi.iii-p17.4"></span>)
pierced him, whereupon he complains that God, by way of indignation,
hath dealt with him, as those that take an earthen vessel and throw it
against the pavement, and that they may beat it to pieces the more
certainly, *lift it up* first as high as they can, *to throw it down*
with more violence. This the LXX. have fitly rendered, <span
id="xi.iii-p17.5"></span>ἐπάρας κατέρ᾿ῥαξάς με, and the Latin, <span
id="xi.iii-p17.6"></span>*elevans illisisti me*, ‘having lifted me up,
thou hast dashed me to pieces.’” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc11010.htm#fr_145) <span
id="xi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p20"></span> It is literally, “My days are like a
shadow, stretched out.” As the sun descends in the firmament, the shadow
of any terrestrial object gradually lengthens, and grows fainter as it
becomes longer, until shooting out to an unmeasurable length, it
disappears. The Psalmist complains that his days were like a shadow
nearly stretched to its utmost length, and at the point of being lost in
total darkness. He felt that he had far passed his meridian, that the
sun of life was about to set, and the dark night of death to fall down
upon him” — See <span id="xi.iii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023)<span id="xi.iii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc11010.htm#fr_146) <span
id="xi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p13.1"></span>Mais qui
plus est ceste *compassion* que les fideles ont tenu lors.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc11010.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p3.1"></span>Craindront ton
nom, Seigneur.” — *Fr*. “Shall fear thy name, O Lord!”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc11010.htm#fr_148) <span
id="xi.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span> The original word for *the solitary* is <span
id="xi.v-p4.1"></span>הרער, *ha-arar*; and as <span
id="xi.v-p4.2"></span>ערער signifies *the tamarisk* or *myrtle*, some
translate, “the afflicted or dejected man;” the myrtle being an emblem
of a low and depressed state of the Church. Accordingly, in the Chaldee,
it is “the prayer of the desolate,” and in the Septuagint, “the prayer
of the humble.” Houbigant derives the word from <span
id="xi.v-p4.3"></span>רעע, *frangere*, *to break*, and renders it, “the
afflicted.” Others read, “the destitute,” supposing the word to come
from <span id="xi.v-p4.4"></span>ערה, *was naked*, as Fry: “‘When he
hath turned himself to the prayer of the destitute’ — the people
emptied, and poured forth — made bare or stripped naked.” Others prefer
the version, “He regarded him when exciting his prayer,” as if the root
of the Hebrew term were <span id="xi.v-p4.5"></span>עור, *to excite*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc11010.htm#fr_149) <span
id="xi.v-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span> Horsley translates the verbs in the 16th and
17th verses in the present, —

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span>“Truly Jehovah is building Zion;  
He appeareth in his glory.  
He regardeth the prayer of the destitute,  
And their prayer he despiseth not.”

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span>He regards the Psalm as a “prayer and
lamentation of a believer, in the time of the last Antichristian
persecution;” and after observing that the 16th and 17th verses are
rendered by our English Bible in the future, he says, “These futures, in
the original, are all present; ‘buildeth — appeareth — regardeth — and
despiseth not.’ The Psalmist in his confidence of the event speaks of it
as doing.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc11010.htm#fr_150) <span
id="xi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p8.1"></span>Le Seigneur.” —
*Fr*. “The Lord.” In the Hebrew it is <span id="xi.v-p8.2"></span>יה,
*Jah*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc11010.htm#fr_151) <span
id="xi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p3.1"></span>Du haut lieu
de son sanctuaire.” — *Fr*. “From the high place of his sanctuary.”

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc11010.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xi.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p4.1"></span>C’est, ceux
qui estoyent jugez a mort.” — Note, *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, those who
were appointed to death, *or* destined to be put to death.” “*Sons* of
death” is a Hebraism. “According to the Hebrew idiom, the thing which is
the effect, the object, the production of another thing, or in almost
any way can be said to belong to it, is called ‘the son’ of that other.
The expression is so thoroughly naturalised with us, that we are hardly
aware of its origin, which appears to be in the Hebrew writers.” —
*Mant*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc11010.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p12"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p12.1"></span>Qui estoit
brusle et du tout ruine.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc11010.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.vii-p3.1"></span>*Car*.” —
*Fr*. This supplement is not in the Latin version.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc11010.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xi.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span> The original word for *the same* is <span
id="xi.vii-p4.1"></span>הוא, *hua*, literally *He*, — “But thou art He;”
that is, *the* Eternal; *necessarily eternal*; and, consequently,
unchangeable and imperishable. “The Hebrew word appears to be one of the
divine names, as if it were said, ‘He who hath permanent existence, who
exists eminently.’ Lowth observes, that it is often equivalent to the
true and eternal God; and that the phrase in this place expresses God’s
eternal and unchangeable nature.” — *Mant*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc11010.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xi.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span> This and the two preceding verses are
applied by the Apostle Paul to Christ in <span
id="xi.vii-p5.1"></span>[Heb. 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#012)<span id="xi.vii-p5.1"></span>, in
proof of his superiority to angels. In this passage then, Christ, it
would appear, is the person addressed; for if the apostle’s inspiration
is admitted, the correctness of his interpretation of the Old Testament
Scriptures cannot be doubted. Inappropriate applications of them, it is
evident, would be inconsistent with his having spoken under the
infallible guidance of the Spirit of God. And if these verses are
applicable to the Savior of men, they contain an irrefragable proof of
his essential divinity. He is called *Jehovah* throughout the psalm, a
name peculiar to God only; the creation of all things is said to be
performed by him, a work peculiar to God only; eternity and immutability
are ascribed to him, attributes which in the strict and absolute sense
belong exclusively to God.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc11010.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xi.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p9"></span> *Way* or *journey* is a term often used in
Scripture to denote the course of a man’s life; and here the Psalmist
speaks, as other sacred writers not unfrequently do, of the whole Jewish
nation as if it were one man, and of its continuance, which was to be
until the coming of Christ, as if the life of one man. It was now, so to
speak, only in its meridian. An attention to this remark will assist the
reader in understanding Calvin’s exposition of the passage.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc11010.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p10"></span> Consequently, the ruin and desolation to
which they seemed given up by the Babylonish captivity, was like the
cutting off or shortening of their days.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc11010.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xi.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p13"></span> “Possibly the Psalmist (whom some learned
interpreters suppose to be Daniel) may have respect to that prophecy,
<span id="xi.vii-p13.1"></span>[Dan.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)<span id="xi.vii-p13.1"></span>,
which probably was published before this time; for this time was almost
precisely the midst of the days between the building of the material
temple by Solomon, and the building of the spiritual temple, or the
Church, by the Messias; there being about a thousand years distance
between these two periods, whereof seventy prophetical weeks, or four
hundred and ninety years, were yet to come. And so he prays that God
would not root them out of this Babylonish captivity, but would
graciously restore them to their own land, and preserve them as a Church
and nation there, until the coming of the Messias.” — *Poole*’*s
Annotations*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc11010.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xi.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p18"></span> “The phrase is borrowed from the fact,
that *hands* are the instruments by which men usually perform any
operation; and this is, like other human operations and affections,
figuratively transferred to God.” — *Stuart* on <span
id="xi.vii-p18.1"></span>[Heb
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="xi.vii-p18.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 103](cc11011)
