[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11021)  [Next](cc11023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span>PSALM 114

<span id="xxiii-p2"></span>This psalm contains a short account of that
deliverance by which God, in bringing his people out of Egypt: and
conducting them to the promised inheritance, gave a proof of his power
and grace which ought to be held in everlasting remembrance. The design
of that wonderful deliverance was, that the seed of Abraham might yield
themselves wholly to God, who, receiving them by a gracious act of
adoption, purposed that they should be to him a holy and peculiar
people.  <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354)

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
114:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001)<span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** When Israel went out from Egypt, and
the house of Jacob from a barbarous people;  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) **2.** Judah was for his  <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) holiness, Israel for his dominions.
**3.** The sea saw, and fled:  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357)
Jordan was turned backward. **4.** The mountains leaped like rams, and
the hills as the lambs of the flock.

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>**1** *When Israel went out from Egypt*
That exodus being a remarkable pledge and symbol of God’s love for the
children of Abraham, it is not surprising that it should be so
frequently called to remembrance. In the beginning of the psalm, the
prophet informs us that the people whom God purchased at so great a
price are no more their own. The opinion of certain expositors, that at
that time the tribe of Judah was consecrated to the service of God,
according to what is said in <span id="xxiii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="xxiii.i-p8.1"></span>,
and <span id="xxiii.i-p8.2"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="xxiii.i-p8.2"></span>,
appears to me foreign to the prophet’s design. All doubt about the
matter is removed by what is immediately subjoined, God’s taking Israel
under his rule, which is simply a repetition of the same sentiment in
other words. Judah being the most powerful and numerous of all the
tribes, and occupying the chief place among them, here takes the
precedency of the rest of the people. At the same time, it is very
evident that the honor which is in a peculiar manner ascribed to them,
belongs equally to the whole body of the people.  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) When God is said to be sanctified, it
must be understood that the prophet is speaking after the manner of men,
because, in himself, God is incapable of increase or diminution. *Judah
is called his holiness,*  <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) *and
Israel his dominion,*  <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) because
his holy majesty, which hitherto had been little known, secured the
veneration of all who had witnessed the displays of his incredible
power. In delivering his people, God erected a kingdom for himself and
procured respect for his sacred name; if then they do not constantly
reflect upon such a remarkable instance of his kindness, their
insensibility is totally inexcusable.

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p13"></span>**3** *The sea saw, and fled* He does not
enumerate in succession all the miracles which were wrought at that
time, but briefly alludes to the sea, which, though a lifeless and
senseless element, is yet struck with terror at the power of God. Jordan
did the same, and the very mountains shook. It is in a poetical strain
that the Psalmist describes the receding of the sea and of the Jordan.
The description, however, does not exceed the facts of the case. The
sea, in rendering such obedience to its Creator, sanctified his name;
and Jordan, by its submission, put honor upon his power; and the
mountains, by their quaking, proclaimed how they were overawed at the
presence of his dreadful majesty. By these examples it is not meant to
celebrate God’s power more than the fatherly care and desire which he
manifests for the preservation of the Church; and, accordingly, Israel
is very properly distinguished from the sea, the Jordan, and the
mountains — there being a very marked difference between the chosen
people and the insensate elements.

<span id="xxiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
114:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005)<span
id="xxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** What ailed thee, O see! that thou
fleddest? and thou, Jordan, that thou turnedst back? **6.** The
mountains, that ye did leap like rams; and ye hills, like lambs of the
flock? **7.** At the presence of the Lord, tremble, thou earth,  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) at the presence of the God of Jacob;
**8.** Who turned the rock into pools of water,  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) and the mighty rock into a fountain of
waters.  <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363)

<span id="xxiii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p8"></span>**5** *What ailed thee, O sea!* The
prophet interrogates the sea, Jordan, and the mountains, in a familiar
and poetical strain, as lately he ascribed to them a sense and reverence
for God’s power. And, by these similitudes, he very sharply reproves the
insensibility of those persons, who do not employ the intelligence which
God has given them in the contemplation of his works. The appearance
which he tells us the sea assumed, is more than sufficient to condemn
their blindness. It could not be dried up, the river Jordan could not
roll back its waters, had not God, by his invisible agency, constrained
them to render obedience to his command. The words are indeed directed
to the sea, the Jordan, and the mountains, but they are more immediately
addressed to us, that every one of us, on self-reflection, may carefully
and attentively weigh this matter. And, therefore, as often as we meet
with these words, let each of us reiterate the sentiment, — “Such a
change cannot be attributed to nature, and to subordinate causes, but
the hand of God is manifest here.” The figure drawn from the *lambs* and
*rams* would appear to be inferior to the magnitude of the subject. But
it was the prophet’s intention to express in the homeliest way the
incredible manner in which God, on these occasions, displayed his power.
The stability of the earth being, as it were, founded on the mountains,
what connection can they have with rams and lambs, that they should be
agitated, skipping hither and thither? In speaking in this homely style,
he does not mean to detract from the greatness of the miracle, but more
forcibly to engrave these extraordinary tokens of God’s power on the
illiterate.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p10"></span>**7** *At the presence of the Lord*
Having aroused the senses of men by interrogations, he now furnishes a
reply, which many understand to be a personification of the earth;
because they take <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.1"></span>י, *yod,* to be the
affix of the verb <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.2"></span>חולי*, chuli;* and
they represent the earth as saying, It is my duty to tremble at the
presence of the Lord. This fanciful interpretation is untenable; for the
term, *earth,* is immediately subjoined. Others, with more propriety,
considering the <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.3"></span>י, *yod,* in this, as
in many other passages, to be redundant, adopt this interpretation: It
is reasonable and becoming that the earth should tremble in the presence
of the Lord. Again, the term <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.4"></span>חולי,
*chuli,* is by many rendered in the imperative mood; which
interpretation I readily adopt, as it is most probable that the prophet
again makes an appeal to the earth, that the hearts of men may be the
more sensibly moved. The meaning is the same, — It must be that the
earth quake at the presence of her King. And this view receives
confirmation from the term <span id="xxiii.ii-p10.5"></span>אדון,
*adon,* being used, which signifies *a lord* or *a master.* He then
immediately introduces the name *of the God of Jacob,* for the purpose
of banishing from men all notions of false gods. Their minds being prone
to deceit, they are always in great danger of allowing idols to usurp
the place of the true God. Another miracle is mentioned, in which God,
after the passage of the people through the Red Sea, gave an additional
splendid manifestation of his power in the wilderness. The glory of God,
as he informs us, did not appear for one day only, on the departure of
the people; it constantly shone in his other works, as when a stream
suddenly issued out of the dry rock, <span
id="xxiii.ii-p10.6"></span>[Ex
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)<span id="xxiii.ii-p10.6"></span>.
Waters may be found trickling out from among rocks and stony places, but
to make them flow out of a dry rock, was unquestionably above the
ordinary course of nature, or miraculous. I have no intention of
entering into any ingenious discussion, how the stone was converted into
water; all that the prophet means amounts simply to this, that water
flowed in places formerly dry and hard. How absurd, then, is it for the
sophists to pretend that a transubstantiation takes place in every case
in which the Scripture affirms that a change has been produced? The
substance of the stone was not converted into water, but God
miraculously created the water, which gushed out of the dry rock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc11022.htm#fr_354) <span
id="xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p3"></span> “The exodus of Israel from Egypt, with some
of its most remarkable accompanying and consequent miracles, are, in
this brief psalm, commemorated in the boldest style of poetry, with
personifications, indeed, of inanimate nature of the utmost daring and
sublimity, in ‘thoughts that breathe, and words that burn.’” —
*Drake*’*s Harp of Judah.*

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc11022.htm#fr_355) <span
id="xxiii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span> The word <span
id="xxiii.i-p3.1"></span>לעז, *loez,* which Calvin renders, *a barbarous
people,* is translated, in our English Bible, “a people of strange
language.” His version is supported by many authorities. The word is
frequently found, in the sense he attaches to it, in Rabbinical works,
and is so understood here by the Chaldee paraphrast, who has <span
id="xxiii.i-p3.2"></span>ברבראי, and by the LXX., who have <span
id="xxiii.i-p3.3"></span>βαρβάρου. The root of these terms, as well as
the Latin word for *barbarous,* is probably the Hebrew <span
id="xxiii.i-p3.4"></span>בר, *out,* or *without,* redoubled; and so it
signifies, to a Jew, any man of another nation. According to Parkhurst,
the word, instead of signifying a barbarous or foreign language or
pronunciation, seems rather to refer to the *violence* of the Egyptians
towards the Israelites, or *the barbarity of their behavior,* which, he
observes, was more to the Psalmist’s purpose than the barbarity of their
language, even supposing the reality of the latter in the time of Moses.
— See his Lexicon on <span id="xxiii.i-p3.5"></span>לעז. Horsley reads,
“a tyrannical people.”

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc11022.htm#fr_356) <span
id="xxiii.i-p3.6"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span> “There is a peculiar beauty in the conduct
of this psalm, in that the author utterly conceals the presence of God
in the beginning of it, and rather lets a possessive pronoun (*i.e*.
His) go without a substantive, than he will so much as mention any thing
of Divinity there; because, if God had appeared before, there could be
no wonder why the mountains should leap, and the sea retire; therefore,
that this convulsion of nature may be brought in with due surprise, his
name is not mentioned till afterwards, and then, with a very agreeable
turn of thought, God is introduced at once with all majesty ” —
*Spectator,* volume 6, No. 461. If, however, the last two words of the
preceding psalm, <span id="xxiii.i-p4.1"></span>הללו-יה, *Halelu-yah,
Praise ye Jehovah,* are the title to this psalm, the antecedent to *his*
is supplied.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc11022.htm#fr_357) <span
id="xxiii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span> In the Hebrew there is no pronoun after
*saw*; nor is any inserted in the Septuagint and Arabic versions, or in
the Chaldee. In our English Bible, *it* is inserted, and *him* in the
Syriac version; but the sentence is certainly much more sublime without
any such supplement.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc11022.htm#fr_358) <span
id="xxiii.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span> “Judah represents here the whole people of
Israel, as Joseph does, in <span id="xxiii.i-p9.1"></span>[Ps
81:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#006)<span id="xxiii.i-p9.1"></span>.
The reason assigned by Kimchi for this use of <span
id="xxiii.i-p9.2"></span>יהודה here is, that at the time of the
departure from Egypt, Judah was considered the head or chief of the
tribes; see <span id="xxiii.i-p9.3"></span>[Ge
49:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)<span
id="xxiii.i-p9.3"></span>. This, however, is mere conjecture. If it be
necessary to assign reasons for the distinction here conferred on this
tribe, I should mention as one:, that the ark was kept in the region
occupied by the descendants of Judah, and, as another, that from him the
Messiah was to spring.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc11022.htm#fr_359) <span
id="xxiii.i-p9.5"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span> *God*’*s holiness* being often taken for
the *keeping his promise sacred* or *inviolate,* as in <span
id="xxiii.i-p10.1"></span>[Ps
102:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009)<span id="xxiii.i-p10.1"></span>,
when, reference being made to the immutability of his covenant, it is
added, “*holy* \[as in another respect, *reverend*\] is his name;” some,
as Hammond and Cresswell, suppose that the meaning here is, that God’s
dealings towards Judah — the people of the Jews, were a demonstration of
his faithfulness in performing his promise made to Abraham long before.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc11022.htm#fr_360) <span
id="xxiii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span> Hammond reads, “And Israel his power,” by
which he understands that Israel was an instance of his power; that God,
in his acting for Israel, declared his omnipotence most signally.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc11022.htm#fr_361) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p3"></span> Street reads, “The earth was in pain.”
“All the ancient versions,” says he, “have the preterperfect here. The
Targum alone agrees with the present reading, if, indeed, that be an
imperative mood. For I do not see why <span
id="xxiii.ii-p3.1"></span>חולי may not be a participle passive with an
*yod* added to it, as <span id="xxiii.ii-p3.2"></span>ההפכי may be a
participle active with the same addition.”

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc11022.htm#fr_362) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p4"></span> Hammond reads, “into a lake of water.”
“The <span id="xxiii.ii-p4.1"></span>מים אגם,” he observes, “is best
rendered a *lake of water,* to note the abundance of it; accordingly,
the Chaldee renders it <span id="xxiii.ii-p4.2"></span>לאריתה, *into a
river*: and so the Psalmist expressly describes the ‘gushing out of the
waters from the rock,’ that ‘they ran in dry places like a river,’ <span
id="xxiii.ii-p4.3"></span>[Ps
105:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#041)<span
id="xxiii.ii-p4.3"></span>.”

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc11022.htm#fr_363) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p5"></span> “The divine poet represents the very
substance of the rock as being converted into water, not literally, but
poetically — that is ornamenting his sketch of the wondrous power
displayed on this occasion.” — *Walford.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 115](cc11023)
