[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11000)  [Next](cc11002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>PSALM 93

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The psalm commences with the celebration of the
infinite glory of God. It is then declared that such is his faithfulness
that he never deceives his own people, who, embracing his promises, wait
with tranquil minds for their salvation amidst all the tempests and
agitations of the world.

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
93:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Jehovah hath reigned, he hath clothed
himself with majesty:  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Jehovah hath
clothed himself with strength, he hath girded himself:  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) he hath also established the world, it shall
not be moved. **2**. Thy throne is stable;  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) from then, from everlasting art thou.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span><span id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>**1** *Jehovah hath reigned* We here see what
I have lately adverted to, that in the power of God there is exhibited
to us matter of confidence; for our not investing God with the power
which belongs to him, as we ought to do, and thus wickedly despoiling
him of his authority, is the source of that fear and trembling which we
very often experience. This, it is true, we dare not do openly, but were
we well persuaded of his invincible power, that would be to us an
invincible support against all the assaults of temptation. All admit in
word what the prophet here teaches, That God reigns; but how few are
there who oppose this shield to the hostile powers of the world, as it
becomes them to do, that they may fear nothing however terrible? In this
then consists the glory of God, that he governs mankind according to his
will. It is said that *he clothes himself with majesty and strength;*
not that we ought to imagine that there is any thing in him which is
derived from another, but it is intended by the effect and indubitable
experience to show his wisdom and righteousness in the government of
mankind. The Psalmist proves that God will not neglect or abandon the
world, from the fact that he created it. A simple survey of the world
should of itself suffice to attest a Divine Providence. The heavens
revolve daily, and, immense as is their fabric, and inconceivable the
rapidity of their revolutions, we experience no concussion — no
disturbance in the harmony of their motion. The sun, though varying its
course every diurnal revolution, returns annually to the same point. The
planets, in all their wanderings, maintain their respective positions.
How could the earth hang suspended in the air were it not upheld by
God’s hand? By what means could it maintain itself unmoved, while the
heavens above are in constant rapid motion, did not its Divine Maker fix
and establish it? Accordingly the particle <span
id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>אף*, aph,* denoting *emphasis,* is introduced —
Yea, *he hath established it.*

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span><span id="ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>**2** *Thy throne is stable* Some read, *is
prepared,* and this agrees well with the context. provided we take the
two clauses as one sentence, meaning — *O* *Lord, as thou art from
eternity, even so thy throne is erected or prepared from that time* For
the sense which some have attached to the words, as if they contained a
simple assertion of God’s eternity, is poor; and the Psalmist evidently
intends to say that as God is eternal in essence, so he has always been
invested with power and majesty. The term *throne* signifies, by the
figure synecdoche, righteousness, and office or power of government; it
being customary to transfer such images taken from men to God, in
accommodation to our infirmity.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) By
this ascription of praise the Psalmist effectually disposes of all the
absurd ideas which have been broached, tending to deny or disparage the
power of God, and declares, upon the matter, that God may sooner cease
to be, than to sit upon his throne in the government of this world.

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
93:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. The floods have lifted up, O Jehovah!
the floods have lifted up their voice; the floods shall lift up their
waves. **4**. The waves  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) of the sea
are terrible, by reason of the noise of great waters, Jehovah is
terrible above. **5**. Thy testimonies are singularly true: holiness is
the glory of thy house, O Jehovah! for length of days.  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span><span id="ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span>**3** *The floods have lifted up, O Jehovah!*
Various meanings have been attached to this verse. Some think there is
an allusion to the violent assaults made upon the Church by her enemies,
and the goodness of God seen in restraining them.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Others are of opinion that the words should
be taken literally, and not figuratively, in this sense — Though the
noise of many waters be terrible, and the waves of the sea more fearful
still, God is more terrible than all. I would not be inclined to insist
too nicely upon any comparison that may have been intended. I have no
doubt the Psalmist sets forth the power of God by adducing one brief
illustration out of many which might have been given,  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) Intimating that we need not go farther for a
striking instance of Divine power — one that may impress us with an idea
of his tremendous majesty — than to the floods of waters, and agitations
of the ocean; as in <span id="ii.ii-p11.3"></span>[Ps
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#004)<span id="ii.ii-p11.3"></span>,
the mighty voice of God is said to be in the thunder. God manifests his
power in the sound of the floods, and in the tempestuous waves of the
sea, in a way calculated to excite our reverential awe. Should it be
thought that there is a comparison intended, then the latter clause of
the verse must be understood as added, with this meaning, That all the
terror of the objects mentioned is as nothing when we come to consider
the majesty of God himself, such as he is in heaven. There is still
another sense which may be extracted from the words, That though the
world may to appearance be shaken with violent commotions, this argues
no defect in the government of God, since he can control them at once by
his dreadful power.

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>**5** *Thy testimonies*  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) *are singularly true* As yet the Psalmist
has insisted upon the excellency of God in the work of creation, and the
providential government of the world. Now he speaks of his
distinguishing goodness to his chosen people, in making known to them
the doctrine which bringeth salvation. He begins by commending the
absolute trust-worthiness and truthfulness of the law of God. This being
a treasure which was not extended to all nations promiscuously, he adds
immediately that the house of God would be adorned with a glory which
should last for ever. The Divine goodness is displayed in every part of
the world, but the Psalmist justly considers it as of all others the
most inestimable blessing, that God should have deposited in his Church
the covenant of eternal life, and made his glory principally to shine
out of it. Some translate the Hebrew word <span
id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>נאוה*, naävah, desirable,*  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) as if the Psalmist had said that *the
adorning of the temple was precious;* but the grammatical construction
will not admit of this. By *length of days* is meant *perpetual
succession,*  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) and to this we find
Isaiah referring in striking terms, that the Divine truth might be
preserved in faithful custody through successive ages.

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span>“Behold, I have put my word in thy mouth, in
the mouth of thy seed, and of thy seed’s seed,” (<span
id="ii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021)<span id="ii.ii-p17.1"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc11001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span> Horsley translates, —

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>“Jehovah is King,  
Jehovah is gorgeously arrayed.”

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>And, on the second line, he has the following
note: — “The construction of the original is doubtful, though the sense
be obvious. The text may be expounded in either of these two ways; <span
id="ii.i-p5.1"></span>יהוה (*Jehovah*) <span id="ii.i-p5.2"></span>לבש
(hath put on) <span id="ii.i-p5.3"></span>גאות לבש (majesty of dress;)
or, <span id="ii.i-p5.4"></span>גאות לבש (majesty of dress) \[is\] <span
id="ii.i-p5.5"></span>לבש (the dress) <span id="ii.i-p5.6"></span>יהוה
(of Jehovah.)”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc11001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p5.7"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span> See volume 2, page 455, note 2. Bishop Lowth
supposes that here, as well as in that passage, there is an allusion to
the precious and magnificent ornaments of the priests’ attire. “Such,”
says he, “was the gracefulness, such the magnificence of the sacerdotal
vestments, especially those of the High Priest; so adapted were they, as
Moses says, (<span id="ii.i-p6.2"></span>[Ex
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p6.2"></span>,) to
the expression of glory and beauty, that to those who were impressed
with an equal opinion of the sanctity of the wearer, nothing could
possibly appear more venerable and sublime. To these, therefore, we find
frequent allusions in the Hebrew poets, when they have occasion to
describe extraordinary beauty or comeliness, or to delineate the perfect
form of supreme Majesty. The elegant Isaiah (<span
id="ii.i-p6.3"></span>[Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)<span
id="ii.i-p6.3"></span>) has a most beautiful idea of this kind when he
describes, in his own peculiar manner, (that is, most magnificently,)
the exultation and glory of the Church, after its triumphal restoration.
Pursuing the allusion, he decorates her with the vestments of salvation,
and clothes her in a robe of righteousness. He afterwards compares the
Church to a bridegroom dressed for the marriage, to which comparison
incredible dignity is added by the word *Ikohen*, a metaphor plainly
taken from the apparel of the priests, the force of which, therefore, no
modern language can express. No imagery, indeed, which the Hebrew
writers could employ, was equally adapted with this to the display (as
far as the human powers can conceive or depict the subject) of the
infinite majesty of God, ‘Jehovah’ is therefore introduced by the
Psalmist as ‘clothed with glory and with strength,’ (<span
id="ii.i-p6.4"></span>[Ps 93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)<span
id="ii.i-p6.4"></span>,) he is ‘girded with power,’ (<span
id="ii.i-p6.5"></span>[Ps 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007)<span
id="ii.i-p6.5"></span>;) which are the very terms appropriated to the
describing of the dress and ornaments of the priests.” — *Lectures on
the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews*, volume 1, pages 174, 175.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc11001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.i-p6.6"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>Ou, prepare.” —
*Fr*. *marg*. “Or, prepared.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc11001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p13.1"></span>Selon que ces
similitudes-ci prinses des hommes ont de coustume d’estre appropriees a
Dieu, pour le regard et la portee de nostre infirmite.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc11001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span> The Hebrew word <span
id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>משברי, *mishberey*, here used for *waves*, means
“waves” that “beat” against the shore or each other, and so are
“broken,” — “breakers.” Accordingly, Mant translates, “Strong the
breakers tossing high.” Horsley gives a similar version. He reads the
third and fourth verses thus, —

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>3. “The floods, O Jehovah! Raised  
The floods raised their voice;  
The floods lifted up their waves,  
With the sound of many waters.  
4. Mighty are the breakers of the seal;  
Mighty on High is Jehovah!”

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>As to the fourth line, “With the sound of
many waters,” he observes, “This is the first line of the fourth, but
should be joined to the third verse. And are not the floods here
mentioned, the fluids of the indigested chaos, in wild irregular
agitation, before the Creator had reduced it to form and order? Or
rather, may they not be mystical, — the tumults of the rebellious
people?”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc11001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Domui tuae
decus, sanctitas Jehovah in longitudinum dierum.” — *Lat*. The
translation in the French version is different, — “<span
id="ii.ii-p6.2"></span>A ta maison *est donc* magnificence: la sainctete
du Seigneur *est pour* un long temps.” “To thy house *then there is*
glory: the holiness of the Lord *is for* a length of time.” In the
former version, holiness is represented to be the true glory and
ornament of God’s house; in the latter, it is described as the attribute
of God.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc11001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span> Dr Morison, after stating the opinion of
Mudge, who thinks that this psalm was composed on occasion of some
violent inundation, which threatened a general confusion to the world,
adds, “It is more probable, perhaps, that the floods spoken of are
entirely figurative; and that they represent in Eastern phrase, those
powerful enemies by whom the peace of David and the ancient Church was
so often disturbed. But though the floods were lifted high, and
threatened destruction to those who were within their reach, yet Jehovah
was seen, as it were, riding on their most tempestuous billows, and
amidst their mightiest tumult, his throne was unshaken and his kingdom
unmoved.” In support of this view he refers to other passages of
Scripture, as <span id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Isa.
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008), [Isa.
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013)<span id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>; and
<span id="ii.ii-p10.2"></span>Job 46:7, 8<span id="ii.ii-p10.2"></span>,
\[*sic*\] where the confederated enemies of God’s Church are compared to
the tempestuous waves of the mighty ocean, which roll one after another
with resistless fury upon the storm-tossed bark.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc11001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.ii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>Non dubito
quin Propheta quasi *per hypotyposin* Dei potentiam hic nobis exprimat.”
— *Lat*. “<span id="ii.ii-p11.2"></span>Comme par une demonstration.” —
*Fr*. *Hypotyposis* means strictly the first rough sketch of a picture.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc11001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span> “The testimonies of God, when taken
generally, are the truths which he has testified or declared, inclusive
not only of moral precepts, but of gracious and unchangeable promises.
The combined result of which is, to impress on the minds of men the
weighty consideration, that those who trust in the mercy of God must
not, in a lower degree, venerate and adore his sanctity in all their
converse with him.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc11001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p15.1"></span>Quidam,
<span id="ii.ii-p15.2"></span>נאוה, <span id="ii.ii-p15.3"></span>pro
desiderabili accipiunt: acsi dixisset propheta, Templi decus esse
pretiosum,” etc. — *Lat*. The French version follows this exactly. But
the sentence is unsatisfactory; and there would seem to be some mistake,
or omission, in the original text. If the Hebrew word referred to be
rendered *desirable*, then when joined to <span
id="ii.ii-p15.4"></span>קדש, the clause would read, *holiness is
desirable*, or *becoming*, *to thy house*, *etc*. — and not *the
adorning of thy house is desirable*, or *precious*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc11001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.ii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span> “‘Holiness becometh thine house — for
ever,’ <span id="ii.ii-p16.1"></span>לארך ימים, *le-orec yamim*, ‘for
length of days:’ during the whole lapse of time; till the sun and moon
shall be no more.” — *Dr* *Adam Clarke*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 94](cc11002)
