[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11022)  [Next](cc11024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 115

<span id="xxiv-p2"></span>It is obvious that this psalm was penned when
the Church was deeply afflicted. Unworthy as they are to be heard by
God, the faithful, nevertheless, offer up supplications to him for
deliverance, lest his holy name might be exposed to scorn and reproach
among the heathen. Then, mustering courage, they mock at the madness of
all who are addicted to the worship of idols; and, with holy boasting,
they magnify their own happiness, in that they have been adopted by God;
and from this also they take occasion to stimulate one another to
acknowledge the kindness which they have received from him.

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
115:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Not unto us, O Jehovah! not unto us,
but unto thy name give the glory, on account of thy mercy, on account of
thy truth. **2.** Why should the heathen say, Where is now their God?
**3.** Surely our God is in heaven: he hath done whatsoever pleased him.

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span>**1** *Not unto us, O Jehovah!* It is not
certain by whom, or at what time, this psalm was composed.  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) We learn from the first part of it,
that the faithful betake themselves to God, in circumstances of extreme
distress. They do not make known their desires in plain words, but
indirectly hint at the nature of their request. They openly disclaim all
merit, and all hope of obtaining deliverance otherwise than God’s doing
it from *a sole regard to his own glory,* for these things are
inseparably connected. Deserving, therefore, to meet with a repulse,
they yet beseech God not to expose his name to the derision of the
heathen. In their distress they desire to obtain consolation and
support; but, finding nothing in themselves meritorious of God’s favor,
they call upon him to grant their requests, that his glory may be
maintained. This is a point to which we ought carefully to attend, that,
altogether unworthy as we are of God’s regard, we may cherish the hope
of being saved by him, from the respect that he has for the glory of his
name, and from his having adopted us on condition of never forsaking us.
It must, also be noticed, that their humility and modesty prevent them
from openly complaining of their distresses, and that they do not begin
with a request for their own deliverance, but for the glory of God.
Suffused with shame by reason of their calamity, which, in itself,
amounts to a kind of rejection, they durst not openly crave, at God’s
hand, what they wished, but made their appeal indirectly, that, from a
regard to his own glory, he would prove a father to sinners, who had no
claim upon him whatever. And, as this formulary of prayer has once been
delivered to the Church, let us also, in all our approaches unto God,
remember to lay aside all self-righteousness, and to place our hopes
entirely on his free favor. Moreover, when we pray for help, we ought to
have the glory of God in view, in the deliverance which we obtain. And
it is most likely they adopted this form of prayer, being led to do so
by the promise. For, during the captivity, God had said, “Not for your
sake, but for mine own sake will I do this,” <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.5"></span>[Isa
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.i-p6.5"></span>.
When all other hopes fail, they acknowledge this to be their only
refuge. The repetition of it is an evidence how conscious they were of
their own demerit, so that, if their prayers should happen to be
rejected a hundred times, they could not, in their own name, prefer any
charge against him.

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span>**2** *Why should the heathen say, Where is
now their God?* They here express how God would maintain his glory in
the preservation of the Church, which, if he permitted to be destroyed,
would expose his name to the impious reproaches of the heathen, who
would blaspheme the God of Israel, as being destitute of power, because
he forsook his servants in the time of need. This is not done from the
persuasion that God requires any such representation, but rather that
the faithful may direct their thoughts back to that holy zeal contained
in the words to which we have formerly adverted, “The railings of those
that railed against thee have fallen upon me,” <span
id="xxiv.i-p8.1"></span>[Ps 69:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010)<span
id="xxiv.i-p8.1"></span>. And this is the reason for not having recourse
to rhetorical embellishment, to move him to put forth his power to
preserve the Church; they simply protest that their anxiety for their
own safety does not prevent them from valuing the glory of God, even as
it is worthy of being more highly valued. They go on to show how the
glory of God was connected with their deliverance, by declaring that he
was the Author of the covenant, which the ungodly had boasted was
abolished and disannulled; and who, consequently, had declared that the
grace of God was frustrated, and that his promises were vain. This is
the ground on which they remind him of his favor and faithfulness, both
of which were liable to mischievous calumnies, should he disappoint the
hopes of his people, to whom he was bound by an everlasting covenant;
and upon whom, in the exercise of his gratuitous mercy, he had bestowed
the privilege of adoption. And as God, in making us also partakers of
his Gospel, has condescended to graft us into the body of his Son, we
ought to make a public acknowledgement of the same.

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p10"></span>**3** *Surely our God is in heaven.*  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) The faithful, with holy boldness,
encourage themselves the more to prayer. Our prayers, we know, are
worthless when we are agitated with doubts. Had that blasphemy
penetrated their hearts, it would have inflicted a mortal wound. And
hence they very opportunely guard against it, by discontinuing the train
of their supplications. By-and-bye we shall consider the second clause
of this verse in its proper place, where they scoff at the idols, and
lewd superstitions of the heathen. But, at present, every word in this
clause demands our careful inspection. When they place God in heaven,
they do not confine him to a certain locality, nor set limits to his
infinite essence; but they deny the limitation of his power, its being
shut up to human instrumentality only, or its being subject to fate or
fortune. In short, they put the universe under his control; and, being
superior to every obstruction, he does freely every thing that may seem
good to him. This truth is still more plainly asserted in the subsequent
clause, He *hath done whatsoever pleased him.* God, then, may be said to
dwell in heaven, as the world is subject to his will, and nothing can
prevent him from accomplishing his purpose.

<span id="xxiv.i-p12"></span>That God can do whatsoever he pleaseth is a
doctrine of great importance, provided it be truly and legitimately
applied. This caution is necessary, because curious and forward persons,
as is usual with them, take the liberty of abusing a sound doctrine by
producing it in defense of their frantic reveries. And in this matter we
daily witness too much of the wildness of human ingenuity. This mystery,
which ought to command our admiration and awe, is by many shamelessly
and irreverently made a topic of idle talk. If we would derive advantage
from this doctrine, we must attend to the import of God’s doing
whatsoever he pleaseth in heaven and on the earth. And, first, God has
all power for the preservation of his Church, and for providing for her
welfare; and, secondly, all creatures are under his control, and
therefore nothing can prevent him from accomplishing all his purposes.
However much, then, the faithful may find themselves cut off from all
means of subsistence and safety, they ought nevertheless to take courage
from the fact, that God is not only superior to all impediments, but
that he can render them subservient to the advancement of his own
designs. This, too, must also be borne in mind, that all events are the
result of God’s appointment alone, and that nothing happens by chance.
This much it was proper to premise respecting the use of this doctrine,
that we may be prevented from forming unworthy conceptions of the glory
of God, as men of wild imaginations are wont to do. Adopting this
principle, we ought not to be ashamed frankly to acknowledge that God,
by his eternal counsel, manages all things in such a manner, that
nothing can be done but by his will and appointment.

<span id="xxiv.i-p13"></span>From this passage Augustine very properly
and ingeniously shows, that those events which appear to us unreasonable
not only occur simply by the permission of God, but also by his will and
decree. For if our God doeth whatsoever pleaseth him, why should he
permit that to be done which he does not wish? Why does he not restrain
the devil and all the wicked who set themselves in opposition to him? If
he be regarded as occupying an intermediate position between doing and
suffering, so as to tolerate what he does not wish, then, according to
the fancy of the Epicureans, he will remain unconcerned in the heavens.
But if we admit that God is invested with prescience, that he
superintends and governs the world which he has made, and that he does
not overlook any part of it, it must follow that every thing which takes
place is done according to his will. Those who speak as if this would be
to render God the author of evil are perverse disputants. Filthy dogs
though they be, yet they will not, by their barking, be able to
substantiate a charge of lying against the prophet, or to take the
government of the world out of God’s hand. If nothing occurs unless by
the counsel and determination of God, he apparently does not disallow
sin; he has, however, secret and to us unknown causes why he permits
that which perverse men do, and yet this is not done because he approves
of their wicked inclinations. It was the will of God that Jerusalem
should be destroyed, the Chaldeans also wished the same thing, but after
a different manner; and though he frequently calls the Babylonians his
stipendiary soldiers, and says that they were stirred up by him, (<span
id="xxiv.i-p13.1"></span>[Isa
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026)<span id="xxiv.i-p13.1"></span>;)
and farther, that they were the sword of his own hand, yet we would not
therefore call them his allies, inasmuch as their object was very
different. In the destruction of Jerusalem God’s justice would be
displayed, while the Chaldeans would be justly censured for their lust,
covetousness, and cruelty. Hence, whatever takes place in the world is
according to the will of God, and yet it is not his will that any evil
should be done. For however incomprehensible his counsel may be to us,
still it is always based upon the best of reasons. Satisfied with his
will alone, so as to be fully persuaded, that, notwithstanding the great
depth of his judgments, (<span id="xxiv.i-p13.2"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.i-p13.2"></span>)
they are characterized by the most consummate rectitude; this ignorance
will be far more learned than all the acumen of those who presume to
make their own capacity the standard by which to measure his works. On
the other hand, it is deserving of notice, that if God does whatsoever
he pleases, then it is not his pleasure to do that which is not done.
The knowledge of this truth is of great importance, because it
frequently happens, when God winks and holds his peace at the
afflictions of the Church, that we ask why he permits her to languish,
since it is in his power to render her assistance. Avarice, fraud,
perfidy, cruelty, ambition, pride, sensuality, drunkenness, and, in
short, every species of corruption in these times is rampant in the
world, all which would instantly cease did it seem good to God to apply
the remedy. Wherefore, if he at any time appears to us to be asleep, or
has not the means of succoring us, let this tend to make us wait
patiently, and to teach us that it is not his pleasure to act so
speedily the part of our deliverer, because he knows that delay and
procrastination are profitable to us; it being his will to wink at and
tolerate for a while what assuredly, were it his pleasure, he could
instantly rectify.

<span id="xxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
115:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#004)<span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Their idols are silver and gold, the
work of men’s hands. **5.** They have a mouth, but they do not speak:
they have eyes and see not: **6.** They have ears, and do not hear: they
have noses, and smell not: **7.** They have hands, and feel not: they
have feet, and walk not: they do not speak through their throat.  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) **8.** Those that make them shall be
like unto them; and all those who trust to them.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p6"></span>**4** *Their idols* This contrast is
introduced for the purpose of confirming the faith of the godly, by
which they repose upon God alone; because, excepting him, all that the
minds of men imagine of divinity is the invention of folly and delusion.
To know the error and the madness of the world certainly contributes in
no small degree to the confirmation of true godliness; while, on the
other hand, a God is presented to us, whom we know assuredly to be the
maker of heaven and earth, and whom we are to worship, not without
reason or at random. The more effectually to silence the arrogance of
the ungodly, who proudly presume to set at nought God and his chosen
people, he contemptuously ridicules their false gods, first calling them
*idols,* that is to say, things of nought, and, next, showing from their
being formed of inanimate materials, that they are destitute of life and
feeling. For can there be anything more absurd than to expect assistance
from them, since neither the materials of which they are formed, nor the
form which is given to them by the hand of men, possess the smallest
portion of divinity so as to command respect for them? At the same time,
the prophet tacitly indicates that the value of the material does not
invest the idols with more excellence so that they deserve to be more
highly esteemed. Hence the passage may be translated adversatively,
thus, Though they are of gold and silver, yet they are not gods, because
they are the work of men’s hands. Had it been his intention merely to
depreciate the substance of which they were composed, he would rather
have called them wood and stone, but at present he speaks only of gold
and silver. In the meantime, the prophet reminds us that nothing is more
unbecoming than for men to say that they can impart either essence, or
form, or honor to a god, since they themselves are dependent upon
another for that life which will soon disappear. From this it follows,
that the heathen vainly boast of receiving help from gods of their own
devising. Whence does idolatry take its origin but from the imaginations
of men? Having abundance of materials supplied to their hand, they can
make of their gold or silver, not only a goblet or some other kind of
vessel, but also vessels for meaner purposes, but they prefer making a
god. And what can be more absurd than to convert a lifeless mass into
some new deity? Besides, the prophet satirically adds, that while the
heathen fashion members for their idols, they cannot enable them to move
or use them. It is on this account that the faithful experience their
privilege to be the more valuable, in that the only true God is on their
side, and because they are well assured that all the heathen vainly
boast of the aid which they expect from their idols, which are nothing
but shadows.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p7"></span>This is a doctrine, however, which ought to
receive a greater latitude of meaning; for from it we learn, generally,
that it is foolish to seek God under outward images, which have no
resemblance or relation to his celestial glory. To this principle we
must still adhere, otherwise it would be easy for the heathen to
complain that they were unjustly condemned, because, though they make
for themselves idols upon earth, they yet were persuaded that God is in
heaven. They did not imagine that Jupiter was either composed of stone,
or of gold, or of earth, but that he was merely represented under these
similitudes. Whence originated this form of address common among the
ancient Romans, “To make supplication before the gods,” but because they
believed the images to be, as it were, the representations of the gods?
 <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) The Sicilians, says Cicero,
have no gods before whom they can present their supplications. He would
not have spoken in this barbarous style, had the notion not been
prevalent, that the figures of the heavenly deities were represented to
them in brass, or silver, or in marble;  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) and cherishing the notion, that in
approaching these images the gods were nearer to them, the prophet
justly exposes this ridiculous fancy, that they would enclose the Deity
within corruptible representations, since nothing is more foreign to the
nature of God than to dwell under stone, or a piece of marble, or wood,
and stock of a tree, or brass, or silver.  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) For this reason, the prophet Habakkuk
designates that gross mode of worshipping God, the school of falsehood.
(<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.6"></span>[Hab
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.6"></span>.)
Moreover, the scornful manner in which he speaks of their gods deserves
to be noticed, *they have a mouth, but they do not speak;* for why do we
betake ourselves to God, but from the conviction that we are dependent
upon him for life; that our safety is in him, and that the abundance of
good, and the power to help us, are with him? As these images are
senseless and motionless, what can be more absurd than to ask from them
that of which they themselves are destitute?

<span id="xxiv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p12"></span>**8** *They who make them shall be like
unto them.* Many are of opinion that this is an imprecation, and hence
translate the future tense in the optative mood, *may they become like
unto them* But it will be equally appropriate to regard it as the
language of ridicule, as if the prophet should affirm that the idolaters
are equally stupid with the stocks and stones themselves. And he
deservedly severely reprehends men naturally endued with understanding,
because they divest themselves of reason and judgment, and even of
common sense. For those who ask life from things which are lifeless, do
they not endeavor to the utmost of their power to extinguish all the
light of reason? In a word, were they possessed of a particle of common
sense, they would not attribute the properties of deity to the works of
their own hands, to which they could impart no sensation or motion. And
surely this consideration alone should suffice to remove the plea of
ignorance, their making false gods for themselves in opposition to the
plain dictates of natural reason. As the legitimate effect of this, they
are willfully blind, envelop themselves in darkness, and become stupid;
and this renders them altogether inexcusable, so that they cannot
pretend that their error is the result of pious zeal. And I have no
doubt that it was the prophet’s intention to remove every cause and
color of ignorance, inasmuch as mankind spontaneously become stupid.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p13"></span>*Whosoever trusteth in them.* The reason
why God holds images so much in abhorrence appears very plainly from
this, that he cannot endure that the worship due to himself should be
taken from him and given to them. That the world should acknowledge him
to be the sole author of salvation, and should ask for and expect from
him alone all that is needed, is an honor which peculiarly belongs to
him. And, therefore, as often as confidence is reposed in any other than
in himself, he is deprived of the worship which is due to him, and his
majesty is, as it were, annihilated. The prophet inveighs against this
profanity, even as in many passages the indignation of God is compared
to jealousy, when he beholds idols and false gods receiving the homage
of which he has been deprived, (<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ex
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.2"></span>[De
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009)<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.2"></span>)
If a man carve an image of marble, wood, or brass, or if he cast one of
gold or silver, this of itself would not be so detestable a thing; but
when men attempt to attach God to their inventions, and to make him, as
it were, descend from heaven, then a pure fiction is substituted in his
place. It is very true that God’s glory is instantly counterfeited when
it is invested with a corruptible form; (“To whom hast thou likened me?”
he exclaims by <span id="xxiv.ii-p13.3"></span>[Isa
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025)<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.3"></span>,
and <span id="xxiv.ii-p13.4"></span>[Isa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.4"></span>,
and the Scripture abounds with such texts;) nevertheless, he is doubly
injured when his truth, and grace, and power, are imagined to be
concentrated in idols. To make idols, and then to confide in them, are
things which are almost inseparable. Else whence is it that the world so
strongly desires gods of stone, or of wood, or of clay, or of any
earthly material, were it not that they believe that God is far from
them, until they hold him fixed to them by some bond? Averse to seek God
in a spiritual manner, they therefore pull him down from his throne, and
place him under inanimate things. Thus it comes to pass, that they
address their supplications to images, because they imagine that in them
God’s ears, and also his eyes and hands, are near to them. I have
observed that these two vices can hardly be severed, namely, that those
who, in forging idols, change the truth of God into a lie, must also
ascribe something of divinity to them. When the prophet says that
unbelievers put their trust in idols, his design, as I formerly noticed,
was to condemn this as the chief and most detestable piece of profanity.

<span id="xxiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
115:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#009)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p2"></span>**9.** O Israel! Trust  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) thou in Jehovah: he is their help and
their shield. **10.** O house of Aaron! trust ye in Jehovah: he is their
help and their shield. **11.** Ye that fear Jehovah! trust in Jehovah:
he is their help and their shield. **12.** Jehovah has been mindful of
us; he will bless us; he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless
the house of Aaron. **13.** He will bless them that fear Jehovah, both
the small with the great. **14.** Jehovah will add unto you, unto you
and unto your children. **15.** Blessed are ye of Jehovah, who made
heaven and earth.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p6"></span>**9** *O Israel! trust thou in Jehovah*
The prophet again resumes the doctrinal point, that the genuine
worshippers of God have no cause to fear that he will forsake or
frustrate them in the time of need; because he is as much disposed to
provide for their safety as he is furnished with power to do it. He
proceeds, in the first place, to exhort all the Israelites generally to
place their confidence in God; and, secondly, he addresses the house of
Aaron in particular; and, thirdly, he sets down all who fear God. For
this arrangement there was good cause. God had adopted indiscriminately
all the people, to whom also his grace was offered, so that they were
bound in common to place their hope in him. In accordance with this Paul
says, that the twelve tribes of Israel wait for the promised
deliverance, (<span id="xxiv.iii-p6.1"></span>[Ac
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007)<span id="xxiv.iii-p6.1"></span>)
The prophet, therefore, with great propriety first addresses Israel at
large. But having in a peculiar manner set apart the Levites for
himself, and more especially the priests of the house of Aaron, to take
the precedence, and to preside over ecclesiastical matters, he demands
more from them than from the common people; not that salvation was
promised specially to them, but because it was proper that they who had
the exclusive privilege of entering the sanctuary should point out the
way to others. As if the prophet had said, Ye sons of Aaron, whom God
hath chosen to be the teachers of religion to his people, be ye to
others an example of faith, seeing that he hath so highly honored you in
permitting you to enter his sanctuary.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p8"></span>**11.** *Ye who fear Jehovah!* He does not
speak of strangers, as some erroneously suppose, as if this were a
prediction respecting the calling of the Gentiles. Connecting them with
the children of Israel and with the sons of Aaron, they are of opinion
that he refers to the heathens and to the uncircumcised who were not yet
gathered into the sheepfold. By parity of reason one might infer, that
the priests are not of the seed of Abraham, because they are separately
mentioned. It is more probable that there is in these words a tacit
correction of what he had said before, by which he makes a distinction
between the genuine worshippers of God and those hypocrites who were the
degenerate sons of Abraham. Not a few of the seed of Abraham according
to the flesh having departed from the faith of their father, the prophet
here restricts the promise to those who, having received it by faith,
were worshipping God in purity. We now perceive the reason for his first
addressing *the Israelites,* next *the house of Aaron,* and then *the
fearers of Jehovah* It is as if a person in our times were to point his
exhortation first to the whole body of the Church, and then come more
particularly to the ministers and teachers, who ought to be ensamples to
others. And as many falsely pique themselves upon the mere name of being
connected with the Church, and hence deserve not to be classed with
God’s true followers, he expressly mentions the genuine and not the
counterfeit worshippers of God.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p10"></span>**12** *Jehovah hath remembered us* Many
render the term *bless* in the past tense, *he has blessed,* it being
the design of the prophet, according to them, to propose the past
experience of God’s kindness as an encouragement to cherish good hope
for the future: “We have already, from long experience, been taught how
valuable the favor of our God is, because from this source alone have
flowed our prosperity, our abundance, and our stability.” He assumes the
principle, the truth of which ought to be admitted by all, that we
neither enjoy prosperity nor happiness further than it pleases God to
bless us. As often as the Israelites were rescued from manifold dangers,
or succored in time of need, or treated in a friendly manner, so many
palpable proofs had they of the loving-kindness of God towards them. As,
however, there is no just cause to urge us to change the verb from the
future into the past tense, it is quite in unison with the scope of the
passage, if we say that the same blessing is here promised to the
faithful which they have formerly realized. Thus the meaning will be,
that God, mindful of his covenant, has hitherto been attentive to us;
therefore, as he has begun to favor us, he will continue to do so for
ever. In pronouncing these blessings, he observes the same order as
above, assigning to the children of Aaron a superior place in God’s
benediction, excluding from it those among the Israelites who were
hypocrites.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p12"></span>He says, *both the small with the great,*
by which circumstance he magnifies God’s paternal regard the more,
showing that he does not overlook even the meanest and most despised,
provided they cordially invoke his aid. Now, as there is no acceptance
of persons before God, our low and abject condition ought to be no
obstruction to our drawing near to him, since he so kindly invites to
approach him those who appear to be held in no reputation. Moreover, the
repetition of the word *bless* is intended to mark the uninterrupted
stream of his loving-kindness. Should any prefer the past tense, *he has
blessed,* the meaning will be, that the favor of God towards his people
has continued for a long period, which ought to be a sure evidence of
the perpetuity of his fatherly regard. This interpretation is
strengthened by the subsequent verse, in which he says, that God would
multiply the benefits which he had up to that time conferred upon them.
For God’s liberality is an inexhaustible fountain, which will never
cease to flow so long as its progress is not impeded by the ingratitude
of men. And hence it will be continued to their posterity, because God
manifests the grace and the fruit of his adoption even to a thousand
generations.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p13"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p14"></span>**15.** *Ye are blessed of Jehovah* In
the preceding verse the prophet had given them the hope of uninterrupted
happiness, arising from God’s infinite resources never failing, however
liberally and largely he bestows, and from his never ceasing to enrich
those whom he hath admitted as sharers of his bounty. In confirmation of
this doctrine, he declares that the children of Abraham were separated
from other nations; so that, relying upon this privilege, they might
unhesitatingly and unreservedly surrender themselves to a father so
benignant and bountiful. And as the flesh, in consequence of its
stupidity, cannot perceive the power of God, the understanding of which
preserves us in a state of peace and security under his protection, the
prophet, in designating him the maker of heaven and earth, reminds us
that there is no ground to fear that he is unable to defend us; for,
having created the heaven and the earth, he does not now remain
unconcerned in heaven, but all creation is under his sovereign control.

<span id="xxiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
115:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#016)<span
id="xxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p2"></span>**16.** The heavens, the heavens are
Jehovah’s: but the earth he hath given to the children of men. **17.** O
God! the dead shall not praise thee, nor those who go down to silence.
**18.** But we will bless God from this time, and for ever. Praise ye
Jehovah.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p5"></span>**16** *The heavens, the heavens are
Jehovah’s* In this passage the prophet extols the bounty of God, and his
paternal regard for the human race, in that, though he stood in need of
nothing himself, he yet created the world, with all its fullness, for
their use. How comes it to pass that the earth is every where covered
with such a great variety of good things, meeting our eye in all
directions, unless that God, as a provident father of a family, had
designed to make provision for our wants? In proportion, therefore, to
the comforts which we here enjoy, are the tokens of his fatherly care.
This is the prophet’s meaning, which I am astonished is so little
attended to by the most of interpreters. The amount is, that God,
satisfied with his own glory, has enriched the earth with abundance of
good things, that mankind may not lack any thing. At the same time he
demonstrates, that, as God has his dwelling-place in the heavens, he
must be independent of all worldly riches; for, assuredly, neither wine,
nor corn, nor any thing requisite for the support of the present life is
produced there. Consequently, God has every resource in himself. To this
circumstance the repetition of the, term *heavens* refers, *The heavens,
the heavens are enough for God;* and as he is superior to all aid, he is
to himself instead of a hundred worlds. It remains, therefore, as
another consequence from this, that all the riches with which the world
abounds proclaim aloud what a beneficent father God is to mankind. It is
indeed surprising that there should be no relish for this doctrine,
considering that the Holy Spirit spoke of the inestimable goodness of
God. Under the papacy, they chanted this psalm in their churches, and
they continue the practice still; but is there one among a hundred of
them who reflects that God, in bestowing all good things upon us,
reserves nothing for himself, except a grateful acknowledgment of them?
And not only in this matter does the ingratitude of the world appear,
but the wicked wretches have conducted themselves most vilely, in open
and infamous blasphemy; perverting this verse, and making a jest of it,
saying that God remains unconcerned in heaven, and pays no regard to the
affairs of men. The prophet here expressly declares that the world is
employed by God, for the sole purpose of testifying his paternal
solicitude towards mankind; and yet these swine and dogs have made these
words a laughing-stock, as if God, by reason of his vast distance from
men, totally disregarded them. And here I am induced to relate a
memorable story. While we were supping in a certain inn, and speaking of
the hope of the heavenly life, a profane despiser of God happening to be
present, treated our discourse with derision, and now and then mockingly
exclaimed, “The heaven of heavens is the Lord’s.” Instantly afterwards
he was seized with dreadful pain, and began to vociferate, “O God! O
God!” and, having a powerful voice, he filled the whole apartment with
his cries. Then I, who had felt indignant at his conduct, proceeded, in
my own way, to tell him warmly, that now at least he perceived that they
who mocked God were not permitted to escape with impunity. One of the
guests, an honest and pious man, yet alive, but withal facetious,
employed the occasion thus, “Do you invoke God? Have you forgotten your
philosophy? Why do you not permit him to remain at ease in his own
heaven?” And as often as the one bawled out, “O God!” the other, mocking
him, retorted, “Where is now thy *Coelum coeli Domino?*” At that time
his pain indeed was mitigated; nevertheless, the remainder of his life
was spent in impunity.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p7"></span>**17** *O God! the dead shall not praise
thee* In these words the prophet goes on to beseech God to show himself
propitious towards his Church, were there no other object to be gained
than the preventing mankind from being utterly cut off, and the
preserving a people, not only to enjoy his kindness, but also to invoke
and praise his name. After celebrating God’s peculiar favor towards the
Israelites, and the beneficence which he displayed towards mankind at
large, he has recourse to the mercy of God for the pardoning of the sins
of his people. And he proceeds on this footing, that though the heathen
nations revel amidst the profuseness of God’s bounty, yet the seed of
Abraham alone are set apart to celebrate his praises. “Lord, if thou
shouldst allow us to perish, what would be the result, but that thy name
would become extinct, and would be entombed with us?” From his appearing
to deprive the dead of all sensibility, a question occurs: If souls,
after they have departed from their corporeal prison, still survive? It
is certain that they are then more vigorous and active, and; therefore,
it must inevitably follow that God is also praised by the dead.
Moreover, in appointing mankind their abode upon earth, he so
disconnects them with God, that he leaves them a life such as they enjoy
in common with the brutal tribes. For the earth was not given
exclusively to men, but also to oxen, swine, dogs, lions, and bears, and
what is more, to every sort of reptile and insect. For there is not a
fly, nor a creeping thing, however mean, which the earth does not supply
with an abode.  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) The solution of
the first question is easy. Men were so situated on the earth that they
might, as it were, with one voice celebrate the praises of God. And it
was to this concord that the prophet in this place referred, as does
also the Scripture in many other passages.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p9"></span>“I shall not die, but live, and declare the
words of the Lord,”  
(<span id="xxiv.iv-p9.2"></span>[Psalm
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="xxiv.iv-p9.2"></span>:
17).

<span id="xxiv.iv-p10"></span>The good king Hezekiah also, said,

<span id="xxiv.iv-p11"></span>“The living, the living, he shall praise
thee,” (<span id="xxiv.iv-p11.1"></span>[Isa
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019)<span
id="xxiv.iv-p11.1"></span>).

<span id="xxiv.iv-p12"></span>Jonah, too, when cast out of the belly of
the fish, said,

<span id="xxiv.iv-p13"></span>“I will offer sacrifices, and I will pay
my vows unto the Lord,” (<span id="xxiv.iv-p13.1"></span>[Jon
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010)<span id="xxiv.iv-p13.1"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372)

<span id="xxiv.iv-p15"></span>In short, the prophet very justly excludes
the dead from taking any part in the celebration of God’s praises; for
among them there is no communion and fellowship qualifying them for
mutually sounding forth his praises: the proclaiming of his glory on the
earth being the very end of our existence. The reply to the second
inquiry is this: The prophet says that the earth was given to mankind,
that they might employ themselves in God’s service, until they be put in
possession of everlasting felicity. True, indeed, the abundance of the
earth belongs also to the brutal tribes; but the Holy Spirit declares
that all things were created principally for the use of men, that they
might thereby recognize God as their father. In fine, the prophet
concludes that the whole course of nature would be subverted, unless God
saved his Church. The creation of the world would serve no good purpose,
if there were no people to call upon God. Hence he infers that there
will always be some left alive upon the earth. And he not only promises
that the Church shall be preserved, but also calls upon all who are thus
preserved to offer a tribute of gratitude to their deliverer; and,
moreover, he engages in their name to set forth the praises of God. He
does not speak merely of the persons who belong to one age, but of the
whole body of the Church which God upholds from one generation after
another, that he may never leave himself without some to testify and
declare his justice, goodness, and mercy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc11023.htm#fr_364) <span
id="xxiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span> “As the former psalm ended abruptly, and
this is connected with it by the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, Arabic,
Æthiopic, with nineteen MSS.; and as the following ejaculations so
naturally arise from the consideration of the wonderful works of Jehovah
just before recited, Lorinus’s opinion, that it is only a continuation
of the former, is not improbable. Patrick refers it to <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.1"></span>[2Ch 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002)<span
id="xxiv.i-p6.1"></span>. Some suppose it to be written by Moses at the
Red Sea. Others, by David in the beginning of his reign. Others, by
Mordecai and Esther. Others, by the three children in the fiery furnace.
Perhaps by Hezekiah, or some one in the Babylonish captivity. — See
<span id="xxiv.i-p6.2"></span>[Ps
114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p6.2"></span>.”
— *Dimoch.* “There is nothing certain,” observes Walford, “to be
concluded respecting the author of this psalm, or the occasion on which
it was written. It is conjectured, however, to belong to the time of
Hezekiah, and to have been composed in celebration of the very
extraordinary deliverance which was afforded to that pious prince, and
to his people, from the blasphemies and arrogance of Sennacherib, the
king of Assyria, <span id="xxiv.i-p6.3"></span>[2Ch
32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#000)<span id="xxiv.i-p6.3"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.i-p6.4"></span>[Isa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#037)<span id="xxiv.i-p6.4"></span>.
Whether this conjecture be agreeable to the truth, we are unable to say,
though a considerable probability that it is so, arises from the
language of the psalm itself.”

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc11023.htm#fr_365) <span
id="xxiv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p11"></span> “*Our God,* says he, *is in heaven,* as
much as to say, that yours are not. The verse may be also regarded as a
response to the question of the heathen, *Where is now their God*? Such
a response was calculated to fortify the minds of the pious worshippers
of Jehovah, against the ridicule which was heaped upon them by their
idolatrous neighbors.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc11023.htm#fr_366) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p3"></span> Hammond reads the last clause, “neither
breathe, *or* murmur, they through their throats.” “What <span
id="xxiv.ii-p3.1"></span>יהגו here signifies,” says he, “will be
concluded by the context which immediately before had mentioned their
*having mouths and not speaking.* Here, therefore, (as there the proper
action of the *mouth* was *speech*,) the proper action of the *throat*
or *larynx* seems to be intended, and that is *to breathe.* So when,
<span id="xxiv.ii-p3.2"></span>[Ps
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009)<span id="xxiv.ii-p3.2"></span>,
he saith, ‘We consume our days, <span id="xxiv.ii-p3.3"></span>כמו הגה,
the Targum reads, <span id="xxiv.ii-p3.4"></span>היך הבל פומא, ‘as a
vapor,’ *i.e.,* ‘breath of the mouth in winter.’ If this is not the
sense, then certainly it is an inarticulate sound, contradistinct from
speaking. So Kimchi and Aben Ezra state it, and quote <span
id="xxiv.ii-p3.5"></span>[Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.ii-p3.5"></span>,
where the word is applied to the *murmuring* of the *dove.*”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc11023.htm#fr_367) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p8.1"></span>Car que
vouloit dire ceste facon de parler dont usoyent les anciens Romains,
faire oraison deuant les dieux sinon qu’ils estimoyent que les idoles
estoyent comme les representations des dieux?” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc11023.htm#fr_368) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p9"></span> But though these images might, at first,
be intended merely to bring the real Deity before the senses, and thus
to impress the mind the more deeply with sentiments of awe and devotion,
yet in process of time they began to be considered, especially by the
ignorant multitude, as being really gods.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc11023.htm#fr_369) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p10"></span> The heathen not only considered their
*idols* or *images* as representing their gods, but believed that, when
consecrated by their priests, they were thereby animated by the gods
whom they represented, and hence were worshipped as such. “Augustine
(<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.1"></span>*De Civitate Dei,* B. 8, c. 23) tells
us of the theology of the heathen, received from Trismegistus, that
statues were the bodies of their gods, which, by some magical
ceremonies, or <span id="xxiv.ii-p10.2"></span>θεουργίαι, were forced to
join themselves as souls, and so animate and enliven those dead organs,
to assume and inhabit them. And so Proclus (<span
id="xxiv.ii-p10.3"></span>*De Sacrif et Mag*.) mentions it as the common
opinion of the Gentiles, that the ‘gods were, by their favor and help,
present in their images;’ and, therefore, the Tyrians, fearing that
Apollo would forsake them, bound his image with golden chains, supposing
then the god could not depart from them. The like did the Athenians
imagine when they clipped the wings of the image of Victory; and the
Sicilians, in Cicero, (<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.4"></span>*De Divin*.) who
complain that they had no gods in their island, because Verres, Praetor
in Sicily, had taken away all their statues. And so we know Laban, when
he had lost his Teraphim, tells Jacob, (<span
id="xxiv.ii-p10.5"></span>[Ge
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#030)<span
id="xxiv.ii-p10.5"></span>,) ‘that he had stolen his gods;’ and so of
the golden calf, after the feasts of consecration, proclamation is made
before it, ‘These be thy gods, O Israel!’ But this of the animation and
inspiriting of images, by their rites of consecration, being but a
deception and fiction of their priests, the Psalmist here discovers it,
and assures all men that they are as inanimate and senseless after the
consecration as before; base silver and gold, with images of mouths and
ears, etc., but without any power to use any of them, and, consequently,
most unable to hear or help their votaries.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc11023.htm#fr_370) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p3"></span> Many interpreters translate the verb
*trust,* which occurs here and in the next two verses, in the indicative
mood, “Israel trusteth in Jehovah,” etc.; judging this to be more
agreeable to the occasion than the imperative, which is found in the
present copies of the Hebrew text. This emendation is supported by all
the ancient versions.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc11023.htm#fr_371) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iv-p8.1"></span>Nulla enim
musca est, nullus pediculus cui domicilium non praebeat terra.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc11023.htm#fr_372) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p14"></span> Thus the present text of Scripture, and
others of a similar kind, as <span id="xxiv.iv-p14.1"></span>[Ps.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006), [Ps.
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010), [Ps.
88:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.1"></span>;
and <span id="xxiv.iv-p14.2"></span>[Isa.
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019)<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.2"></span>,
are not to be understood as implying that the Hebrews of those times had
no idea of a future state of existence beyond death and the grave. Such
an interpretation would be at variance with many passages of the Old
Testament, as <span id="xxiv.iv-p14.3"></span>[Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), [Ps.
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015), [Ps.
73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024)<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.4"></span>[Pr
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#032)<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.4"></span>;
<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.5"></span>[Eccl.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011), [Eccl.
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009), [Eccl.
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.5"></span>;
with the most explicit declarations of the New, as to the possession of
this knowledge by the ancient Hebrews, <span
id="xxiv.iv-p14.6"></span>[Heb 11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span
id="xxiv.iv-p14.6"></span>; <span id="xxiv.iv-p14.7"></span>[Lu
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#037)<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.7"></span>;
and with what might reasonably be supposed of persons who were favored
with a supernatural revelation, and who enjoyed special intercourse with
God, but who, had they been ignorant of a future state, knew less on
this subject than Pagan writers, many of whom anticipated such a state
in which virtue would receive its appropriate reward. In such passages
the sensible appearances occasioned by death, and these alone, are
represented. As to the eye of sense, nothing appears in the victim of
death but inactivity, silence, decay, and corruption, the sacred writers
seize upon these concomitants of that solemn and affecting event to add
to the force of the argument which they are prosecuting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 116](cc11024)
