[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11023)  [Next](cc11025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>PSALM 116

<span id="xxv-p2"></span>David, being delivered out of very great
dangers, relates what cruel torment and anguish of mind he endured, and
then how remarkably he was preserved by God. The desperate state of
matters with him tended to make the power of God in his preservation
more conspicuous; for had not God interposed for his deliverance, all
hope would have failed. In this way he stirs himself up to gratitude,
and acknowledges that he can make no other return to him for his
innumerable benefits.  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373)

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
116:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1.** I have loved, because Jehovah shall
hear the voice of my supplication. **2.** Because he hath inclined his
ear to me, and during my days I will call upon him. **3.** The snares
 <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) of death compassed me,  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) and the sorrows of the grave found me:
 <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) I found tribulation and grief.
**4.** And I will call upon the name of Jehovah; I beseech thee, O
Jehovah! deliver my soul.

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p9"></span><span id="xxv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p10"></span>**1** *I have loved, because Jehovah will
hear the voice of my supplication.* At the very commencement of this
psalm David avows that he was attracted with the sweetness of God’s
goodness, to place his hope and confidence in him alone. This abrupt
mode of speaking, *I have loved,* is the more emphatic, intimating that
he could receive joy and repose nowhere but in God. We know that our
hearts will be always wandering after fruitless pleasures, and harassed
with care, until God knit them to himself. This distemper David affirms
was removed from him, because he felt that God was indeed propitious
towards him. And, having found by experience that, in general, they who
call upon God are happy, he declares that no allurements shall draw him
away from God. When, therefore, he says, *I have loved,* it imports
that, without God, nothing would be pleasant or agreeable to him. From
this we are instructed that those who have been heard by God, but do not
place themselves entirely under his guidance and guardianship, have
derived little advantage from the experience of his grace.

<span id="xxv.i-p11"></span>The second verse also refers to the same
subject, excepting that the latter clause admits of a very appropriate
meaning, which expositors overlook. The phrase, *during my days I will
call upon him,* is uniformly understood by them to mean, I, who hitherto
have been so successful in addressing God, will pursue the same course
all my life long. But it should be considered whether it may not be
equally appropriate *that the days of David* be regarded as denoting a
fit season of asking assistance, the season when he was hard pressed by
necessity. I am not prevented from adopting this signification, because
it may be said that the prophet employs the future tense of the verb
<span id="xxv.i-p11.1"></span>אקרא, *ekra.* In the first verse also, the
term, *he shall hear,* is to be understood in the past tense, *he has
heard,* in which case the copulative conjunction would require to be
taken as an adverb of time, *when,* a circumstance this by no means
unusual among the Hebrews. The scope of the passage will run very well
thus: Because he has bowed his ear to me when I called upon him in the
time of my adversity, and even at the season, too, when I was reduced to
the greatest straits. If any are disposed to prefer the former
exposition, I will not dispute the matter with them. The subsequent
context, however, appears to countenance the latter meaning, in which
David commences energetically to point out what those days were. And,
with the design of magnifying God’s glory according to its desert, he
says that there was no way of his escaping from death, for he was like
one among enemies, bound with fetters and chains, from whom all hope of
deliverance was cut off. He acknowledges, therefore, that he was
subjected to death, that he was overtaken and seized, so that escape was
impossible. And as he declares that he was *bound by the cords of
death,* so he, at the same the adds, that *he fell into tribulation and
sorrow* And here he confirms what he said formerly, that when he seemed
to be most forsaken of God, that was truly the proper time, and the
right season for him to give himself to prayer.

<span id="xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
116:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#005)<span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Jehovah is gracious and just; our God
is merciful. **6.** Jehovah guards the simple; I was brought low, and he
saved me. **7.** Return, O my soul! into thy rest; for Jehovah hath
recompensed unto thee. **8.** Because thou hast delivered my soul from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. **9.** I will
walk in the presence of Jehovah in the land of the living.

<span id="xxv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p5"></span>**5** *Jehovah is gracious.* He comes now to
point out the fruits of that love of which he spoke, setting before him
God’s titles, in order that they might serve to preserve his faith in
him. First, he denominates him *gracious,* because he is so ready
graciously to render assistance. From this source springs that *justice*
which he displays for the protection of his own people. To this is
subjoined *mercy,* without which we would not deserve God’s aid. And as
the afflictions which overtake us frequently appear to preclude the
exercise of his justice, hence it follows that there is nothing better
than to repose upon him alone; so that his fatherly kindness may engross
our thoughts, and that no voluptuous pleasure may steal them away to any
thing else. He then accommodates the experience of God’s benignity and
equity to the preserving of the simple, that is, of such as, being
undesigning, do not possess the requisite prudence for managing their
own affairs. The term, rendered *simple,* is often understood in a bad
sense, denoting persons inconsiderate and foolish, who will not follow
wholesome advice. But, in this place, it is applied to those who are
exposed to the abuse of the wicked, who are not sufficiently subtle and
circumspect to elude the snares which are laid for them, — in short, to
those who are easily overreached; while, on the contrary, the children
of this world are full of ingenuity, and have every means at their
command for maintaining and protecting themselves. David, therefore,
acknowledges himself to be as a child, unable to consult his own safety,
and totally unfit to ward off the dangers to which he was exposed. Hence
the LXX. have not improperly translated the Hebrew term by the Greek,
<span id="xxv.ii-p5.1"></span>τὰ νήπια, *little children.*  <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) The amount is, that when those who are
liable to suffering have neither the prudence nor the means of effecting
their deliverance, God manifests his wisdom towards them, and interposes
the secret protection of his providence between them and all the dangers
by which their safety may be assailed. In fine, David holds forth
himself as a personal example of this fact, in that, after being reduced
to the greatest straits, he had, by the grace of God, been restored to
his former state.

<span id="xxv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p8"></span>**7** *Return, O my soul! unto thy rest.* He
now exhorts himself to be of good courage; or rather, addressing his
soul, tells it to be tranquil, because God was propitious towards him.
By the term *rest,* some commentators understand God himself, but this
is an unnatural interpretation. It is rather to be regarded as
expressive of a calm and composed state of mind. For it is to be
noticed, that David confesses himself to have been sorely agitated and
perplexed amid an accumulation of ills, in the same way as each of us is
conscious of his own inquietude, when the terrors of death encompass us.
Although, therefore, David possessed unusual fortitude, he was yet
distressed by reason of the conflict of grief, and an inward tremor so
distracted his mind, that he justly complains of being deprived of his
peace. He declares, however, that the grace of God was adequate to quiet
all these troubles.

<span id="xxv.ii-p9"></span>It may be asked, whether the experience of
the grace of God alone can allay the fear and trepidation of our minds;
since David declares, that, having experienced relief from Divine aid,
he would, for the future, be at rest? If the faithful regain their peace
of mind only when God manifests himself as their deliverer, what room is
there for the exercise of faith, and what power will the promises
possess? For, assuredly, to wait calmly and silently for those
indications of God’s favor, which he conceals from us, is the undoubted
evidence of faith. And strong faith quiets the conscience, and composes
the spirit; so that, according to Paul, “the peace of God, which passeth
all understandings” reigns supremely there, <span
id="xxv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Php 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.ii-p9.1"></span>. And hence the godly remain unmoved, though the
whole world were about to go to ruin. What is the import of this
*returning unto rest?* I answer, that however much the children of God
may be driven hither and thither, yet they constantly derive support
from the word of God, so that they cannot totally and finally fall away.
Confiding in his promises, they throw themselves upon his providence;
and still they are sorely distressed by disquieting fears, and sadly
buffeted by the storms of temptation. No sooner does God come to their
assistance, than not only inward peace takes possession of their minds,
but, from the manifestation of his grace, they are supplied with grounds
for joy and gladness. Of this latter kind of quietness David here treats
— declaring that, notwithstanding of all the prevalence of agitation of
mind, it was now time for him to delight himself calmly in God. The term
<span id="xxv.ii-p9.2"></span>גמל*, gamal,* is improperly rendered *to
reward;* because, in Hebrew, it usually signifies to confer a favor, as
well as to give a recompense; which is confirmed by him in the following
verse, in which he says that *his soul was delivered from death.* This,
then, properly speaking, is the recompense; namely, that God, in
delivering him from death, had wiped away the tears from his eyes. The
arrangement of the words is transposed; for, according to our idiom, we
would rather have said, *he hath delivered my feet from falling; and
mine eyes from tears,* and then *he hath delivered my soul from death;*
for we are wont to follow that arrangement, by which the most important
circumstance comes to be mentioned last. Among the Hebrews such a
collocation of the words, as in this passage, is by no means improper.
This is their import: God has not only rescued me from present death,
but also treated me with farther kindness, in chasing away sorrow, and
stretching out his hand to prevent me from stumbling. The grace of God
is enhanced, in that he restored to life one who had been almost dead.

<span id="xxv.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p11"></span>**9** *I will walk in the presence of
Jehovah. To wall in the presence of God is,* in my opinion, equivalent
to living under his charge. And thus David expects to enjoy his safety
continually. For nothing is more desirable than that God should be upon
the watch for us, that our life may be surrounded by his protecting
care. The wicked, indeed, regard themselves as secure, the farther they
are from God; but the godly consider themselves happy in this one thing,
that he directs the whole tenor of their life. God adding, *in the land
of the living,* he means to point out to us the course that we are
expected to pursue; and that, almost every moment of time, fresh
destructions press upon us, if he overlook us.

<span id="xxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
116:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p2"></span>**10.** I have believed, therefore I will
speak;  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) I am afflicted very
sore. **11.** I said in my fear, Every man is a liar.  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379)

<span id="xxv.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p7"></span>**10.** *I have believed* That his
wonderful deliverance may appear the more conspicuous, he again relates
the imminent danger in which he had been placed. He begins by declaring
that he spake in the true sincerity of his heart, and that nothing
proceeded from his lips but what was the fruit of long reflection, and
mature deliberation. Such is the import of the clause, *I have believed,
therefore I will speak;* words which proceed from the full affection of
the heart. In <span id="xxv.iii-p7.1"></span>[2Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)<span id="xxv.iii-p7.1"></span>,
Paul, quoting this passage, follows the Greek version, “I believed,
therefore I have spoken.” I have elsewhere remarked that it was not the
design of the apostles to repeat every word and syllable; it is enough
for us that the words of David are appropriately applied in their proper
and natural sense to the subject to which Paul there refers. Having
referred indirectly to the Corinthians, who were exalting themselves
above the clouds, as if they had been exempted from the common lot of
mankind, “I believed“ says he, “and therefore I have spoken, that he who
hath once raised Christ from the dead, will also extend Christ’s life to
us;” that is, I believe, and therefore I speak. Thus he charges the
Corinthians with being inflated with foolish pride, because they do not
humbly submit to the cross of Christ; especially as they ought to speak
in the exercise of the same spirit of faith with himself. The particle
<span id="xxv.iii-p7.2"></span>כי, *ki,* which we translate *therefore,*
is by some Hebrew interpreters understood as a disjunctive particle; but
the more correct meaning, and which is supported by the best scholars,
is, I will speak nothing but the sentiments of my heart. The drift of
the passage, too, requires this; namely, that the external professions
of the lips correspond with the internal feelings of the heart: for many
talk inconsiderately, and utter what never entered into their hearts.
“Let no person imagine that I employ unmeaning or exaggerated terms;
what I speak, the same I have truly believed.” From this we learn the
useful doctrine, that faith cannot remain inoperative in the heart, but
that it must, of necessity, manifest itself. Here the Holy Spirit
unites, with a sacred bond, the faith of the heart with outward
confession; and “what God hath joined together, let not man put
asunder.” Those dissemblers, therefore, who spontaneously envelop their
faith in obscurity, treacherously corrupt the whole Word of God. We must
remember, however, that the order which David here observes is demanded
of all God’s children, their believing, before they make any professions
with their lips. But, as I said, he speaks of his imminent danger, that
he may the more enhance the safety and deliverance which God had
vouchsafed to him.

<span id="xxv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p9"></span>**11.** *I said in my fear* Some take the
word <span id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>חפז, *chaphaz,* to denote haste or
flight, and consider it as expressive of what David said when he fled in
great haste from the face of Saul. But, as it figuratively signifies
*fear,* I have no doubt that David here declares that he felt astonished
and dejected in spirit, as if he were upon the brink of a precipice,
ready to tumble into the abyss. He acknowledges that, when he was so
dreadfully harassed in mind, his heart had almost sunk within him.
Annotators are not agreed about the meaning of the second member of the
verse. One class holding that David declares that he doubted the promise
of the kingdom made to him by the prophet Samuel. That Samuel was a
competent witness, admits of no question; but when David saw himself
banished from his native country, and constantly exposed to death in
various forms, he might be overtaken by the temptation that he had been
vainly and ineffectually anointed by Samuel. According to them, the
meaning is — I had almost perished in my flight, and the promise given
me fled away; and, moreover, I had been deceived by delusive hope.
Another class, putting an opposite interpretation upon this passage,
assert that David surmounted the temptation; so that, when Satan by his
wiles wished to make him despair, he instantly recovered himself; and
removed all occasion of unbelief in the following manner: “What art thou
doing, miserable man that thou art, and whither art thou hastening?
Darest thou, even indirectly, impute falsehood to God? Nay, rather let
him be true, and let vanity, and falsehood, and perfidy, lie at thine
own door.” My own opinion is, that this doctrine is to be understood
more generally, that David did not intend this prediction directly for
himself; but, his mind being perplexed, he inadvertently entangled
himself in the snares of Satan, and was unable to place his confidence
any where. The faithful often stagger, and Satan bringing them into a
state of deep darkness, the word of God almost forsakes them; still they
do not abandon their confidence, nor deliberately charge God with
falsehood, but rather keep their evil thoughts under restraint. The verb
*to say,* among the Hebrews, is expressive of firm persuasion, as we say
in French, <span id="xxv.iii-p9.2"></span>*J’ay conclu, ou resolu,* “I
have concluded, or resolved;” and, therefore, we are to understand that
this temptation could not enter David’s heart, without his instantly
withstanding it. Consequently, the view which I have given of the
passage is the proper one, That David did not see God during this season
of mental darkness. The faithful do not deliberately speak against God,
or ask whether he be true or not, nor does this horrid blasphemy
completely engross their thoughts; but, on the contrary, as often as it
arises, they banish it from them, and hold it in abhorrence.
Nevertheless, it occasionally happens that they are so troubled, that
they behold nothing except vanity and falsehood. Such was David’s
experience during this fear and trouble; he felt as if a dense fog
obstructed his vision. “There is no certainty, no security. What shall I
think? In what shall I confide? To what shall I have recourse?”
Frequently do the faithful thus reason with themselves, there is no
trust to be reposed in men. A veil is spread over their eyes, which,
preventing them from seeing the light of God, causes them to grovel upon
the earth, till, being elevated above the heavens, they begin anew to
discern the truth of God.

<span id="xxv.iii-p10"></span>The design of David, as I formerly
observed, is in all respects to magnify the grace of God; and for this
purpose, in speaking of his trials, he acknowledges that he did not
deserve divine help and comfort; for he ought to have recollected, that,
depending on the prophecy, he would have risen superior to all unbelief.
This, he says, he did not do, because, owing to the perturbation of his
mind, he could see nothing but vanity. If his faith was shaken in this
violent manner, what will we do if God do not support and sustain us?
This is not meant to keep the faithful in suspense between doubt and
uncertainty, but rather to make them call more earnestly upon God. We
ought to consider this trial attentively, for we can form no conception
of these assaults until we actually experience them. Let us at the same
time remember, that David’s attack was only temporary, continuing while
he was perplexed with doubt, in consequence of the prophecy having
escaped from his recollection.

<span id="xxv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
116:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p2"></span>**12.** What shall I render unto Jehovah?
all his benefits are upon me. **13.** I will take the cup of salvation,
 <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) and call upon the name of
Jehovah. **14.** I will pay my vows to Jehovah now in the presence of
all his people.

<span id="xxv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iv-p5"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p6"></span>**12.** *What shall I render unto Jehovah?*
He now exclaims with devout admiration, that the multitude of God’s
benefits was greater than he could find language to give expression to
the grateful emotions of his heart. The question is emphatic, *What
shall I render?* and imports, that it was not the desire, but the means,
of which he was destitute, to enable him to render thanks to God.
Acknowledging his inability, he adopts the only means in his power, by
extolling the grace of God as highly as he could. “I am exceedingly
wishful to discharge my duty, but when I look around me, I find nothing
which will prove an adequate recompense.” Some understand the phrase,
*upon me,* to intimate, that David had the recollection of all the
benefits which God bestowed on him deeply engraven upon his mind.
Others, along with the LXX., supply the particle *for, What shall I
render unto Jehovah for all his benefits towards me?* But it is much
better to make the first clause of the verse a complete sentence, by
putting a period after *Jehovah.* Because, after confessing his
incompetency, or rather his having nothing to offer to God as a
sufficient compensation for his benefits, he at the same time adds in
confirmation of it, that he was laid under such obligations, not by one
series of benefits only, but by a variety of innumerable benefits.
“There is no benefit on account of which God has not made me a debtor to
him, how should I have means of repaying him for them?” All recompense
failing him, he has recourse to an expression of thanksgiving as the
only return which he knows will be acceptable to God. David’s example in
this instance teaches us not to treat God’s benefits lightly or
carelessly, for if we estimate them according to their value, the very
thought of them ought to fill us with admiration. There is not one of us
who has not God’s benefits heaped upon us. But our pride, which carries
us away into extravagant theories, causes us to forget this very
doctrine, which ought nevertheless to engage our unremitting attention.
And God’s bounty towards us merits the more praise, that he expects no
recompense from us, nor can receive any, for he stands in need of
nothing, and we are poor and destitute of all things.

<span id="xxv.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p8"></span>**13.** *The cup of salvation* He refers to
a custom which was prevalent under the Law. For when they rendered
solemn thanks to God, a feast was also appointed, at which, in token of
their gladness, there was an holy libation. This being a symbol of their
deliverance from Egyptian thraldom, is for that reason here called the
*cup of salvation*  <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) The term to
*call upon,* signifies to celebrate the name of God; and this he
expresses more plainly, subsequently, by saying that he would *pay his
vows in the assembly of the faithful,* the sanctuary alone being the
place where sacrifices could be offered. The amount is, that the
faithful need not be greatly perplexed about the way of performing their
duties, God not demanding from them a return which he knows they are
unable to give, but being satisfied with a bare and simple
acknowledgment. The proper return is to own our obligation to him for
every thing. If God deal so kindly and mercifully with us, and we fail
in giving to him the tribute of praise for our deliverance which he
claims, then our supineness becomes the more base. And certainly they
are unworthy of the enjoyment, I say not of the riches of the world, but
of the light of the sun and the air by which we breathe and live, who
would rob the Author of them of the small return which so legitimately
belongs to him. The Mosaic ritual has indeed been abrogated, and along
with it the external libation referred to by David, yet the spiritual
service, as we found in <span id="xxv.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ps
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span id="xxv.iv-p10.2"></span>,
“The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me,” is still in force. Let us,
however, bear in mind, that God is lawfully praised by us, when we offer
in sacrifice not only our tongues, but also ourselves, and all that we
possess. And this not because God derives any profit from it, but
because it is reasonable that our gratitude should manifest itself in
this way.

<span id="xxv.iv-p11"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p12"></span>**14** *I will pay my vows unto Jehovah*
The steadfastness of his piety shines forth in this, that, in the midst
of his dangers, he had vowed unto God. And now he proves that he by no
means forgot these engagements, as most men do, who, when the hand of
God lies heavy upon them, implore his help for a short time, but soon
bury in oblivion the deliverance which they have received. The Holy
Spirit, speaking of the true worship of God, very properly connects, by
an indissoluble bond, these two parts of worship, “Call upon me in the
day of trouble;” and, “after thy deliverance glorify me,” <span
id="xxv.iv-p12.1"></span>[Ps
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span id="xxv.iv-p12.1"></span>.
If any regard it as an absurdity for the faithful to enter into covenant
with God by making vows to him, to procure his approbation, my reply is,
that they do not promise the sacrifice of praise, to soothe him by their
flatteries, as if he were a mortal like themselves, or to bind him to
them by proposing some reward, for David had previously protested that
he would not offer any recompense. The design, then, and the use of vows
is, first, That the children of God may have their hearts strengthened
with the confidence of obtaining whatever they ask; and, secondly, That
they may be stimulated the more to offer up their tribute of gratitude
to God for his mercies. To aid the children of God in their infirmity,
the privilege of vowing may surely be conceded to them, for by this
means their most merciful Father condescends to allow them to enter into
familiar converse with him, provided they make their vows for the object
I have stated. Happen what may, nothing must be attempted without his
permission. And hence the Papists appear the more ridiculous, who, under
pretext of what is advanced in this place, defend all sorts of vows,
however foolish and absurd and rashly made; as if drunkenness were
lawful, because God permits us to eat.

<span id="xxv.v"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p1"></span><span id="xxv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
116:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span id="xxv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p2"></span>**15.** Precious in the eyes of Jehovah is
the death of his meek ones. **16.** Come, O Jehovah! because I am thy
servant; I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid: thou hast broken
my fetters. **17.** I will sacrifice the sacrifices of praise to thee,
and call upon the name of Jehovah.  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) **18.** I will pay my vows now in the
presence of all his people, **19.** In the courts of the house of
Jehovah, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem! Praise ye Jehovah.

<span id="xxv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.v-p5"></span><span id="xxv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p6"></span>**15.** *Precious in the eyes of Jehovah is
the death of his meek ones.* He goes on now to the general doctrine of
God’s providential care for the godly, in that he renders them
assistance in time of need; their lives being precious in his sight.
With this shield he desires to defend himself from the terrors of death,
which often pressed upon him, by which he imagined he would instantly be
swallowed up. When we are in danger and God apparently overlooks us, we
then consider ourselves to be contemned as poor slaves, and that our
life is regarded as a thing of nought. And we are aware that when the
wicked perceive that we have no protection, they wax the more bold
against us, as if God took no notice either of our life or death. In
opposition to their erroneous doctrine, David introduces this sentiment,
that God does not hold his servants in so little estimation as to expose
them to death casually.  <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) We may
indeed for a time be subjected to all the vicissitudes of fortune and of
the world; we will nevertheless always have this consolation, that God
will, eventually, openly manifest how dear our souls are to him. In
these times, when innocent blood is shed, and the wicked contemners of
God furiously exalt themselves, as if exulting over a vanquished God,
let us hold fast by this doctrine, that the death of the faithful, which
is so worthless, nay, even ignominious in the sight of men, is so
valuable in God’s sight, that, even after their death, he stretches out
his hand towards them, and by dreadful examples demonstrates how he
holds in abhorrence the cruelty of those who unjustly persecute the good
and simple. If he put their tears in a bottle, how will he permit their
blood to perish? <span id="xxv.v-p7.1"></span>[Ps
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)<span id="xxv.v-p7.1"></span> At
his own time he will accomplish the prediction of Isaiah, “that the
earth shall disclose her blood,” <span id="xxv.v-p7.2"></span>[Isa
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#021)<span id="xxv.v-p7.2"></span>. To
leave room for the grace of God, let us put on the spirit of meekness,
even as the prophet, in designating the faithful *meek ones,* calls upon
them to submit their necks quietly to bear the burden of the cross, that
in their patience they may possess their souls, <span
id="xxv.v-p7.3"></span>[Lu 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p8"></span><span id="xxv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p9"></span>**16** *Come, O Jehovah! because I am thy
servant.* As, in the former verse, he gloried that in him God had given
an example of the paternal regard which he has for the faithful, so here
he applies, in an especial manner, to himself the general doctrine, by
declaring that his *fetters had been broken,* in consequence of his
being included among the number of God’s servants. He employs the term
*fetters,* as if one, with hands and feet bound, were dragged by the
executioner. In assigning, as the reason of his deliverance, that he was
God’s servant, he by no means vaunts of his services, but rather refers
to God’s unconditional election; for we cannot make ourselves his
servants, that being an honor conferred upon us solely by his adoption.
Hence David affirms, that he was not God’s servant merely, but the *son
of his handmaid.* “From the womb of my mother, even before I was born,
was this honor conferred upon me.” He therefore presents himself as a
common example to all who shall dedicate themselves to the service of
God, and place themselves under his protection, that they may be under
no apprehension for their safety while they have him for their defense.

<span id="xxv.v-p10"></span><span id="xxv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p11"></span>**17.** *I will sacrifice the sacrifices of
praise to thee.* He once more repeats what he had said about gratitude,
and that publicly; for we must manifest our piety, not only by our
secret affection before God, but also by an open profession in the sight
of men. David, along with the people, observed the rites of the law,
knowing that these, at that time, were not unmeaning services; but while
he did this, he had a particular reference to the purpose for which they
were appointed, and offered principally the sacrifices of praise and the
calves of his lips. He speaks of the *courts of God’s house,* because at
that time there was but one altar from which it was unlawful to depart,
and it was the will of God that the holy assemblies should be held
there, that the faithful might mutually stimulate one another to the
cultivation of godliness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc11024.htm#fr_373) <span
id="xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv-p3"></span> This psalm is without a title in the Hebrew,
although the LXX. Have prefixed to it *Hallelujah,* with which <span
id="xxv-p3.1"></span>[Psalm 115](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#000)<span
id="xxv-p3.1"></span> ends. There have been various conjectures among
interpreters as to its author. Some ascribe it to Hezekiah, and suppose
it to relate to his recovery from the dangerous sickness recorded in
<span id="xxv-p3.2"></span>[Isa
38](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#000)<span id="xxv-p3.2"></span>. Others
think that it was composed by David upon his deliverance from the
rebellion excited by his son Absalom, after which he immediately had
liberty to return to the sanctuary and public assembly at Jerusalem,
verses 14, 18, and 19. This opinion is confirmed from verse 11, in which
he speaks of having for a time, under the sad experience of human
treachery and deception, pronounced all men to be liars; a state of
feeling more applicable to David’s distressed circumstances during the
rebellion of his son, than to Hezekiah on his recovery from sickness.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc11024.htm#fr_374) <span
id="xxv.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span> The root of the Hebrew word <span
id="xxv.i-p3.1"></span>חבלי, *cheblei,* here rendered *snares,* “is
<span id="xxv.i-p3.2"></span>חבל, which signifies *to bind,* and in Piel
conj., *to pain,* or *torment.* Geseius, in his Thesaurus, under <span
id="xxv.i-p3.3"></span>חבל, says: — ‘Pi. i. q. Kal, No. 1, <span
id="xxv.i-p3.4"></span>*torsit,* inde *cum tormentis* et doloribus
*enixa est* ’ <span id="xxv.i-p3.5"></span>חבל consequently signifies
*pain,* or *cable.* It would seem from the verb to which it is a
subject, that the latter is the more suitable sense, whilst the
parallelism is in favor of the former. The former, however, is here
contained in the latter, for the expression <span
id="xxv.i-p3.6"></span>חבלי מות alludes to the custom of binding the
victims for slaughter, or malefactors when taken to the place of
execution; which binding was productive of great pain.” — *Phillips.*
See volume 1, page 264. Cresswell reads, “*The* *straits of the grave,*
that is, the terrors of instant death, *had found me*.”

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc11024.htm#fr_375) <span
id="xxv.i-p3.8"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span> “ — ‘compassed me.’ The original word <span
id="xxv.i-p4.1"></span>אפף expresses the repetition of the encircling of
the toils. They surrounded him again and again.” — *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc11024.htm#fr_376) <span
id="xxv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span> Fry’s translation of this clause is: —

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span>“The nets of Hades had caught hold upon me;”

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span>on which he has the following note: — “Or,
according to the usual meaning of <span id="xxv.i-p7.1"></span>צור and
<span id="xxv.i-p7.2"></span>צרר, ‘the pangs or pains of hell.’ It is
not impossible, indeed, that it should be derived from <span
id="xxv.i-p7.3"></span>נצר; we might then render, ‘The purveyors of
Hades had found me:’ and the imagery, at any rate, seems to be taken
from the toils of the hunter. Michaelis would read <span
id="xxv.i-p7.4"></span>מצודי, ‘nets,’ instead of <span
id="xxv.i-p7.5"></span>מצורי*, pangs*; but it is very probable that,
without any change, <span id="xxv.i-p7.6"></span>מצורי signifies some
part of the apparatus of hunting. ‘<span id="xxv.i-p7.7"></span>מצר *a
strait, distress,* <span id="xxv.i-p7.8"></span>*angustia* ’ <span
id="xxv.i-p7.9"></span>[Ps. 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005),
[Ps. 116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.i-p7.9"></span>; <span id="xxv.i-p7.10"></span>[La
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#003)<span id="xxv.i-p7.10"></span>. In
which last text, Mr Lowth says that ‘there is a metaphor from those that
hunt a prey, which they drive into some *strait* and narrow passage,
from whence there is no making an escape.’”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc11024.htm#fr_377) <span
id="xxv.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p6"></span> This rendering of the LXX. also suggests
the idea of *weakness,* which Fry has adopted, who reads, “Jehovah
preserveth the weak.” “The usual meaning of <span
id="xxv.ii-p6.1"></span>פתאים,” says he, “is <span
id="xxv.ii-p6.2"></span>*simplices, fatui, persuasu faciles*; but I
believe the Septuagint has preserved the true meaning of the passage,
<span id="xxv.ii-p6.3"></span>Φυλάσσων τὰ νήπια ὁ κυριος. The leading
idea of <span id="xxv.ii-p6.4"></span>פתה is *laxity* or *yielding,* and
may as well apply to the weakness of the body, or of the faculties of
the mind, under the pressure of grief and pain, as to the relaxing of
the powers of the understanding, in yielding to the seductions of folly
or vice.”

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc11024.htm#fr_378) <span
id="xxv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p3"></span> “‘I believed, therefore have I spoken;’ I
firmly believe what I say, therefore I make no scruple of saying it.
This should be connected with the preceding verse, and the full stop
should be placed at ‘spoken.’” — *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc11024.htm#fr_379) <span
id="xxv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p4"></span> Horsley’s version of this verse is as
follows: “‘In an ecstasy of despair, I said, the whole race of man is a
delusion.’ ‘A delusion,’ *a lie, a cheat, a thing of nothing, made to no
purpose.* So Mudge understands this latter part. He judiciously
observes, that the prefixed <span id="xxv.iii-p4.1"></span>ה necessarily
determines the phrase, <span id="xxv.iii-p4.2"></span>כל האדם, to the
collective sense of the whole race. *Every man,* or *all men,* should be
<span id="xxv.iii-p4.3"></span>כל אדם, without <span
id="xxv.iii-p4.4"></span>ה.” Fry similarly translates, “The entire of
the manhood is a lie; or,” he observes, “(as the word we render *lie*
signifies,) a thing *failing* and disappointing the hopes built upon
it.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc11024.htm#fr_380) <span
id="xxv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p3.1"></span>C’est, des
deliverances.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “That is, of deliverances.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc11024.htm#fr_381) <span
id="xxv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p9"></span> That there is here an allusion to the cup
of wine drunk in the offering of eucharistical sacrifices is very
generally admitted by commentators. During the feast that followed these
sacrifices, the master of the family took a cup of wine into his hands,
and after solemnly giving thanks to God for the mercies experienced,
first drank of it himself, and then delivered it to all present to be
partaken of in rotation. “The cup here spoken of by the Psalmist,” says
Cresswell, “was probably used by the master of a Hebrew family at an
entertainment in his own house, at which the remainder of the victims
was eaten, after he had offered (<span id="xxv.iv-p9.1"></span>[Le
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011)<span id="xxv.iv-p9.1"></span>,
etc.) the sacrifice of a peace-offering for a thanksgiving; when,
lifting up the cup of wine in his hand, he called upon the name of the
Lord, giving him thanks. The modern Jews are said to use a similar
ceremony every year in commemoration of the deliverance of their
ancestors from the bondage of Egypt.” Some, indeed, deny that there is
any allusion to such eucharistical sacrifices, as Hengstenberg, who
observes, that this communion cup is *a mere fiction.* In the
institution of the festival offerings, nothing is indeed said of the
cup; but we know from <span id="xxv.iv-p9.2"></span>[Matt.
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030)<span id="xxv.iv-p9.2"></span>,
that in the feast of the Passover, for instance, the drinking of a cup
of wine and the singing of a hymn were parts of the observance. From
Jewish tradition we also learn that such was the ancient practice. See
Lightfoot’s Horae Hebraicae on <span id="xxv.iv-p9.3"></span>[Matthew
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#000)<span id="xxv.iv-p9.3"></span>. Our
Lord, apparently in imitation of the Jewish custom, as the head of the
family, at the feast of the Passover, “took the cup, and gave thanks,”
(<span id="xxv.iv-p9.4"></span>[Lu
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#017)<span id="xxv.iv-p9.4"></span>.)
In allusion to this custom, Paul calls the communion cup in the Lord’s
Supper “the cup of blessing,” (<span id="xxv.iv-p9.5"></span>[1Co
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016)<span id="xxv.iv-p9.5"></span>.)
The Psalmist, then, here intimates his intention of publicly yielding
thanks to God for the mercies bestowed upon him.

<span id="xxv.iv-p10"></span>There was a libation of wine enjoined by
the Mosaic law to be made in the temple every morning and evening for a
drink-offering, (<span id="xxv.iv-p10.1"></span>[Nu
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#007)<span id="xxv.iv-p10.1"></span>,)
to which some suppose there is here a reference, observing, that the
three last verses seem to intimate, that the Psalmist was now at the
temple, offering the meat-offering, drink-offering, and sacrifices, to
the Lord.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc11024.htm#fr_382) <span
id="xxv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p3"></span> “This seems to mean the sacrifice
prescribed, <span id="xxv.v-p3.1"></span>[Le
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012)<span id="xxv.v-p3.1"></span>,
because the courts of the Lord’s house are mentioned. <span
id="xxv.v-p3.2"></span>[Ps 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.v-p3.2"></span>, and 56:12, perhaps mean only thanksgiving, as
<span id="xxv.v-p3.3"></span>[Ps
69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030)<span id="xxv.v-p3.3"></span>,
certainly doth. See verse 31.” — *Archbishop Secker.*

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc11024.htm#fr_383) <span
id="xxv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.v-p7"></span> “For their death to be precious is, in
effect, no more than that it is, so considered, rated at so high a price
by God, as that he will not easily grant it to any one that most desires
it of him. Absalom here hostilely pursued David and desired his death,
he would have been highly gratified with it, taking it for the greatest
boon that could have befallen him: but God would not thus gratify him;
nor will he grant this desire easily to the enemies of godly men,
especially of those that commit themselves to his keeping, as David here
did.” — *Hammond.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 117](cc11025)
