[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11001)  [Next](cc11003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>PSALM 94

<span id="iii-p2"></span>The Psalmist implores Divine assistance against
wicked and violent men, who persecuted the upright in a cruel and
tyrannical manner. It is evident that he refers to domestic foes, whose
unrighteous domination was as vexatious and oppressive to the Lord’s
people, as all the injuries received from the Gentile nations without.

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
94:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. O Jehovah! God of vengeances; God of
vengeances,  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) shine forth.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) **2**. Lift up thyself, thou Judge of the
earth! render a reward to the proud. **3**. O Jehovah! how long shall
the wicked — how long shall the wicked triumph? **4**. They pour forth,
they speak hard things, all the workers of iniquity lift up themselves.
**5**. They break in pieces thy people, O Jehovah! and afflict thy
inheritance. **6**. They slay the widow, and the stranger, and murder
the fatherless.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span><span id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>**1** *O Jehovah! God of vengeances* We know
that the Jews were surrounded by many neighbors who were not well
affected towards them, and were thus incessantly subject to the assaults
and oppression of bitter enemies. As this intestine persecution was even
more afflictive than the rampant and unrestrained violence of the
wicked, we need not wonder that the Psalmist should earnestly beseech
God for deliverance from it. The expressions which he uses, calling upon
God to *shine forth* conspicuously, and *lift himself up on high,*
amount in common language to this, that God would give some actual
manifestation of his character as judge or avenger; for in that case he
is seen ascending his tribunal to exact the punishment due to sin, and
demonstrate his power in preserving order and government in the world.
The phraseology is used only in reference to ourselves, disposed as we
are to feel as if he overlooked us, unless he stretched out his hand to
help us in some visible and open manner. In calling him twice
successively *the God of vengeances,* and then, *judge of the earth,*
the Psalmist uses these titles as applicable to the present situation in
which he stood, reminding Him in a manner of the office which belonged
to him, and saying — O Lord! it is thine to take vengeance upon sinners,
and judge the earth — see how they take advantage of the impunity which
is extended to their guilt, and triumph audaciously in their wickedness!
Not that God needs to be admonished of his duty, for he never resigns
himself to indifference, and even when he seems to delay his judgments,
is only adjusting them according to what he knows to be the best season;
but his people conceive of him in this way to themselves, and take
occasion from this to embolden and stimulate themselves to greater
vehemency in prayer.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) The same may
be said of the repetition which the Psalmist uses. When the wicked then
indulge in unrestrained excesses, we are to remember that God can never
cease to assert his character as the judge of the earth who takes
vengeance upon iniquity. Does he seem in our carnal apprehension to have
at any time withdrawn and hidden himself? let us put up without
hesitation the prayer which is here taught us by the Holy Spirit, that
he would *shine forth*

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span><span id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>**3** *O Jehovah! how long shall the
wicked?* The Psalmist justifies himself in this verse for the fervent
importunity which he showed in prayer. There was need of immediate help,
when the wicked had proceeded to such an extent of audacity. The
necessity of our case may justly embolden us in our requests, which must
be all the more readily heard as they are reasonable; and here the
Psalmist insists that his complaints were not without cause, nor
originated in trifling reasons, but were extorted by injuries of the
most flagrant description. Notice is taken of the length of time during
which their persecutions had lasted, as an aggravating circumstance.
They had become hardened under the long-continued forbearance of God,
and had in consequence contracted a shamelessness, as well as obstinacy
of spirit, imagining that he looked upon their wickedness with an eye of
favor. The term *how long* twice repeated, implies the extent of
impunity which had been granted, that it was not as if they had newly
started upon their career, but that they had been tolerated for a length
of time, and had become outrageously flagitious. It was thus that in
former times wicked men tyrannized to such a degree over the Church,
while yet God did not interfere to apply a remedy; and we need not be
surprised that he should subject her now to protracted persecutions, nor
should we conclude that, because he does not immediately proceed to cure
existing evils, he has utterly forsaken her. The term *triumph* denotes
that fullness of audacious and boasting exultation which the wicked feel
when they are intoxicated with continued prosperity, and conceive that
they may indulge in every excess without restraint.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>**4** *They pour forth, they speak hard
things*  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) He shows in still clearer
terms, how their fierceness in persecution was such that they did not
scruple to glory in their guilt. The Hebrew verb <span
id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>נבע, *nabang,* means more than *to speak.*
Literally it signifies *to rush* or *boil forth,* and comes to denote
figuratively the uttering of reckless or rash words. We see how wicked
men are instigated by pride and vain-glory, to demean and disgrace
themselves so far as to boast vain-gloriously of their power, breathing
forth threatenings of bloodshed, violence, and monstrous cruelty. It is
to such ebullitions that the Psalmist refers, when men who are lost to
all sense of shame and modesty boast of the wickedness which they can
perpetrate at will. This is what he means by their *speaking hard
things,* uttering discourse which is under no restraint of fear, or
prudential consideration, but which launches into the most unbridled
license. As the Lord’s people had formerly to endure the heavy trial of
seeing the Church subjected to this wild tyranny and misrule, we should
account it no strange thing to see the Church suffering still under
miserable misgovernment, or positive oppression, but should pray for
help from God, who, though he connives at wickedness for a time,
eventually comes to the deliverance of his children.

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span><span id="iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>**5** *They break in pieces thy people, O
Jehovah!* Having spoken of their discourse or language as vain-glorious
and shameless, he proceeds to speak of their deeds, in cruelly
persecuting the Church. It is hard that even the subjects of heathen
princes should be subjected to unjust persecution, but a more
intolerable thing still, that those who are God’s own people, his
peculiar inheritance, should be trampled under the foot of tyranny. The
prayer before us is one which, as I have already remarked, is given with
the intention that we should prefer it ourselves, when we or others may
be persecuted by wicked men, and especially intestine enemies. Our
safety is dear to the Lord, not only as we are men, the workmanship of
his hand, but as we are his peculiar heritage; and this should lead us,
when wronged at any time, to betake ourselves to God with the more
confidence. It is farther added — that they spare not *the widow,* and
*the orphan, and murder the stranger* God, while he has commanded us in
general to cultivate equity and justice in our common intercourse, has
commended the orphan, widow, and stranger, to our peculiar care, as
being more exposed to injury, and therefore more entitled to humanity
and compassion. To treat such objects with cruelty argues a singular
degree of impiety, and contempt of divine authority, and is not only an
outrage of common justice, but the infraction of a privilege of special
protection which God has condescended to cast around them.  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) They who are chargeable with such
conduct, particularly provoke the divine anger. As to little children
especially, their helplessness and tender age will even protect them
from being attacked by dogs and wild beasts. And what shall we think of
the monstrous inhumanity of men, who would make them the objects of
their assault? We have here a specimen of the dreadful state of matters
which must then have prevailed in the Church of God. The law was there,
and the ordinances of divine appointment, yet we see to what an awful
extent every species of wickedness abounded. Let us beware lest we fall
into a similar state of corruption, and should it so happen under our
own observation that men persecute the stranger, seize the widow, and
rob the fatherless, let us, in imitation of the Psalmist, who would have
us alleviate their misfortunes, pray God to undertake their defense.

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
94:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**7**. And they have said, God shall not
see, the God of Jacob shall not know. **8**. Understand, ye stupid
 <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) among the people: and ye fools,
when will ye be wise? **9**. He that planted  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) the ear, shall he not hear? he that
formed the eye, shall he not see? **10**. He that chastiseth the
nations, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge.  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** *And they have said, God shall not
see* When the Psalmist speaks of the wicked as taunting God with
blindness and ignorance, we are not to conceive of them as just exactly
entertaining this imagination of him in their hearts, but they despise
his judgments as much as if he took no cognisance of human affairs. Were
the truth graven upon men’s hearts that they cannot elude the eye of
God, this would serve as a check and restraint upon their conduct. When
they proceed to such audacity in wickedness as to lay the hand of
violence upon their fellow-creatures, to rob, and to destroy, it shows
that they have fallen into a state of brutish security in which they
virtually consider themselves as concealed from the view of the
Almighty. This security sufficiently proves at least, that they act as
if they never expected to be called to an account for their conduct.
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) Though they may not then be guilty
of the gross blasphemy of asserting in so many words that God is
ignorant of what goes forward in the world, a mere nothing in the
universe — the Psalmist very properly charges them with denying God’s
providential government, and, indeed, avowedly stripping him of the
power and function of judge and governor, since, if they really were
persuaded as they ought of his superintending providence, they would
honor him by feeling a reverential fear — as I have elsewhere observed
at greater length. He intends to express the lowest and most abandoned
stage of depravity, in which the sinner casts off the fear of God, and
rushes into every excess. Such infatuated conduct would have been
inexcusable even in heathens, who had never heard of a divine
revelation; but it was monstrous in men who had been brought up from
infancy in the knowledge of the word, to show such mockery and contempt
of God.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span><span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>**8** *Understand, ye stupid among the
people* As it was execrable impiety to deny God to be Judge of the
earth, the Psalmist severely reprimands their folly in thinking to elude
his government, and even succeed by artifices in escaping his view. The
expression, *stupid among the people,* is stronger than had he simply
condemned them as foolish. It rendered their folly more inexcusable,
that they belonged to the posterity of Abraham, of whom Moses said,

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>“What people is there so great, who have
their gods so near unto them, as the Lord thy God hath this day come
down unto thee? For this is your understanding and wisdom before all
nations, to have God for your legislator.” (<span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>[De 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span>  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)
Perhaps, however, he may be considered as addressing the rulers and
those who were of higher rank in the community, and styling them
*degraded among the people,* that is, no better than the common herd of
the vulgar. Proud men, who are apt to be blinded by a sense of their
importance, require to be brought down, and made to see that in God’s
estimation they are no better than others. He puts them on a level with
the common people, to humble their self-complacency; or we may suppose
that he hints with an ironical and sarcastic allusion to their boasted
greatness, that they were distinguished above others chiefly for
pre-eminent folly — adding, at the same time, as an additional
aggravation, that they were obstinate in their adherence to it; for as
much is implied in the question, *When will ye be wise?* We might
consider it an unnecessary assertion of Divine Providence to put the
question to the wicked, *Shall not he who made the ear hear?* because
there are none so abandoned as openly to deny God’s cognisance of
events; but, as I have observed above, the flagrant audacity and
self-security which most men display in contradicting his will, is a
sufficient proof that they have supplanted God from their imaginations,
and substituted a mere dead idol in his place, since, did they really
believe him to be cognisant of their actions, they would at least show
as much regard to him as to their fellow-creatures, in whose presence
they feel some measure of restraint, and are prevented from sinning by
fear and respect. To arouse them from this stupidity, the Psalmist draws
an argument from the very order of nature, inferring that if men both
see and hear, by virtue of faculties which they have received from God
the Creator, it is impossible that God himself, who formed the eye and
the ear, should not possess the most perfect observation.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>**10.** *He that chastiseth the nations,
shall not he correct?* He would have them argue from the greater to the
less, that if God did not spare even whole nations, but visits their
iniquity with punishment, they could not imagine that he would suffer a
mere handful of individuals to escape with impunity. The comparison
intended, however, may possibly be between the Gentiles and the Jews. If
God punished the heathen nations, who had not heard his word, with much
severity, the Jews might expect that they, who had been familiarised to
instruction in his house, would receive still sharper correction, and
that he would vindicate his justice most in that nation over which he
had chosen to preside. Still the former sense of the passage appears to
me preferable, That it is folly in any number of individuals to flatter
themselves with impunity, when they see God inflicting public punishment
upon collective people. Some think there is an exclusive allusion to the
signal and memorable instances of Divine judgment recorded in Scripture,
as in the destruction of Sodom with fire from heaven, (<span
id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Ge 19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span>.) and of the whole human family by the flood,
(<span id="iii.ii-p16.2"></span>[Ge
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p16.2"></span>.) But
the simpler meaning is best, That it were the height of madness in
individuals to think that they could escape when nations perish. In
adding that God *teacheth men knowledge,*  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) the Psalmist glances at the overweening
confidence of such as despise God, and pride themselves in their
acuteness and shrewdness, as we find Isaiah denouncing a woe against
those crafty enemies of God who dig deep, that they may hide themselves
from his sight, (<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>.)
It is a disease prevalent enough in the world still. We know the refuges
under covert of which both courtiers and lawyers take occasion to
indulge in shameless mockery of God.  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) It is as if the Psalmist had said — You
think to elude God through the confidence which you have in your acute
understandings, and would pretend to dispute the knowledge of the
Almighty, when, in truth, all the knowledge which is in the world is but
as a drop from his own inexhaustible fullness.

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
94:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**11**. Jehovah knoweth the thoughts of
men,  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) that they are vain.  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) **12.** Blessed is the man whom thou hast
instructed, O God! And taught out of thy law; **13**. To give him rest
from days of evil whilst the pit is digged for the wicked.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>**11.** *Jehovah knoweth the thoughts of
men, etc*. He again insists upon the folly of men in seeking to wrap
themselves up in darkness, and hide themselves from the view of God. To
prevent them from flattering themselves with vain pretexts, he reminds
them that the mists of delusion will be scattered at once when they come
to stand in God’s presence. Nothing can avail them, so long as God from
heaven stamps vanity upon their deepest counsels. The Psalmist’s design
in citing them before the Judge of all, is to make them thoroughly
search and try their own hearts; for the great cause of their
self-security lay in failing to realize God, burying all distinction
between right and wrong, and, so far as that was possible, hardening
themselves against all feeling. They might contrive to soothe their
minds by means like these, but he tells them that God ridiculed all such
trifling. The truth may be a plain one, and well known; but the Psalmist
states a fact which many overlook, and which we would do well to
remember, That the wicked, when they attempt to hide themselves under
subtile refuges, cannot deceive God, and necessarily deceive themselves.
Some read — *They* (that is, men themselves) *are vanity;* but this is a
forced rendering, and the form of expression is one which both in the
Greek and Hebrew may be translated, *God knows that the thoughts of men
are vain.*

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>**12** *Blessed is the man whom thou hast
instructed, O God!* The Psalmist now passes from the language of censure
to that of consolation, comforting himself and others of the Lord’s
people with the truth, that though God might afflict them for a time, he
consulted their true interests and safety. At no period of life is this
a truth which it is unnecessary to remember, called as we are to a
continued warfare. God may allow us intervals of ease, in consideration
of our weakness, but would always have us exposed to calamities of
various kinds. The audacious excesses to which the wicked proceed we
have already noticed. Were it not for the comfortable consideration that
they are a blessed people whom God exercises with the cross, our
condition would be truly miserable. We are to consider, that in calling
us to be his people, he has separated us from the rest of the world, to
participate a blessed peace in the mutual cultivation of truth and
righteousness. The Church is often cruelly oppressed by tyrants under
color of law — the very case of which the Psalmist complains in this
psalm; for it is evident that he speaks of domestic enemies, pretending
to be judges in the nation. Under such circumstances, a carnal judgment
would infer, that if God really concerned himself in our welfare he
would never suffer these persons to perpetrate such enormities. To
prevent this, the Psalmist would have us distrust our own ideas of
things, and feel the necessity of that wisdom which comes from above. I
consider the passage to mean that it is only in the Lord’s school we can
ever learn to maintain composure of mind, and a posture of patient
expectation and trust under the pressure of distress. The Psalmist
declares that the wisdom which would bear us onward to the end, with an
inward peace and courage under long-continued trouble, is not natural to
any of us, but must come from God.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)
Accordingly, he exclaims, that those are the truly blessed whom God has
habituated through his word to the endurance of the cross, and prevented
from sinking under adversity by the secret supports and consolations of
his own Spirit.

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>The words with which the verse begins,
*Blessed is the man whom thou hast instructed,* have no doubt a
reference to chastisements and experience of the cross, but they also
comprehend the gift of inward illumination; and afterwards the Psalmist
adds, that this wisdom, which is imparted by God inwardly, is, at the
same time, set forth and made known in the Scriptures.  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) In this way he puts honor upon the use of
the written word, as we find Paul saying, that all things

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>“were written for our learning, that we,
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope” (<span
id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>[Ro
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>This shows from what quarter we are to
derive our patience — the oracles of God, which supply us with matter of
hope for the mitigation of our griefs. In short, what the Psalmist means
is summarily this: Believers must, in the first place, be exhorted to
exercise patience, not to despond under the cross, but wait submissively
upon God for deliverance; and next, they must be taught how this grace
is to be obtained, for we are naturally disposed to abandon ourselves to
despair, and any hope of ours would speedily fail, were we not taught
from above that all our troubles must eventually issue in salvation. We
have here the Psalmist’s testimony to the truth, That the word of God
provides us with abundant ground of comfort, and that none who rightly
avails himself of it need ever count himself unhappy, or yield himself
to hopelessness and despondency. One mark by which God distinguishes the
true from the false disciple is, that of his being ready and prepared to
bear the cross, and waiting quietly for the Divine deliverance, without
giving way to fretfulness and impatience. A true patience does not
consist in presenting an obstinate resistance to evils, or in that
unyielding stubbornness which passed as a virtue with the Stoics, but in
a cheerful submission to God, based upon confidence in his grace. On
this account it is with good reason that the Psalmist begins by laying
it down as a fundamental truth, necessary to be learned by all the
Lord’s people, That the end of those temporary persecutions, to which
they are subjected, is their being brought at last to a blessed rest
after their enemies have done their worst. He might have contented
himself with saying, that the truly blessed were those who had learned
from God’s word to bear the cross patiently, but that he might the more
readily incline them to a cheerful acquiescence in the Divine disposals,
he subjoined a statement of the consolation which tends to mitigate the
grief of their spirits. Even supposing that a man should bear his trials
without a tear or a sigh, yet if he champ the bit in sullen hopelessness
— if he only hold by such principles as these, “We are mortal
creatures,” “It is vain to resist necessity, and strive against fate,”
“Fortune is blind” — this is obstinacy rather than patience, and there
is concealed opposition to God in this contempt of calamities under
color of fortitude. The only consideration which will subdue our minds
to a tractable submission is, that God, in subjecting us to
persecutions, has in view our being ultimately brought into the
enjoyment of a rest. Wherever there reigns this persuasion of a rest
prepared for the people of God, and a refreshment provided under the
heat and turmoil of their troubles, that they may not perish with the
world around them, — this will prove enough, and more than enough, to
alleviate any present bitterness of affliction.

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span><span id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>By *evil days,* or *days of evil,* the
Psalmist might thus mean the everlasting destruction which awaits the
ungodly, whom God has spared for a certain interval. Or his words may be
expounded as signifying, that the man is blessed who has learned to be
composed and tranquil under trials. The rest intended would then be that
of an inward kind, enjoyed by the believer even during the storms of
adversity; and the scope of the passage would be, that the truly happy
man is he who has so far profited, by the word of God, as to sustain the
assault of evils from without, with peace and composure. But as it is
added, *whilst*  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) *the pit is digged
for the wicked,* it would seem necessary, in order to bring out the
opposition contained in the two members of the sentence, to suppose that
the Psalmist rather commends the wisdom of those who reckon that God
afflicts them with a view to saving them from destruction, and bringing
them eventually to a happy issue. It was necessary to state this second
ground of comfort, because our hearts cannot fail to be affected with
the most intense grief when we see the wicked triumph, and no Divine
restraint put upon them. The Psalmist meets the temptation by
appropriately reminding us that the wicked are left upon earth, just as
a dead body which is stretched out upon a bed, till its grave be dug.
Here believers are warned that, if they would preserve their constancy,
they must mount their watchtower, as Habakkuk says, (<span
id="iii.iii-p19.1"></span>[Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii-p19.1"></span>)
and take a view in the distance of God’s judgments. They shall see
worldly men rioting in worldly delights, and, if they extend their view
no farther, they will give way to impatience. But it would moderate
their grief, would they only remember that those houses which are
nominally appropriated to the living, are, in fact, only granted to the
dead, until their grave be digged; and that, though they remain upon
earth, they are already devoted to destruction.  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
94:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**14**. Surely Jehovah will not cast off his
people, and he will not forsake his inheritance. **15**. But judgment
will return unto righteousness, and all the upright in heart after him.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span><span id="iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span>**14** *Surely Jehovah will not cast off his
people* He enforces the same truth which he had stated above in still
clearer terms, denying it to be possible that God should cast off his
people, whom he had chosen in a manner to be his inheritance. When
assailed by afflictions, we should fly to this consideration, as a
sanctuary of refuge, that we are God’s people, gratuitously adopted into
his family, and that he must necessarily have a most intimate and tender
regard for our safety, having promised to watch as carefully over his
Church as if it were his own heritage. We are thus again taught that our
patience will soon give way and fail, unless the tumult of carnal
suggestions be allayed by a knowledge of the Divine favor shining in
upon our souls.

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span><span id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>**15.** *But judgment will return unto
righteousness* In the dark season of affliction, it is not easy to
recognize the secret love which God even then bears to his own children,
and the Psalmist adduces another ground of comfort, in the consideration
that God will eventually put an end to the confusions which perplex
them, and reduce matters to order. The form of expression used by the
Psalmist is a little obscure, and this has led some to read the first
part of the verse, as if it contained two distinct clauses — *justice
will return at the end,* and then, *judgment will return* This is a
violent wresting of the context. I have no doubt the Psalmist meant to
say that judgment would be fitted or conformed to justice. And by
judgment here is meant, as in many other places, the government or
public state of matters. The confusion which prevails in the world,
seems to argue some defect or unrighteousness of administration; and he
holds out to us that it shall be well in the issue. More is said than
merely that men who indulged in reckless oppression would be brought
back to equitable dealing. A deeper meaning is intended, That God, when
he interposed to restore the condition of his people, would bring forth
openly to the light his justice which had lain concealed; by which we
are not to understand that he ever deviates the least in his providence
from the strictest rectitude, only there is not always that harmony and
arrangement which might make his righteousness apparent to man’s view,
and the correction of this inequality is here called justice of
government.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) As the sun’s light is
hid from view at night, or at a cloudy season, so when the wicked
persecute the righteous, and are allowed to indulge in iniquity without
restraint, the Divine justice is obscured by the clouds which are thus
interposed between us and the providence of God, and judgment is in a
manner separated from justice. But when things are brought back again to
their proper state, justice and government are seen to harmonize
perfectly together in the equality which prevails.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) Faith no doubt, should enable us to
discern the justice of God even when things are most dark and
disordered; but the passage speaks of what would be obvious to sense and
actual observation, and asserts that the justice of God would shine as
the sky when all is calm and serene.

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>*And all that are upright in heart after
him* Some read, *after it,* that is, *after righteousness;* but as by
righteousness here we are to understand the equal and harmonious
government which prevails when God takes vengeance upon the wicked and
delivers his own people, this rendering will scarcely suit. It would
rather seem that God himself is to be understood, so that the relative
is here without an antecedent. In the Hebrew, when mention is made of
God, the relative is not unfrequently put instead of the name. The words
then mean, that upon God’s restoring order in the world, his people
would be encouraged to follow him with greater alacrity. Even when
called to bear the cross, they sigh after him under their troubles and
distresses, but it binds them more closely to his service when they see
his hand stretched forth in this visible manner, and sensibly experience
his deliverance.

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
94:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016)<span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**16**. Who will rise up for me against my
adversaries? who will stand up for me  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) against the workers of iniquity? **17**.
Unless Jehovah had been my help, my soul had well nigh dwelt in silence.
 <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) **18**. If I said, My foot has
fallen, thy kindness, O Jehovah! has held me up.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) **19**. In the multitude of my thoughts,
 <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) thy comforts within me delight my
soul.  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span><span id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span>**16.** *Who will rise up for me against my
adversaries?* Here the Psalmist points out, in a lively and graphic
manner, how destitute he was of all human aid. As if at the moment in
danger, he cries out — *Who will stand up for me?* Who will oppose
himself to my enemies? And immediately afterwards he replies, that had
not God helped him, he must have despaired of safety. In declaring that
he had been thus miraculously rescued from death, when deserted by all
the world, he commends the more God’s kindness and grace. When men aid
us, they are only instruments by which the grace of God works; but we
are apt not to recognize God’s hand when we see any subordinate agency
in the deliverance. He speaks of *his life dwelling in silence,* (verse
17) for the dead lie in the grave without feeling or strength. Thus the
Psalmist owns that there was no means by which his life could have been
preserved, had not God interposed without delay.

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span><span id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span>**18.** *If I said, My foot has fallen* What
is said in this verse confirms the preceding statement. The more to
commend God’s kindness and power, he declares that it was no common
danger from which he had been rescued, but in a manner from present
death. The import of the language is, that death stared him so full in
view, that he despaired of himself; as Paul speaks of having had the
message of death in himself, when his condition was desperate, and he
had given up hope of life, (<span id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>[2Co
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>.)
The fact of the Psalmist having been delivered after he had considered
death certain, made the Divine interposition the more conspicuous. If we
understand him as speaking of temporal death only in the expression, *My
foot has fallen* — there is nothing unaccountable in the circumstance of
his having despaired,  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) as God often
prolongs the life of his people in the world, when they had lost hope,
and were preparing for their departure. Possibly, however, the Psalmist
only means that this was the language of sense; and this is the more
probable, because we have already seen that he never ceased praying to
God — a proof that he had still some hope. The next verse affords still
further proof, for there he tells us that his afflictions were always
mixed with some comfort. By *thoughts,* he means anxious and perplexing
cares, which would have overwhelmed him had not consolation been
communicated to him from above. We learn this truth from the passage,
That God interposes in behalf of his people, with a due regard to the
magnitude of their trials and distresses, and at the very moment which
is necessary, enlarging them in their straits, as we find stated in
other places. The heavier our calamities grow, we should hope that
Divine grace will only be the more powerfully manifested in comforting
us under them, (<span id="iii.v-p15.2"></span>[Ps.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001), [Ps.
118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)<span id="iii.v-p15.2"></span>,)
But should we through weakness of the flesh be vexed and tormented by
anxious cares, we must be satisfied with the remedy which the Psalmist
here speaks of in such high terms. Believers are conscious of two very
different states of mind. On the one hand, they are afflicted and
distressed with various fears and anxieties; on the other, there is a
secret joy communicated to them from above, and this in accommodation to
their necessity, so as to preserve them from being swallowed up by any
complication or force of calamity which may assail them.

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
94:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020)<span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**20**. Shall the throne of iniquities have
fellowship with thee, framing molestation for law?  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) **21**. They will gather together against
the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. **22**. But
Jehovah has been my fortress; and my God for the rock of my confidence.
**23**. And he shall repay their own iniquity upon them, and shall cut
them off in their wickedness; Jehovah our God shall cut them off.

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span><span id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>**20** *Shall the throne of iniquities have
fellowship with thee?* He again derives an argument for confidence from
the nature of God, it being impossible that he should show favor to the
wicked, or sanction their evil devices. With God for their enemy, how
could they escape being destroyed? The words have greater force from
being thrown into the form of a question, to show how completely opposed
all sin is to the divine nature. The term *throne* is used, because
those against whom the present charge is brought were not common robbers
or assassins, who are universally recognized as infamous, but tyrants
who persecuted the Lord’s people under color of law. These, although
occupying the throne which has been consecrated to *God,* have stained
and polluted it with their crimes, and therefore have nothing in common
with it. The meaning is brought out more clearly in the subsequent
clause of the verse, where they are declared to be persons utterly
estranged from God, who *frame molestation for law,* or, as the Hebrew
word <span id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>חק, *chok,* signifies, *decree of
law,* or *statute order.* The Psalmist aims at those profligate judges
who, under pretense of pursuing the strict course of office, perpetrate
the worst species of enormities. Judges of this abandoned character, as
we know, with no other view than to retain possession of a specious name
for integrity, invent various excuses to defend their infamous
oppressions. The meaning of the Psalmist is apparent then; and it is
this, that honorable as a throne may be, so far as the name goes, it
ceases to have any worth or estimation with God when abused by wicked
men; for iniquity can never meet with his approbation.

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span><span id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>**21.** *They will gather together against
the soul of the righteous* As the Hebrew word <span
id="iii.vi-p10.1"></span>גדד*, gadad,* or <span
id="iii.vi-p10.2"></span>גוד*, gud,*  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) signifies to collect forces or a band of
men, the Psalmist evidently intimates that he had to do with leading
persons of influence, and not with those merely in private station. The
term implies too, that it was not merely one or two private individuals
who persecuted him, and others of the Lord’s people, but a public
convention. Melancholy and disgraceful must the state of matters have
been, when the wicked thus ruled in lawful assembly, and those who
formed the college of judges were no better than a band of robbers. The
case becomes doubly vexatious, when the innocent victims of oppression
are not only injured, but have a stigma fixed upon their character. And
what more unseemly spectacle, than when the whole course of judicial
administration is just a foul conspiracy against good and innocent men?
 <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) The instance here recorded should
prepare us for a like emergency, if it chance to occur in our own day,
when the wicked may be permitted, in the providence of God, to mount the
seat of judgment, and launch destruction upon the upright and the
righteous, under color of law. Intolerable as it might seem at first
sight, that persons innocent of any crime should meet with cruel
persecution, even from the hands of judges, so as to be loaded with
ignominy, we see that God tried his children in other times by this
double species of oppression, and that we must learn to bear
submissively not only with unrighteous violence, but with charges most
injurious to our character, and most undeserved.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span><span id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span>**22** *But Jehovah has been my fortress*
The Psalmist declares, that great as were the extremities to which he
had been reduced, he had found sufficient help in the single protection
of God; thus passing a new commendation upon his power, which had been
such as alone, and unaided, to put down the mightiest endeavors — all
the force and the fury of his numerous enemies. He does more than say
that God was a fortress, where he might hide with safety, and from the
top of which he could bid defiance to every assault. Having
congratulated himself upon the divine protection, he proceeds to
denounce destruction upon his enemies; for it is to be considered as
God’s special prerogative to make the evil which his enemies devise
against his people recoil upon their own heads. The mere defeating, and
frustrating their attempts, would afford no inconsiderable display of
divine justice; but the judgment of God is far more marvellously
manifested when they fall into the pit which they themselves had
prepared, when all the subtle plans which they have adopted for ruining
the innocent end in their being destroyed by their own craftiness, and
when having done their utmost, they fall by their own sword. We are slow
to believe that this shall be the issue, and accordingly it is said
twice — *he shall cut them off* — *the Lord our God shall cut them off*
It may be noticed also, that the Psalmist in using the expression *our
God,* holds out a ground of encouragement to the faithful, reminding us
of what he had said above, that God will not forget his own inheritance,
even his people whom he has brought unto the faith of himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc11002.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span> This is a literal translation of the
original Hebrew, and Archbishop Secker thinks it is much more spirited
than that of our English version. The word *vengeance*, when applied to
God, means nothing more than his retributive justice. It may not be one
of the happiest words for representing the Hebrew term when used to
express this attribute of Deity, being liable to be misunderstood, as if
it implied a revengeful spirit, the sense which it commonly bears when
applied to men. “This retributive justice,” says Dr Adam Clarke, “is
what we often term *vengeance*, but perhaps improperly; for vengeance
with us signifies an excitement of angry passions, in order to gratify a
vindictive spirit, which supposes itself to have received some real
injury; whereas, what is here referred to is the simple act of justice
that gives to all their due.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc11002.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> Mant renders,

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>“Beam forth with all thy radiance bright.”

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>“The Hebrew verb,” he observes, “signifies
*to irradiate*, *shine forth*, as God in glory; <span
id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>[Ps. 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001), [Ps.
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002)<span id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>; and
that either in vengeance, as in this place, or kindness, as in <span
id="iii.i-p6.2"></span>[Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003)<span
id="iii.i-p6.2"></span>.” — *See Parkhurst*’*s Lexicon* on <span
id="iii.i-p6.3"></span>יפע

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc11002.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>Mais les
fideles s’arrestent a mediter ainsi en eux-mesmes la nature d’iceluy,
afin de s’accourager, meilleure esperance, et soliciter a prier avec
plus grande ardeur et vehemence.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc11002.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span> In our English Bible this verse is put into
the interrogative form, and the words “how long” are supplied: “*How*
*long* shall they utter *and* speak hard things?” Calvin translates it
as a simple statement, and without any supplemental words; which
Archbishop Secker considers to be more correct.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc11002.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p18.1"></span>Non
seulement le droict commun est viole, mais aussi le privilege que Dieu a
voulu ordonner pour les maintenir en sauvete et seurete.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc11002.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>בערים,
*boharum*, *ye brutish* From <span id="iii.ii-p3.2"></span>בער, *a
brute*.” — *Bythner*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc11002.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> “The Hebrew verb denotes *planting* in
various senses: and is with great propriety applied to the wonderful
structure of the ear, and its insertion into and connection with the
head.” — *Mant*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc11002.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span> Upon this and the preceding verse, Grotius
says, “This is a very excellent way of arguing; for whatever perfection
there is in created beings, it is derived from God; and therefore it
must be in him in the most eminent manner.” It is well observed by Dr
Adam Clarke, that “the Psalmist does not say, He that planted the ear
*hath he not an ear*? He that formed the eye *hath he not eyes*? No, but
shall he not *hear* — shall he not *see*? And why does he say so? To
prevent the error of humanising God; of attributing members or corporeal
parts to the infinite Spirit.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc11002.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>Et certes
une asseurance tant lourde monstre qu’ils pechent tout ainsi comme s’ils
ne devoyent jamais estre appelez, rendre raison de leur vie.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc11002.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span> The Latin reads here as follows: “<span
id="iii.ii-p14.1"></span>Quis populus tam nobilis, qui deos sibi
appropinquantes hubeat, sicuti hodie Deus tuus ad te descendit? Haec
enim vestra est intelligentia coram cunctis Gentibus, et sapientia, Deum
habere legislatorem.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc11002.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.ii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span> In our English Bible, the words *shall not
he know*? are added. “But this is not acknowledged by the original nor
by any of the versions. Indeed it is not necessary; for, either the
words contain a simple proposition, ‘It is he who teacheth man
knowledge;’ or this clause should be read in connection with verse 11,
‘Jehovah, who teacheth man knowledge, he knoweth the devices of man,
that they are vanity.’ As he teaches knowledge to man, must He not know
all the reasonings and devices of the human heart?” — *Dr Adam Clarke*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc11002.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>Mais nous
voyons avec quelles couvertures tant les courtisans que les gens de
justice obscurcissent leurs entendemens afin que sans aucune vergongne
ils osent bien se moquer de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc11002.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> Horsley reads, “the devices of man:” and
asking, Did not St Paul for <span id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>אדם read
<span id="iii.iii-p3.2"></span>ערם, or rather <span
id="iii.iii-p3.3"></span>ערום? refers to <span
id="iii.iii-p3.4"></span>[1Co
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc11002.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.iii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span> The original word <span
id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>הבל is “from <span
id="iii.iii-p4.2"></span>הבל, which first signifies *to vanish*, or
*come to nought*, as in <span id="iii.iii-p4.3"></span>[Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii-p4.3"></span>,
‘They walked after <span id="iii.iii-p4.4"></span>ההבל, vanity, <span
id="iii.iii-p4.5"></span>ויהבלו, and vanished, *or* came to nought;’ and
if understood here in this sense, it must signify *vanishing*,
*transient*, that soon comes to nothing; and accordingly the Syriac
renders it a *vapour* But there is another notion of <span
id="iii.iii-p4.6"></span>הבל; it is put metaphorically for ‘<span
id="iii.iii-p4.7"></span>stultescere,’ ‘to grow foolish.’

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>Thus in <span
id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>[Psalms
62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011)<span id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>,
it is best rendered from the Hebrew, ‘Trust not in oppression and
rapine, <span id="iii.iii-p5.2"></span>אל-תהבלו, become not vain,’ *i*
*e*., *fools*, to signify that those that so trust, that depend on
unlawful means for enriching themselves, will certainly be deceived,
find this the most perfect *folly* in the event. And the term *folly*
being that by which the Atheist is most frequently expressed in
Scripture, will be most agreeable to this place, where the Atheist’s
cogitations are described, verse 7, confident of *God*’*s not seeing nor
regarding*; which thoughts of his, as they are Atheistical, and so
false, and so *foolish* in one sense, as *folly* is *ignorance*, so are
they most impudent, (which is practical and the greatest *folly*,) will
never secure his wicked actions of impunity, but, on the contrary, will
betray him to all the ruin in the world. And to this sense it is, that
in verse 8 we find it said in the like style, ‘Understand, O ye brutish;
and ye fools, when will ye be wise?’ and so this is the adequate notion
of the word here.” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc11002.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>Les
hommes ne sont point si sages, qu’au milieu des afflictions continuelles
ils taschent d’un courage paisible de parvenir jusques au but; mais qui
ceste sagesse-la leur est donnee de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc11002.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p13.1"></span>Mais le
Prophete adjouste incontinent, que ceste sagesse laquelle Dieu nous
inspire au dedans, nous est quant-et-quant proposee et manifestee en la
Loy.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc11002.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span> In our English Bible it is “*until* the
pit be digged:” on which Hammond, who gives the same translation as
Calvin, comments as follows: — “The rendering of <span
id="iii.iii-p18.1"></span>עד, *until*, in this place, may much disturb
the sense, and make it believed that the *rest* <span
id="iii.iii-p18.2"></span>מימי רע, *from the evil days*, *i* *e*., from
persecution, (see <span id="iii.iii-p18.3"></span>[Eph
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#016)<span id="iii.iii-p18.3"></span>,)
which God gives to good men, is to continue *till* the pit be digged for
the ungodly, *i* *e*., till the measure of their sins be filled up, and
so destruction be ready for them: whereas, the contrary of this is
evident, that either the destruction of the wicked is first, and the
quiet and rest of the good (oppressed by them) a natural effect of that,
and so subsequent to it; or that both of them are of the same date, at
once ‘tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled
rest,’ <span id="iii.iii-p18.4"></span>[2 Thess.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii-p18.4"></span>.
And this is evidently the meaning of it here, and so will be discerned,
if only the <span id="iii.iii-p18.5"></span>אד be rendered <span
id="iii.iii-p18.6"></span>*dum*, *whilst*, (as it is elsewhere used,
<span id="iii.iii-p18.7"></span>[Jon
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii-p18.7"></span>,
<span id="iii.iii-p18.8"></span>אד היותי, ‘whilst I was,’ <span
id="iii.iii-p18.9"></span>[Job
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016)<span id="iii.iii-p18.9"></span>,
<span id="iii.iii-p18.10"></span>אד זה מדבר, ‘whilst he was speaking,’)
for then thus it will run very fitly, ‘That thou mayest give him rest —
whilst the pit is digged —’” Horsley reads the verse —

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>“To produce ease for him out of the days
of adversity, Whilst the pit is digging for the impious.”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc11002.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>Que les
maisons qui sont destinees aux vivans, pour un peu de temps sont bien
concedees aux morts cependant qu’on leur fait leur fosse; et qu’en ceste
facon ceux qui neantmoins sont destinez a perdition, demeurent en vie,”
etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc11002.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p8.1"></span>Mais pource
qu’au regard des hommes ou ne voit pas tousjours une telle moderation ou
temperature que sa justice soit apparente; laquelle est nommee
Gouvernement juste, apres que l’inequalite est corrigee.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc11002.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>On voit un
tresbon accord entre la domination et justice en une equalite bien
moderee.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc11002.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> Horsley reads, “Who will set himself on my
side?” The original words are <span id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>מי-יתיצב לי.
“The verb <span id="iii.v-p3.2"></span>יתיצב,” says this critic, “I take
to be a military term; literally, ‘to take one’s place in battalion’”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc11002.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span> “The Hebrew is <span
id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>דומה <span id="iii.v-p4.2"></span>*Sepulchrum*,
Pagn. *Silentium*, Mont. The Septuagint has <span
id="iii.v-p4.3"></span>τῷ ᾅδη; and Jerome <span
id="iii.v-p4.4"></span>*in inferno*.” — *Reeves*’ *Collation of the
Hebrew and Greek text of the Psalms*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc11002.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.v-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>יסעדני,
*yisadeni*, *propped me* It is a metaphor taken from any thing
*falling*, that is *propped*, *shored up*, or *buttressed* How often
does the *mercy* of God thus prevent the ruin of weak believers, and of
those who have been unfaithful?” — *Dr Adam Clarke*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc11002.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span> In the Septuagint and Vulgate, it is “in the
multitude of my sorrows.”

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc11002.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span> Horsley reads the whole verse thus: —

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>“In the multitude of my anxieties within
me,  
Thy comforts cheered my soul.”

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>And he observes, “The original word <span
id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>ישעשעו signifies ‘to cause to leap or dance for
joy;’ but the English language will not bear an application of this
image to the soul; though we say, ‘to make the *heart* leap for joy.’”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc11002.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>Si nous
entendons le *glissement* *du pied*, seulement de la mort corporelle, il
ne sera point absurde de dire que le Prophere ait este en ce desespoir.”
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc11002.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> Dr Kennicott reads, “<span
id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>sub specie legis;” in which he is followed by
Horsley: “Framing oppression under the pretense of law.” Fry’s version
of the whole verse stands thus: —

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span>“Is the tribunal of iniquity in accord with
thee?  
Decreeing wrong against me by law?”

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>“Legal forms,” he remarks, “have often been
given to the proceedings of the persecutors of God’s people; and the
sacred institutions, both of the civil and religious authorities, have
been perverted to be the tools of oppression.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc11002.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.vi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>יגודו,
(*ja-ghod-du*,) *will collect in a troop* Targ. ‘will heap together
evils;’ LXX. ‘will hunt after.’ From <span id="iii.vi-p11.2"></span>גדד,
*ran by troops*, *invaded with an army*.” — *Bythner*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc11002.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.vi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>Deinde
quid minus consentaneum, quam ut tota forensis ratio nihil aliud sit
quam scelesta conspiratio ad insontes damnandos?” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc11002.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>Toutesfois
pour autant que Dieu a jadis exerce ses serviteurs en l’une et l’autre
sorte de tentation, apprenons non seulement de porter patiemment une
violence injuste, mais aussi les calomnies indignes,” etc. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 95](cc11003)
