[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11010)  [Next](cc11012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>PSALM 103

<span id="xii-p2"></span>By this psalm every godly man is taught to give
thanks to God for the mercies bestowed upon himself in particular, and
then for the grace which God has vouchsafed to all his chosen ones in
common, by making a covenant of salvation with them in his law, that he
might make them partakers of his adoption. But the Psalmist chiefly
magnifies the mercy by which God sustains and bears with his people; and
that not on account of any merit or worth of theirs, for they only
deserve to be visited with severe punishment, but because he
compassionates their frailty. The psalm is at length concluded with a
general ascription of praise to God.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>A Psalm of David.  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Bless Jehovah, O my soul! and all my
inward parts, bless his holy name. **2.** Bless Jehovah, O my soul! and
forget not any of his benefits: **3.** Who forgiveth all thine
iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; **4.** Who redeemeth thy life
from the grave; who crowneth  <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)
thee with mercy and compassions; **5.** Who satisfieth \[or filleth\]
thy mouth with good: thy youth shall be renewed as the eagle’s.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span><span id="xii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**1.** *Bless Jehovah, O my soul!* The
prophet, by stirring up himself to gratitude, gives by his own example a
lesson to every man of the duty incumbent upon him. And doubtless our
slothfulness in this matter has need of continual incitement. If even
the prophet, who was inflamed with a more intense and fervent zeal than
other men, was not free from this malady, of which his earnestness in
stimulating himself is a plain confession, how much more necessary is it
for us, who have abundant experience of our own torpor, to apply the
same means for our quickening? The Holy Spirit, by his mouth, indirectly
upbraids us on account of our not being more diligent in praising God,
and at the same time points out the remedy, that every man may descend
into himself and correct his own sluggishness. Not content with calling
upon his *soul* (by which he unquestionably means the seat of the
understanding and affections) to bless *God,* the prophet expressly adds
his *inward parts,* addressing as it were his own mind and heart, and
all the faculties of both. When he thus speaks to himself, it is as if,
removed from the presence of men, he examined himself before God. The
repetition renders his language still more emphatic, as if he thereby
intended to reprove his own slothfulness.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span><span id="xii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**2.** *And forget not any of his benefits*
Here, he instructs us that God is not deficient on his part in
furnishing us with abundant matter for praising him. It is our own
ingratitude which hinders us from engaging in this exercise. In the
first place, he teaches us that the reason why God deals with such
liberality towards us is, that we may be led to celebrate his praise;
but at the same time he condemns our inconstancy, which hurries us away
to any other object rather than to God. How is it that we are so
listless and drowsy in the performance of this the chief exercise of
true religion, if it is not because our shameful and wicked
forgetfulness buries in our hearts the innumerable benefits of God,
which are openly manifest to heaven and earth? Did we only retain the
remembrance of them, the prophet assures us that we would be
sufficiently inclined to perform our duty, since the sole prohibition
which he lays upon us is, *not to forget them.*

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span><span id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**3.** *Who forgiveth all thy iniquities* He
now enumerates the different kinds of the divine benefits, in
considering which he has told us that we are too forgetful and slothful.
It is not without cause that he begins with God’s pardoning mercy, for
reconciliation with him is the fountain from which all other blessings
flow. God’s goodness extends even to the ungodly; but they are,
notwithstanding, so far from having the enjoyment of it, that they do
not even taste it. The first then of all the blessings of which we have
the true and substantial enjoyment, is that which consists in God’s
freely pardoning and blotting out our sins, and receiving us into his
favor. Yea, rather the forgiveness of sins, since it is accompanied with
our restoration to the favor of God, also sanctifies whatever good
things he bestows upon us, that they may contribute to our welfare. The
second clause is; either a repetition of the same sentiment, or else it
opens up a wider view of it; for the consequence of free forgiveness is,
that God governs us by his Spirit, mortifies the lusts of our flesh,
cleanses us from our corruptions, and restores us to the healthy
condition of a godly and an upright life. These who understand the
words, *who healeth all thy diseases,* as referring to the diseases of
the body, and as implying that God, when he has forgiven our sins, also
delivers us from bodily maladies, seem to put upon them a meaning too
restricted. I have no doubt that the medicine spoken of has a respect to
the blotting out of guilt; and, secondly, to the curing us of the
corruptions inherent in our nature, which is effected by the Spirit of
regeneration; and if any one will add as a third particular included,
that God being once pacified towards us, also remits the punishment
which we deserve, I will not object. Let us learn from this passage
that, until the heavenly Physician succor us, we nourish within us, not
only many diseases, but even many deaths.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span><span id="xii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**4** *Who redeemeth thy life from the
grave* The Psalmist expresses more plainly what our condition is
previous to God’s curing our maladies — that we are dead and adjudged to
the grave. The consideration that the mercy of God delivers us from
death and destruction ought, therefore, to lead us to prize it the more
highly. If the resurrection of the soul from the grave is the first step
of spiritual life, what room for self-gloriation is left to man? The
prophet next teaches us that the incomparable grace of God shines forth
in the very commencement of our salvation, as well as in its whole
progress; and the more to enhance the commendation of this grace, he
adds the word *compassions* in the plural number. He asserts that we are
*surrounded* with them; as if he had said, Before, behind, on all sides,
above and beneath, the grace of God presents itself to us in
immeasurable abundance; so that there is no place devoid of it. The same
truth he afterwards amplifies in these words, *thy mouth is satisfied,*
by which metaphor he alludes to the free indulgence of the palate, to
which we surrender ourselves when we have a well-furnished table; for
those who have scanty fare dare scarcely eat till they are half
satisfied.  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) Not that he approves
of gluttony in greedily devouring God’s benefits, as men give loose
reins to intemperance whenever they have great abundance; but he
borrowed this phraseology from the common custom of men, to teach us
that whatever good things our hearts can wish flow to us from God’s
bounty, even to perfect satisfaction. Those who take the Hebrew word
<span id="xii.i-p18.2"></span>עדי, *adi,* for *ornament,*  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) mar the passage by a mere conceit of
their own; and I am surprised how so groundless an imagination should
have come into their minds, unless it may be accounted for from the
circumstance that it is usual for men of a prying or inquisitive turn of
mind, when they would show their ingenuity, to bring forward mere
puerilities. The Psalmist next adds, that God was constantly infusing
into him new vigor, so that his strength continued unimpaired, even as
the Prophet Isaiah, (<span id="xii.i-p19.4"></span>[Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p19.4"></span>)
in discoursing on the restoration of the Church, says that a man of a
hundred years old shall be like a child. By this mode of expression, he
intimates that God, along with a very abundant supply of all good
things, communicates to him also inward rigor, that he may enjoy them;
and thus his strength was as it were continually renewed. From the
comparison of the eagle, the Jews have taken occasion to invent, for the
purpose of explanation, a fabulous story. Although they know not even
the first elements of any science, yet so presumptuous are they, that
whatever may be the matter treated of, they never hesitate to attempt to
explain it, and whenever they meet with any thing which they do not
understand, there is no figment so foolish that they do not bring
forward, as if it were an oracle of God. Thus, for expounding the
present passage, they give out that eagles, every tenth year, ascend to
the elemental fire, that their feathers may be burnt,  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) and that then they plunge themselves
into the sea, and immediately new feathers grow upon them. But we may
easily gather the simple meaning of the Prophet from the nature of the
eagle, as described by philosophers, and which is well-known from
observation. That bird continues fresh and vigorous, even to extreme old
age, unenfeebled by years, and exempt from disease, until it finally
dies of hunger. That it is long-lived is certain; but at last, its beak
or bill grows so great that it cannot any longer take food, and,
consequently, is forced to suck blood, or to nourish itself by drinking.
Hence the ancient proverb in reference to old men who are addicted to
drinking, *The eagle’s old age;* for necessity then constrains eagles to
drink much. But as drink alone is insufficient to maintain life, they
die rather through hunger, than fail by the natural decay of strength.
 <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) Now we perceive, without the
help of any invented story, the genuine meaning of the Prophet to be,
that as eagles always retain their rigor, and even in their old age are
still youthful, so the godly are sustained by a secret influence derived
from God, by which they continue in the possession of unimpaired
strength. They are not always, it is true, full of bodily vigor while in
this world, but rather painfully drag on their lives in continual
weakness; still what is here said applies to them in a certain sense.
This unquestionably is common to all in general, that they have been
brought out of the grave, and have experienced God to be bountiful to
them in innumerable ways. Were each of them duly to reflect how much he
is indebted to God, he would say with good reason *that his mouth is
filled with good things;* just as David, in <span
id="xii.i-p23.6"></span>[Ps 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)<span
id="xii.i-p23.6"></span>, and <span id="xii.i-p23.7"></span>[Ps
139:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#018)<span id="xii.i-p23.7"></span>,
confesses that he was unable to reckon up the Divine benefits, because
“they are more in number than the sands of the sea.” Did not our own
perverseness blind our understandings, we would see that, even in
famine, we are furnished with food in such a manner, as that God shows
us the manifold riches of his goodness. With regard to the renovation of
our strength, the meaning is, that since, when our outward man decays,
we are renewed to a better life, we have no reason to be troubled at the
giving way of our strength, especially when he sustains us by his Spirit
under the weakness and languishing of our mortal frames.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#006)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Jehovah executeth righteousness and
judgment for all that are oppressed. **7.** He made known his ways to
Moses, his doings to the children of Israel. **8.** Jehovah is merciful
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *Jehovah executeth righteousness*
David having recounted the Divine benefits bestowed upon himself, now
passes from this personal consideration to take a wider view of the
subject. There is, however, no doubt that when he declares God to be the
succorer of *the oppressed,* he includes himself among the number, for
he had enjoyed the Divine help under many persecutions; and, from his
own experience, he describes the character in which God is accustomed to
manifest himself towards all who are unrighteously afflicted. As the
faithful, while in this world, are always living among wolves, by using
the plural number, he celebrates a variety of deliverances, to teach us
that it is God’s ordinary work to succor his servants whenever he sees
them injuriously treated. Hence we are taught to exercise patience when
we find that God takes it upon him to avenge our wrongs, and that he
covers us with the shield of his justice, or defends us with the sword
of his judgment, as often as we are assaulted wrongfully.

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**7** *He hath made known his ways to Moses*
David now speaks in the name of the chosen people; and this he does very
suitably, being led to it by the consideration of the benefits which God
had bestowed upon himself. Convinced that it was only as a member of the
Church that he had been enriched with so many blessings, he immediately
carries back his contemplations to the common covenant made with the
people of Israel. He, however, continues the same train of thought as in
the preceding verse; for these *ways,* which he says had been shown to
Moses, were nothing else than the deliverance wrought for the people
until they entered the promised land. He selected this as an instance of
God’s righteousness and judgment, surpassing all others, to prove that
God always shows himself righteous in succoring those who are oppressed.
But since this instance depended upon the Divine promise, he doubtless
has an eye principally to it; his language implying that God’s
righteousness was clearly demonstrated and seen in the history of the
chosen people, whom he had adopted, and with whom he had entered into
covenant. God is said to have made known his ways first to Moses, who
was his servant and messenger, and afterwards to all the people. Moses
is here represented as invested with the office to which he was Divinely
appointed; for it was God’s will to be made known to the people by the
hand and working of that distinguished man. The *ways,* then, and the
*doings of God,* are his rising up with wonderful power to deliver the
people, his leading them through the Red Sea, and his manifesting his
presence with them by many signs and miracles. But as all this flowed
from the free covenant, David exhorts himself and others to give thanks
to God for having chosen them to be his peculiar people, and for
enlightening their minds by the truths of his law. Man, without the
knowledge of God, being the most miserable object that can be imagined,
the discovery which God has been pleased to make to us in his Word, of
his fatherly love, is an incomparable treasure of perfect happiness.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** *Jehovah is merciful and gracious*
David seems to allude to the exclamation of Moses, recorded in <span
id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Ex 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span
id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>, where the nature of God, revealed in a
remarkable way, is more clearly described than in other places. When
Moses was admitted to take a nearer view of the Divine glory than was
usually obtained, he exclaimed upon beholding it, “O God! merciful and
gracious, forgiving iniquity, slow to wrath, and abundant in goodness.”
As, therefore, he has summarily comprehended in that passage all that is
important for us to know concerning the Divine character, David happily
applies these terms, by which God is there described, to his present
purpose. His design is to ascribe entirely to the goodness of God the
fact that the Israelites, who by their own wickedness forfeited from
time to time their relation to him, as his adopted people, nevertheless
continued in that relation. Farther, we must understand in general, that
the true knowledge of God corresponds to what faith discovers in the
written Word; for it is not his will that we should search into his
secret essence, except in so far as he makes himself known to us, a
point worthy of our special notice. We see that whenever God is
mentioned, the minds of men are perversely carried away to cold
speculations, and fix their attention on things which can profit them
nothing; while, in the meantime, they neglect those manifestations of
his perfections which meet our eyes, and which afford a vivid reflection
of his character. To whatever subjects men apply their minds, there is
none from which they will derive greater advantage than from continual
meditation on his wisdom, goodness, righteousness, and mercy; and
especially the knowledge of his goodness is fitted both to build up our
faith, and to illustrate his praises. Accordingly, Paul, in <span
id="xii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Eph 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)<span
id="xii.ii-p9.2"></span>, declares that our height, length, breadth, and
depth, consists in knowing the unspeakable riches of grace, which have
been manifested to us in Christ. This also is the reason why David,
copying from Moses, magnifies by a variety of terms the mercy of God. In
the first place, as we have no worse fault than that devilish arrogance
which robs God of his due praise, and which yet is so deeply rooted in
us, that it cannot be easily eradicated; God rises up, and that he may
bring to nought the heaven-daring presumption of the flesh, asserts in
lofty terms his own mercy, by which alone we stand. Again, when we ought
to rely upon the grace of God, our minds tremble or waver, and there is
nothing in which we find greater difficulty than to acknowledge that He
is merciful to us. David, to meet and overcome this doubting state of
mind, after the example of Moses, employs these synonymous terms: first,
that God is merciful; secondly, that he is gracious; thirdly, that he
patiently and compassionately bears with the sins of men; and, lastly,
that he is abundant in mercy and goodness.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#009)<span
id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** He will not always chide: nor will
he keep his anger for ever. **10.** He hath not dealt with us after our
sins; nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. **11.** For in
proportion to the height of the heavens above the earth has been the
greatness of his goodness  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) upon
 <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) them that fear him. **12.** As
far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
transgressions from us.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**9** *He will not always chide* David,
from the attributes ascribed to God in the preceding verse, draws the
conclusion, that when God has been offended, he will not be
irreconcilable, since, from his nature, he is always inclined to
forgive. It was necessary to add this statement; for our sins would be
continually shutting the gate against his goodness were there not some
way of appeasing his anger. David tacitly intimates that God institutes
an action against sinners to lay them low under a true sense of their
guilt; and that yet he recedes from it whenever he sees them subdued and
humbled. God speaks in a different manner in <span
id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>[Ge 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span
id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>, where he says, “My Spirit shall no longer
strive with man,” because the wickedness of men being fully proved, it
was then time to condemn them. But here David maintains that God will
not always chide, because so easy is he to be reconciled, and so ready
to pardon, that he does not rigidly exact from us what strict justice
might demand. To the same purpose is the language in the second clause:
*nor will he keep anger for ever* The expression, *to keep anger for
ever,* corresponds with the French phrase, *Je lui garde, Il me l’a
garde,*  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) which we use when the
man, who cannot forgive the injuries he has received, cherishes secret
revenge in his heart, and waits for an opportunity of retaliation. Now
David denies that God, after the manner of men, keeps anger on account
of the injuries done to him, since he condescends to be reconciled. It
is, however, to be understood that this statement does not represent the
state of the Divine mind towards all mankind without distinction: it
sets forth a special privilege of the Church; for God is expressly
called by Moses, (<span id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>[De
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009)<span id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>) “a
terrible avenger, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children.” But David, passing by unbelievers, upon whom rests the
everlasting and unappeasable wrath of God, teaches us how tenderly he
pardons his own children, even as God himself speaks in Isaiah, (<span
id="xii.iii-p8.2"></span>[Isa. 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)<span id="xii.iii-p8.2"></span>,)
“For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I
gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from them for a moment; but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee.”

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span>**10.** *He hath not dealt with us after
our sins* The Psalmist here proves from experience, or from the effect,
what he has stated concerning the Divine character; for it was entirely
owing to the wonderful forbearance of God that the Israelites had
hitherto continued to exist. Let each of us, as if he had said, examine
his own life; let us inquire in how many ways we have provoked the wrath
of God? or, rather, do we not continually provoke it? and yet he not
only forbears to punish us, but bountifully maintains those whom he
might justly destroy.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>**11.** *For in proportion to the height
of the heavens above the earth* The Psalmist here confirms by a
comparison the truth that God does not punish the faithful as they have
deserved, but, by his mercy, strives against their sins. The form of
expression is equivalent to saying that God’s mercy towards us is
infinite. With respect to the word <span id="xii.iii-p12.1"></span>גבר,
*gabar,* it is of little consequence whether it is taken in a neuter
signification, or in a transitive, as is noted on the margin; for in
either way the immeasurableness of God’s mercy is compared to the vast
extent of the world. As the mercy of God could not reach us, unless the
obstacle of our guilt were taken away, it is immediately added, (verse
12th,) that God removes our sins as far from us *as the east is distant
from the west* The amount is, that God’s mercy is poured out upon the
faithful far and wide, according to the magnitude of the world; and
that, in order to take away every impediment to its course, their sins
are completely blotted out. The Psalmist confirms what I have just now
stated, namely, that he does not treat in general of what God is towards
the whole world, but of the character in which he manifests himself
towards the faithful. Whence also it is evident that he does not here
speak of that mercy by which God reconciles us to himself at the first,
but of that with which he continually follows those whom he has embraced
with his fatherly love. There is one kind of mercy by which he restores
us from death to life, while as yet we are strangers to him, and another
by which he sustains this restored life; for that blessing would
forthwith be lost did he not confirm it in us by daily pardoning our
sins. Whence also we gather how egregiously the Papists trifle in
imagining that the free remission of sins is bestowed only once, and
that afterwards righteousness is acquired or retained by the merit of
good works, and that whatever guilt we contract is removed by
satisfactions. Here David does not limit to a moment of time the mercy
by which God reconciles us to himself in not imputing to us our sins,
but extends it even to the close of life. Not less powerful is the
argument which this passage furnishes us in refutation of those fanatics
who bewitch both themselves and others with a vain opinion of their
having attained to perfect righteousness, so that they no longer stand
in need of pardon.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013)<span
id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**13.** As a father is compassionate towards
his children, so has Jehovah been compassionate  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) towards them that fear him. **14.**
For he knoweth of what we are made; he hath remembered that we are dust.
**15.** As for man, his days are like the grass: as a flower of the
field, so he flourisheth. **16.** As soon as the wind passeth over it,
it is gone;  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) and its place shall
know it no more.

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>**13.** *As a father is compassionate
towards his children,* The Psalmist not only explains by a comparison
what he has already stated, but he at the same time assigns the cause
why God so graciously forgives us, which is, because he is a *father* It
is then in consequence of God’s having freely and sovereignly adopted us
as his children that he continually pardons our sins, and accordingly we
are to draw from that fountain the hope of forgiveness. And as no man
has been adopted on the ground of his own merit, it follows that sins
are freely pardoned. God is compared to earthly fathers, not because he
is in every respect like them, but because there is no earthly image by
which his unparalleled love towards us can be better expressed. That
God’s fatherly goodness may not be perverted as an encouragement to sin,
David again repeats that God is thus favorable only to those who are his
sincere worshippers. It is indeed a proof of no ordinary forbearance for
God to “make his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,” (<span
id="xii.iv-p7.1"></span>[Mt 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="xii.iv-p7.1"></span>;) but the subject here treated is the free
imputation of the righteousness by which we are accounted the children
of God. Now this righteousness is offered only to those who entirely
devote themselves to so bountiful a Father, and reverently submit to his
word. But as our attainments in godliness in this world, whatever they
may be, come far short of perfection, there remains only one pillar on
which our salvation can securely rest, and that is the goodness of God.

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span>**14.** *For he knoweth* David here
annihilates all the worth which men would arrogate to themselves, and
asserts that it is the consideration of our misery, and that alone,
which moves God to exercise patience towards us. This again we ought
carefully to mark, not only for the purpose of subduing the pride of our
flesh, but also that a sense of our unworthiness may not prevent us from
trusting in God. The more wretched and despicable our condition is, the
more inclined is God to show mercy, for the remembrance that we are clay
and dust is enough to incite him to do us good.

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p11"></span>To the same purpose is the comparison
immediately following, (verse 15,) that all the excellency of man
withers away like a fading flower at the first blast of the wind. Man is
indeed improperly said *to flourish.* But as it might be alleged that he
is, nevertheless, distinguished by some endowment or other, David grants
that he flourishes like the grass, instead of saying, as he might justly
have done, that he is a vapor or shadow, or a thing of nought. Although,
as long as we live in this world, we are adorned with natural gifts,
and, to say nothing of other things, “live, and move, and have our being
in God,” (<span id="xii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Ac
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="xii.iv-p11.1"></span>;)
yet as we have nothing except what is dependent on the will of another,
and which may be taken from us every hour, our life is only a show or
phantom that passes away. The subject here treated, is properly the
brevity of life, to which God has a regard in so mercifully pardoning
us, as it is said in another psalm: “He remembered that they were but
flesh, a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again,” (<span
id="xii.iv-p11.2"></span>[Ps
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span id="xii.iv-p11.2"></span>.)
If it is asked why David, making no mention of the soul, which yet is
the principal part of man, declares us to be dust and clay? I answer,
that it is enough to induce God mercifully to sustain us, when he sees
that nothing surpasses our life in frailty. And although the soul, after
it has departed from the prison of the body, remains alive, yet its
doing so does not arise from any inherent power of its own. Were God to
withdraw his grace, the soul would be nothing more than a puff or blast,
even as the body is dust; and thus there would doubtless be found in the
whole man nothing but mere vanity.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span><span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#017)<span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>**17.** But the goodness of Jehovah is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness upon the children’s children; **18.** To those who keep
his covenant, and remember his statutes to do them

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span><span id="xii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span>**17.** *But the goodness of Jehovah, etc*
The Psalmist leaves nothing to men to rely upon but the mercy of God;
for it would be egregious folly to seek a ground of confidence in
themselves. After having shown the utter emptiness of men, he adds the
seasonable consolation, that, although they have no intrinsic
excellence, which does not vanish into smoke, yet God is an
inexhaustible fountain of life, to supply their wants. This contrast is
to be particularly observed; for whom does he thus divest of all
excellence? The faithful who are regenerated by the Spirit of God, and
who worship him with true devotion, these are the persons whom he leaves
nothing on which their hope may rest but the mere goodness of God. As
the Divine goodness is everlasting, the weakness and frailty of the
faithful does not prevent them from boasting of eternal salvation to the
close of life, and even in death itself. David does not confine their
hope within the limits of time — he views it as commensurate in duration
with the grace on which it is founded. To *goodness* is subjoined
*righteousness*, a word, as we have had occasion frequently to observe
before, denoting the protection by which God defends and preserves his
own people. He is then called righteous, not because he rewards every
man according to his desert, but because he deals faithfully with his
saints, in spreading the hand of his protection over them. The Prophet
has properly placed this righteousness after goodness, as being the
effect of goodness. He also asserts that it extends to the children and
children’s children, according to these words in <span
id="xii.v-p5.1"></span>[De 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#009)<span
id="xii.v-p5.1"></span>, “God keepeth mercy to a thousand generations.”
It is a singular proof of his love that he not only receives each of us
individually into his favor, but also herein associates with us our
offspring, as it were by hereditary right, that they may be partakers of
the same adoption. How shall He cast us off, who, in receiving our
children and children’s children into his protection, shows to us in
their persons how precious our salvation is in his sight?

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span><span id="xii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>Farther, as nothing is more easy than for
hypocrites to flatter themselves under a false pretext, that they are in
favor with God, or for degenerate children groundlessly to apply to
themselves the promises made to their fathers, it is again stated, by
way of exception, in the 18th verse, that God is merciful only to *those
who,* on their part, *keep his covenant,* which the unbelieving make of
none effect by their wickedness. The *keeping,* or *observing of the
covenant,* which is here put instead of the *fear of God,* mentioned in
the preceding verse, is worthy of notice; for thus David intimates that
none are the true worshippers of God but those who reverently obey his
Word. Very far from this are the Papists, who, thinking themselves equal
to the angels in holiness, nevertheless shake off the yoke of God, like
wild beasts, by trampling under foot his Holy Word. David, therefore,
rightly judges of men’s godliness, by their submitting themselves to the
Word of God, and following the rule which he has prescribed to them. As
the covenant begins with a solemn article containing the promise of
grace, faith and prayer are required, above all things, to the proper
keeping of it. Nor is the additional clause superfluous — *who remember
his statutes;* for, although God is continually putting us in mind of
them, yet we soon slide away to worldly cares — are confused by a
multiplicity of avocations, and are lulled asleep by many allurements.
Thus forgetfulness extinguishes the light of truth, unless the faithful
stir up themselves from time to time. David tells us that this
remembrance of God’s statutes has an invigorating effect when men employ
themselves in doing them. Many are sufficiently forward to discourse
upon them with their tongues whose feet are very slow, and whose hands
are well nigh dead, in regard to active service.

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
103:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019)<span
id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**19.** Jehovah hath established his throne
in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all. **20.** Bless Jehovah,
ye his angels, who are mighty in strength, who do his commandment, in
hearing  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) the voice of his word.
**21.** Bless Jehovah, all ye his hosts; ye his ministers, who do his
pleasure. **22.** Bless Jehovah, all ye his works in all places of his
dominion: bless Jehovah, O my soul!

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span>**19.** *Jehovah hath established his throne
in the heavens* David having recounted the benefits by which God lays
each of us in particular, and also the whole Church, under obligation to
him, now extols in general his infinite glory. The amount is, that
whenever God is mentioned, men should learn to ascend in their
contemplations above the whole world, because his majesty transcends the
heavens; and they should farther learn not to measure his power by that
of man, since it has under its control all kingdoms and dominions. That
none may think that earthly creatures only are here put in subjection to
God, the Psalmist chiefly addresses the angels. In calling upon them to
join in praising God, he teaches both himself and all the godly, that
there is not a better nor a more desirable exercise than to praise God,
since there is not a more excellent service in which even the angels are
employed. The angels are doubtless too willing and prompt in the
discharge of this duty, to stand in need of incitement from us. With
what face then, it may be said, can we, whose slothfulness is so great,
take it upon us to exhort them? But although these exalted beings run
swiftly before us, and we with difficulty come lagging after them, yet
David enjoins them to sing God’s praises for our sake, that by their
example he may awaken us from our drowsiness. The object he has in view,
as I have adverted to before, is to be noted, which is, by addressing
his discourse to the angels to teach us, that the highest end which they
propose to themselves is to advance the divine glory. Accordingly, while
in one sentence he clothes them with *strength,* in the immediately
following, he describes them as hanging on God’s word, waiting for his
orders, — *Ye who do his commandment* However great the power, as if he
had said, with which you are endued, you reckon nothing more honorable
than to obey God. And it is not only said that they execute God’s
commandments, but to express more distinctly the promptitude of their
obedience, it is asserted, that they are always ready to perform
whatever he commands them.

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span><span id="xii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span>**21** *Bless Jehovah, all ye his hosts*. By
*hosts* is not to be understood the stars, as some explain it. The
subject of the preceding verse is still continued. Nor is the repetition
superfluous; for the word *hosts* teaches us that there are myriads of
myriads who stand before the throne of God, ready to receive every
intimation of his will. Again, they are called *his ministers who do his
pleasure,* to intimate to us, that they are not there intent in idly
beholding God’s glory, but that having been appointed as our ministers
and guardians, they are always ready for their work. Instead of *word,*
the term *pleasure* is here used, and both are employed with much
propriety; for although the sun, the moon, and the stars, observe the
laws which God has ordained for them, yet being without understanding,
they cannot properly be said to obey his word and his voice. The term
*obey* is indeed sometimes transferred to the mute and insensible parts
of creation.  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) It is, however,
only in a metaphorical sense that they can be said *to hearken to God’s
voice,* when by a secret instinct of nature they fulfill his purposes.
But this in the proper sense is true of angels, who actively obey him
upon their understanding from his sacred mouth what he would have them
to do. The word *pleasure* expresses more plainly a joyful and cheerful
obedience, implying that the angels not only obey God’s commandments,
but also willingly and with the greatest delight receive the intimations
of his will, that they may perform what he would have them to do. Such
is the import of the Hebrew noun, as has been stated elsewhere.

<span id="xii.vi-p10"></span><span id="xii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p11"></span>**22** *Bless Jehovah, all ye his works*
The Psalmist in conclusion addresses all creatures; for although they
may be without speech and understanding, yet they ought in a manner to
re-echo the praises of their Creator. This he does on our account, that
we may learn that there is not a corner in heaven or on earth where God
is not praised. We have less excuse, if, when all the works of God by
praising their Maker reproach us for our sloth we do not at least follow
their example. The express mention of *all places of his dominion,*
seems to be intended to stir up the faithful to greater ardor in this
exercise; for if even those countries where his voice is unheard ought
not to be mute in his praise, how can we lawfully remain silent to whom
he opens his mouth, anticipating us by his own sacred voice? In short,
David shows that his design in recounting God’s benefits, and magnifying
the extent of his empire, was to animate himself the more to the
exercise of praising him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc11011.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> The author of this beautiful and affecting
psalm was David; but the time and occasion of its composition are
uncertain. Some are of opinion that it is a song of gratitude for
David’s recovery from some dangerous sickness. Others think it was
written upon his receiving assurance that his great sin in the case of
Bathsheba and Uriah was forgiven. “I am not prepared to say,” observes
Walford, “that this judgment is certainly correct; but as it is a
subject of no great moment, am willing to acquiesce in it. If it be
correct, then we have two of the most instructive examples of
enlightened and fervent piety, which are contained in the Holy
Scriptures, occasioned by one failure in the conduct of a good man, who
was habitually remarkable for his steadfast obedience to the laws of
God. The one of these examples is in <span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>[Psalm
51](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#000)<span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>, in
which the sacred writer records his deep and humble penitence: and the
other, which is now before us, displays the feelings of sacred joy and
thankfulness, in terms that are most delightful and consolatory. So
admirably adapted are these two psalms to the varied sentiments and
emotions of Christian feeling, that I can scarcely suppose any real
believer of the gospel is to be found who has not, on multiplied
occasions, made them the objects of his attentive meditation, so as to
have, if not the express words, yet the sense of them, engraven on his
heart and memory, in characters never to be effaced but by death.”

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc11011.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>Ou,
envirrone.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, surroundeth.”

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc11011.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span> Walford’s rendering of this verse is as
follows: —

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>“Who satisfieth thy advancing age with
good;  
Thy youth is renewed as the eagle’s.”

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>In defense of reading “thy advancing age”
instead of “thy mouth” as it is in our English translation, and as
Calvin has it, he observes, “The version here adopted is that of the
Chaldee, and is supported by the parallelism in the following clause.”

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc11011.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>A grand’
peine osent-ils manger a demi leur saoul.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc11011.htm#fr_165) <span
id="xii.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span> “Abu Walid mentions two interpretations: 1.
That of our English translators; 2. That which takes <span
id="xii.i-p19.1"></span>עדיך in the sense of *ornament*, ‘who
multiplieth thy adorning with good,’ *i* *e*., ‘who abundantly adorneth
thee with good.’ Aben Ezra approves the notion of *ornament*, but
applies it to the soul, the ornament of the body, *i* *e*., ‘who
satisfieth thy soul with good.’” — *Hammond* The Septuagint reads, <span
id="xii.i-p19.2"></span>ἔπιθυμίαν σου, “thy desire,” or “sensitive
appetite,” the satisfying of which is the providing for the body all the
good things it stands in need of, and thus it is equivalent to
“satisfying,” or “filling the mouth,” the organ for conveying
nourishment to the body. Kimchi understands the phrase as expressing
David’s recovery from sickness. In sickness the soul abhorreth bread,
and even dainty meat, <span id="xii.i-p19.3"></span>[Job
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p19.3"></span>.
The physician, too, limits the diet of the patient, and prescribes
things which are nauseous to the palate. This commentator, therefore,
supposes that David here describes the blessing of health, by *his mouth
being filled with good things*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc11011.htm#fr_166) <span
id="xii.i-p19.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p20.1"></span>Afin que
leurs plumes soyent bruslees.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc11011.htm#fr_167) <span
id="xii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span> What Calvin here asserts of the eagle has
as little foundation in truth as the Jewish fiction which he justly
discards. Augustine’s explanation of the renewal of the youth of the
eagle is equally fabulous. He affirms that in its old age its beak grows
out so long, and becomes so incurvated, as to hinder it from taking
food, thus endangering its life, but that it removes the excrescence, by
striking its beak against a stone, so that it is enabled to take its
ordinary food, and becomes young again. “There are,” says Dr Adam
Clarke, “as many legends of the eagle among the ancient writers as there
are in the Kalendar of some saints, and all *equally true*. Even among
modern divines, Bible-Dictionary men, and such like, the most ridiculous
tales concerning this bird continue to be propagated; and no small
portion of them have been crowded into comments on this very verse.” Of
these “legends of the eagle,” the accounts given of it by the Jewish
commentators, by Calvin himself, and by Augustine, are a specimen; for
they are altogether unsupported from its natural history. The Psalmist,
in speaking of the renewing of its youth, we conceive refers simply to
the changing of its feathers. Like all other birds, the eagle has its
annual moulting season, in which it casts its old feathers, and is
furnished with a new stock. When its plumage is thus renewed, its
appearance becomes more youthful and beautiful, while, at the same time,
its rigour and liveliness are improved. In like manner, by the
communications of Divine grace, the spiritual beauty, strength, and
activity of the people of God are increased. Although any other bird
would have served the Psalmist’s purpose, yet he may have preferred the
eagle, not only because it is the king of birds, superior to others of
the feathered tribe in size, strength, and vivacity, but because it
retains its vigor to a protracted old age, and preserves its youthful
appearance to the last by the frequent change of its plumage. The
Prophet Isaiah uses the same allusion, to illustrate the perseverance of
the saints in holiness,

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>“They that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength;  
they shall mount up with wings as eagles.”  
<span id="xii.i-p22.3"></span>[Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031)<span id="xii.i-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>The eagle seems to have borrowed its Hebrew
name <span id="xii.i-p23.1"></span>נשר, *nesher*, from the shedding of
its plumage. Its root is the Chaldee verb <span
id="xii.i-p23.2"></span>נשר, *nashar*, <span
id="xii.i-p23.3"></span>*decidit*, *defluxit*, *he fell*, *he shed* “The
name agrees with <span id="xii.i-p23.4"></span>שור, *to look at*,” says
Bythner, “because the eagle can look at the sun with a straight and
steady gaze; also with <span id="xii.i-p23.5"></span>ישר, *to be
straight*, because it flies in a straight course.”

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc11011.htm#fr_168) <span
id="xii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou, il a
magnifie sa bonte.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, he hath magnified his
goodness.”

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc11011.htm#fr_169) <span
id="xii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> “Hammond prefers reading *above* “Though
<span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>על,” says he, “signifies *on* and
*towards*, as well as *above* or *over*, and may be fitly so rendered,
verses 13 and 17, where (as here) God’s *mercy* is said to be <span
id="xii.iii-p4.2"></span>על, *upon his children*, and <span
id="xii.iii-p4.3"></span>על, *upon them that fear him*; yet the
comparison that is here made between *the heaven* and *the earth*, and
the *height* or excellence of the one <span id="xii.iii-p4.4"></span>על,
(not *upon* but) *above* the other, being answered, in the <span
id="xii.iii-p4.5"></span>ἀντα πόδοσις, by the *greatness* or *strength*
(so <span id="xii.iii-p4.6"></span>גבר signifies) of God’s *mercy*,
<span id="xii.iii-p4.7"></span>על יראיו; that phrase must by analogy be
rendered *above*, not *upon*, or *towards them that fear him* And then
the meaning must needs be this, that whatsoever our *fear* or
*obedience* to God be, his *mercy* towards us is as far *above* the size
or proportion of that, as *the* *heaven is above the earth*, *i* *e*.,
there is no proportion between them; the one is as a point to that other
vast circumference; nay, the difference far greater, as God’s *mercy* is
infinite, like himself, and so infinitely exceeding the pitiful
imperfect degree of our obedience. The other expression that follows
verse 12, taken from the distance of the *East from the West*, is
pitched upon, says Kimchi, because those two quarters of the world are
of greatest extent, being all known and inhabited. From whence it is
that geographers reckon that way their longitudes, as from North to
South their latitudes.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc11011.htm#fr_170) <span
id="xii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span> “I am watching him, as he has watched to
do a bad turn to me.”

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc11011.htm#fr_171) <span
id="xii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span> In the French the verb is in the present
tense, “So Jehovah is compassionate.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc11011.htm#fr_172) <span
id="xii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span> It has been supposed that there is here a
reference to that pestilential destructive wind of the East, called the
Simoon, which, from its extreme heat, destroys at once every green
thing. Disease and death overtake man, and reduce him to his original
dust, as surely and speedily as this scorching wind blasts the tender
flower.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc11011.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span> In the French version it is “<span
id="xii.vi-p3.1"></span>en obeissant,” “in obeying.” Hammond reads, “at
hearing;” and observes,” The sense of <span id="xii.vi-p3.2"></span>לשמע
in this place seems best expressed by the Arabic, as soon as they hear;
for that is the character of the angels’ obedience, that as soon as they
hear the voice of God’s word, as soon as his will is revealed to them,
they promptly and presently obey it. The Chaldee renders it, ‘at his
voice being heard;’ and the LXX. <span id="xii.vi-p3.3"></span>Τοῦ
ἀκοῦσαι, ‘as they hear,’ or ‘as soon as they hear.’”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc11011.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.vi-p9.1"></span>Aux
creatures muetes et insensibles.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 104](cc11012)
