[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11004)  [Next](cc11006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>PSALM 97

<span id="vi-p2"></span>The description which we have of the kingdom of
God in this psalm, does not apply to the state of it under the Law. We
may infer, accordingly, that it contains a prediction of that kingdom of
Christ, which was erected upon the introduction of the Gospel. The
Psalmist, while he commends it to us by insisting upon its greatness and
glory, so well calculated to compel the reverential fear of men, gives
an amiable representation of it, by informing us that it has been
erected for the salvation of mankind sinners.

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
97:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Jehovah reigns: let the earth rejoice,
let the great islands  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) be glad.
**2.** Clouds and darkness are round about him; righteousness and
judgment are the habitation  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) of his
throne. **3.** A fire shall go before his face, and shall burn up his
enemies round about. **4.** His lightnings enlightened the world; the
earth shall see, and tremble. **5.** The hills flow down like wax at the
presence of Jehovah, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span><span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**1** *Jehovah reigns* His inviting men to
rejoice, is a proof that the reign of God is inseparably connected with
the salvation and best happiness of mankind. And, the joy he speaks of
being common to the whole world and to the regions beyond the seas, it
is evident that he predicts the enlargement of God’s kingdom, which had
been confined within the narrow boundaries of Judea, to a far wider
extent. The Psalmist, in setting forth the various particulars of the
Divine glory in the four verses which follow, would seek to impress all
men with a reverential fear of him. Thus he gives us a representation of
the formidable majesty attaching to God, that he may dash and humble
vain confidence and carnal pride. A cloudy sky overawes us more than a
clear one, as the darkness produces a peculiar effect upon the senses.
The Psalmist makes use of this symbol, no doubt, to impress the world
with the greater reverence of God. Others refine more upon the words,
and think that clouds are said to be round about God, to check human
rashness and presumption, and restrain that excessive curiosity which
would pry more than is fit into the mysteries of Godhead. This is an
interpretation of the words which makes them convey a very useful
lesson; but I am against all refined renderings, and think that the
Psalmist intended in associating darkness with God, to impress the
hearts of men with a fear of him in general.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) The same meaning is brought out in the
remaining context, when *fire is said to go before him, and burn up his
enemies, his lightnings to shake the earth, and the mountains to flow
down.* Should any object that this does not agree with what was said of
the joy which his kingdom diffuses, I might answer, first, that although
God is ready on his part to diffuse blessedness wherever he reigns, all
are not capable of appreciating it. Besides, as I have already hinted,
the truth is one of use to believers, humbling the pride of the flesh,
and deepening their adoration of God. God’s throne is represented as
founded in *justice* and *judgment*, to denote the benefit which we
derive from it. The greatest misery which can be conceived of, is that
of living without righteousness and judgment, and the Psalmist mentions
it as matter of praise exclusively due to God, that when he reigns,
righteousness revives in the world. He as evidently denies that we can
have any righteousness, till God subjects us to the yoke of his word, by
the gentle but powerful influences of his Spirit. A great proportion of
men obstinately resist and reject the government of God. Hence the
Psalmist was forced to exhibit God in his severer aspect, to teach the
wicked that their perverse opposition will not pass unpunished. When God
draws near to men in mercy, and they fail to welcome him with becoming
reverence and respect, this implies impiety of a very aggravated
description; on which account it is that the language of denunciation
suits with the kingdom of Christ. The Psalmist intimates that those who
should despise God in the person of his only-begotten Son, will feel in
due time and certainly the awful weight of his majesty. So much is
implied in the expression used — *The* *earth* Shall See. For the
wicked, when they find that their attempts are vain in fighting against
God, resort to subterfuge and concealment. The Psalmist declares that
they would not succeed by any such vain artifice in hiding themselves
from God.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
97:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**6.** The heavens have declared his
righteousness, and all the people have seen his glory. **7.** Confounded
be all those who serve graven images, who glory in their inventions;
 <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) let all the gods worship before
him. **8.** Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) rejoiced because of thy judgments, O
Jehovah!

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span><span id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**6** *The heavens have declared his
righteousness* Here he states that there would be such an illustrious
display of the righteousness of God, that the heavens themselves would
herald it. The meaning is not the same as in the beginning of the
nineteenth psalm, “The heavens declare the glory of God,” etc. In that
psalm David means no more than that the wisdom and power of God are as
conspicuous in the fabric of the heavens, as if God should assert them
with an audible voice. The meaning of the passage before us is, that the
spiritual righteousness of God should be so signally manifested under
the reign of Christ as to fill both heaven and earth. There is much
force in this personification, in which the heavens, as if even they
were penetrated with a sense of the righteousness of God, are
represented as speaking of it. It is equally probable, however, that the
heavens signify here *the angels, who are contained in heaven,* by the
figure of metonomy or synecdoche, while, in the corresponding clause,
instead of the earth being mentioned, he speaks of the peoples who dwell
upon it. The angels may very properly be said to announce and celebrate
the Divine glory.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span><span id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>**7** *Confounded be all those who serve
graven images.* The Psalmist draws a broad distinction here, as in the
psalm next to this, between the true God and the false gods which men
form for themselves. This he does that the praise which he had ascribed
might not be applied to any but the true God. Men are all ready to admit
that they ought to celebrate the praises of God, but, naturally prone as
they are to superstition, few indeed will be bound down to worship God
in the manner which is right. No sooner have they to do with God than
they deviate into the most baseless delusions. Each fashions a god for
himself, and all choose what suits them best in the medley of
inventions. This is the reason why the sacred writers, under the
apprehension that men may turn to false gods, are careful in giving
exhortations to the worship of God, to state at the same time who the
true God is. The order observed by the Psalmist suggests the remark,
that corrupt superstitions will never be removed until the true religion
obtains. Prevented from coming to the true God by the slowness of their
spiritual apprehension, men cannot fail to wander in vanities of their
own; and it is the knowledge of the true God which dispels these, as the
sun disperses the darkness. All have naturally a something of religion
born with them,  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) but owing to the
blindness and stupidity, as well as the weakness of our minds, the
apprehension which we conceive of God is immediately depraved. Religion
is thus the beginning of all superstitions, not in its own nature, but
through the darkness which has settled down upon the minds of men, and
which prevents them from distinguishing between idols and the true God.
The truth of God is effectual when revealed in dispelling and
dissipating superstitions. Does the sun absorb the vapors which
intervene in the air, and shall not the presence of God himself be
effectual much more? We need not wonder then that the Psalmist, in
predicting the Kingdom of God, triumphs over the ungodly nations, which
boasted in graven images, as when Isaiah, speaking of the rise of the
Gospel, adds,

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>“Then all the idols of Egypt shall fall,”
(<span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>Since the knowledge of God has been hid from
the view of men, we are taught also that there is no reason to be
surprised at the host of superstitions which have overspread the world.
We have an exemplification of the same truth in our own day. The
knowledge of the true doctrine is extinguished amongst the Turks, the
Jews, and Papists, and, as a necessary consequence, they lie immersed in
error; for they cannot possibly return to a sound mind, or repent of
their errors, when they are ignorant of the true God. When the Psalmist
speaks of their being *confounded,* he means that the time was come when
those who were given to idolatry should repent, and return to the
worship of the true God. Not that all without exception would be brought
to genuine repentance, — for experience has taught us in these our own
times how atheistical men  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) will
cast off superstition, and yet assume the most shameless effrontery, but
that this is one of those consequences which the knowledge of God should
effect, the turning of men from their errors unto God. Some there are
who obstinately resist God, of which we have many examples in the
Papacy; but we have every reason to believe that they are secretly
prostrated by that which they affect to despise, and confounded
notwithstanding their opposition. What the Psalmist says a little after,
*Let all the gods*  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) *worship
before him,* properly applies to the angels, in whom there shines forth
some small portion of divinity, yet it may, though less appropriately,
be extended to fictitious gods; as if he had said, Whatever is accounted
or held as a god must quit its place and renounce its claims, that God
alone may be exalted. Hence it may be gathered that the true definition
of piety is, when the true God is perfectly served, and when he alone is
so exalted, that no creature obscures his divinity; and, accordingly, if
we would not have true piety entirely destroyed amongst us, we must hold
by this principle, That no creature whatever be exalted by us beyond
measure,

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span>**8** *Zion heard, and was glad* In the
former part of the psalm he had spoken of that joy which should be
common to all the world. Now he makes special mention of God’s chosen
nation; and this partly, because they were to enjoy the first-fruits of
this joy, and partly, because he would remove all occasion for rivalry
or envy. Accordingly, having said that the Gentile nations should be
brought to equal privileges with the posterity of Abraham, he adds, that
the Jews would not suffer any diminution of honor by this co-partnership
of privilege, but might rather reasonably rejoice in being chosen of God
to be the fountain out of which the world was to be watered and
refreshed. Those of whom the Psalmist speaks were the true children of
Abraham and them only. They had a double reason for rejoicing, when God
extended his government and glory from the rising to the setting sun;
for, while he exhibited to them in Christ the complete fulfillment of
that redemption which was promised, they, at the same time, saw the
glory of God diffused from the narrow limits of Judea to all parts of
the world. When the nations were blessed in the seed of Abraham,
agreeably to the prediction which had gone before, this was no
inconsiderable confirmation of their faith, as also, when they saw a
religion which had been hated and despised universally embraced. But
why, it may be asked, does he speak of those things being *heard,*
rather than *seen*? Two reasons may be given for this. First, he would
have God’s believing people anticipate the blessing by hope, ere the
consummation of it arrived; and, again, the language intimates, that the
glory of the Gospel would be spread to such distant quarters, that the
Jews would rather hear of it by report, than witness it with their own
eyes.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
97:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**9.** For thou, Jehovah, art high above all
the earth: thou art exalted far above all gods. **10.** Ye that love
Jehovah, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his meek ones; he will
deliver them out of the hand of the wicked. **11.** Light has been sown
for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. **12.**
Rejoice in Jehovah, ye righteous, and celebrate the memory of his
holiness.

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span><span id="vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**9** *For thou, Jehovah, art high above all
the earth* Having already, in another place, explained these words, I
shall not say more at present upon them. Only it is to be noticed, that
there is a comparison drawn between God and the angels, and whatever has
any claim to eminence. The Psalmist limits all other excellency in such
a manner, as to leave no room for questioning that all majesty is
comprehended in God only. This was the case more eminently when God
manifested himself in his only-begotten Son, who is the express image of
himself. Before that period his greatness was less apparent, because he
was less known.

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span><span id="vi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>**10** *Ye that love Jehovah, hate evil*
Those that fear God are here enjoined to practice righteousness, as Paul
says,

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span>“Let every one that nameth the name of
Christ depart from iniquity,”  
(<span id="vi.iii-p8.2"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="vi.iii-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>He shows from the very nature of God, that
we cannot be judged and acknowledged to be his servants unless we depart
from sin, and practice holiness. God is in himself the fountain of
righteousness, and he must necessarily hate all iniquity, unless we
could suppose that he should deny himself; and we have fellowship with
him only on the terms of separation from unrighteousness. As the
persecution of the wicked is apt to provoke us to seek revenge, and
unwarrantable methods of escape, the Psalmist guards us against this
temptation, by asserting that God is the keeper and protector of his
people. If persuaded of being under the Divine guardianship, we will not
strive with the wicked, nor retaliate injury upon those who have wronged
us, but commit our safety to him who will faithfully defend it. This
gracious act of condescension, by which God takes us under his care,
should serve as a check to any impatience we might feel in abstaining
from what is evil,  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) and
preserving the course of integrity under provocation.

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span><span id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span>**11.** *Light has been sown for the
righteous* He confirms the truth just advanced, and anticipates an
objection which might be brought against it. We have seen that the
Lord’s people are often treated with the utmost cruelty and injustice,
and would seem to be abandoned to the fury of their enemies. The
Psalmist reminds us for our encouragement that God, even when he does
not immediately deliver his children, upholds them by his secret power.
 <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) In the first clause of the
verse there is a double metaphor. By *light* is meant joy, or a
prosperous issue, (according to a phraseology which is common in
Scripture,) as darkness denotes adversity. The latter metaphor of
*sowing* is rather more difficult to understand.  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) Some think that gladness is sown for
the just, as seed which, when cast into the ground, dies or lies buried
in the earth a considerable time before it germinates. This idea may be
a good one; but, perhaps, the simplest meaning of the words is the
following, that though the righteous may be almost banished out of the
world, and unable to venture themselves forth in public, and hidden from
view, God will spread abroad their joy like *seed,* or bring forth to
notice the light of their joy which had been shut up. The second clause
of the verse is an exegesis of the first — *light* being interpreted to
mean *joy,* and *the righteous* such as are *upright in heart* This
definition of *righteousness* is worthy of notice, That it does not
consist in a mere outward appearance, but comprehends integrity of
heart, more being required to constitute us righteous in God’s sight
than that we simply keep our tongue, hands, or feet, from wickedness. In
the concluding verse he exhorts the Lord’s people to gratitude, that
looking upon God as their Redeemer, they should lead a life
corresponding to the mercy they have received, and rest contented under
all the evils they encounter, with the consciousness that they enjoy his
protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc11005.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, que beaucoup
d’isles.” — *Fr* *marg* “Or, let the many isles.” Horsley and some other
critics object to translating the original word, <span
id="vi.i-p3.2"></span>איים, *iyim*, by *isles* He reads, “Let the
various settlements of man rejoice:” on which he observes, “I cannot
more exactly render the force of the Hebrew <span
id="vi.i-p3.3"></span>איים, than by this periphrasis. The English
language hath no single word to convey the same idea; and the word
‘isles’ or ‘islands,’ hath hardly any relation to it.” Fry’s note here
is as follows: — “The Hebrew terms rendered, ‘the multitude of the
isles,’ ‘the various settlements of men,’ ‘the extended shores,’ seem in
a special manner to designate these western parts of the world, which
were known as distant coasts visited by the ships of Tyre. All Europe
might originally fall under this denomination, with some parts of the
sea coasts of Africa, and even of Asia; nor can there be any doubt, that
all subsequent discoveries by sea, once uninhabited, but now colonized,
and settled from the old countries, would be designated by this term.
Some nations of this description are called upon, in particular, to
rejoice in the Savior’s appearing.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc11005.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vi.i-p3.4"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> The word <span id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>מכון,
*mechon*, here rendered “habitation,” is from <span
id="vi.i-p4.2"></span>כון, *kun*, *he prepared*, *fitted*, *confirmed*
“It is used,” says Hammond, “for *a place*, *seat*, but especially *a
basis*, whereon anything is set: from whence the LXX. had their <span
id="vi.i-p4.3"></span>μεχωςὼθ, (the very Hebrew <span
id="vi.i-p4.4"></span>מכונות) for *basis*, <span
id="vi.i-p4.5"></span>[1Ki 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#027)<span
id="vi.i-p4.5"></span>. The Chaldee here retains the original <span
id="vi.i-p4.6"></span>מכון, but the LXX., from the notion of the verb
for *fitting*, read <span id="vi.i-p4.7"></span>κατόρθωσις, ‘the setting
right of his throne;’ the Syriac, by way of paraphrase, ‘by equity and
judgment thy throne is confirmed:’ all which concur to the notion of
*basis* or *foundation*, which is the thing that gives the *rectitude*
first, and then the *stability*, to the chair or throne that is set on
it. And so that is unquestionably the right, intelligible rendering of
the phrase, ‘Righteousness and judgment are the (not habitation but)
basis of his throne,’ *i* *e*., his sentences, decrees, judicatures, are
all built upon righteousness and judgment, as a throne is built and
established on a foundation.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc11005.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>Que le Prophete
a voulu par ce regard obscur de Dieu, toucher au vif les coeurs des
hommes, afin qu’ils tremblent.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc11005.htm#fr_97) <span
id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, idoles.”
*Fr* *marg* “Or, idols.” The original word here is <span
id="vi.ii-p3.2"></span>אלילים *elilim* See note 2, page 50.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc11005.htm#fr_98) <span
id="vi.ii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> “*Judah*’*s daughters*, the inferior towns
and villages of Judea, so called with reference to the metropolis, or
mother city. This is a very elegant kind of personification, by which
the subject, adjunct, accident, effect, or the like, of any thing or
place is called the son, or, as in this instance, the daughter of that
thing or place. Hence the Hebrew poets often introduce, as it were, on
the stage, nations, countries, or kingdoms, clothed in the dress of
women, and performing all the functions suited to such a character. The
practice is familiar to our minds; but probably it is so rendered by our
habitual acquaintance with the Hebrew idiom, to which it appears to owe
its origin.” — *Mant on Psalms* 48:11.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc11005.htm#fr_99) <span
id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>Les hommes
ont naturellement quelque religion,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc11005.htm#fr_100) <span
id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>Lucianici
homines.” — *Lat*. “<span id="vi.ii-p13.2"></span>Disciples de Lucian et
Atheistes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc11005.htm#fr_101) <span
id="vi.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span> With the exception of the Chaldee, which,
instead of “gods,” has “people,” all the ancient versions translate
*angels* — *all his angels*, as if the Hebrew reading had originally
been <span id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>כל מלאכיו, and not as in our present
copies <span id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>כל אלהים. It has indeed been
questioned whether <span id="vi.ii-p14.3"></span>אלהים, *elohim*, can be
correctly translated *angels* The most of modern lexicographers and
critics reject this sense of the word. “But usage, after all,” says
Moses Stuart, “pleads in favor of it. The Septuagint render <span
id="vi.ii-p14.4"></span>אל (God) by <span
id="vi.ii-p14.5"></span>ἄγγελος, in <span id="vi.ii-p14.6"></span>[Job
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015)<span id="vi.ii-p14.6"></span>;
and <span id="vi.ii-p14.7"></span>אלהים by <span
id="vi.ii-p14.8"></span>ἄγγελοι, in <span id="vi.ii-p14.9"></span>[Ps.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006), [Ps.
96:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007), [Ps.
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii-p14.9"></span>.
Paul follows them by quoting <span id="vi.ii-p14.10"></span>[Ps
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p14.10"></span> in
<span id="vi.ii-p14.11"></span>[Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii-p14.11"></span>;
and also by quoting <span id="vi.ii-p14.12"></span>[Ps
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii-p14.12"></span> in
<span id="vi.ii-p14.13"></span>[Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p14.13"></span>;
*i* *e*., supposing that he does actually quote it. Is not this
sufficient evidence that there was a <span
id="vi.ii-p14.14"></span>*usus loquendi* among the Jews, which applied
the word <span id="vi.ii-p14.15"></span>אלהים occasionally to designate
*angels*? It is admitted that kings and magistrates are called *elohim*,
because of their rank or dignity. Is there any thing improbable in the
supposition that angels may be also called <span
id="vi.ii-p14.16"></span>אלהים, who at present are elevated above men,
<span id="vi.ii-p14.17"></span>[Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii-p14.17"></span>?”

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>Stuart, in the above remarks, speaks as if
it were doubtful whether Paul in <span id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>[Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>,
“And again, when he bringeth the first-begotten into the world, he
saith, And let all the angels of God worship him,” quotes from the 7th
verse of the 97th Psalm. Commentators are divided in opinion on this
point, some maintaining that the quotation is from <span
id="vi.ii-p15.2"></span>[Psalm 97](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#000)<span
id="vi.ii-p15.2"></span>, and others that it is from <span
id="vi.ii-p15.3"></span>[De 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)<span
id="vi.ii-p15.3"></span>, in the Septuagint version, where the very
words are found which appear in <span id="vi.ii-p15.4"></span>[Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii-p15.4"></span>,
although *only* in that version; the Hebrew and all the ancient versions
being without them. One difficulty attending the supposition of his
quoting from <span id="vi.ii-p15.5"></span>[De
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)<span id="vi.ii-p15.5"></span>
is, that the subject connected with this command to the angels (if we
admit the clause in the Septuagint to be a part of the sacred text) has
no relation to the Messiah. The context celebrates the victory over the
enemies of Israel, which God will achieve. After saying that ‘his arms
should be drunk with blood, and that his sword should devour flesh with
the blood of the slain and of captives, from the time when he begins to
take vengeance on the enemy,’ the Septuagint (not the Hebrew)
immediately inserts, <span id="vi.ii-p15.6"></span>εὐφράνθητε οὐρανοὶ
ἅμα αὐτῷ καὶ προκυνησάτωσαν αὐτῷ πάντες ἄγγελοι θεοῦ. This in the place
where it stands must mean, “Let the inhabitants of the heavenly world
rejoice in the victory of God over the enemies of his people, and let
them pay their adoration to him.” But the Messiah does not seem to be at
all alluded to any where in the context, much less described as being
*introduced into the world* It is not therefore very likely that this is
the passage quoted, unless we suppose that Paul borrowed the words
merely as fitted to express the idea which he intended to convey,
without any reference to their original meaning. The probability is in
favor of a quotation from the text before us; which in the Septuagint
runs thus: <span id="vi.ii-p15.7"></span>προσκυνήσατε αὐτῷ πάντες
ἄγγελοι αὐτοῦ. Paul’s words are, <span id="vi.ii-p15.8"></span>και
προσκυνησάτώσαν αὐτῷ παντες ἄγγελοι Θεοῦ. Here the variation from the
Septuagint is so very inconsiderable, making no change upon the sense of
the passage, that the discrepancy, especially when it is considered that
very few of the quotations from the Old Testament in the New agree <span
id="vi.ii-p15.9"></span>*verbatim* either with the Hebrew or Septuagint,
is no argument against the supposition of the Apostle’s quoting this
text from that version which was in general use among the Jews. And this
psalm admits of an easy application to the coming and kingdom of the
Messiah, whose advent was to destroy idolatry, and be the source of
rejoicing and happiness to all the righteous, which the passage in
Deuteronomy referred to does not. — See *Stuart*’*s Commentary* on <span
id="vi.ii-p15.10"></span>[Heb 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.ii-p15.10"></span>, and *Excursus* 6.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc11005.htm#fr_102) <span
id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>De nous
tenir en bride, de peur qu’il ne nous soit fascheux ou grief de nous
abstenir de malice,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc11005.htm#fr_103) <span
id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>Quamvis
non statim suos liberet Deus, arcana tamen virtute tucri eorum salutem.”
— *Lat*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc11005.htm#fr_104) <span
id="vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span> Walford objects to the version *light is
sown*, on the ground that it presents an incongruous combination of
figures; and he translates, “light is diffused.” “Who can say,” he
remarks, “what is meant by the sowing of light? The diffusion or
expansion of light is intelligible, and means that though good men may
be in darkness or adversity, light and prosperity will burst through the
cloud.” The Septuagint, Vulgate, Arabic, and Æthiopic versions
translate, “light *is risen* for the righteous,” probably reading <span
id="vi.iii-p14.1"></span>זרח, *zarach*, which De Rossi found in one
manuscript, instead of <span id="vi.iii-p14.2"></span>זרע, *zara*
Houbigant and others adopt this reading, conceiving it to be more
agreeable to the common idea of light. But Muis vindicates the text from
<span id="vi.iii-p14.3"></span>[Ps
126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005)<span id="vi.iii-p14.3"></span>;
and Archbishop Secker thinks “sown” a very proper expression. In support
of the same rendering, Merrick, in his Annotations, quotes several
passages from the classic Greek authors, in which both light and
gladness are said to be sown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 98](cc11006)
