[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11020)  [Next](cc11022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii"></span>

<span id="xxii-p1"></span>PSALM 113

<span id="xxii-p2"></span>In this psalm the providence of God furnishes
matter for praising him, because, though his excellency is far above the
heavens, nevertheless, he deigns to cast his eyes upon the earth to take
notice of mankind. And as not a few are disconcerted by the vicissitudes
which they behold occurring in the world, the prophet takes occasion,
from these sudden and unlooked for changes, to warn us to attend
expressly to God’s providence, that we may entertain no doubt that all
things are governed according to his will and pleasure.  <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351)

<span id="xxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
113:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001)<span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye Jehovah. Praise, ye
servants of Jehovah! praise the name of Jehovah. **2.** Blessed be the
name of Jehovah henceforth and for ever. **3.** Jehovah’s name is to be
praised, from the rising of the sun unto his going down. **4.** Jehovah
is high above all nations, his glory is above the heavens.

<span id="xxii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p5"></span>**1** *Praise, ye servants of Jehovah!* This
psalm contains abundant reasons for all men without exception to praise
God. The faithful alone being endued with spiritual perception to
recognize the hand of God, the prophet addresses them in particular. And
if we consider how cold and callous men are in this religious exercise,
we will not deem the repetition of the call to praise God superfluous.
We all acknowledge that we are created to praise God’s name, while, at
the same time, his glory is disregarded by us. Such criminal apathy is
justly condemned by the prophet, with the view of stirring us up to
unwearied zeal in praising God. The repetition, then, of the exhortation
to praise him, ought to be considered as referring both to perseverance
and ardor in this service. If, by the *servants of God,* some would
rather understand the Levites, to whom the charge of celebrating his
praises under the Law was committed, I am not much opposed to it,
provided they do not exclude the rest of the faithful, over whom
formerly God appointed the Levites as leaders and chief musicians, that
he might be praised by all his people without exception. When the Holy
Spirit addresses the Levites expressly in relation to the subject of
God’s praises, it is designedly that, by their example, they may show
the way to others, and that the whole Church may respond in one holy
chorus. Now that we are all “a royal priesthood,” (<span
id="xxii.i-p5.1"></span>[1Pe 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span
id="xxii.i-p5.1"></span>) and as Zechariah testifies, (<span
id="xxii.i-p5.2"></span>[Zec
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021)<span id="xxii.i-p5.2"></span>)
that under the reign of Christ, the meanest of the people shall be
Levites, there is no question that, excepting unbelievers who are mute,
the prophet invites us all in common to render this service unto God.

<span id="xxii.i-p6"></span><span id="xxii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p7"></span>**2** *Blessed be the name of Jehovah* The
prophet confirms what I stated above, that the praises of God must be
continued throughout the whole course of our life. If his name is to be
continually praised, it ought, at least, to be our earnest endeavor,
during our brief pilgrimage here, that the remembrance of it may
flourish after we are dead. In the next verse, he extends the glory of
God’s name to all parts of the earth; wherefore our apathy will be
totally inexcusable, if we do not make its praises resound among
ourselves. Under the law, God could not be praised aright, excepting in
Judea by his own people, to whom the knowledge of him was confined. His
works, however, which are visible to all nations, are worthy of the
admiration of the whole world. To the same effect is the following
clause respecting the loftiness of God’s glory; for can there be any
thing more base, than for us to magnify it but seldom and tardily,
considering it ought to fill our thoughts with enrapturing admiration?
In extolling the name of God so highly, the prophet intends to show us
that there is no ground for indifference; that silence would savor of
impiety were we not to exert ourselves to the utmost of our ability to
celebrate his praises, in order that our affections may, as it were,
rise above the heavens. When he adds, that *God is high above all
nations,* there is an implied reproach, by which he fastens upon the
chosen people the charge of apathy in the exercise of praise. For can
there be any thing more preposterous, than for those who are
eye-witnesses of God’s glory, which shines forth even among the blind,
to refrain from making it the theme of their praises? At the very time
when God conferred upon the Jews the exclusive honor of being the
depositaries of the knowledge of his heavenly doctrine, he was
nevertheless, according to Paul, not without a witness, (<span
id="xxii.i-p7.1"></span>[Ac 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span
id="xxii.i-p7.1"></span>; <span id="xxii.i-p7.2"></span>[Ro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="xxii.i-p7.2"></span>)
After the promulgation of the Gospel, his exaltation above the nations
was more evident, for then the whole world was placed under his sway.

<span id="xxii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
113:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005)<span id="xxii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Who is like unto Jehovah our God,
who hath his dwelling on high, **6.** Who humbleth himself to behold the
things that are done in heaven, and on earth!  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) **7.** Who raises the poor from the
dust, who lifts the afflicted from the dunghill; **8.** That he may
place him with princes, with the princes of his people. **9.** Who
maketh the barren woman to dwell in the family, a joyful mother of
children. Praise ye Jehovah.  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353)

<span id="xxii.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p9"></span>**5** *Who is like unto Jehovah our God*
The prophet strengthens his position for the celebration of God’s
praises, by contrasting the height of his glory and power with his
unbounded goodness. Not that his goodness can be separated from his
glory; but this distinction is made out of regard to men, who would not
be able to endure his majesty, were he not kindly to humble himself, and
gently and kindly draw us towards him. The amount is, that God’s
dwelling above the heavens, at such a distance from us, does not prevent
him from showing himself to be near at hand, and plainly providing for
our welfare; and, in saying that God is exalted above the heavens, he
magnifies his mercy towards men, whose condition is mean and despicable,
and informs us that he might righteously hold even angels in contempt,
were it not that, moved by paternal regard, he condescends to take them
under his care. If in regard to angels he humble himself, what is to be
said in regard to men, who, grovelling upon the earth, are altogether
filthy? Is it asked, whether or not God fills heaven and earth? The
answer is obvious. The words of the prophet simply mean, that God may
trample the noblest of his creatures under his feet, or rather that, by
reason of their infinite distance, he may entirely disregard them. In
short, we must conclude that it is not from our proximity to him, but
from his own free choice, that he condescends to make us the objects of
his peculiar care.

<span id="xxii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p11"></span>**7** *Who raiseth the poor from the dust*
In this passage, he speaks in terms of commendation of God’s
providential care in relation to those diversified changes which men are
disposed to regard as accidental. He declares that it is solely by the
appointment of God that things undergo changes far surpassing our
anticipations. If the course of events were always uniform, men would
ascribe it merely to natural causes, whereas, the vicissitudes which
take place teach us that all things are regulated in accordance with the
secret counsel of God. On the other hand, struck with astonishment at
the events which have happened contrary to our expectation, we instantly
ascribe them to chance. And as we are so apt to view things from a point
the very reverse from that of recognising God’s superintending care, the
prophet enjoins us to admire his providence in matters of marvellous, or
of unusual occurrence; for since cowherds, and men of the lowest and
most abject condition, have been elevated to the summit of power, it is
most reasonable that our attention should be arrested by a change so
unexpected. We now perceive the prophet’s design. In this passage, as
well as in others, he might have set before us the structure of the
heavens and the earth; but, as our minds are unaffected by the ordinary
course of things, he declares that the hand of God is most apparent in
his marvellous works. And in saying that men of mean and abject
condition are not merely elevated to some petty sovereignty, but that
they are invested with power and authority over God’s holy people, he
increases the greatness of the miracle — that being of far more
consequence than to rule in other parts of the earth; for the state or
kingdom of the Church constitutes the principal and august theater where
God presents and displays the tokens of his wonderful power, wisdom, and
righteousness.

<span id="xxii.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p13"></span>**9** *Who maketh the barren woman to
dwell in the family* He relates another work of God, which if,
apparently, not so notable, ought not, on that account, the less to
engage our thoughts. Unimpressed as we are by the ordinary works of God,
we are constrained to express our astonishment when a woman who has been
for a long period barren, unexpectedly becomes the mother of a numerous
family. The Hebrew term, <span id="xxii.ii-p13.1"></span>הבית,
*habbayith,* is to be understood, not simply of a *house,* but also of a
*household,* — *that* is, the thing containing, for that which is
contained, — just as the Greeks apply <span
id="xxii.ii-p13.2"></span>οικος, and the Latins *domus,* to a
*household.* The meaning is, that the woman who was formerly barren is
blessed with fruitfulness, and fills the house with children. He
attributes joy to mothers, because, though the hearts of all are prone
to aspire after wealth, or honor, or pleasures, or any other advantages,
yet is progeny preferred to every thing else. Wherefore, since God
superintends the ordinary course of nature, alters the current of
events, elevates those of abject condition and ignoble extraction, and
makes the barren woman fruitful, our insensibility is very culpable, if
we do not attentively contemplate the works of his hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc11021.htm#fr_351) <span
id="xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxii-p3"></span> This interesting little ode, which is alike
elegant in its structure, and devotional in its sentiment, its theme
being the celebration of Jehovah’s power, glory, and mercy, is thought
by Bishop Patrick to be the commencement of what the Hebrews called the
Great Hallel or Hymns, which they recited at their tables in the new
moons and other feasts, especially in the paschal night, after they had
eaten the lamb. He supposes that the Great Hallel included this and the
five following psalms. See page 310. “It is very uncertain who was the
author of this psalm; but as the 7th and 8th verses are manifestly taken
from <span id="xxii-p3.2"></span>[1Sa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008)<span id="xxii-p3.2"></span>, and
the 9th probably alludes to the history of Hannah, it might be composed
by Samuel or David, who were so nearly interested in the signal mercies
vouchsafed to her.” — *Dimock.*

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc11021.htm#fr_352) <span
id="xxii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p3"></span> “Lowth translates rightly after Hare: —

<span id="xxii.ii-p4"></span>‘Who is like Jehovah our God?  
Who dwelleth high,  
Who looketh low;  
In heaven and on earth.’

<span id="xxii.ii-p5"></span>He refers to the same structure, <span
id="xxii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Cant. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#000),
[Cant. 5:0](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#000)<span
id="xxii.ii-p5.1"></span>. For the first part, see <span
id="xxii.ii-p5.2"></span>[Jer
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008)<span id="xxii.ii-p5.2"></span>;
and for the whole, see <span id="xxii.ii-p5.3"></span>[Ps
138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)<span id="xxii.ii-p5.3"></span>;
<span id="xxii.ii-p5.4"></span>[Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)<span id="xxii.ii-p5.4"></span>.”
— *Archbishop Secker in Merrick*’*s Annotations on the Psalms.* Lowth
observes that the last member is to be divided, and assigned in its two
divisions to the two preceding members, as if it were, “Who dwelleth
high in heaven, and looketh low on earth.”

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc11021.htm#fr_353) <span
id="xxii.ii-p5.5"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii-p6"></span> The words, *Praise ye Jehovah,* at the end
of the psalm, are, in the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, Arabic, and
Æthiopic versions, and in a very ancient manuscript, placed at the head
of next psalm, where, perhaps, they formerly stood as the title.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 114](cc11022)
