[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](ncm3) [Next](ncm5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

# NAVAJO CREATION MYTH

### T<span class="small">HE</span> S<span class="small">TORY</span> O<span class="small">F</span> T<span class="small">HE</span> E<span class="small">MERGENCE</span>

### *HAHDENIGAI-HUNAI*

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

## THE STORY OF THE EMERGENCE

### F<span class="small">IRST</span> W<span class="small">ORLD</span>

 The story starts in the Running-Pitch place or Jah-dokonth.
Hashjeshjin, the son of the Fire, whose mother is a Comet, and
Etsay-Hasteen, the first man, who is the son of Night and whose father
is Nah-doklizh, which is the blue above the place where the Sun has set,
were there; also Estsa-assun, who is the first woman, whose mother is
the Daybreak and whose father is Nahtsoi which is the yellow light after
the Sun has set; also Etsay-hashkeh or Coyote Man, whose mother is
Yah-zheh-kih, or the Dawn Light. The fifth who is there is Begochiddy,
the blue-eyed and yellow-haired god, the great god, whose mother is a
Ray of Sunlight, Shah-bekloth, and whose father is the Daylight,
Shun-deen; also Asheen-assun, the Salt Woman whose mother was
Tohe-estan, or Water Woman, and whose father was Tsilth-tsa-assun, or
Mountain Man. (He looks like a woman but is a man.) These are the six
people who were living on the dark earth or first world, Jah-dokonth.

 On the dark earth Begochiddy built in the east a white mountain; in the
south a blue mountain, in the west a yellow mountain, and in the north a
black mountain, and he also made mountains surrounding all the dark
earth and the colored mountains, and these were called Tsilth-nah-n’
deel-doi, which means colored mountains which appear and disappear; and
in the center of the world Begochiddy made a red mountain.

 He also created the red ants, Willachee, and the black ants,
Willazhini, which run in a line on the logs in the mountains, the yellow
ants, Willa-klitsoi, and wood ants, Willachee-tsai, which are half red
and half black, also Nicky-dol-zholi or <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>
gray ants. He named them as they were created and smiled as he made
them. He also made Nahasan-b’ hogahndi, which lives in the ground, and
Wolazhi, which is a tiny black ant, also Neho-neh-yahni, or “black bug
which flies around”, and which is the Midge.

 On the east side under the mountains he planted some bamboo, or
Lukatso. On the south side he planted big sunflowers, N’d’gilly-tso. On
the west side under the mountains he planted Luka, or reed. On the north
side under the mountains he planted small sunflowers, N’d’gilly.

 After Begochiddy had created these things he gave them Tsa-tlai (First
Law). In the first world there was one law, in the second two laws, in
the third three laws, and in the fourth four laws.

 Begochiddy now created Kay-des-tizhi (Wound in a Rainbow), who is both
man and woman. By this time the ants that he had created had increased
very much.

 Hashjeshjin asked Begochiddy why there should be only one law and why
he, Hashjeshjin, should not be able to make some laws. Begochiddy
answered: “I made the law, and there shall be no other.” So Hashjeshjin
grew angry and said: “Just because you have made the ants and man, you
think you are very great and for that reason I will burn the things you
have made and the world, too.” And four days later Hashjeshjin started
burning the world.

 Begochiddy told the first man, Etsay-Hasteen, to go to the east
mountain and get some earth and some of the Lukatso plants and bring
them back to him, and he told Estsa-assun, the first woman, to go to the
south mountain and bring him some of the big sunflowers, N’d’gilly-tso,
and Etsay Hasteen also went to the west mountain and brought back earth
and Luka (reed plants), and Estsa-assun also went to the north mountain
and brought earth and small sunflowers, N’d’gilly.<span
id="page_40_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_40_note_*)

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 In the center of the red mountain Begochiddy stuck the Lukatso, the big
bamboo, and all of the creatures that he had created entered into it.
The bamboo now started to grow with all that were in it, growing higher
and higher until it reached the second world, the blue world,
Naho-doklizh-dasakah, overhead, and grew into it. The little tiny black
ants came out first into the new world and after them the rest of the
ants and then the people, and next to the last came Etsay-hashkeh, and
last of all Hashjeshjin. When all had climbed out of the bamboo,
Begochiddy pulled the bamboo up into the second world and Hashjeshjin
blew into the hole four times which made the hole close up and the first
world burned up and is still burning.

### S<span class="small">ECOND</span> W<span class="small">ORLD</span>

 Begochiddy took the earth brought from the first world and created
mountains in the east, south, west, and north, and plants similar to
those in the first world, and he planted white cotton in the east, blue
cotton in the south, yellow cotton in the west, and black cotton in the
north. On this world the soil was not rich enough to plant crops. He
created the humble bee, honey bee, yellow jacket, and the black wasp. He
made twin men and twin women and Begochiddy smiled as he created all
these things.

 Hashjeshjin did not like this world or the creatures there and told
Begochiddy that he wanted to kill the male twins and Begochiddy
answered: “Why not kill both the male and female twins?” Hashjeshjin
answered him twice in the same way and then he killed the twins. So
Begochiddy had made two laws.

 Then Begochiddy slit the bodies of the male twins from the neck down to
the legs, and cut the flesh into small pieces, and cut off the ends of
the fingers and toes and put all the pieces back into the heads. He then
did the same to the female twins, starting at the feet and cutting
upwards, and the pieces he put <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> into
their heads as in the male twins. Both the male and female twins were
called Ethkay-nah-ashi. He put the Lukatso (bamboo) into the male and
female bodies from the head to the legs and he put a small bamboo across
the mouths of the male twins, a large sunflower on the right-hand side
of the face, a big bamboo across the forehead and on the left side
another sunflower. On the heads of the female twins he put a reed across
the chin and forehead and a small sunflower on each cheek.

 Begochiddy then took a piece of bamboo a foot long and put it into the
mouth of the male twins and held the other end in his mouth and then he
breathed his spirit into the dead male twins and a great sound began in
their bodies. And while this sound went on, in the east near the
mountains the white cotton began to move, and in the south the blue
cotton moved, and in the west the yellow cotton, and in the north the
black cotton, and then all the cotton rose and changed into clouds. The
white cotton turned into white clouds, the yellow to yellow clouds, the
blue to blue clouds, and the black to black clouds. Begochiddy breathed
into the bodies of the female twins and when the great sound began in
their bodies, then under the white cloud in the east grew up
Kloh-lachee, the red grass. In the south under the blue cloud grew the
small yellow rabbit bush, Giss-dil-yessi. In the west under the yellow
cloud grew the Tsay-zhee or gramma grass. And in the north under the
black cloud grew Tohikath, the Water-Bearer. After these clouds and
plants were made, the rain began in the east and went around the world
in all directions.

 When it had rained and the plants had flowered it made everyone very
happy. They went out to the mountains and picked the flowers and smelled
of them and wanted to go and live near the mountains so as to be close
to the plants, but Begochiddy and Hashjeshjin said: “No, you may go up
to the mountains but you must not live there.” The people asked this
four <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> times and were refused each time.
Hashjeshjin said: “As you are not willing to obey, I will burn the
water.”

 Now Begochiddy created a red mountain, Yoh-lachee, a bad mountain,
which gives people sores on their bodies; and he stuck the big bamboo
into the top of this mountain and sent Etsay-Hasteen to gather from the
east, south, west and north, all the things that had been created. And
Etsay-Hasteen brought earth from the mountains and plants and clouds and
put them into the big bamboo. Kay-des-tizhi, the man wrapped in the
Rainbow, put the Ethkay-nah-ashi under his rainbow robe and they all
went into the big bamboo while Hashjeshjin began to burn the water (oil)
in the second world.<span id="page_43_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_43_note_*)

### T<span class="small">HIRD</span> W<span class="small">ORLD</span>

 The little black ants were the first to come out of the bamboo into the
third world which is the yellow world, Nah-klitsoi-dasahkah. And after
all were out of the bamboo, Begochiddy pulled it up into the new world
and Hashjeshjin blew into the hole and closed it up. All the plants,
mountains and clouds that were in the second world were planted in the
third world and Begochiddy created a mountain in the center of this
world called Tsilth-tla-del-tai. And he made another mountain
Tsilth-n’del-tai, the second mountain, and Tsilth-tah-del-tai, the third
mountain, and Tsilth-teen-del-tai the fourth mountain. Then he made
Tohe-egleen, or Water Meeting Place, and then Tohe-nostleh, or Crossing
Waters, and in the middle of these crossing waters he put
Sis-tahilth-lachee, or Red Mountain Turtle. One of these streams ran
from west to east and one from north to south.<span
id="page_43_fr_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_43_note_**) In the east part of
the Crossing Waters he placed Tahilth-lachee, a big turtle which was red
in color. In the south water he placed the red thunder, Iknee-lachee.
<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> In the west water he placed
Tabasteen-lachee, red otter, and in the north water Teoltsodi-lachee,
red water monster. Begochiddy then made a quick-sandy spring called
Nahodoh-othle, and a place called Lukatso-sakah, meaning the Growing
Place of bamboo. Then Begochiddy made Tsilth-lakai, White Mountain (near
Telluride, Colorado), and he placed a white thunder bird on the top of
this mountain and he made four cyclones, black, blue, yellow and white,
and hail of four colors and put them inside of the White Mountain. He
took the bamboo and breathed into the Ethkaynah-ashi and life came into
the mountains, water, and animals that he had created.

 Hashjeshjin created the crow, Gahgi, and the magpie, Ea-ah-ee. And
Begochiddy made the humming bird, Data-tehe, and the turtle-dove,
Hospiddy. And then through the Ethkay-nah-ashi he breathed life into the
birds and gave them voices.

 He made trees, and he made all kinds of animals, birds, bugs, fishes,
worms, and everything. He appointed the wolf and mountain lion kings of
the animals, and the oriole and mocking bird as kings of the birds, and
Begochiddy smiled as he made these animals and birds.

 Begochiddy now created the first man, Etsay-Hasleen (Made Now), and
Atrahgeh-Hasleen (Center Man), next Adahgeh-Hasleen (Behind Man), next
Hlakah-kestrah-Hasleen (Fourth Man). And then he made four women of the
same names. Kay-des-tizhi, Wound-in-a-Rainbow, took charge of all
created animals, birds, and human beings, which were all created pairs.
Begochiddy now created corn of four varieties, black, white, blue and
yellow. Then he took the bamboo and breathed through the Ethkaynah-ashi
and gave life to all that he had created. And all created life had one
language which all spoke and understood. There was no Sun or Moon in
this world but the mountains gave plenty of light.

 Begochiddy now made himself a Rainbow house, and he and <span
id="page_45">p. 45</span> the five gods of the first world were all
living under the east mountain, while the people and animals were living
together in the middle of the world. The Navajos were there from the
beginning and Begochiddy now made the Hopis and the Zunis. The males
were made first and the females afterwards, and he made for the Zunis
four gods, one, the tall god called Yeh-nez, and the other three gods
called Yehs. He made the Taos (Tohwulth) Indians and gave them a male
bamboo which they had to watch over, and gave the Hopi a female bamboo
which they were to guard.

 The six gods living under the east mountain wanted the Hopis and
Navajos to be friends so they gave a female Ethkaynah-ashi to the Hopis
and a male to the Navajos. By now all the Indians living together made a
large group, and Begochiddy was chief of them all, and Etsay-hashkeh,
Coyote Man, watched over the Indians and told the six gods how the
people were getting on.

 The Indians now planted four kinds of corn and Estsan-natah, Head
Woman, told them what to do, and how to grind corn. By this time they
had different kinds of dresses, some white and some striped with colors,
and shoes made of white deer hide. They began to grow tobacco, beans,
pumpkins, squash; and they planted Bezh-l’entklizi, a red flower which
they needed for their eagle ceremony. All the Indians worked together in
harmony. They killed the animals, mostly deer, for meat.

 Now the first marriage took place, Etsay-Hasleen with Eekai-etahdeh,
who was the daughter of Estsan-nahtah, Head Woman. Eekai-etahdeh liked
to go down to the river and sit there most of the day. Her husband had
the post of Chief-in-the-Morning, and told the people when to go hunting
and before each hunt called a meeting in his Rainbow Hogahn and gave
them tobacco to smoke. The door of this hogahn was made of woven reeds
and was a very fine door. Etsay-Hasleen went hunting four days <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> in succession, and each day after he had
departed Eekai-etahdeh went to the river. When Etsay-Hasleen came back
at night, he found his supper not ready and his wife not there. This
made Etsay-Hasleen very angry, and he became jealous. On the fourth day
he slipped away from his men instead of going hunting, and went down to
the river and hid in the bushes where he could watch his wife.
(Begochiddy and Hashjeshjin had sent a spirit to appear before the girl
and make love to her but she knew nothing of this). As Etsay-Hasleen was
watching, he saw something swimming towards his wife. It looked like a
big bunch of weeds, but as it neared the girl the husband saw it was a
handsome young man, Sethkinh. Though he looked like a man, he was really
the Water Horse, Kahilth-klee, and he had put a lot of weeds on his head
to conceal him in swimming. The young man and girl talked a while and
the husband became very jealous and went home into his Rainbow house and
laid down thinking of his wife, and he did not even smoke.

 When the girl thought it time for her husband to have returned from the
hunt, she went home and found him there and said to him: “When did you
get back from the hunt?” and he did not answer. She asked him four times
with no answer, and she then cooked some supper and served it in a very
finely made basket. She was angry at his not answering her question and
she told him so. The husband then said: “I am angry, too, at the way you
have behaved,” and pushed the food away with his foot. So his wife
understood that he knew what she had been doing and she got up and ran
off to her mother. She told her mother everything, and that her husband
was angry with her, and her mother grew very angry and said: “Your
husband is not supporting you properly although he has plenty of meat
and corn and is rich.” The mother ran over to the Rainbow Hogahn and sat
down outside the door. And while she sat there, she scolded her
son-in-law very harshly and then she went back to her own home.<span
id="page_46_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_46_note_*)

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

 Etsay-Hasleen did not answer her, but got up and went to another hogahn
which belonged to Kay-des-tizhi who was rich and had plenty of food and
things. Etsay-Hasleen called the three other chiefs together and made
them a speech, telling them about his wife and his mother-in-law, and
saying that he thought they should all resign from being chiefs as they
could not keep order, and they decided to do as he said.

 Begochiddy knew all about this trouble and he and the five gods came to
Kay-des-tizhi’s hogahn and called the head people and the chiefs of the
birds and animals to come to a Council. So they all came and went into
the hogahn and Begochiddy said to them: “I am going to separate the men
and the women, and the female birds and animals. All the males are to go
and live across the river, and the females are to stay on this side of
the river.” After this speech they agreed that this was right and should
be done.<span id="page_47_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_47_note_*)

 The chiefs told their people about this and they said that they would
do as Begochiddy had ordered. Kay-des-tizhi was to lead the men across
the river and also take charge of the corn-grinding stones. So four big
boats were made from a tree called Nash-konh and they named the boats
Nash-konh after the tree. Kay-des-tizhi took all his goods and property
and all of the male children and loaded them into one boat, and
Begochiddy watched and saw that all the males crossed over the river.
All went except a young Blue Fox man and a young Yellow Fox man,
Mah-ih-doklizhi-sethkinh (Blue Fox Handsome Man) and
Mah-ih-klitsoji-sethkinh (Yellow Fox Handsome Man). Both had flutes, and
at night while the women were grinding corn they played their flutes to
them. The flutes were made of small bamboo and when the women heard
them, they laughed and had a merry time. Begochiddy soon found out that
he had overlooked the two Foxes, and he made them go across the river to
the rest of the males.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

 The men were strong and well-fed as they had plenty of corn and beans,
and tobacco; and they made farms; and Kay-des-tizhi was their cook. The
women also planted corn and beans, but the harvest was very poor; the
corn was scanty and wormy; and their clothing was wearing out as they
had no new skins to make new clothing. Estsan-natah, Head Woman, came up
to Begochiddy and begged him to let them go back to the men as the women
were very poor and hungry, and were tired of living alone. Begochiddy
said: “Very well, all is forgiven; go back to your men, but I make for
you this third law—‘the male shall rule and whatever your chiefs say,
that must be done.’ ” They all agreed to this and then Begochiddy said:
“If any other evil thing happens, I will make a flood to destroy you,”
and the women all said: “Very well, we will keep the home clean, cook
the food, and care for the children.” So the females were all taken
across to the males, and they started to make new clothes of cotton and
deer skins of which the men had plenty. The men had plenty of food,
meat, and corn, but they did not have any beads.

 One day Estsa-assun and Asheen-assun went walking by the
Water-Crossing-Place or whirlpool called Away-nah-olth, and there they
saw a baby floating in the middle of the whirlpool. They went and told
the gods about the baby, which had long black hair. Etsay-hashkeh, after
hearing this from the women, said to himself: “I think I will go and see
this baby,” and he went towards the whirlpool from the east, then from
the other three directions, south, west, and north, and each time he saw
the baby floating. When he came from the fourth direction, he lifted the
baby out of the water and hid him under his white robe, which was called
Mah-ih-jilthli-lakai, and he kept the baby hidden inside of his robe for
four days.

 Four days after the baby had been stolen, a great noise began to sound
in the east, south, west and north. And though Begochiddy knew what this
meant, he told a crow to go to the east <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>
to see what was the matter, and the crow came back and said a storm was
coming. To the south he sent a magpie, who saw a big blue storm coming.
To the west he sent a humming bird, who saw a yellow storm coming. To
the north he sent a dove, who found a white storm there. And the six
gods went in all four directions gathering the plants, animals, and
everything that had so far been created. They placed them in Lukatso,
the big bamboo.

 Estsan-natah, Head Woman, said to her son-in-law, Etsay-Hasleen: “I
know many prayers and you know many songs to protect us.” And she said
to him also: “From now on, all the people who have been good and kind
will go up to the fourth world, but all the bad people will go down to
the first world, or Burning-Pitch-Place.”

 Meanwhile big storms were approaching from the four directions, and
Begochiddy told Estsan-natah to sing her songs to protect the people.
From this origin come the three first ceremonies. One ceremony is the
story of the Ethkaynah-ashi; another the prayer and song; and another
the song only. But no ceremony was held at the time of the creation. The
songs and prayers used at that time are still used in the ceremonies. If
people are bad and know this ceremony and ask for forgiveness, they need
not go to the burning world. If a man kills another and repents and
knows the ceremony he need not go down to the lower world, and the name
of the ceremony is Chalth-yilth-nahgih-eh, or Wanderer-in-the-Dark. It
can be held for sickness, when the sickness results from crime. The
spirit of the Ethkaynah-ashi is the spirit of life and also is the
spirit of the Wanderer-in-the-Dark.

 There were two spirits who did not go up to the fourth world, one male
and one female. The female was named Kith-nah-ha-klithy, which is the
Spirit of Dusk which works with the Spirit of Darkness who is the male
spirit, Kith-nah-kliz-hini. The female spirit lived in the house of red
fire, Konth-lachee, <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> with a door made of
smooth wind, Niltche-dil-kohni. The male spirit lived in the House of
Darkness, Chalth-yilth-hogahn, with a door named Nehochee-dothinlah.

 Now the hot waters named Toh-bazdezkih and Toh-bazdeznah were rushing
upon Lukatso (big reed) and all the creatures and plants hurried to get
into it. But it would not start to grow, so they moved it to
Tohe-egleen, where the waters meet, but it would not grow there, so they
moved it again to Nah-hodoh-othle, quicksand spring, where it began to
grow at once. The turkey people did not get into the bamboo but clung
outside to its joints, and, as the water rose, their tail feathers
dipped into the white foam, which has made their tail feathers white on
the ends to this day. As the water rose, they would climb up to the next
joint until the water rose to it, and then they would climb up to
another joint. The Lukatso kept growing until it could grow no more, and
still it was not high enough to reach the next world, so Begochiddy made
a white cloud above it and the people climbed up to it while the Spider
Woman and the Spider Man wove a web around the edge of it to prevent the
people from falling off.

 Begochiddy saw that the chiefs and people were excited, so he called a
Council to see what they could suggest about how to reach the upper
world. The wolf chief had a white corn stalk in his hand and was dressed
in the white tail feathers of the eagle. The lion chief had yellow corn
in his hand and was dressed in the yellow tail feathers of the eagle.
The lion and wolf knew that someone had done wrong to bring about such
danger from the waters and asked their people who had sinned, and the
people accused the chiefs because they said that they themselves had
done nothing wrong. Begochiddy told the lion and the wolf that because
they did not please the people they could not be chiefs any longer. And
so the mocking bird and humming bird chiefs were the only ones left to
govern, and they tried to find out who <span id="page_51">p. 51</span>
had done wrong but could not succeed. Begochiddy knew the sinner and
also knew the people’s thoughts.

 Among those at the Council was the chief of the locusts who wore an
arrow on his forehead made of an eagle tail. He asked Begochiddy why he
had called the Council, and Begochiddy answered: “The people are afraid
of the waters and do not know how to get into the upper world,” and the
Locust said: “I know how to reach there. Call the Ant People who are
living at Nehochee.”

 So the Ant People were asked to try to dig a hole through to the upper
world (this is called the Black Trail), but they could not succeed. And
the yellow ants then tried, but they had to give it up (this is called
the Yellow Trail). Meanwhile the Turkey People were making noises
because their tails were still dipping in the water as they clung to the
outside of the bamboo. Begochiddy asked the tiny black ants if they
could dig through to the upper world (their road is called the Sparkling
Trail), but they could not. So Begochiddy said to the Locust chief:
“Sechai (Grandfather), please show us how to reach the next world.” And
the Locust put his arrow on his forehead and shot up into the next
world. He had great powers.

### F<span class="small">OURTH</span> W<span class="small">ORLD</span>

 The Locust came up through the crust and then through mud and water,
for water covered the whole fourth world, and over it was flying a great
white bird, Cheestehi-lakai. He had arrows with him and when he saw the
Locust, he flew at him to kill him, but the Locust splashed water about,
and the bird could not find him. The great bird asked the Locust: “Where
did you came from, and who are you?” To show the Locust his power he
took his arrow and swallowed it and then drew it out again, and asked
the Locust if he could do anything like that, for if he could it would
prove that he was great and powerful, and could <span id="page_52">p.
52</span> live on the fourth world. The Locust had now come to the top
of the water and was floating on it, resting with crossed legs. And he
answered the great bird: “Yes, I can do that; watch me!” And he thrust
his arrow through his heart and drew it out again, saying to the bird:
“Can you do that? I have more power than you.” So the bird was
frightened and flew off to the east, and was not seen again.

 From the south now came a big blue bird who tested the power of the
Locust by thrusting his arrow twice down his throat; and the Locust
conquered him by thrusting his arrow twice through his heart, and the
blue bird flew back to the south.

 A great yellow bird came from the west who swallowed his arrow three
times, and the Locust thrust his arrow through his heart three times,
and the yellow bird flew west again.

 From the north came a white bird, and thrust his arrow down his throat
four times, then the Locust thrust his arrow through his heart four
times, and the bird flew north again. So the Locust won the contest of
power with the great birds in this world.

 Meanwhile the people still in the bamboo were very nervous because it
was waving about in the air and they did not know what was happening to
the Locust. When he came back by the hole to the lower world and began
to speak to the people in the bamboo, his voice made a chee-chee sound
because of the hole through which he had thrust his arrow. He told them
that he had had a hard time getting up into the upper world, and he told
them about the water, and of his trial of strength with the big birds,
and he called the people his grandchildren.

 Begochiddy asked all the chiefs and captains of the people: “Who will
go up to the fourth world?” But no one would go, so Begochiddy went
himself, and when he reached the upper world, he came out on a big pile
of mud in the middle of the water.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

 To the east he saw a great white cloud, and he made a Rainbow Lightning
which carried him to this cloud. And when he reached it, he found there
Hashje-altye, the great god of the Yeh-bechai, and Hashje-altye was glad
to see him and said: “How are you, my grandson? I own this world and
have great power. The big birds tried to claim this world but I have
conquered them and they are my servants.” They were very happy together
and then Begochiddy went back running on the water to the pile of mud at
the center of the world.

 Then he saw a blue cloud to the south with showers dropping from it,
and he went there on the Rainbow and found Beganaskiddy, Bringer of
Seeds, who welcomed Begochiddy and they were happy together.
Beganaskiddy greeted Begochiddy as Hashje-altye had done and afterwards
Begochiddy ran back on the water to the center of the world.

 Then seeing a yellow cloud in the west, he went there on the Rainbow
and found Hashje-hogahn, and they had the same intercourse as Begochiddy
had had with the other gods, and then he went back to the center of the
world running on the water.

 To the north there was a white cloud, raining, and Begochiddy went
there on the Rainbow, and found another Beganaskiddy. The same ceremony
took place, and then he came back to the center of the world again.

 Meanwhile Lukatso, the bamboo, was still swaying about, and the people
inside of it were very much worried.

 Begochiddy stood on the pile of mud at the world’s center and saw
Hashje-altye, the two Beganaskiddy, and Hashje-hoahn standing up to
their breasts in the water at the east, south, west and north of the
world. And Begochiddy waved his hand to each god in turn and they rose
as he greeted them onto the surface of the water. then Hashje-altye took
his cane and pushed the water back slowly to the east, and Beganaskiddy
pushed harder to the south, Hashje-hogahn pushed harder still to the
west, and Beganaskiddy at the north pushed hard so that <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> the earth shook from the blow, and all the
water ran off in different directions and made rivers. There was nothing
where the water had lain but petrified wood and mud badlands, but there
was water around all the earth and that was the ocean. Where the water
had lain there were beasts who had been living in the water, but when
Begochiddy blew on them they turned into strange shaped rocks, and as he
continued to blow a crust formed on the mud. He looked to the east and
saw figures away off, and he went towards them and found them to be
gods, Yeh, with blue faces; Hashje-baka, male, and Hashje-ba-ahd,
female; six males and six females. In the south there were the same
gods, in the west the same, and in the north the same; and they were
beautiful.

 Begochiddy went back to the Lukatso, bamboo, and found the people much
excited, and they were very glad to see Begochiddy, and when he came
back to them they called him Sechai (Grandfather). He told them that he
had met many people above, and that the world was good. They were very
glad to hear that, and then Begochiddy sent Badger up to see the world.
When he reached the hole, he tried to jump onto the crust but he broke
through, and that is the reason why his paws are black to this day.

 Begochiddy asked how the wet earth could be dried, and they sent up to
the fourth world white thunder (Iknee-lakai) from the white mountain,
also white cyclone (Niholtso-lakai) and white hail (N’dlohe-lakai), and
black, blue and yellow cyclones. When the hail and thunder and cyclones
hit the petrified wood and the mud columns which stuck up out of the
mud, they were broken into pieces. Then the cyclones blew until they had
dried the mud. And they sent live dust-devils, Nastol-disse, to trim up
the rock pillars and make holes in them. After that five little
whirlwinds were sent up, and they spread the tiny stones about smoothly.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

 Then the storms all went below to the third world from which they came,
and the Lukatso began to grow again. And the people came up into this
world led by the ants, with the turkey people coming last. Begochiddy
pulled the bamboo up by the tassel on top and then threw the tassel back
into the hole, which is why Lukatso, the bamboo, has no tassel now. This
fourth world they called Hahjeenah.

 The water from the third world came up into the hole after the people,
and Begochiddy saw it and asked: “What is the reason that the water
keeps coming up?” He blew and blew into the hole but could not stop it,
and they were afraid it would overflow into this world. So the chief men
held a council, and Etsay-Hasteen and all of them were very much worried
and frightened, and each asked the other: “Who has done wrong and caused
all this trouble?” Begochiddy said: “If none of you know who has done
wrong, I think it may be Etsay-hashkeh, Coyote, who is the cause of it.”
And he went up to Etsay-hashkeh and opened his white robe and showed the
baby he had stolen. It had yellow hands and looked very strange.
Begochiddy took hold of the baby, but Etsay-hashkeh would not let it go,
so Begochiddy dropped it, and Etsay-hashkeh threw the baby into the hole
to the lower world, saying: “This is what has been the cause of the
trouble.” The baby fell on the forehead of a large water monster which
was in the water at the bottom of the hole, and then the monster sank
down in the water and took the baby down with it, and after that the
water ceased to rise towards this world, and has always remained at that
level.

 There was nothing to make fire with in this new world, and the people
wanted fire but did not know how to get it. The only person who had fire
was Hashjeshjin, who kept away from the rest of the people. They saw
smoke on the horizon far off, and Etsay-hashkeh, the Coyote, went over
to see what it was. He found Hashjeshjin and Dontso (the white-headed
fly) lying <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> asleep, and all around them
in four directions were river boulders burning like wood. And he stole
some of the fire and ran back to the people and gave it to them.

### C<span class="small">EREMONY OF</span> S<span class="small">WEAT-HOUSE</span> W<span class="small">HERE</span> C<span class="small">REATION OF THIS</span> W<span class="small">ORLD</span> B<span class="small">EGAN</span>

 Begochiddy then called the people together and said: “Let us make plans
as to how we shall live.” But no one would plan at all and there were no
ideas, so Begochiddy sald: “Let us make a sweat-house for purification.”
“But what shall we build it of?” said the people. Begochiddy replied:
“It is close to where Tchah, the Beaver, lives and we will borrow some
material from him.” Etsay-Hasleen went and borrowed some sticks from the
Beaver and brought back a lot as he had plenty.

 The people then said: “There are no rocks here to build with,” and
Begochiddy said: “There are plenty, ask Deh-nozzi (the mountain sheep)
for some.” So Etsay-Hasleen went and got plenty of stone from the
mountain sheep who said: “You are welcome to them.”

 The people asked: “What shall we have for fire?” Begochiddy said: “Go
to Hasteen Dontso (the fly) and he will give you fire.” He gave them
fire gladly. And the people asked: “Where can we get water?” Begochiddy
said: “Tabasteen-etahdeh, daughter of the Otter, will give you water.”
(They sing first of wood, then of stone on the wood, then of fire under
the wood, and afterwards of bathing in the water.) For the roof house of
the sweat-house they placed Rainbows, crossing from four directions to
hold it up, and then the Robe of Darkness was placed over the Rainbows.
Stones were brought and placed in the middle of the house. (They are now
placed on one side of it.)

 The people now asked: “What shall we have to cover the <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> door?” Begochiddy replied: “Go ask
Nasjah-hasteen, your grandfather, the Owl, and he will tell you.” The
Owl said: “Yes, I have white, blue, yellow and black colored robes and
you may have as many as you wish, and I also have robes that flash.” And
the people chose a flashing robe and put it over the door, borrowing it
from the Owl.

 Then they all went into the sweat-house except Begochiddy, Hashjeshjin,
Etsay-hashkeh and the women, for women were not allowed in the
sweat-house. And they sang and Etsay-Hasteen led the singing. They sang
of the fire, the stones, the wood, the water, and the sparkling robe,
describing all of these things; and then they sang about the heat.

 All the people who had loaned the things to make this sweathouse stood
about outside; and the great Owl stood on the top of the roof, listening
to the songs which described the things used in the sweat-house, and
also thanked the givers for their help.

 When the people came out of the sweat-house, Begochiddy told them to
rub themselves with earth, which they did, thanking the earth as they
did it. Then they went into the sweathouse again, and the Locust
appeared and said: “I will sing for you.” So they all went in together
and the Locust sang to them. He sang about what he had done in helping
the people to come up into this world, and about the contest with the
great birds. Meanwhile the daughter of the Otter brought water in a
wooden bowl and left it by the door outside, and when the people came
out for the second time, they bathed in this water.

 Then they went into the sweat-house again and began to plan to build
some mountains on the earth. The first was Siss-nah-jini (Holy Mountain
of the East), the next was Tsoll-tsilth (Mount Taylor), then
Nahtah-has-eh (Mountain south of Zuñi), next Dogo-slee-ed (San Francisco
Peaks), then Debeh-entsah (La Plata Mountains), next
Tsilth-nah-ot-zithly (Huerfano <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>
Mountain), next Johl-een (Pedernal Peak), next Tradadeen (a peak of the
Jemez range).

 Then they planned some rivers, Toh-bakahni, the male (San Juan) river,
and Toh-ba-ad, the female (Rio Grande) water; then a lake, Hahjeenah,
where the people came out of the bamboo (near Silverton, Colorado).

 Then they planned some more mountains, Tsilth-lakai (White Mountains),
Tsilth-kah-del-kah (Chuskai Mountains), Tsilth-il-entai (mountains near
Chin Lee, Arizona), Tsilth-ti-del-tai (Sangre de Cristo range near Santa
Fe, New Mexico), Tsilth-teen-del-tai (Jemez Mountain), Tsilth-beel-yah
(Bill Williams Mountains south of San Francisco Peaks, Arizona). And
then going westward towards California they planned these mountains,
Tsilth-endes-kai, Tsilth-kis-lakai, Tsilth-dithklith, Tsilth-klitsoi,
Tsilth-en-dokahnt, Tsilth-dogid-shegar, Tsilth-binneh-hasteen-tseel,
Tsilth-neeteen-tseel, and Tsilth-ran-es-tseel (Bright Shining or Blue
Mountain, on Santa Cruz Island, California).

 Then they planned to create the Sun, Johonah-eh, and the Moon,
Klayonah-eh, and many stars: the Morning Star, Sontso; the Evening Star,
which is also Sontso; the North Star, Sontso-dohn-dohzeedi—The One That
Does Not Move; and Sontso-deshyi, the Red Star Overhead. Also they
planned the constellations: the Dipper, or Male Stars Going Around Like
A Clock, Nohokos-bakahni; the little Dipper, or Female Stars Going
Around, Nahokos-ba-ahdi; and the Pleiades or Seven Stars which is
Dilgeheh. They planned also: Orion, Etsay-etsosi, the Thin Man; the
Rabbit’s Feet, Gah-atayjih; the Milky Way, Eekai-estahi; the Crown,
Nashi-taythli; and Taurus, Bisolai or Two Stars Together; and the Great
Snake of the North, Kleeshtso. They also planned Tah-zhuni, Smoky Star
or Nebula; Dont-whutso, Two Stars Hooked Together; Sont-bidai, the Star
With Horns; also Sont-eh-dekah, a Star Out of Sight in The East; and the
Coyote Star, also in the east, called Mah-ih-besont. <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> And all of these stars, mountains, the Sun,
Moon and the rivers were planned while the people were in the
sweat-house.

 Then they began to plan the months. Each month had its own name and
character and some of them had their own stars. The star for November
was Hasteen-sikai (Old Man Bending Over); and this was called
Niltche-tsosi, the Small Wind Month. The December star is Azay-tso
(First Big Medicine), and it was called Niltche-tsoi, or Big, Cold-Wind
Month. The January stars are Gah-atay-ih (Rabbit Tracks or Rattle), and
this month was called Zus-entlis, or Thm, Icy Sheet. The February stars
are Eekai-estahi (the Milky Way), and it was called Atsah-beyazh, or
Young Eagle Month. March’s name is Wooz-cheed (Noise Made by Eaglets),
and it was called Iknee-tsosi or Little Thunder Month. April was called
Tahn-chill (Small Growth), and the Canyon Wren belongs to that month,
and its stars are Tuzhi-begay (Turkey Tracks). Another name for April is
Sah-tah-debeh, meaning Mountain Sheep Have Lambs month, and a bird
called Debeh-neh (Phoebe) also belongs to it. May was called Tahn-tso
(Large Growth), and its star is Datsahni (Porcupine). June’s name was
Ayah-zush-chilly, meaning, Early-Greens-Are-Grown. Its star is
Kleeshtso, or the Great Snake. July was called Ayah-zush-tso, meaning
Large Growth and Young Fawns month, and Wuzzy-gishi, the measuring worm,
belongs to it. August’s name was Binni-tahn-tsosi, meaning,
Corn-Tassels-Have-Come, and the Anlthtahni, or Corn Bugs, belong to it.
Its stars are all the small stars in the center of the sky. September
was named Binni-tahn-tso, meaning When-Everything-is-Ripe, and
Even-the-Mountains-are-Ripe. Its stars are Nahshalth-helee (the Ducks).
October was called Gahnji, meaning Half-Winter-and-Half-Summer, and its
star is Sontso-dohn-doh-zeedi, meaning North-Star-Stands-There.

 These things they planned to make upon this world. And then they came
out of the sweat-house and made another Hogahn <span id="page_60">p.
60</span> of Rainbows called Hodayah which belonged to Kay-des-tizhi,
the Man-Wrapped-in-a-Rainbow. And inside the Hogahn they spread many
kinds of robes, and all six of the gods and all the Yeh gods and all the
chiefs gathered in this Hogahn for a big Council.

 And they sang the “Beginning of the World” song: “Nahteen, Song
Odolith.”

### N<span class="small">AHTEEN</span> O<span class="small">DOLITH</span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>1st Verse</em></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td>Nahastsan odolith<br />
Hodayah-dahnbith odolith<br />
Tas-ah odolith<br />
Sahanahray-bikay-hozhon odolith<br />
Tsilth-assun odolith<br />
Insontseel odolith<br />
Entklizhi-tas-eh odolith<br />
Kah-sah-oni odolith<br />
Tohe assun odolith<br />
Toh-ashtla-nascheen odolith<br />
Sahanahray-bikay-hozhon odolith<br />
Nahtahi-assun odolith<br />
Tradadeen-bith odolith<br />
Sahanahray-bikay-hozhon odolith<br />
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>2nd Verse</em></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td>Elkaydahn-shehit-Taynizzen</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>3rd Verse</em></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td>Hodayah-dahnven-ent-sissicasseh</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>4th Verse</em></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td>Elkaydahn-bayaehl-gistsis</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span class="small">Note: This is in obsolete Navajo as told by Hasteen
Klah and the following translation as he gave it to the
interpreter.</span>

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### B<span class="small">EGINNING OF THE</span> W<span class="small">ORLD</span> S<span class="small">ONG</span>

It begins

“Creating the World  
Creating the Mountain Gods  
Creating mountain rain and creating beads and jewelry  
Creating Sahanahray Bekayhozhon  
Creating Mountain Man  
Creating Little Rain on the Mountain  
Creating jewelry and beads  
Creating the holy spirit  
Creating little rain spirit  
Creating Sahanahray Bekayhozhon  
Creating all mixed springs, lakes and ponds  
Creating Sahanahray Bekayhozhon  
Creating the Spirit of Creating  
Creating the Spirit of Corn pollen  
Creating Sahanahray Bekayhozhon.”  

*The song is repeated three times, substituting for odolith*
(*creating*):

|             |                                                     |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| *2nd Verse* |                                                     |
|             | The beginning of the world, I knew about it before. |
| *3rd Verse* |                                                     |
|             | The beginning of the world, I am thinking about it. |
| *4th Verse* |                                                     |
|             | The beginning of the world, I am talking about it.  |

*Repeating the rest of the song as in the first verse.*

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

 The spirits of all the things about to be created were also in the
Hogahn with the gods and the chiefs. All the corn and all the seeds were
brought by the Yeh gods at Begochiddy’s request. Hashjeshjin brought all
the stars, the Sun, the Moon, and all the Light, and the other people
brought the rest of the things that were to be on this world. They were
all in the Hogahn.

 They decided to place the mountain Siss-nah-jini in the east. And they
made a pile of dirt to represent it in the Hogahn. And they made the
spirit for this mountain. And then all the mountains that have been
named before in this story were placed in their proper positions in the
Hogahn. They put the Sun in the east and the Moon in the west; and in
the middle, they placed the Chuskai Mountains and Black Mountain, which
is near Chin Lee, and also the Jemez Mountains. And they made a song
about the creating of the mountains. And they made spirits like men and
put them into all these mountains and into the Sun and the Moon.

 Then they sang the song of the Holy Spirit of Darkness:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>  </td>
<td>Hozhon-la-hozhon-la<br />
Hozhon-la hozhon-la<br />
Sahanahray-hozhoni-<br />
 bikaygi-klizhin-entslee<br />
Hozhon-la hozhon-la<br />
Hozhon-la hozhon-la<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

which means: “The world is beautiful and we are going to put the spirit
into it.” While they were creating the spirits, they always sang.

 Hashjeshjin and Choostaigi, who are the black gods and are brothers,
now put their own spirits into the stars and the mountains, and these
spirits were in human form in the likenesses of Hashjeshjin and
Choostaigi. Then Begochiddy told the Council that all of the songs which
had been sung since the making of the first world should be remembered
by men forever; <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> and that also they must
remember all the names of the mountains. And all the other gods repeated
what he had said. Etsay-Hasteen, the first male, and Estsa-assun, the
first female, who have the spirit of sickness and give it to men if they
do wrong, said to the people: “If you do not remember these things and
reverence them, we will bring sickness upon you.” And all the gods said
the same. And the Yeh gods were appointed to watch over the people, and
they gave flint to them so that they could get fire.

 Begochiddy said: “We must hurry and create the Spirit-of-the-Earth,
Nahastsan-be-esteen, which is the Spirit that makes things grow.” So
they created this Spirit, who was painted with a yellow stripe across
her mouth, a blue stripe across her nose, and on her eyes a black stripe
and on her forehead a white stripe, and she had blue horns with black
tips. The Spirit had eagle feathers on her head, and on the feathers
were different kinds of birds, and in her hand she had a pollen basket,
and she was wrapped in a blanket made of everything that grows on the
earth.

 Then they created the Spirit of the Sky, Yaah-dithklithy-be-esteen, the
Rain and Cloud Spirit, who was dressed like the Earth Spirit except that
he had black horns with blue at the ends. He had a head-dress of clouds
and on the clouds were all kinds of rain and fog. And in his hand he
carried a water jug, and he was wrapped in a black cloud robe. He
controls the rain.

 The earth and Sky Spirits are connected with corn pollen. Their hands
and feet are clasped together, and the mouth of one of these Spirits is
connected with the other. And also they have a black wind and a blue
wind which work together and this is called Tradadeen-yeh-kaneh-de-azh.
(There is a prayer about this which is part of the ceremony). Sahanahray
and Bikay-hozhon are the Holy Spirits to the Earth and to the Sky.

 They decided that the spirit of Siss-nah-jini, the Holy Mountain of the
East, should be dressed in white shell beads, but <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> the spirit of Tsoll-Tsilth (Mount Taylor) became jealous
because he wanted to wear white shell, and they argued with him four
times about it. Finally it was decided that Siss-nah-jini’s spirit
should be dressed in white shell with a big white shell for a
head-dress. And they gave him the white corn to carry. And his blanket
was made of morning light. And they put a small white shell in his
mouth.

 Tsoll-tsilth’s spirit was dressed in turquoise in the same way as
Siss-nah-jini’s, but his blanket was turquoise, and they gave him
blue-birds, and they put turquoise in his mouth.

 The spirit of Dogo-slee-ed (San Francisco Mountain) was dressed in
abalone shell. They gave him yellow corn to carry, and his blanket was
made of yellow sunset light, and in his mouth was put a small abalone
shell.

 The spirit of Debeh-entsah (La Plata Mountains) was dressed in jet. His
blanket was a robe of night blackness, and he was given all the game,
deer, sheep, antelope. And in his mouth was put jet.

 The spirit of Tsilth-nah-ot-zithly (Huerfano Mountain) was dressed in
all kinds of colored clothing, and they gave him a robe of agate and put
in his mouth white crystals.

 The spirit of Johl-een (Pedernal Mountain) was dressed in all kinds of
jewelry, and his blanket was made of Rainbows, and they put corn pollen
in his mouth.

 There are two mountains which are built like men, the Chuskai Mountains
and the Black Mountains. Niltsa-tseel, the Rainy Mountains (Chuskai
range) was dressed in Natseen-nahi. His head is Beautiful Mountain. He
has a turquoise rattle. His hand is a mountain near Lukachukai; his feet
are two peaks west of Tohatchi; and the red patch of earth at Toadalena
is his heart. The spirit of Tsilth-klizhin or Black Mountain, which is
near Chin Lee, is dressed the same as the Chuskai Mountains, in
Natseen-nahi. His feet are near Indian Wells; his tail is close to
Ganado; the trail to Oraibi is his middle, and in the center <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> of Black Mountain is a hollow space where his
ribs are. His heart is in the Black Mountains and his head is north near
the San Juan River. His hands are the cliffs northwest of his head, near
Marsh Pass, and he had a big ear of corn in his hand, Tsa-kahn.

 The mountains that they had built in the first world were now remade in
this fourth world, and the Jemez and Sangre de Cristo Mountains were
both dressed in turquoise. Santa Fe Mountain is called Tradadeen-tsilth
(Corn Pollen Mountain), and Jemez Mountain is called Anlthtahni-tsilth
(Corn Bug Mountain).

 The Coyote now said: “Give me some dirt out of which you are making
mountains!” But they refused, saying: “You are not clever enough to make
mountains.” He said: “Yes, I am clever enough.” He asked this four
times, and finally the gods gave him some of the earth which was left
after making so many kinds of mountains, and the Coyote took it and made
a peak in the south and decorated it with aloe. He said: “This will be
called my mountain.” It took the shape of his paws and it has that shape
now, and is called Pagosa Peak.

 Then they made the Sun of fire with a rainbow around it, and they put
the Turquoise Man into the Sun as its spirit. (The Sun should be
represented with woodpecker feathers around it and with horns.) The Moon
was made of ice with a rainbow around it, and the spirit of the Moon was
the White-Shell-Man. (The Moon should be represented with horns also.)

 Then they made a black wind, and they put the spirit of the Abalone Man
into it. This is the east wind. They then made a yellow wind and put the
spirit of the Red Shell Man into it. The winds also have horns, and wear
twisted wind robes around them. Then they made the Fall and Winter and
put them in the north and west; and they made the Spring and Summer, and
placed them in the south and east; each to be six months long. The
Coyote claimed one month which was October, and Begochiddy <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> made a prayer stick of Lukatso (bamboo), half
yellow and half white, representing summer and winter, and gave it to
him in answer to his claim. October is the mixed-up or changing month
and is so known to all the Indians.

 Then all the spirits which had been made went into the places where
they belonged, and they raised the Sun and Moon and Stars and Winds and
placed them in their proper places. They were all spirits. Hashjeshjin
placed the North Star and said that everything was complete and that he
was glad. Begochiddy said to Etsay-Hasteen: “Why do you not place some
stars?” So Etsay-Hasteen made the Big Dipper and placed it, and dressed
it in feathers, and gave it horns. And Estsa-assun also took stars and
placed the Little Dipper. And Etsay-Hasteen also placed the Seven Stars.
(Hashjeshjin claimed that the Seven Stars were on his foot, and on his
knees and hips and back and shoulders, and on the side of his face.)
Estsa-assun picked up another star, Etsay-etsosi, and placed it at the
south. She also picked up another star, Etsay-etso, and placed it. And
she placed the Milky Way and the Crown and the Porcupine Star, and the
Southern Cross. Etsay-Hasteen arranged the Rabbit’s Track and placed the
Porcupine Star and the Horned Star and several others. They took turns
in placing the stars. Then Etsay-Hashkeh, the Coyote, said: “Let me
try,” and he asked for two stars. So they gave him two, but he could not
find a good place in which to place them, and had to put them close
together, and called them the Fighting Stars. Then he asked them for
another star and he placed it at the south near the horizon (Antares),
and called it the Coyote Star. It goes to sleep after the Sun sets. He
was still greedy and asked for more but was refused, so he filled both
paws full of stars and threw them into the sky which made the tiny stars
which cover it all over. Hashjeshjin’s is the Cornet Star with a tail.

 Then they placed twelve big white cyclones (Niholtso) in the east under
the edge of the world, and twelve blue cyclones <span id="page_67">p.
67</span> (Niholtso-doklizh), under the edge of the world at the south,
and twelve yellow cyclones (Niholtzo-klitsoi) in the west under the edge
of the world, and twelve black cyclones under the north. And these
forty-eight cyclones are what hold the world up. They also sent all
kinds of winds up to the Sky to hold up the sky and stars. The Indians
have a wind prayer, Eyah-nos-zhini, which is to help these winds hold up
the world. Begochiddy told them now to chew up the roots and herbs and
then blow this medicine in different directions.

 Then Begochiddy took the Ethkaynah-ashi and motioned toward all
creation and it came to life. And the Sun started to rise in the east,
and the Sun Spirit’s heart started to beat. The Sun and the Moon moved
quickly, and the Mountains and Stars slowly, and the eyes of the people
in Council were paralyzed at seeing this movement. And everyone was
petrified and called out: “What is the matter with our eyes, they won’t
move?”

 Etsay-hashkeh, the Coyote, and Hashjeshjin knew why this happened, and
Etsay-hashkeh jumped up and said: “I will explain it to you. The
son-in-law and mother-in-law must not look at each other. It is like the
stars; the constellation Etsa-tzo is the mother-in-law, and the
constellation Dilgeheh is the son-in-law; and these stars must not meet.
For the same reason mother-in-law and son-in-law must not see each
other, and if they do their eyes will become blind.” When they had
understood this, their eyes ceased to be paralyzed.

 They named the Earth Spirit, Nahastsan-be-esteen, and the Sun,
Johonah-eh and the Sky Spirit Yaah-dith-klithy-be-esteen, and the Moon,
Klayonah-eh, and the two mountains, Siss-nah-jini and Tsoll-tsilth. And
while they were being named, the Coyote said: “Tsoll-tsilth is my name
and I want it,” but they said: “No, you cannot have it, your name is
Mah-ih (thief).” He said: “I am not a thief,” and he was very angry and
sent his spirit to trouble Tsoll-tsilth (Mount Taylor) which began to
slide down, so that the gods had to put a lot of small peaks of <span
id="page_68">p. 68</span> Malpais (badlands) around the mountain to stop
it from slipping, and the little peaks succeeded in holding it, and they
are still doing so. They asked Tsoll-tsilth if he was all right now, and
the Mountain said that he was quite comfortable. He cut the hair off
from one side of his head so that there are trees on one side only
today. Then the Council named all the mountains in their order and they
all went where they are today.

### F<span class="small">IRST</span> D<span class="small">EATH AND</span> F<span class="small">IRST</span> M<span class="small">OVEMENT OF</span> C<span class="small">REATION</span>

 Everything was in its place, but the Earth, Sky, Sun, and Moon did not
move and the Coyote said the reason was that a person was going to die.
(Begochiddy told this to the Coyote and the Coyote told the people.)
Then the first person died, who was called Etsay-dassalini, and at once
the Earth and the Sun and Moon began to move again and the Sun said: “I
am glad when a person dies as that is what keeps me moving, and I am
glad to keep moving.”

 Begochiddy planted everything that grew, and made everything that
breathed, and took the Ethkaynah-ashi and motioned toward all creatures
and plants and they came to life. He appointed the seasons for
everything that grew and they answered: “We will do as we are told.” And
all creation started and the ants began building houses. The first time
that the Sun crossed the sky, it was too near the Earth and it was too
hot. The second time it still was too hot. The third time it was still
too hot, but the fourth time it was exactly in the right place and it
has stayed there ever since.

 Etsay-Hasteen asked: “Where has the life gone from the man who died?”
No one knew, so he kept on asking all the people until he came to
Begochiddy, who answered him: “I will hunt for it.” So he hunted for a
long time but could not find the life that had gone until he looked down
into the Third World, and there he saw the man who had died brushing his
hair, his <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> face painted red. And
Begochiddy came to the people and said: “I have seen the man who died
down below in the Third World. I saw him with the shadow of the
Ethkay-nah-ashi. You must live holy lives, for the people who do wrong
go down to the Burning-Pitch-Place, where there is an enormous monster
who devours people.” The people who go down there are called Chindi or
Devils.

 Begochiddy then said to the people: “I am going to heaven now, but I
will come back in two days. Watch me go up.” And they all watched him as
he went straight up into the air.

 At this time Has-estrageh-hasleen died, and he was the second man to
die. When Begochiddy came back in two days, he said it was a very
beautiful place up there in heaven, and that he had seen
Has-estrageh-hasleen in a very beautiful place, sitting surrounded by
flowers and smelling of them, and Begochiddy said: “All who believe in
my word will go up to heaven, but all who do wrong or think wrong will
go down to where the pitch is burning.”

 While Begochiddy was in heaven, he made a man called Begothkai, whom he
called his son, and brought back with him to earth. He was a short man,
white in flesh, with black eyes and black hair and with a white face.

 Begothkai spoke to the people and told them to move to Nahtee-tseel
(north of Durango, Colorado) where there are four mountains in a line,
and after they had done as he told them then they could live wherever
they liked, Then Begochiddy and his son went back to heaven and Day and
Night came to the earth as they come today. Begothkai never has come
down again from heaven.

 When the people first emerged from the lower world, they had seen a Yeh
over on Mount Taylor, Tson-tsilth, but he was small and they were not
afraid. Now they saw him again, and he had grown very large and had a
very big nose, small eyes, and black whiskers on his chin. They realized
that he had <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> turned into a giant. When
they first saw him, they thought he was a Yeh but now they knew that he
was a Yehtso or Big Giant. (The reason that the giant lived on
Tsoll-tsilth was because Tsoll-tsilth was a badly behaved mountain which
had argued about its name and had asked to dress in white shell beads).
The Sun claimed the giant and called him his son, although he really was
not related to him, and the Sun took the giant to his home and dressed
him with stone shoes and clothing of Bezh or obsidian to protect him
from his enemies. And he gave him the Lightning Arrow (Iknee-kah) as a
weapon for his right hand, and a stone knife for his left hand. When he
had dressed him, the Sun took the Yehtso on a streak of lightning and
went to Tsoll-tsilth. The giant had a hot spring, Toh-sit-toh, from
which he drank, and though the people lived far from this place, when
the giant would call “singo,” the people were forced to come to him, and
then he would eat them. Then the people saw another kind of monster
called Dah-il-kadeh who lived at Black Lake (near Pueblo Bonito, New
Mexico). This monster had twelve antelopes guarding him, and when the
antelopes saw any person within reach they told Dah-il-kadeh and he ran
out and grabbed them and then ran backward on his own track to his den.
Dah-il-kadeh looks like a gopher but is enormous. He hunted in all four
directions, and the people were very much afraid of him as he was very
fierce. They never went near him, but he could often catch them as he
could run very fast.

 There was an enormous bird, Tseh-nah-hahleh, who lived at Ship Rock,
Tseh-ed-ah, who had a very long beak, very large eyes, and his claws
were very long and sharp, and he ate people. He had two little ones in
his nest whom he had to feed.

 There also was a man made of stone who lay stretched out on a hill
beside the river just west of the Aztec Ruins. When anyone walked past
he would kick them into the San Juan River, <span id="page_71">p.
71</span> and when they were drowned, he would feed them to his two
children. He was called Tseh-ed-ah-eh-delklithy, which means Kicking
Rock. His children lived in the river and ate the drowned people.

 Also on the top of the Jemez Mountains there was a great hollow place
called Nehochee-otso, and there lived a great striped rock which could
roll very quickly in any direction, and killed people by rolling on
them. It was called Tseh-nagi, Rolling Rock.

 Then on the east side of Blue Water, New Mexico, there was a red
mountain where a lot of black insects lived who killed people by looking
at them. They stared at a person until he was paralyzed, and then they
ate him. They were called Benan-yah-runi, or Staring-Eyes-That-Kill.

 Where the La Plata River meets the San Juan River lived an immense
centipede who was very fierce and treacherous, and could run very fast.
He had many young ones who helped to eat the people. He was called
Sil-dil-hushy-tso, the One-Who-Bites.

 There was also a Crushing Rock, or Rocks-That-Come-Together, just west
of Taos Mountain. This was called Tseh-ah-kin-dithly.

 Dohgah-tyelth, west of the Chama River, was the place of
Luka-ih-digishi, the Cutting Reeds. Here many trails led into the reeds,
and when any one passed through them, the reeds moved and cut the person
into little pieces and ate him. If no one was among the reeds they
remained perfectly quiet.

 Another monster was called Tseh-ko, a narrow black canyon north of
Taos. If a person tried to step across it, it widened and they fell in
and were killed.

 Up in the Canjilon Mountains there was a place called Siss-pai. There
were big cactuses called Hoosh-esh-entsiah-etso, and many trails led
among them. When people walked through the <span id="page_72">p.
72</span> trails the cactus would close and catch them. They had heads
like human beings, and when a person was caught on the spines of the
cactus, he stayed there until he dried up.

 On the Mancos River lived the Tushgizhi-ent-dil-kizhi, Rock Swallows.
They were very bad birds. They would rush out at people, striking them
and clawing them at once.

 At Tsilth-entsah, there lived four bears, Shush-nah-kahi
(Bears-That-Trail). These monsters were killing many people, who were in
despair, and did not know how to fight them.

### T<span class="small">HE</span> S<span class="small">AVING OF</span> C<span class="small">REATED</span> B<span class="small">EINGS</span>

 At Tsilth-nah-ot-zilthy, the small Huerfano Mountain, were living
Etsay-Hasteen, Estsa-assun, and Etsay-hashkeh (First Man, First Woman
and Coyote). They were not in danger from the monsters because they went
about in a cloud. By this time the people were being killed off so fast
that only a few were left. And Begochiddy came down from heaven and when
he saw how the people were suffering, he took pity on them and said he
would preserve them. He told them he would put a pair of every living
creature into a large flute made of big bamboo which belonged to
Etsay-Hasteen. And all the creatures said: “Very well, we are willing to
go.” And they got into the flute and it flew off with them. They flew to
Siss-nah-jini and from there they flew four times around all the
mountains, and then they flew to a big peak called Tsilth-lapai-ah,
north of San Francisco Peak. In this peak there was a large cave. The
people got out of the flute and went into the cave and lived there, all
except Etsay-hashkeh, Etsay-Hasteen, Estsa-assun and Asheen-assun, who
flew away in the flute back to Huerfano Peak. Every day they flew about
invisibly and every night they went back to Huerfano. They saw a lot of
Yehtso-lapai, or grey monsters, walking about. These were large-eyed,
fish-eyed, foolish and crazy people, and very bad. They carried baskets
on their backs and were very poor and wore grass clothing.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### C<span class="small">REATION OF</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY</span>

 Begochiddy asked the four gods in the flute if they were lonely. And
they said that they were very lonely now that all the people who had
been created were hidden in the cave because of the monsters. So
Begochiddy told the First Woman, Estsa-assun: “I will come back in four
days and see what can be done,” And after four days he came back and
said: “This night I will show you.”

 Then a great Star appeared over Johl-een (Pedernal Mountain). And the
star, which was Hashjeshjin (the Fire God), sent a Light-ray down to the
mountain. Begochiddy came again and asked what they had seen, and they
told him that they had seen a bright light on Johl-een. And while they
were talking, Hashje-altye (the Talking God) came dressed in a rainbow
and a shiny feather head-dress. And he spoke four times to them. The
people told him to go and see why there was light on the mountain and he
said: “Very well, I will go and find out about it.”

 When Hashje-altye came to Johl-een, he saw the Light-ray connecting the
mountain and the sky, and looking like an immense shining cloud or
rainbow. Hashje-altye went towards the mountain and heard the Bluebird,
Dohleh, singing. And he came to the mountain from the west side, and he
heard all sorts of birds singing. And when he came from the north he
heard the pollen or corn bird, Ahn-enteni. Then he went back from the
north, to the west, then to the south, then to the east side and stood
there. And then he went up to the mountain and there he found a very
fine newly-born baby girl, with flowers surrounding her. Hashje-altye
was very glad to see this, and went back to tell Begochiddy and the
others what he had found. Begochiddy knew all about the baby, as he had
seen it, and he said to the people: “It is the child of the Earth Spirit
and the Sky Spirit.”

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

 Then the gods went and found the baby, bringing gifts with them.
Estsa-assun brought a white shell basket, Etsay-Hasteen a fine water
bowl; Asheen-assun (Salt Woman) brought soap root. They were going to
wash the baby then, but before doing so they asked all the mountains and
peaks if they could take care of it and wash it, but the mountains and
peaks could not agree as to which should undertake the care of the child
and so all refused. Begochiddy came down and told the gods to take the
baby to Lukasahkah-tso (Alamo) and wash the baby there at that spring,
and then to take her back to Tsilth-nah-ot-zilthy (Huerfano Peak) and
there to make a hogahn out of mirage to be called Hadahonigay-be-hogahn.

 They did all that Begochiddy commanded, and loved the baby very much,
and guarded it closely. And the mountains also loved the baby.

 They made a cradle of the straight lightning for it, and placed a
rainbow at the foot of the cradle, and they decorated the cradle with a
rainbow, and the bow over the top of the cradle was made of a rainbow.
The Salt Woman was sent to get something soft for the baby to lie on,
and she shredded bark for it, and this same bark today is used for
babies’ cradles. The cradle was called Away-estsa.

 The robe in which the baby was wrapped was made of a beautifully
patterned cloud, and over it they wrapped the baby in another white
cloud robe, and used a very fine white rock powder to rub in all the
baby’s creases. The Salt Woman called the baby her sister. They then
motioned to the baby with the Ethkaynah-ashi and gave it life, and the
baby started to cry.

 Hashje-altye spoke to the others and said: “How can we feed the baby?”
And they tried to feed it on pollen, but it did not agree with the baby,
so Hashje-altye said: “It would be better to give the baby to
Hashje-ba-ahd (the female Yeh), and she would know how to bring it up
and take care of it.” The gods who had the baby would not agree to this.
They loved the baby <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> so much they would
not give it up to any one and they said they could feed the baby on the
pollen of the white shell. So Hashje-altye agreed that they should take
care of it. Hashje-hogahn (the House God) also asked for the baby, as he
had daughters who would take care of it and feed it from the pollen of
the afterglow of the sunset, but the gods refused to let him have the
child. They fed the baby with the white inside bark of the cedar tree
mixed with pollen, but the baby did not like it and spat it out. Then
they fed her with the white shell pollen and the flower pollen, and she
liked this and flourished.

 When she was two years old, she was able to walk about and one of the
Yehtso-lapai, a Grey Monster, tried to steal her, but fortunately
Etsay-Hasteen saw the Yehtso climbing up the mountain looking for the
baby. The Yehtso could not see the baby but he found her tracks, and
Etsay-Hasteen said to the monster: “There is no baby here. I made these
tracks that you have found with my hands.” Four times Etsay-Hasteen
drove the Yehtso-lapai away.

 Asheen-assun, the Salt Woman, was the nurse of the baby and guarded
her. And once upon a time a good many of the Yehtso-lapai managed to see
the Salt Woman with the baby and they tried to climb up the mountain to
reach them but found it too difficult. After this happened,
Etsay-Hasteen planted a great many little cactus plants around the
mountain so that when the Yehtso-lapai attempted to climb over them they
cried out with pain and did not dare to cross the cactus in order to
steal the baby.

 When she was about six years old and had lost her baby teeth, they made
her another set of teeth of white shell, and told her when she rose in
the morning to throw her old teeth toward the east.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### M<span class="small">AIDEN</span> C<span class="small">EREMONY FOR</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY</span>

 When she was sixteen years old, they had the Maiden Ceremony for her
called Hozhonigi, or Making-the-Path-of-Life-Beautiful. They dressed her
in white shell shoes, fine deer-skin robes and the finest sort of shell
and turquoise ornaments. Her hair was parted in the middle and hung down
tied at the back half way to the ends. They invited Kay-des-tizhi, the
Man-Wrapped-in-a-Rainbow, and he came and brought many different shell
dishes and food, and also he brought her a baby lamb; and all the gods
came; also the Yeh.

 The ceremony began with a race between the Salt Woman and the girl
before sunrise every morning for four days. On the night of the fourth
day, they sang the Creation Song, which has twenty-four verses.
Etsay-Hasteen sang it first and the others after him, and they sang
until daybreak. Etsay-Hasteen also had a song he sang while the girl and
woman raced before sunrise, which is called Sheyash-estsa-sohni, or
Young-Woman’s-Race. They told the Earth Spirit about this ceremony and
he sent the white and red paint with which they painted her cheeks red,
and they painted two small white stripes on each cheek. They sang of
painting the maiden, Zhan-sheya-yanez-nuchee. Begochiddy told the people
that he wanted them to paint their faces in the same way. Those who
begin the painting of their faces at the top and paint down to the chin
signify that they are asking for rain; those who paint from the chin up
to the forehead are asking for anything that grows. So they painted
their faces, and brought many robes and piled them in a heap on top of
one another at the door of the Mirage Hogahn where the girl lived.

 Then she lay face down flat on this pile of robes and her hair covered
her whole body. Estsa-assun stroked her hair and face and body to make
her fine and strong. After that they gave her <span id="page_77">p.
77</span> the lamb which Kay-des-tizhi had brought her, and she held it
to her breast as she lay on the pile of blankets.

 Begochiddy asked the people what name they were going to give this girl
but they all stood silent. And while they watched her she grew older and
older until she was a bent old woman, and even as they watched her, she
grew a little younger again, and before their eyes she changed four
times from youth to age, but at the fourth change she remained about
twenty years old, and she was very beautiful. Begochiddy named her White
Shell Woman, Yolthkai-estsan, and the rest of the people called her by
that name. From this time onward, she would always be able to grow old
or young as she desired and so she was called also Estsan-ah-tlehay, or
Changing Woman.

 Then she rose from the pile of robes and gave the lamb back to
Kay-des-tizhi, the Man-wrapped-in-a-Rainbow. And the people turned their
backs to her, and she went to each one in turn and took their heads in
her hands and lifted them a little to thank them for their gifts.
Begochiddy gave her a big basket full of flowers and she gave the
flowers to the people who put them in their hair, and all went away
again very happy and thankful. In the basket of flowers which she had
passed around, there were a lot of poison weeds named Johnjilway,
Toh-o-whetso, Asgai-binee, Ajah-tohee, but no one received them; they
only received the good flowers and the poison weeds were taken back into
the hogahn.

### M<span class="small">ATING OF THE</span> S<span class="small">UN AND</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY</span>

 One day the maiden was gathering wood, and suddenly felt some one touch
the bundle of wood which she carried. She was terrified, dropped her
wood, and ran home. When she got there, Estsa-assun asked her what was
the matter and reassured her, and told her to go back again and get some
more wood. She <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> was twenty-two years old
now, and though at first she did not know who had touched her, she found
out that it was the Sun Spirit who had fallen in love with her.

 After this, during six months, she and the Sun Spirit did not see each
other and were separated; and this separation was called Toh-n’del-kous.

### B<span class="small">IRTH OF</span> N<span class="small">AYENEZGANI AND</span> T<span class="small">OHBACHISCHIN</span>

 About six months after the separation of the maiden and the Sun, twins
were born to her called Nayenezgani, who was the elder, and
Tohbachischin, and they had the same sort of cradle as was made for
their mother. They did not eat anything for four days after they were
born. They gave them cedar bark at first to eat but it did not agree
with them, and after four days their mother began to feed them and they
flourished. At two years old, they could walk and play around the
hogahn. It is said that at Huerfano Peak (Tsilth-nah-ot-zilthy) where
they lived, the tracks of the boys are still to be seen. Hashje-altye
and Begochiddy came often to see the boys, as they loved them very much,
and at four years old they were both quite big and strong. When they
were seven years old, they both lost their teeth and their mother put
white shell teeth in the place of the ones they had lost. They threw
away their old teeth towards the east and it is said that all teeth that
are thus thrown away are given to the Badger, Tabasteen.

 When they were sixteen years old, they were quite grown up, and they
looked so much alike no one could tell them apart. They wanted very much
to find out who their father was. They asked this four times before the
Sun had risen, but their mother was ashamed to tell them. But when the
Sun had come up about half way, she pointed to it and said: “That is
your father.”

 Etsay-Hasteen made the twins bows and arrows, and they <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> went about hunting and enjoying themselves.
Once in their wanderings they came close to the edge of the mountain and
they saw a Yehtso, a Gray Monster, coming up, and they shot at him with
their bows and arrows and he was so frightened that he ran away.

 One day when they were out hunting, Begochiddy met them and sitting
down between them said: “The Sun is your father and you must go and
visit him.” To help them, and to tell them what would happen in the
future, and to show them the way, he gave them wind spirits,
Niltche-beyazh. And he gave Nayenezgani the elder, the rainbow,
Natseelit, to carry him wherever he wanted to go. And he gave
Tohbachischin a ray of light, Shah-bekloth. He told the boys that when
they came to their father’s house they would be shown all sorts of
clothing and other things, but that they must choose only the flint
armor, Bezh; the lightning arrows, Iknee-kah; and the stone knife, also
the big cyclones and the big hail, and the kehtahn or magic cigarette
named Kehtahn-de-konth; and he repeated: “You must be sure to ask for
that.” (Their mother, Estsan-ah-tlehay, did not know that they were
starting on this journey.)

### B<span class="small">EGINNING OF THEIR</span> J<span class="small">OURNEY TO THE</span> S<span class="small">UN</span>

 Then Nayenezgani stood on the rainbow and Tohbachischin stood on the
ray of light and Begochiddy breathed on the rainbow and the ray of light
and started them on their way. After flying some distance through the
air, they walked on the earth again for some distance, but they came to
a great sand-dune called Sals-ah which they could not cross on foot. So
they mounted their rainbow and ray of light and were carried over that
obstacle. They walked again for some distance but had to mount into the
air on their magic rainbow and ray to cross a very big canyon. Then they
walked again until they came to a very big cactus when again they used
their magic arrows. And <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> again they
walked until they were stopped by many reeds and they crossed them in
the same magic way.

 Again they walked on and came to a big river. At the edge of the river
they found a lot of water-bugs who asked the twins where they were
going, and the boys said that they were going to cross the river, and
the bugs said: “We will help you.” And they bunched themselves together
and took the boys on their backs and carried them over. After they had
crossed the river they met a meadow-lark who asked them: “Where are you
going, my grandsons? Your father is very angry, so I will give you a
song to help you when you meet him.” So the meadow-lark sang a song to
them and they went on their way.

 Suddenly a woman jumped out of the ground before them who had a spider
web in her hand, and she was the Spider Woman. She invited the boys to
come into her home but the boys thought the doorway was too small and
that they could not get in. The Spider Woman knew what they were
thinking so she blew four times at the doorway and each time that she
blew the doorway grew larger until finally it was large enough for the
boys to enter. The Spider Woman said to them: “Your father is not kind,
so I will teach you a song to help you, and also give you an eagle’s
pin-feather which will protect you.”

 The boys went on their way until they met four old women who asked
them: “Where are you coming from?” The boys pointed to their home and
the old woman said to the boys: “Your father is not kind, so we will
give you a song to help you.” These were the first old people in the
world and if they had not met the boys, no one would ever grow old now.
The twins went on and met an older woman who would not speak to them and
later they met a still older woman. Then the twins came to the Daybreak,
and they went on under it until they came to the After-glow-of-Sunset
and went on under it, then under the Dusk, then under the Darkness until
they came to a place where many children were playing, and this place
was <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> called Yeh-kai-beyazhi, and they
crossed this place on their rainbow and light ray. And they then went up
into the Black Sky and came to the Turquoise House, Hogahn-doklizh,
which is always in darkness.

 On the wall outside near the door of the house was a large hook on
which the Sun was hung, while the Spirit of the Sun lived inside the
house. In the Turquoise House were four rooms, one east, one south, one
west, and one north, and there were many little Suns there, and all
sorts of bright lights to make it light. Two Thunder-birds, Iknee, were
guarding the door, but the boys entered the house without being molested
by the guards although they saw the twins. The second guard over the
house was the Water Monster, Teoltsodi, and the third guard was the big
snake, Kleeshtso. The fourth guard was the mountain lion, Nashtui-l’tso,
and the boys passed all of them.

### T<span class="small">EST OF THE</span> T<span class="small">WINS BY THE</span> S<span class="small">UN</span>

 Inside on the east side of the house there was a black cloud rolled up,
on the south side a blue cloud, on the west a yellow cloud, and on the
north a white cloud. The twins met the Moon Spirit there, though the
Moon itself was not present as it was wandering about. And the Spirit
asked them: “What are you doing here, my boys? Your father is a fierce
man and I will try to protect you.” So the Spirit wrapped the two boys
in the white cloud to hide them.

 After they were hidden in the white cloud, the Sun Spirit came in and
asked the Moon Spirit: “Who was speaking?” and the Moon Spirit answered:
“No one except myself.” The Sun Spirit did not believe this and went to
the black cloud and unrolled it but found nothing there, and he unrolled
the south cloud and the west cloud, and finally in the north cloud he
round the boys. He seized them by the hair of their heads and <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> threw them against some great spikes of
obsidian which were turned edge-wise like knives set in the floor at the
east side of the hogahn. He said: “I hope these boys are my sons” (for
if they were really his sons they would not be hurt by anything). They
were not harmed by the knives; and then the Sun Spirit threw them onto
the knives on the south, west and north, and they were still unharmed.

 The Sun Spirit called the Moon Spirit and said: “Uncle, heat the
sweat-house.” So the Moon Spirit heated the sweat-house, and on one side
he dug a hole large enough to contain the two boys and covered it with a
little Moon. He brought the boys over to the sweat-house and showed them
the hole where they could hide, and they hid themselves in it. Then the
Sun Spirit came to the house bringing a jug of water and poured it on a
bar of obsidian which had been heated red hot; and it filled the house
with much steam, and he asked the boys: “Are you too warm in there?” and
the boys answered: “No.” He asked this of the boys four times and they
answered each time: “No, we are all right,” so the Sun Spirit went back
to his hogahn and the boys came out of the sweat-house.

 Each night while they were at the Sun’s house they slept on the roof,
and they had a robe of white clouds to cover them and the Sun Spirit
gave them another robe also, but they were very cold there and would
have frozen except that the Otter Woman came and gave them her fur robe
to spread over them. It hailed and stormed all night, and the Sun
thought that they would be frozen, but thanks to the fur robe which the
Otter Woman gave them they were warm.

 When the Sun went into his home again, he filled a turquoise pipe, a
white shell pipe, an abalone pipe, and a jet pipe with poison smoke. On
their way back to the Sun’s house from the sweat-house, the twins met a
caterpillar who gave them some medicine weeds to eat so that they could
not be killed if they smoked the poison pipes of the Sun. Back in the
Sun’s house <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> again the boys were given a
blue pipe to smoke, and the Sun lighted it with a little Sun. They
smoked all of the pipes easily.

 Finding that he could not kill them with the poison smoke, the Sun
Spirit caught the boys by the hair and threw them into a big black jar
on the east side of the room. He then hung a huge stone by a stream of
water to the roof over the jar and let the stone fall to crush the
twins; but when he looked into the jar, he saw the boys in it unharmed.
He tried this four times, and even made the great stone drop more
heavily but he could not hurt the twins. Then he took the boys into his
arms, holding one on either side of him, for he knew now that they were
really his sons, because they had not been harmed by his tests.

 The Sun Spirit had four children by a spirit woman named Yoodi-yenai,
who had been in the Fourth World. Her eldest daughter was called
Turquoise Girl, Doklizhe-etahdeh, and the younger was called White Shell
Girl, Yolthkai-etahdeh. The older boy was called Abalone Boy,
Dichithli-eshki, and the younger boy was called Jet Boy, Baszhini-eshki.
The Sun Spirit said to his daughters: “Bring some water to your
brothers,” and the Turquoise Girl brought a blue basket and a jug of
water, and the White Shell Girl brought a white basket and a jug of
water, and also they brought soap-root, and the twins washed their hair
and their sisters bathed them and dried them first with fine white corn
meal and then with corn pollen. Then the Sun and his spirit wife went to
the eastern room and brought sweet-smelling flowers with which they
rubbed the twins. And they were made beautiful and looked just like the
other children of the Sun. And they sat down on a turquoise bench. The
Sun Spirit told his daughters to feed the twins and they gave them
Yolthkai-tahn (corn meal mush, ceremonially called White-Shell-Food).

 The Sun Spirit then asked the twins: “Why did you come to me?” And they
answered: “There are monsters killing all of our people and we want to
be able to kill them.” The Sun Spirit did <span id="page_84">p.
84</span> not answer but took the boys to the east room which was
reached by steps. He opened the door, and there they saw many rainbows,
and the Sun Spirit asked the twins if that was what they wanted, but the
boys said: “No, we do not want that sort of thing.” Then the Sun took
them to a door at the south and opened it, and there were many plants,
corn, beans, and so forth. And the Sun Spirit said: “Is that what you
wanted?” The boys said: “No.” So the west door was opened, and there
they saw clothing and jewelry, and the Sun asked them: “Did you come for
this sort of thing?” And they said: “No;” but the boys had forgotten
what they wanted and the Sun then showed them many more things.

 Then Niltche-beyazh, the Spirit Wind, spoke in their ears and said:
“Begochiddy told you to ask for flint armor and the other weapons.” So
they said to the Sun: “We want the flint armor and the stone knife,
lightning arrows, cyclones, hail, and the magic kehtahn.” The Sun said
to them: “What do you want them for? They are dangerous.” And they
answered: “We want to dress in that armor and use the weapons to kill
the giants and the monsters.” When the twins answered thus, the Sun
Spirit sat down with his head in his hands and said sadly: “You must not
kill your brother,” for he claimed the giants as his children. But
finally he decided to grant their request and said: “Very well, I will
give what you have asked for.” And he taught them how to wear the armor,
and how to shoot the lightning arrows, and how to use the stone knife,
the big hail, the cyclones, and also how to use the magic kehtahn. And
they then told him how they were going to kill the monsters, the bears,
and other creatures who were harming the people.

 Then the Sun Spirit gave them the gifts that they had asked for and
they started to go back to Tsoll-tsilth on the clouds, the Sun
accompanying them. And when they reached there, they rested above the
mountain sitting on the clouds, and the Sun Spirit asked them many
questions to test their cleverness. He <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>
pointed to Siss-nah-jini and asked them its name and the boys answered
correctly. The Sun asked the names of all the mountains and they named
them correctly. He also pointed to Huerfano Peak below and the boys
recognized their home, so the Sun was satisfied that they were
intelligent and asked them no more questions.

### K<span class="small">ILLING OF THE</span> G<span class="small">IANT</span>

 They were preparing to go to kill the monsters, but the Sun Spirit said
to them: “Let me try first to kill the giant.” The twins descended on
the lightning to the earth at Bahkse-hotetsa, which is near Tsoll-tsilth
(Mount Taylor), and then went up to the top of the mountain, carried by
the lightning and the rainbow. They sat down on a rock called Azeth
which is just south of Mount Taylor (near Grants, New Mexico), and the
Wind Spirit told them to hurry and put on their stone armor, so they put
it on, and when they had done so, suddenly to the east they saw the
giant’s forehead appearing, then he passed out of sight again. Then he
appeared at the south, then at the west, then at the north, and each
time they saw him more plainly until, when he appeared at the north,
they could see the whole of him except his feet, and then he disappeared
in a flash and went back to his spring, Toh-sit-toh, where he stopped to
drink, his hands on the ground.

 The boys mounted the magic lightning and rainbow and flew over the
giant as he drank, and he saw their reflections in the spring and rose
up. They approached from the east and the giant said: “What fine boys, I
must have them.” They answered together: “What a big giant, we must have
him.” This enraged the giant and he seized his stone knife and threw it
at the boys. It passed under them because the Wind Spirit had warned
them, and they rose on the rainbow as the giant threw the knife. When
the knife hit the ground, the boys seized it and <span id="page_86">p.
86</span> went around to the south of the giant, and as they came
towards him from that direction, the Wind Spirit warned them to bend
down, while another stone knife, thrown by the giant, flew over their
heads. They picked up this knife also, and went to attack him from the
west. The giant threw another knife at them, but, warned by the Wind
Spirit, they escaped it by rising into the air, and they picked up that
knife. Then they were attacked from the north, and escaped again, and
picked up that knife also.

 Now the Sun sent help in the form of a big black cloud which dropped
down on the giant bringing a black cyclone. And lightning came from the
cloud, and broke the giant’s suit of stone armor on all four sides, and
Hashjeshjin (the Fire God), who was still in the Third World, sent up a
volcano with fire coming out of it to help the twins. And the giant
shook all over.

 Then the twins took their lightning arrows and shot them through the
giant, and the arrows threw the giant’s heart to a place northeast of
Bluewater, and it is still to be seen there in the form of a big black
volcanic rock.

 From the place where his heart and body fell, the blood started running
in rivers in different directions, so the twins drew a line with their
stone knife through the blood and made a deep valley to divide the blood
streams, for if they should join, the giant would live again; and where
the blood settled is now a plain of volcanic rock.

 The boys scalped the giant, and took the sinew from the back of his
neck and they cut off the point of his heart. Tsoll-tsilth claimed the
body and it is still in the mountain. Begochiddy appeared then and said:
“You have done well,” and then he blew on the giant and turned his body
and blood to rock.

 The twins went back to their home at Tsilth-nah-ot-zilthy (Huerfano
Peak), and greeted their mother and the other three women who were
there, and all the women danced with joy when they saw the boys come.
The name of the dance is Chonoteen. <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>
Etsay-Hasteen played the big flute and then he made the wand such as is
now used in the N’dah (or Squaw Dance) ceremony. And they carved a wand
with a bow symbol on one side, and a scalp symbol on the other side of
it. This wand is called Ahralth-tseen now, but it used to be called
Ahtsee-des-tseen.

 The twins said: “We have killed the giant, Mother,” and she answered
them: “Oh, no, you could not have killed such an enormous giant, he has
stone clothing and so many knives that you could not hurt him.” (Their
mother really knew that they had killed the giant, but pretended that
she did not). Next morning they had their breakfast, and then they
placed in the middle of the hogahn the white cloud with the male rain
(heavy rain), also the cyclone, also the hail, and the burning kehtahn.
And Nayenezgani, the older twin, said to the younger: “I am going to
kill the monsters, meanwhile you must watch this burning kehtahn, and
when I am in great danger it will burn very bright and fast; then you
must come and help me at once.”

 Then Nayenezgani asked: “Where shall I find Dah-il-kadeh?” (the great
monster that looks like a gopher). And he was told that it lived at
Black Lake, so he set off to kill it, and when he walked the ground
trembled under his feet he was so powerful, and he carried the fire
stick, Nestrahnihi.

### K<span class="small">ILLING OF</span> D<span class="small">AH-IL-KADEH</span>

 The monster was watching in all directions and also was guarded by
twelve antelopes, but they could not see Nayenezgani because he was
flying on the rainbow, and he landed near the monster, and walked around
to discover some place from which he could attack it. As he went along,
he met the Gopher, who ran back into his hole, then came out again, and
kept on running in and out again four times, but finally said to the
boy: “What is the matter, my grandson?” And Nayenezgani answered: <span
id="page_88">p. 88</span> “I want to kill this monstor, Dah-il-kadeh,
but I cannot reach him,” and the Gopher said to him, “I am willing to go
near him—I am not afraid of him.” And the boy said: “If you will help me
to reach him, you may have his skin.” The Gopher made a hole, and
burrowed under the ground to the monster, then he made another hole
deeper in the earth, another deeper still, and the fourth tunnel was a
very deep one, and was dug under the monster’s heart. When the Gopher
reached the monster, he ate off the hair under his heart, and the
monster felt this and moved, saying: “What is under me?” and the Gopher
answered: “I am getting fur to wrap my children who are cold.”

 Then the Gopher went back to Nayenezgani and told him that he was
ready. And they both went into the tunnel, and when they reached the
monster’s heart and saw it and heard it beating, the boy took a
lightning arrow and shot it through the heart. The monster jumped up and
destroyed the lower tunnel with his horns, but as he did so the boy ran
to the next tunnel, and when the monster destroyed that, the boy escaped
to the third tunnel, and when this was destroyed, he hid in the upper
tunnel and the monster tore up half of the tunnel in which the boy was
hidden, but fell over dead before he could reach the boy.

 The antelope guards were rushing around the monster looking for
Nayenezgani and when they saw him, he lit some cedar bark with his fire
stick and threw a piece to the east and all the antelopes ran after it,
then he threw another burning piece of bark to the south, and they ran
after that, and another to the west, and another piece to the north.
When they had chased after that they were so tired that they were
helpless and the boy took his stone knife and killed all but two of
them, and he told these two antelopes that they must behave better in
the future. He told them this four times, and they agreed that they
would be good.

 Nayenezgani was still afraid to go near the monster and the <span
id="page_89">p. 89</span> Gopher said: “I will find out if he is dead. I
will run around on his horns.” So he ran from one horn to the other and
proved that the monster was dead. And Nayenezgani went up to him and
scalped him, and took the sinews of the legs and neck, and took his
stomach and filled it with blood. Also he cut off his horns which were
the shape of the antelope horns. Though he was very large the monster
had a very small eye. Nayenezgani told the Gopher that he could help
himself to the rest of the monster, and the Gopher brushed himself with
the blood, making himself look so much like the monster that when you
look at the Gopher now you can tell how the Dah-il-kadeh looked.

 Nayenezgani went home, and as he came near he gave the god-call,
Yo-ho-ho-ho and also Ya-ha-ha-ha, and his mother and the other women met
him with dancing. Etsay-Hasteen played his flute and they sang. They
hung the scalp of the Dah-il-kadeh on the cedar wand, Aralth-tseen, and
as they did so, the wand threw off sparks. Then Nayenezgani told his
mother about his adventures, and she pretended as before that he could
not have killed the monster, but he convinced her that it was true, and
he spent the night there.

### K<span class="small">ILLING OF THE</span> G<span class="small">REAT</span> B<span class="small">IRD</span>

 Next day he clothed himself in stone armor and asked his mother and
grandmother where he could find the Great Bird, Tseh-nah-hahleh. And his
mother told him that it was very dangerous to hunt the bird.
Nayenezgani, however, started on his way, taking with him the skin of
the Dah-il-kadeh, and the blood enclosed in the monster’s stomach, and
the earth shook as he went. The rainbow carried him towards the home of
the Great Bird on top of Ship Rock. Before he reached it, he dressed
himself in the skin of the Dah-il-kadeh, and he carried the monster’s
stomach full of blood inside his clothing. The <span id="page_90">p.
90</span> Great Bird saw him coming, and flew towards him making much
noise, flying over him four times. Then she caught up Nayenezgani in her
claws and carried him to Ship Rock, circling it four times and then
threw him down between the two peaks. Nayenezgani would have been killed
by the fall except for the fact that the feather which the Spider Woman
had given him enabled him to fall slowly.

 When he lit on the rock, he tore open the stomach full of blood, and
the Great Bird thought she had killed him, and so flew off the nest
telling her little ones to eat Nayenezgani, as he was dead. Nayenezgani
lay still, and the little birds came nearer to him, but he said:
“Sh-sh,” and frightened them away. They called out to their mother:
“Shemah (Mother), this human being is not dead, for he said ‘Sh-sh’ to
us,” but the Great Bird said: “That is nonsense, go on and eat. The
noise you heard was the sound of his fall.” So the Great Bird flew away
to the west over the mountains and when she had gone Nayenezgani got up
and went to their nest and called the little birds to him, and they were
frightened and went back to their nest and began to cry. Nayenezgani
told them to be quiet, and that if they made a noise, he would kill
them.

 The oldest bird came to him and Nayenezgani took hold of him and pushed
his beak down, and made his wings a different shape, and painted his
wings and tail white and told him to go south and live there and be
good, and not do any harm to any one any more, and he became the first
eagle. Nayenezgani called the smaller bird to him four times before he
would come, and then Nayenezgani gave him a long pair of ears and told
him that he was to be the owl, and that if he harmed the earth people he
would kill him. And he sent him north to the La Plata Mountains to a
place which was to be his home, called Saltahn-iskai, near Pagosa Peak.
And the owl was very tired when he reached his new home.

 Nayenezgani looked about to find a place in which to hide so <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> that he could kill the parent birds, but the
only place he could find was in the nest, and so he hid there. Then the
male rain started, and he saw the father bird flying back with something
in his claws and when he came nearer, Nayenezgani saw that he was
carrying a handsome young man who was dressed in fine jewelry and many
bracelets. And the bird dropped the man, and when he fell the turquoise
jewelry flew in every direction. The father bird then lit on the peak,
but before he folded his wings, Nayenezgani shot him and saw that the
young man whom the bird had dropped on the peak was a Taos Indian. From
the west began a light female rain, and the mother bird flew in,
carrying a young and pretty girl dressed in white shell beads. And she
dropped the girl on the rock. Just as the mother bird lit on the peak,
Nayenezgani shot her with a lightning arrow and the bird fell dead from
the peak.

 Nayenezgani now looked about to find a way down from the peak, and
below he saw a bat whose name was Jahbunny-estsan (Bat Woman), and he
said to her: “Grandmother, help me down, and I will give you a feather.”
She hid four times and would not answer. Finally she told him to go to
the other side of the peak, and then she appeared to Nayenezgani with a
basket on her back, upheld by spider webs. She danced about when she
reached the top of the peak and said to him: “Now get into my basket,”
but Nayenezgani answered: “The strings are too small, they will break
under my weight,” but she said: “No, I can carry very heavy load with
these webs.”

 Nayenezgani was afraid and would not get into the basket, so the Bat
Woman told him to fill it with big rocks and he did so, and the strings
of the spider web still held, although they buzzed with the strain.
Nayenezgani was convinced that the Bat Woman could carry him, and he
took the stones out of the basket, and went over to the edge of the peak
and got into the basket. The Bat Woman told him to shut his eyes, and
she began to go down. Half way down the Bat woman stopped on a <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> small ledge and walked back and forth while
Nayenezgani wondered whether they were on the ground or not, but he
could not see as she had told him to keep his eyes shut.

 He grew so nervous that he opened his eyes, and at once they both fell
to the ground, but fortunately the shelf on which they had been was not
far up the cliff. The Bat Woman was so angry that she struck Nayenezgani
with a cane she held in her hand, because he had opened his eyes. Then
he got out of the basket and went to where the Great Bird had fallen. He
pulled out twelve of his tail feathers, doing the same to the female
bird, and he scalped both birds with his stone knife, and told the Bat
Woman to help herself to the feathers that remained, and she filled her
basket with small feathers.

 Nayenezgani warned her not to go through the sunflower place as she
would regret it; and he set off towards home, but as he went, he watched
the Bat Woman because he saw she was going straight to the sunflower
place. When she reached there, all the feathers in the basket blew out,
and she lost them all. She went back to find the dead birds again,
thinking that she would find more feathers, but Nayenezgani did not wait
to see if she got any. He mounted his rainbow and went home, where his
return was celebrated in the same way as it had been before.

### D<span class="small">ESTRUCTION OF THE</span> K<span class="small">ICKING</span> R<span class="small">OCK</span>

 Next day after breakfast, having found out from his mother where he
should go, he started off to Tseh-ed-ah-eh-delkithly (the
Rock-that-Kicks-People-into-the-River). He saw a man lying on his back
with his head on a bluff and his feet near the river, and he was pulling
the whiskers out of his chin. When Nayenezgani tried to pass, he kicked
at him, and Nayenezgani said: “What is the matter, Sechai
(Grandfather)?” The Rock Man said: “My leg was cramped, and I had to
kick to straighten <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> it out.” Four times
he was questioned and he answered four times. After that Nayenezgani
took his stone knife and hit the Rock Man on the head, and cut through
his breast, hips and legs, chopping him into four pieces and then
scalping him.

 The Rock Man’s children lived in the river and Nayenezgani threw the
pieces of the Rock Man down to them, and heard them quarreling for the
pieces of meat, saying: “That is my piece,” not knowing that they were
eating their own father. Then Nayenezgani went down into the river and
killed all the children except two. One was called Kahtsen (Alligator)
and Nayenezgani said to him: “You must never hurt anyone again, will you
promise this?” And the alligator answered: “I am not sure.” Nayenezgani
asked this four times but the alligator would not promise. The other
child who was spared was called Siss-’tyel (Turtle), and was told to be
good in the future, as he would be used for medicine by men, and his
shell would be used to drink out of and also to make medicine in, and
the turtle agreed to this and said that he would always be good. So
Nayenezgani went home on the rainbow and they danced and celebrated his
return as before.

### D<span class="small">ESTRUCTION OF</span> R<span class="small">OLLING</span> R<span class="small">OCK</span>

 The next morning Nayenezgani asked where he would find Tseh-ehi (the
Rolling-Rock) and his mother told him that it was in the Jemez
Mountains, so he went there and looked at it from a peak near by. When
Nayenezgani tried to approach it, the Rock began to roll towards him and
he shot his lightning arrow at the Rock from the east, but could not hit
it, and the Rock then rolled back to its den. Then Nayenezgani shot at
it from the south and managed to knock a little splinter from it while
the Rock pursued him. He then approached the Rock from the west and the
same thing happened, and also from the <span id="page_94">p. 94</span>
north, and at the end he only managed to knock off a few pieces and
could not injure it, and meanwhile it kept chasing him while he was
barely able to avoid it.

 At his home at Huerfano the magic kehtahn began to burn very brightly,
which showed that Nayenezgani was in great danger. So they sent hail,
big rain, and cyclones to attack the Rock. And the water soaked it, and
Hashjeshjin burnt it with his fire, and then hit it with a stone knife,
and large pieces were broken off it. The Rock tried to escape them, but
they chased it into a mountain from which it burst out as though from a
volcano, and finally they chased the Rock four times around the earth,
while it grew smaller and smaller, until at last it fell into the Grand
Canyon, where it now is. After taking its scalp the three went
home—Nayenezgani and Hashjeshjin with Mah-ih-degishi (Spirit of the
Scalp).

### D<span class="small">ESTRUCTION OF</span> S<span class="small">TARING</span>-E<span class="small">YES</span>-T<span class="small">HAT</span>-K<span class="small">ILL</span>

 The next hunting by Nayenezgani was of the monsters called
Benan-yah-runi (Staring-Eyes-That-Kill), who lived at Tsilth-lachee, Red
Mountain.

 Asheen-assun, the Salt Woman, brought Nayenezgani a lump of salt, and
told him how to use it in killing these monsters. And she told him to
take his fire sticks also. As he came near where the
Staring-Eyes-That-Kill lived, he found a great many of their tracks, and
followed them to where they lived in a cave, and they all stared at him,
never closing their eyes. Nayenezgani made a fire with his fire sticks
and threw a handful of salt into the fire, which exploded into the
monsters’ eyes, blinding them, and they had to shut their eyes to rub
the salt and fire out of them. Then Nayenezgani took his stone knife and
killed them all, except two which crept into a little crack in the wall
of the cave. One of these he made into a Screech Owl, Gloutrah-nasjah,
and the other he called Nah-zunni, <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> Snow
Bug. He told both of these never to harm people any more and they
agreed. And he sent the Screech Owl to the prairies, where he was to
live in a hollow in the ground. And he sent the Snow Bug to travel on
the snow in the winter forever. Then he went home again, and they
celebrated in the same way with dancing and song. He told them how he
had killed all of the Staring-Eyes-That-Kill. Every time he returned
home he hung the scalps of the monsters he had killed on the scalp
stick.

### D<span class="small">ESTRUCTION OF</span> G<span class="small">REAT</span> C<span class="small">ENTIPEDES</span>

 After breakfast the next morning, he started out to kill the
Sil-dil-hushy-tso (Great Centipedes), and they told him that they lived
at a place called Tseh-negleen (Water-Meeting-Place) on the La Plata
River near Farmington.

 So he went there and found a lot of centipedes who, as they walked,
bowed themselves up in the middle, and then could spring a great
distance to catch their victims. The largest centipede jumped at
Nayenezgani but could not bite through the stone armor, and Nayenezgani
seized his stone knife, and cut him into little pieces, and then killed
all the rest of them and their little ones except a pair, a male and a
female, and these he let go, telling them to behave themselves and never
harm anyone. He scalped the largest centipede and went home, where he
hung the scalp on the scalp stick, and they held the usual celebration.

### D<span class="small">ESTRUCTION OF</span> C<span class="small">RUSHING</span> R<span class="small">OCKS</span>

 The next morning he went to Chustoh-ba-ahd, south of Taos, where he
wanted to destroy the Crushing Rocks, Tseh-ah-kindithly. And he rode on
his Rainbow and took with him the horns of the Dah-il-kadeh. When the
Rocks tried to crush him, he would evade them on his Rainbow and the
Rocks <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> could not crush him. He did this
four times, and then he took the horns of the Dah-il-kadeh and put them
across between the Rocks which prevented them from coming together. He
then threw his fire between the Rocks, and heated them so hot that when
he hit them with his stone knife, they splintered into many pieces.
Before he left, he motioned toward the splintered rocks and said:
“Hereafter you will be used for the colored sands of which our
sandpaintings will be made.” And this colored rock which Nayenezgani
burned is what the Indians now use for their paintings. Then he went
home and was received with rejoicing.

### D<span class="small">ESTRUCTION OF</span> C<span class="small">UTTING</span> R<span class="small">EEDS AND OTHER</span> M<span class="small">ONSTERS</span>

 The next morning after breakfast he went to destroy the Cutting Reeds,
Luka-degizh, which were at Toh-gay-tyelth, a round peak west of Taos. He
took with him his fire sticks and when he came to the little canyon
where the Reeds lived, he pretended to enter on one of the many trails,
and the Reeds tried to catch him, waving and clashing together, but four
times they missed him. When he tried to cut the Reeds down with his
stone knife, he found it was impossible, so he used his fire sticks and
burned them all up except two. These he cautioned to be good in the
future and he told them that the earth people would use them in their
ceremonies. The two Reeds agreed to this, and Nayenezgani took the scalp
from the largest Reed and went home and told his mother that he had
burned all the Cutting Reeds, and then they celebrated.

 Then he went to destroy the Canyon-that-Spreads-Apart, Tseh-ko, which
is also near Taos. Four times he avoided being dropped into the Canyon
as it spread, and then he put four obsidian stones across it, and
fastened them together to hold the Canyon steady. He told the Canyon
that it must be good and not engulf people, and that the earth people
would use it in <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> their ceremonies. And
the Indians pray now to this Canyon. He then went home and they
celebrated as before.

 The next day he went to destroy the Cactus-that-Catches,
Hoosh-entsah-etso, which grew at Siss-pai (near Canjilon). And he
destroyed the Cactus with his stone knife, and burned all except the
little ones which he preserved. And he told them to be good, and that
they would be used in the ceremonies. Then he went home to his mother.

 Next he went to kill the bad Rock Swallows, Tush-gizhi-ent-dilkizhi,
who lived near the Mancos River in one of the canyons near Mesa Verde.
When Nayenezgani went into this canyon the birds swooped down on him,
and he shot his lightning arrows at them, but could not hit them, as
they flew too quickly. Then they tried to hurt him, but his stone armor
protected him. At home, at Huerfano, the magic kehtahn began to burn
brightly, warning Tohbachischin. And he blew four times toward his
brother. And the cyclones, hail, thunder, and also the white cloud on
which Tohbachischin usually rode, all went to help Nayenezgani.

 Meanwhile Nayenezgani was running from the birds, who followed him in
clouds like a swarm of bees. Then rain came from the white cloud, and
the cyclones swept the birds aside, and the hail stones struck them so
all were killed except two little ones. Nayenezgani told these two
little birds to be good and do no harm, and the birds promised to do so.
So the God let them live in the Canyon peacefully. Then Nayenezgani went
home and they celebrated.

 Next Nayenezgani went to find the Bears-that-Trail, Shush-nah-Kahi.
There were four of these bears, and they lived on a mountain called
Tsilth-entsah, near the Blanco River about four miles east of
Farmington. When the god came there and went up the mountain, he met a
strange-looking girl named Shikinh-shush-nah-tlehay
(Changing-Bear-Maiden), who had red eyes, and carried a basket full of
berries on her back. <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> Nayenezgani asked
her where she came from and she replied: “I have been picking berries in
the canyon and there are many still there.” Nayenezgani went on, and
suddenly he saw the Bears coming towards him in single file. He
immediately mounted his rainbow and rose into the air, and when he had
gone up about fifteen feet, the Bears rushed under him trying to grasp
his shadow. Nayenezgani then took his lightning arrows and killed them
all.

 The girl he had met on the way was a Bear in human form, and now she
appeared coming up the canyon in her Bear form, and Nayenezgani killed
her also. He then scalped the four Bears but not the Girl Bear. He
dragged her down the canyon to a big piñon tree, and spread her arms and
legs far apart, put his head down close to hers and said: “I will bring
you back to life if you will promise not to harm people any more.” The
Bear Maiden did not answer, but Nayenezgani blew four times on her head,
and suddenly she came to life, sprang up and ran away to the mountains.
Then Nayenezgani went home and they celebrated as before.

 After that he asked his mother if there were any more monsters to be
killed and she answered: “No, you have killed them all, there are no
more left.” Nayenezgani was not sure that this was true, so he started
out and visited all the mountains in the east looking for monsters, but
he found none, and after that he went to the mountains of the south,
west, and north but found no more monsters to kill, so he came home
again.

 One evening after this, while sitting outside his hogahn, he saw a
great red light to the north, and this made him angry and he said to the
people: “You said there were no more monsters to kill but there must be
some over there.” And he brought the people out of the hogahn and they
all saw the red light. Nayenezgani then took a forked stick and stuck it
in the ground and aimed it at the fire so that in the morning he would
be able to tell where the fire was. The next day he looked along the
<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> stick, and marked the place on the
distant mountain to which the stick pointed before starting out, and
then he mounted his rainbow and went there.

 The place where the fire had been was at the La Plata River and
Nayenezgani found there an old woman, Sahn, who was Old Age. She was
sleeping near a fire, while on the other side of the fire slept a black
man, Bi-eth, which means Lazy Man or Sleepy-Man-of-no-Account.
Nayenezgani raised his stone knife to kill the woman, but as he did so
he fell asleep, and dropped down on the ground next to her. The old
woman waked up when he fell and said: “What is the matter, why do you
try to kill me, Grandson?” And then she waked up Nayenezgani. Other
people now came towards them. They were Yah (Body Lice), Dechin
(Hunger), Tayen (Thinness), and Ahtsaylin (Lies). Old Age begged
Nayenezgani to spare her; she said she would hurt no one, and that some
people would love to be as old as she was. Bi-eth, or Sleepiness, also
begged Nayenezgani not to kill him, as sleep is always good for people.
Yah, Body Lice, also begged for mercy and said: “I am good-natured, let
me go.” Tayen, Thinness, begged for his life and said: “Thinness usually
hurts no one.” Dechini, Hunger, begged for mercy, saying: “If you starve
a little, you enjoy your food much more afterwards”

 So Nayenezgani let them all go free, and he told the four—Hunger, Lice,
Thinness, and Sleepiness—to go and stay at Tseh-dokohe, nine miles north
of Farmington; and Old Age and Lies were to go to a place fifteen miles
east of Pueblo Bonito, named Yath-pai. Then Nayenezgani went home again
as there were some Yehtso-lapai (Gray Giants) wandering about. And
Nayenezgani surrounded them and left them at the spring of Tchah-toh
near Huerfano and turned them into stones. Begochiddy came down again
from heaven and they told him about the killing of the monsters and he
was very glad and said to them: “I will be back in twelve days and we
will have a Council.”

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

### P<span class="small">LANS FOR</span> F<span class="small">LOOD AND</span> R<span class="small">ECREATION</span>

 At the end of twelve days, Hashjeshjin (The Fire God) and all the gods
came and they held a Council in the Hogahn called Hadahonesteen
(Mirage). The twins sat on one side of the Hogahn, and the gods on the
other and the gods talked very softly as they did not want the twins to
hear them. They were talking of making more mountains and of fastening
the mountains together with metal nails. The boys grew tired of hearing
the whispering of the gods, and wanted to know what they were talking
about, and asked them to talk out loud so that they could hear. Their
mother said to them: “We were talking of strengthening the mountains and
putting them in good condition, and we are planning another flood to
wash away all the old plants and trees, and of planting new ones, and of
fastening the mountains down with metal, so that they will not be washed
away in the flood.” She said that the gods were glad that the bad
monsters were killed and that they wanted to cleanse and recreate the
world, and the twins agreed that this should be done.

 So they began to fasten the mountains down with lead, gold and so
forth. And they worked seven days strengthening the mountains. Each
mountain was strengthened and made in small size, but when Begochiddy
used the Ethkaynah-ashi and blew at the mountains four times, they grew
bigger and better than they were before. Then they killed all the trees
because they thought them bad, and Begochiddy said that after seven days
it would begin to rain. And all the gods went into the big bamboo flute
again.

 And the rain began and kept on for forty-two days, and water covered
the whole earth except the tops of the mountains. When it stopped, a
great rainbow appeared over the world, <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>
and on top of it stood Begochiddy with his hands spread out in gladness.

 The water covered the world for forty-two days, and then began to
decrease and run off in different directions, leaving only mountains and
rocks, and no plants or animals. The gods came back to Huerfano Peak
where they had lived before, and Begochiddy waved his hands over the
world, and at once it was covered with trees and plants and animals, and
when it had rained a little, everything began to grow. The gods planted
a little cornfield called Dah-gejol-gishy at Huerfano. They also grew
their squash, beans, and tobacco there. They named the mountains again
and also named some other places, Bezh-lachee-begizh—Washington Pass
over the Chuskai Mountains; Tseh-hatral—volcanic rocks near the foot of
the pass over the Chuskai Mountains; also Sontso-lah Mountain which is
near Crystal, New Mexico; Tsen-tyel—Flat Rock in Canyon de Chelly; also
Nashjeh-tseel—Spider Mountain or Peaked Rock in Canyon de Chelly;
Toh-deh-hashkeh—on top of Black Mountain near Chin Lee;
Ahdah-tintsoi—peak on Black Mountain; Nah-tee-tseel—Tobacco Mountain
near Bluff City; Tsilth-kay-hozhoni—Beautiful Mountain north of Chuskai
Mountain; Ahgeh-naschini—Crown Point; Tsis-kit—Cedar-Covered Flat-Topped
Rock near Ojo Alamo. They visited these places as they named them and
then went back to Huerfano.

 Then they met again in the hogahn for a Council with the boys sitting
on one side and the gods on the other as before. And as before the twins
could not hear, and asked after a time what the gods were talking about.
Their mother said: “We are planning to make more people to fill this
fine new world,” and the boys were very glad to hear this. They
discussed how the people were to be made, and decided to make the men of
turquoise and white corn, and the women of white shell and yellow corn,
and the corn pollen would be for the male and <span id="page_102">p.
102</span> the corn bug for the female. The gods took these six things
and turned them into three men and three women.

 Begochiddy said: “I am going to a place called Siss-nah-tyel, which is
near Kim-beto where Kay-des-tizhi, the Man-Wrapped-in-a-Rainbow lives.
And I am going to plan to make animals there, and I shall make the
donkey first, Tahilth-sapai, which means Dusty Beast because he is
always rolling in ashes, then the sheep, then the horses and after that
all sorts of animals. And Begochiddy laughed as he was planning these
animals and he kept going back and forth between Siss-nah-jini, which
was his home, and the Council.

### C<span class="small">REATION OF</span> M<span class="small">AN AND</span> A<span class="small">NIMALS</span>

 Then they began to make Man. They made his feet and his toe nails and
his ankles of soil of the Earth, his legs of lightning, his knees of
white shell and his body of white corn and yellow corn. His veins were
of striped corn and blue corn, the calico corn made the hair on his arms
and body, the black corn made his eyebrows, and the red corn was his
blood. His heart was of obsidian, and his breath was the white wind; his
ear was made of white shell and the ear drum of mica. They took all the
flesh of all the different animals to make his body, and also all other
kinds of flower pollen. They made him of all kinds of water: rains,
springs, lakes, rivers and ponds, also of the black cloud and the male
rain, and the sky, and the female rain, and they made his arms of the
rainbow. His hair was made of darkness, his skull of the sun, his
whiskers of darkness and his face of daybreak. His nose was made of
Yoh-lachee (red beads), his eyes of the Suns, his teeth of white corn
and his speech of thunder, his tongue of straight lightning, and the
little whirlwind was what kept his nerves moving. The movement of his
finger was the air, his saliva was the little rain, and the water of his
nose and his tears were the medium rain; and his food was of white <span
id="page_103">p. 103</span> and yellow corn. And the name of the new
kind of human being was Anlthtahn-nah-olyah, meaning
Created-from-Everything. The people who had been in the cave were called
Hahjeenah-dinneh, which means The-People-Who-Came-Up.

 Hashje-altye (Talking God) was the first to be made, then Hashje-hogahn
(House God), next Nahtahn-lakai-eshki (White Corn Boy), then
Nahtahn-tsoi-atehd (Yellow Corn Girl), then Tradadeen-eshki (Corn Pollen
Boy), then Tradadeen-atehd (Corn Pollen Girl), Sahanahray-eshki (the
Holy Spirit Boy), and Bikay-hozhon-atehd (Holy Spirit Girl). These were
the first human beings made on this earth of the substance of the
universe which already was full of the Holy Spirit.

 They made animals, and the donkey was made first of a substance called
Ne-ho-pah, and his hoofs were made of obsidian.

 This is the way they made men and creatures: they put everything which
was used to make man laid out in pairs in a line on the Robe of Daybreak
at the south, west, and north sides of the hogahn and covered them with
a buckskin. And the pair on the north side was covered with a rainbow as
well as a buckskin. At the east side were the Yeh gods. The spirit of
Siss-nah-jini Mountain motioned with a rainbow over all the human
beings, and the Spirit of Tsoll-tsilth Mountain motioned over them with
the sunlight, and they sang all night over the people, and blessed them
with the light and the rainbow, and towards daybreak they took medicine
and herbs and sprinkled over the human beings, and then the Yeh motioned
over them with the Ethkaynah-ashi, and power came to them, and they were
shaken with it.

 The gods gave strong power to the people and covered them with flowers.
And also they covered the new animals with plants and grasses; and then
all the gods spoke and told the people four times to rise, that day had
come. Then the Yeh took off the buckskins which had covered the people
and the animals and Hashje-hogahn, the house God, gave his cry:
Ah-ho-ah-ho. <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> And the Yehs’ spirits
went in the four directions into the four Holy Mountains, and when the
spirits entered the north mountain, the bird spirits went with them. The
four mountains were called Siss-nah-jini, Tsoll-tsilth, Do-go-slee-ed,
and Debeh-entsah. If people do not believe that the Yeh spirits are in
these mountains and keep them holy, sickness and disease will come to
afflict the people, for the Yehs control sickness (and that is the
reason why the Indians are not healthy now, because at the ceremonies
they do not take these things seriously).

 Then the newly-made people, Anlthtahn-nah-olyah, arose and the gods
motioned towards them with the Ethkay-nah-ashi and the new people spoke,
saying: “Shemah (mother), Lecheh (father),” for they saw Begochiddy and
called him father, and they called Estsan-ah-tlehay their mother. Then
the new people ate some white corn, for, although they were made of
corn, it was good for them to eat it, and the Navajos live on corn
today.

### F<span class="small">IRST</span> S<span class="small">ONG OF THE</span> H<span class="small">OGAHN</span>

 This ends the creating of human beings and creatures, and Begochiddy
was glad and laughing when he had finished the creation.<span
id="page_104_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_104_note_*) And he made the new
people run races around the world, and the animals raced too, and the
donkey won, for Begochiddy loved him most, and the mule came in second.
They then made a hogahn for the new people, and at present the hogahn
song, Hogahn-beyin, is sung just after sundown for thanksgiving and as a
prayer. Natah-hogahn-beyin is said.

 After this Begochiddy turned all the animals loose to wander as they
pleased, but the donkey was kept for his own use; and he said to the
animals: “Some day I will come back and need you, but now you can wander
as you please.” There were a great many songs sung while he was making
the animals and <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> there are so many of
these songs that today very often not all of the songs are sung in one
night’s ceremony.

 They gathered for another Council in the hogahn and again the gods
spoke so low that Nayenezgani and his brother, Tohbachischin, could not
hear what they said, and the twins asked the gods to speak so that they
could understand them and the gods answered: “We were talking about the
creating of animals and human beings, and how you killed the monsters.
Now we are planning to go and get the people (Hahjeenah-dinneh) who are
living in the cave.” Nayenezgani said: “That is well.”

 Then they made a great rainbow shaped like a basin, and they all
mounted this and went to the cave. They asked Nayenezgani and his
brother to go, but Etsay-hashkeh, the Coyote, stayed behind as he did
not care to go, and the other gods did not urge him.

 While the gods were gone on the journey to the cave, the Coyote made
some little coyotes of his own, a white one from the east, a yellow one
from the west which was a female, a blue one from the south which was a
male, and a black coyote from the north which was a female, and each
pair stood nose to nose; and he also made a dog which stood with the
female black coyote. The names of these coyotes were: the east,
Ki-othkath-tee-ni-gosai, which means Turning-in-the-Daybreak; west,
Nahotsoi-nah-go-sai, which means Turning-in-the-Afterglow; south,
Chadidoth-dani-gosai, which means Turning-in-the-Darkness; and the name
of the dog was Dobinny-des-daha, or Trailing Dog. Etsay-hashkeh also
made some crazy coyotes. If one of these should bite a human being, he
would probably go mad. And also he made some mad dogs whose bites would
bring madness.

 Etsay-hashkeh made these creatures because he did not know how to
behave, and no one was there to know what he was doing. And though
Begochiddy knew what the Coyote was doing he was willing that these
animals should be made.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

### R<span class="small">ETURN OF</span> C<span class="small">REATED</span> B<span class="small">EINGS FROM</span> C<span class="small">AVE</span>

 Meanwhile the gods reached the cave, and they had to use ladders to
reach down to the Hahjeenah-dinneh or Emergence People and bring them up
to the surface of the earth. So the people came out onto this earth, and
were very glad to leave the cave as they had been there a long time, and
had been much worried about what was going to become of them. The little
ants were the first to come out, and the turkey people were the last,
and Hashjeshjin (the Fire God) counted them as they came out.

 The gods told them that they had made a beautiful world and that it was
quite safe and they answered: “We are glad.” Begochiddy then said to the
gods that all people in the future should have different languages and
the gods agreed to this. They divided all the clothing so that each
people should have a certain share, and the beasts also could choose
which tribe they should join. The Navajos took the best seed of the corn
while the Pueblos and Zuni took the poorer seeds. The birds chose their
tribes, but only the turkey people chose to go with the Navajos.
Estsan-ah-tlehay, the Changing-Woman, took the turkeys and held them in
her arms.

 Begochiddy and the gods said to the people: “You are all going to have
different languages now, live differently, and do your hair in different
ways.” The Navajos did their hair in a queue and the other tribes cut
their hair across the front, and this is the way they do it to this day.
They told the birds how they were to live and build their nests and they
all agreed to do as they were told. Then Begochiddy told the people how
they were to worship. They must keep the prayer stick or ceremonial
Kehtahns holy, and they must place pollen and flint and shell beads and
turquoise and medicine near the kehtahns when <span id="page_107">p.
107</span> they pray, and Begochiddy will hear them and answer their
prayers.

### S<span class="small">EPARATION OF</span> P<span class="small">EOPLE INTO</span> C<span class="small">LANS</span>

 Begochiddy said to the plants and the trees: “You must grow and blossom
and bear fruit at certain seasons.” And they agreed to do this. Then he
said to all creatures: “After four days you can go wherever you please.”
And when that time was ended, Begochiddy blew four times in different
directions and some of the Navajos went towards Huerfano, and some went
to a place called Nehal-zhini, the Black Place, and some to Kih-ah-ah,
the Standing-Up-Place near Crown Point. And the people who were last to
be made, the Anlthtahn-nah-olyah, went to live near Huerfano, and never
went far away from it. This clan family was then named
Tsilth-bin-jodithy, which means Wandering-Around-the-Mountain. They are
now called the Asheen or Salt Clan.

 They made a ceremonial hogahn in which the gods told stories of the
third world; and this story and the songs of the Creation were handed
down from these chieftains to the people and then from one generation to
another, and so it has been handed down to this day. Nayenezgani was
made the commander of the earth as Begochiddy was in heaven. They
learned the Yeh ceremony, Tseh-rahd-n’dinneh, at this time.

 To make the four chiefs holy, they put earth from all the holy
mountains into their shoes, and they put rock crystals into their mouths
so as to make all that they said true.

 After a time, the Salt Clan, Asheen, increased and spread to other
places where they made homes and these made the different clans which
now exist; and the people who stayed at Huerfano are called Hogahn Clan.
Begochiddy told the people: “As I have made each clan and each building,
I have made for each a different spirit and I laughed as I made them.”
And then Begochiddy <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> made two other
spirits known as Bego-zhini and Bego-tso, and these no one has seen.

 The Sun said to Estsan-ah-tlehay: “I want you to go to a place in the
west where I can visit you now and then.” And she said she was willing
to go. The Sun told her to tell the gods that she was going and find out
whether they would agree. So she asked them and they said: “No, we will
go to the west, but you must go to the east.” And she told the Sun what
they had said, but he answered: “No, let the others go east, everything
is lovely in that direction, but you must go west to the Island” (Santa
Cruz, off the coast of Santa Barbara, California). And the Sun told her
this four times and said: “Even if the gods do not want you to go to the
Island, you must go, and certain gods of the Yeh will go with you and
twelve other people. And I will send guards for you: the Hail, Thunder,
Lightning, Rain and the Water Monster.”

### J<span class="small">OURNEY OF</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY TO THE</span> W<span class="small">EST</span>

 Then the Sun sent his messenger, Tohnilai, the Dragon Fly, to tell
Begochiddy to come down to them, and he came, and they told him about
this dispute and asked him what they should do. Then Begochiddy
answered: “That is well, Estsan-ah-tlehay must go to the Island.”
Begochiddy spoke to the other gods about it and the other gods said:
“No, we wish to go. Let Estsan-ah-tlehay stay here.”

 The Coyote, Etsay-hashkeh, said: “I will take some of the last people
made, Anlthtahn-nah-olyah, and a dog, and we will go north.” So he went
north with a man, a woman, and two dogs. And these people never came
back. They are now called Dinneh-nahoo-lonai (Eskimo).

 They asked the turkeys whether they wanted to go with Estsan-ah-tlehay.
The turkeys could not make up their minds, but were going back and forth
between the different people. So <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> then
they told the turkeys that they must go to Tsoll-tsilth (Mount Taylor),
which they finally did.

 Estsa-assun, the First Woman, did not want Estsan-ah-tlehay to go away
to the west, but the gods said: “It must be so, and she must start in
the morning.” When morning came, they had the
Ceremonial-Before-Traveling. First, Estsan-ah-tlehay made some white
shell ceremonial mush, and Estsa-assun made red shell mush.
Estsan-ah-tlehay made the mush in a big black pot, and as they stirred
the coals under it they said a prayer, and while they stirred it with a
pudding stick, they prayed again, raising the stick towards the sky.
Then the gods and the twelve people who were going to the west sat down
on one side of the hogahn, while those who were opposed to their going
sat on the other side. Then the people with Estsan-ah-tlehay ate,
rubbing themselves and blessing their food, and praying to be strong and
not tired during the journey. Estsa-assun, who made the red shell mush,
and the people with her grabbed the food, eating it carelessly, and
drinking hot water. They represent the careless people who are angry
against the gods, and those who eat in this way bring sickness. The gods
who ate the white shell mush ate slowly, praying and behaving properly,
which is the ceremony of eating. Estsa-assun told the people that when
they increased very much, there would be earthquakes and war between
them. Etsay-Hasteen, her husband, said nothing because he could not
speak against his wife, but he felt very badly.

 Now they started to go, and Hashje-altye (the Talking God) stood in
front of the people facing east and all the people had flowers in their
hands and the spirits of the birds were with them. Nayenezgani held the
scalp stick in his hand. There is a song about the starting of this
journey called Deh-ye-yah-heh, meaning “I am a white shell woman and I
am going.”

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Kai yolthkai estsa chin<br />
 Eshli nihai in inyah.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

 The travellers who were going west with Estsan-ah-tlehay visited all
the mountains that have heen named, and when they reached the second
mountain, Tsoll-tsilth, they saw in the distance the smoke of
Estsa-assun and Etsay-Hasteen going on their way to the north with
Etsay-hashkeh. Asheen-assun, the Salt Woman, stayed with the Salt Clan
at Huerfano.

 The travellers with Estsan-ah-tlehay, after making a circuit of the
holy mountain, started to go west from Huerfano by Bezh-lachee-begizh
(Cottonwood Pass), over the Chuskai mountains. As they passed over it,
they touched a big rock which stands there called Tseh-bezh-delneheh.
And you can see the hand prints there now, and Indians who pass that way
should put their hand on the hand prints and pray.

 After that they came to a spring and made balls out of corn meal and
ate what they could and left the rest near the spring; these now are
turned into rocks like marbles, Tseh-genesh-hize. The Sun came down and
ate with them, and near that place is a sign of the Sun on the rock,
also the sign of the Moon.

 They went then to a cliff with a rock with a hole through it sticking
out of the cliff. This place is named Tseh-hatral. They left the Corn
Pollen Boy (Tradadeen-eshki) and the Corn Pollen Girl (Tradadeen-etadeh)
there to live, and also the Corn Bug Bird (At-atid-ehd).

 Then they went on to Sontso-lah, two mountains with a path between them
near Crystal, New Mexico. There they left two spirits to live,
Siss-yatyeh and Tsilth-deginnih, which are the Echo and Holy Mountain
Spirits; and in that place all Navajos should pray.

 Then they went down Tseh-gih (Canyon de Chelly) to Tyen-tyel (Flat
Rock) and there they left Tseh-atehd-deginnih (Rock Girl People), and
also Tseh-altyeh (Echo Rock). Then they went to Nasjeh-tseel (Spider
Rock), and came to Tseh-benigeh (a Rock in Canyon de Chelly). They left
there Hashje-altye (the Talking God) and Hashje-hogahn (the House God).
<span id="page_111">p. 111</span> And at Kin-lakai (White House) they
left Hashje-baka and Hashje-ba-ahd, the Male and Female Gods; these are
the dancers. All these last places mentioned are in Canyon de Chelly.

 They passed by Chin Lee and went to a big rock island in the stream
named Tseh-benazelleh, and landed on top of this rock and made some foot
prints there. Then they flew from there in a flute to the top of Black
Mountain near Toheen-da-hazkah, a flat-topped peak. There they blew
their noses and cleaned themselves and left some white rocks in that
place. Nayenezgani was carrying the scalp stick and he threw it on to
the top of the rock, and said that no Navajo must go up there.

 Then they entered the flute again, and went to the Ozheh-be-hogahn, a
tribe of the Hopi Indians living north of Moencopi in a very lovely
place. And they gave flint to these people, and also a feather of the
Great Bird, Tseh-nah-hahleh.<span
id="page_111_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_111_note_*)

 They went in the flute to the top of San Francisco Peak, Dogo-slee-ed,
and from there they walked in the afternoon to a little mesa covered
with cedar called Tsini-deh-aheh, and they slept there and had a
Ceremony and Song. At this Ceremony they made the Gohi-ninny. One of the
travellers was turned into a Gohi-ninny, and they made four of these men
here who were the ancestors of the Pima tribe.

 Then they went on to Tsilth-kai-des-kahli, a white-topped mountain, and
left there four people called Delzheh, who are often slaves of the Hopis
and were probably the Yuma Indians.

 Then they came to Tsilth-nah-tsakai, Half-White-Mountain, and left
there four people called Bes-antsai (meaning unknown) then to Tsilth-
(an unknown mountain), and left there four people called Belthrah
(Apaches); then to Tsilth-deltsoi (Yellow Mountain near Kingman,
Arizona), where they left four people called Nah-ketlah-tsi-koi, which
is a tribe that wears wooden soles on its shoes.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

 Then they went to Tsilth-n’doh-kunsh (Sailing Mountain) and left there
the tribe called Away-kiyatye, and this tribe talked like babies.

 Then they came to Tsilth-dohgeh-jiggah, and left there people called
Bekekeh-yazhi (Papagoes) who wear sandals with thongs between their
toes. Then they went to Tsilth-beneh-holkoh Mountain, and left there a
people called Kah-dinneh, or Arrow People. Then they went to
Haltahn-neligay-tseel or Mirage Mountain, and left there a people called
Haltahn-ah-begay, or Mirage Clan.

 At Foggy Mountain, Hahden-nesteen-tseel, they left the Foggy Clan. And
at Nes-teen, which is the Coast Range of California, they left twelve
people. Then they mounted on the Fog and rode over a great deal of water
to Tsilth-gant-tseel (which is a little peak on Santa Cruz Island off
the coast of Santa Barbara, California). After they had landed on the
peak, they saw Begochiddy walking towards them on the water. His hair
was shining, and little rays of light shone and sparkled from him.

### M<span class="small">AKING OF THE</span> H<span class="small">OUSE OF</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY ON THE</span> I<span class="small">SLAND</span>

 Then they made a great house of rock crystal which shone and made
rainbows as the light reflected from it. And the Wind, and Light, and
all of the other spirits helped to make it. It was called
Tralth-kageh-bekindeh-nah-elth, or the House-Which-Floats-on-Water. In
the east they made a white shell room, in the south a turquoise room, in
the west a yellow room made of abalone shell, and in the north a black
jet room; and little Suns were placed in it to give light. The house was
four stories tall and ladders were made of white shell, jet, turquoise,
and abalone to reach the upper stories. At the east they placed a white
shell door, at the south a turquoise door, at the west a door of abalone
shell, and at the north a door of jet. To close and bar the east door,
there was a large white shell stick, and at the <span id="page_113">p.
113</span> north door there was a black thunderbird, Iknee-dithklith. On
the top of the house was a many-colored thunderbird, larger than any
other, and chief of the thunderbirds, and he carried little thunderbirds
on his back.

 In the center was a big room and in it an altar decorated with all
colors, and Estsan-ah-tlehay danced in front of it while the altar
varied from one color to another. At the main door to the east, there
was a white medicine rattle which would sound whenever anyone
approached. This was the home of Estsan-ah-tlehay, and there is a song
about this.

 Meanwhile, the Salt Woman, Asheen-assun, who was left at Huerfano, went
to the hill near Crystal (New Mexico), wondering where she could make a
home. But she did not like it there, so she returned to Huerfano and
started out again. She went to Zuni where she wandered about for a
while, and made a hole in a big cliff near there, which is still there.
The Zunis did not like her very much, but still they did not want her to
leave. Then she went to Nohopah, which is near there; and then to
Tseh-nihih-deh-ah which is a holy place in the ground south of Zuni, and
there she stayed. It is a place where there are two peaks, one of which
is female and the other male.

 She told all the different tribes to come and visit her occasionally
and get salt there. When the people go there and try to get salt, they
should dress like Yeh and know a certain song called Asheen-assun-beyin
(Salt Woman Song). If they do not know this song, they should sing the
song of Estsan-ah-tlehay. Then they must stand in line and say:
“Grandmother, come give me some water,” and the water will come rushing
in all around them, and then the people can reach down and get the salt.
If this song is not sung, the salt grows hard as granite, and no one can
get any. This is forever the home of the Salt Woman.

 Nayenezgani and Tohbachischin came back from the home of
Estsan-ah-tlehay and went to where the rivers, the Piedra and the San
Juan, meet on the other side of Blanco. They came <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> back in order to teach the Navajos about the ceremonies, and
they also took part in the ceremonies, and helped the people and
explained the ceremonies to them. The twins went back occasionally to
the Island to visit their mother, and stayed four days at a time, and
then they came back to their home again.

### C<span class="small">REATION OF</span> M<span class="small">ORE</span> P<span class="small">EOPLE BY</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY</span>

 Estsan-ah-tlehay, the Changing-Woman, began to be lonely. The mirage
made the mountains of the world grow taller, and then she would take a
rock crystal and use it as we do a telescope, and she was able to see a
great distance; and this she did whenever she was lonely.

 She decided to make more human beings to live with her, so she sent
word to all the gods to come to her and have a Council. And they came
and went into the ceremonial house, the four-colored crystal house on
the Island; and the gods stood together on one side and the twins on the
other; and Estsan-ah-tlehay said to her boys: “We are going to create
more people for I am lonely.” The Sun brought down a Turquoise man and a
White Shell woman, which were very small—like little images. These were
named Doklizhe-eshki, Turquoise Boy, and Yolthkai-etahdeh, White Shell
Girl. And the Sun said to the Changing-Woman: “Find out how to make more
people like these images.”

 The Changing Woman bathed herself, and when she had bathed, she rubbed
herself on her right side, and with the dead skin which she had rubbed
off, she wrapped the little white shell image; and then the Sun rubbed
himself on the right side and with the skin that was rubbed off, he
wrapped the turquoise image. These small images were the ancestors of
the Hushklishni Clan or Mud Clan. Estsan-ah-tlehay and the Sun took the
skin from their left sides and with this dead skin they made the <span
id="page_115">p. 115</span> Toh-klitsohni or Yellow Water Clan.
Estsan-ah-tlehay rubbed herself from her head down to her breast, and
with this skin made a female, and the Sun did the same and made a male,
and these were called Toh-ah-zholi or Light-Water Clan. Estsan-ah-tlehay
took the skin from the back of her head to her hips, and with this made
a female, and the Sun did the same, and made a male, and these were
called Bitahni Clan. They put a robe of Daybreak over them, and they
held a ceremony over them, singing twenty-two verses of a song called
Dinneh-noahnai-glah or Making-More-People.

 Then Estsan-ah-tlehay took the Rainbow Spirit and moved these people.
Then she motioned toward them with Ethkay-nah-ashi which gave them life.
And they became human beings. They were created during the night, and at
daybreak Estsan-ah-tlehay called four times to them to get up, and they
arose and bathed while the people sang over them; and when they came to
life they were already twenty-one years old. Estsan-ah-tlehay sang to
them, and as she sang, they were clothed in new buckskin shoes and
everything needful.

 As time went on, the people increased until there were enough to
satisfy Estsan-ah-tlehay. There were lots of people, and the children
gathered the white shell and broke it up on the beach. Then
Estsan-ah-tlehay appointed the chiefs of the clans. The chief of the
Toh-klit-sohni, or Yellow Water Clan, was called Nahtal-tilth.
Huskah-binah-oltin was the chief of the next clan, Toh-ah-zholi, or
Light Water Clan. The chief of the Bitahni Clan was Do-bitsah-hallih.
The first chief had a white shell cane, the second had a turquoise cane,
the third had an abalone cane, and the fourth a jet cane. There were so
many people by this time that Estsan-ah-tlehay sent many of them to
another island (Santa Rosa). They were increasing so fast that the
children did not thrive, and Estsan-ah-tlehay felt so badly about this
that she called a Council to decide what to do. And the gods came
together and decided to send many of the people <span id="page_116">p.
116</span> back to a place called Kih-ah-ah near Crownpoint, New Mexico.
There is an old ruin on a hill there, and the clan of this place is
called Ruin Clan or Kih-ahni.<span
id="page_116_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_116_note_*)

### J<span class="small">OURNEY OF THE</span> C<span class="small">LANS FROM THE</span> I<span class="small">SLAND BACK TO</span> N<span class="small">AVAJO</span> C<span class="small">OUNTRY</span>

 Begochiddy said that it was a good idea to send people back to this
place and that he would give the different clans protectors on their
journey. He appointed the Mountain Lion, Nash-tui-l’tso, as protector to
the Mud Clan; and the Bear from Tsilth-dithklith (Black Mountain) was
appointed protector of the Yellow Water People, and the Weasel was the
guard for the Light Water Clan. The porcupine was the protector for the
Bitahni Clan. Then the different guarding animals were brought to the
clans, and they held a Council and decided that in four days those who
were to go east should start.

 They had many riches with them and a great many shells, and their
clothing was decorated with shells, while each captain wore a large
shell on the top of his head as a sign of his rank. On the day that they
were ready to start a fog came up, and in four days they crossed the sea
on it and reached the mainland. The travellers, who were called
Changing-Woman’s-Children, set out walking towards the east, and the
Weasel and the Porcupine were carried on the people’s backs.

 As they journeyed, they came to a place called Tsilth-binny-holoneh, or
Mountain-that-Thinks. And in a valley near by they saw a lot of corn
fields full of ripe corn, and there they discovered a single hogahn but
no people, so all the men put their packs on the ground and walked up to
the hogahn. They found no one there, but a fire was burning under a
cooking pot filled <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> with deer meat, and
they looked around and saw nothing there except that on the east and
west walls quivers were hanging, made of mountain lion skin, and on the
south and north walls were quivers made of otter skin. Suddenly they
heard a sound which came from the quiver made of mountain lion skin, and
many men came out of it, young, old and middle-aged, and these were
called the Kah-dinneh, or Arrow people. Then from the south side, from
the otter skin quiver, came out many women and young girls. So the
hogahn was full of the Arrow People and they rejoiced and were glad to
see the visitors. The rest of the travellers came up with their packs on
their backs and when evening came they all met together and told
stories.

 The names of the Arrow People and of the travellers were similar, and
they all had tobacco. The travellers told their story and told where
they were going to, and where they had come from; and the Arrow People
said to them: “Estsan-ah-tlehay is our mother, too.” And they all made
friends as they were all relations.

 The Arrow People had plenty of food, and gave the travellers many ears
of roasting corn, and then they all went to sleep. The travellers stayed
at this place a month, and the Arrow People gave them part of their corn
fields, to feed them, and some of the travellers married there. Then the
chiefs of the travellers said to one another: “We have stayed long
enough in this place, we must move on,” and they started on their way,
one of the Arrow Women going with them, and they had a lot of corn to
eat.

 After they had travelled for a while, the chief of the Mud Clan tried
to find water by sticking his cane in the ground, but got no water, only
mud, and that is the reason why his clan is named the Mud Clan. Then the
chief who had the turquoise cane stuck that into the ground and nice
blue water gushed out of the ground. The chief who had the abalone shell
cane thrust <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> it into the ground but the
water that came was salty, and when the jet cane was used, the water
that came was black.

 Four days after they had left the Arrow People, their Bear Guard began
to roar, and then he sang a song called Shonrah-hindeh-hotsil, meaning
My-Home-is-in-Danger. When the chiefs heard this song, they called the
people together because the Bear had warned them that something was
going to happen. Then the Arrow People overtook them suddenly and
surrounded them armed with bows and arrows. The Bear ran towards the
east and circled around the travellers, biting the Arrow People. And he
circled the travellers four times, protecting them from the hostile
Arrow People. The next day they started hurriedly without breakfast and
travelled on while the Bear came behind to guard them.

 A week after this, they were again surrounded by some hostile people
called Nakel-astsel-kai (Unknown) early in the morning. The Bear had
warned them by growling and singing his song, and the Porcupine threw
his spines into the enemy and killed many, and frightened the others so
that they ran into the mountains and prayed in fear.

 Then they went on again and met a man standing naked with folded arms
who was one of the Away-kiyatyeh Clan, the People-Who-Talk-like-Babies.
The fourth captain of the travellers took hold of the man and asked him:
“Why can’t you talk to us?” The Mud Clan, Hush-klishni, and the Bitahni
made friends with this naked man and gave him a robe. As they went on
their way, they met many tribes and greeted them and passed on. A year
passed before they reached Dogo-slee-ed, San Francisco Peaks.

 Before they had left the Island, Estsan-ah-tlehay had told them that
the holy mountains would bow to them as they went by, and that they must
stop and visit the holy mountains. When they came to Dogo-slee-ed, it
bowed to them, and they sent <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> one of
their people to the top of the mountain who looked southeast and saw in
that direction a great white peak (Tsoll-tsilth), and he knew that that
was where they were to go next. As he gazed from the peak, the holy
mountains rose up, but when he had come down they had sunk again. And he
told the people that he had seen where they were to go next, and that he
knew the way there.

 So they journeyed on, but their guide grew confused and mistook the
direction. And they went northeast instead of southeast, and crossed the
Little Colorado River, and they were terribly hungry, and so was the
Mountain Lion guard who waved his tail. The guide went hunting to try to
find food, and the Mountain Lion went out at night and killed many
antelope. In the morning the people were fed and stayed there for
several days after this. The Lion killed eight antelopes every night for
them so that they had plenty of food.

 They went on to the north and came to the Painted Desert in the
springtime, and they were dying for lack of water, for the four canes of
the chiefs could not find any. At length they came to a bluff where
there was a cave, and the captains tried to find water with their canes,
but only found very little. And the Bear Guard went up to the cave and
dug, and dug, and made a spring there, and they called the spring
Shush-betoh (Bear Spring). It is near Navajo Mountain, Arizona.

 They journeyed on and came to a place near Fort Defiance.
Estsan-ah-tlehay had told them to leave the Porcupine on Tsilth-klizhin
(Chin Lee Mountain), and they very nearly forgot to do this, but after
they had passed the mountain, one of the captains remembered what
Estsan-ah-tlehay had told them, and they went back and left the
Porcupine on Tsilth-klizhin.

 They passed to the north of Chin Lee and found great difficulty there
in getting game; even the Mountain Lion Guard could not find any. The
Weasel then began to nod, and told <span id="page_120">p. 120</span>
them to go to sleep, and while they were sleeping, the Weasel went out
and hunted, and the next morning they found that he had killed many
rabbits and placed them around the fires, so all the people had plenty
to eat, and they thanked the Weasel and patted him.

 They went on to Tseh-na-kohni but knew they were going in the wrong
direction, so they turned back and went through the Lukachukai
Mountains. They travelled by a canyon and as they went the Bear danced,
and it is now called the Dancing Canyon.

 They came near Toadlena, and then over the plain and “Petrified Wood”
Mountain towards Crown Point, and in the gap they heard some people
talking about hunting. The people were the Kih-ah-ah Clan or Ruin People
and they had a Bear and a Snake to guard them, and when they saw the
travellers approach, they took up their bows and arrows, thinking the
travellers were enemies.

 The Bear Guard of the Kih-ah-ah people, and the Bear who guarded the
travellers ran towards each other angrily, and the Big Snake, Kleeshtso,
of the Kih-ah-ah Clan, and Nashtui-l’tso, the Mountain Lion, who guarded
the travellers, also ran towards each other and started to fight, but as
they approached, the bears recognized each other, so that they made
friends. When the people saw that their guards were friendly, they all
made friends, and the Kih-ah-ah people asked the travellers where they
had come from and the travellers learned the name of their hosts.

 The travellers said that Estsan-ah-tlehay was their mother and that
they had come from her home, and the Kih-ah-ah or Ruin People said: “She
is our mother, too,” and the chiefs of the travellers and of the Ruin
People looked so much alike that they could not be told apart; and their
names were almost the same, also their pipes, also their tobacco
pouches. The white shell tobacco pouch was decorated with turquoise; the
abalone <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> pouch was decorated with jet,
and the jet pouch with abalone, and the turquoise pouch with white
shell. The first captain’s tobacco pouch had a large white shell pipe in
it, the second captain’s tobacco pouch had a big turquoise pipe in it,
the third captain’s had an abalone shell pipe in it, and the fourth
captain’s had a jet pipe in it. And there is a song about these pouches
which is called Nahtoh-beyin, Tobacco Song.

 Then all the people talked together and visited each other and told
stories, and smoked, and had a big feast. The chiefs all made speeches
and they asked who had Etsay-entee (a kind of early corn), and the
Kih-ah-ah people said: “We have it.” They talked a long time about many
things and used the playing stone called Espinee, a small stone, and
another called Juggie. And they played a game in which they used the
following stones: Nezhi, Wonshi, Tsee, Nah-bin-ithbithy, Binskai,
Bakaz-tlah, also two stones joined together called Bayez. These are
kicking stones. In the game the stone was placed on the foot and kicked;
and this game is still played by the Zunis.

 Before starting off on their journey again, the travellers were painted
with a sign of lightning on their legs, white corn on their breasts, and
yellow corn on their backs. And they painted a Sun Dog on each breast
and on each shoulder blade. Their faces were painted white. They took
food with them, and seed corn, and water in a gourd. They went towards
Crown Point and when they came to a place called Teece-sahkahdi, which
means Lone Tree, they found a nice level piece of ground and they
planted some corn there and this was the cornfield of the Toh-ah-zholi
or Light-Water Clan. Then they went to a little hill near Gallup called
Sin-nahyah, which means Hill-with-Little-Trees; and they planted corn
for the Hushklishni or Mud Clan; and they had a big cornfield and gave
the Yellow Water Clan, Toh-klitsohni, one-half of this field.

 As the corn began to grow and the little ears were forming, the crows
and coyotes began to eat the corn and the people <span id="page_122">p.
122</span> went to their cornfields and lived there to protect the corn.
There were some children playing a game in the cornfield; a boy was
stationed in the east, a girl at the south, a boy at the west, and a
girl at the north, and they were playing a game called
Ahchineh-bah-jee-chin which meant: “We won’t give the children away.” In
the game the east boy would run in a circle to touch the girl on the
south and then around to all the others hiding in the corn, and if the
east boy did not touch one of the children, it would mean that the one
he did not touch would be a hunter.

### J<span class="small">OURNEY OF THE</span> T<span class="small">WO</span> C<span class="small">HILDREN TO</span> E<span class="small">STSAN-AH-TLEHAY</span>

 It began to rain a little, and a rainbow appeared from the north and
touched the edge of the cornfield, but the children went on playing and
when the east boy had touched the south girl and looked for the west boy
and north girl, he could not find them. They hunted a long time for the
two children but could not find them, and they went home and told their
parents who all rushed out to hunt for the two who were lost. Suddenly
the people saw a rainbow on top of the Chuskai Mountains and they knew
that the rainbow had picked up the children. So they had a little
ceremony and made four footprints outside of their houses out of white
corn, and four footprints and handprints of corn pollen inside the
houses, and prayed. They sent a messenger to another village of
Kih-ah-ah people and to all the other villages, that they must keep the
days holy until these children came home again.

 The people were right, for the rainbow had taken up the children and
carried them to the Chuskai Mountains, and then west to the seashore.
And on the rainbow stood Hashje-altye and Hashje-hogahn, one on each
side of the children. When they reached the seashore, the children could
see the Island <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> across the sea and
flowers were growing all along the beach very thickly. Estsan-ah-tlehay
had made thirty-two trails from the shore to the Island going down under
the sea in spiral shape. And Hashje-altye (the Talking God) asked the
boy and girl which trail they would take to reach Estsan-ah-tlehay. They
selected the right trail, and it led them under the sea to the house of
Estsan-ah-tlehay, and Hashje-altye led the way.

 When they reached the Island, they went under it to the great crystal
house, and entered it, and there they saw an old, old woman lying on the
floor. Hashje-altye said to her: “Here are your children.” And the old
woman asked if one was a boy and one was a girl, and they said: “Yes.”
Estsan-ah-tlehay tried to rise, but she was so old she could hardly
move, so Hashje-altye helped her, and she crawled to the door and raised
the bar that closed it, and went into the altar in the inner room. Then
she appeared again stronger and younger, and then went in again to the
altar. Four times she did this, and the last time she appeared she was
only about sixteen years old and she danced about very happily. She
summoned the spirits of the Yeh and told them to bring a bowl of white
crystal for the children to bathe in. The female Yehs washed the girl,
and the male Yehs washed the boy and they dressed the boy and girl in
white shoes and clothing, and put feathers in their hair as is now done
in the fire dance, and then they fed them. Estsan-ah-tlehay told the
children that the reason why she had sent for them was that she wanted
to give them prayer sticks and medicine called Siss-bayis-kothy, which
is a belt of medicine, and she gave them these things and told them
stories all night long. Next morning Estsan-ah-tlehay mounted to a peak
on the Island with the children and drew the whole earth up to her. As
she stood there, and as they looked towards the east, they saw many
sheep; and at the south they saw all kinds of plants and rain watering
the plants; and to the west they looked and saw all <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> kinds of horses and mules and donkeys; and
to the north they saw all kinds of game, deer, lions, and wild animals.
And there is a song for everything they saw on the mountain. It is
called Estsan-eh-beyin, which means “The Changing-Woman’s Song.”<span
id="page_124_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_124_note_*) In three days the
children learned all the songs of the sheep, horses, corn and all other
things. These songs mean to bring forth and multiply. After four days
they had learned everything and Estsan-ah-tlehay said she would go part
way back with them.

 Then Estsan-ah-tlehay said to the children: “I want to learn your
songs.” But they knew only two, which they sang for her, one of which
was called Ahchini-beyin. That night they held a Council and all the
gods came and they spread a buckskin and a cotton robe for the children
to sit on, and they put the medicine belt down on the robes by the
children. The gods sang all night, and at daybreak, Estsan-ah-tlehay
showed them many sheep, cows, and horses at Siss-nah-tyel (near
Kim-betoh, New Mexico), and said to them: “I give these animals to you,
and now you know my songs, and you must go back and teach them to your
people and tell them never to forget them. I will give you your names.
The boy will be called Nahtahyah-ni-zhehni, which means the
Establishment-and-End-of-the-Created-Law or Standing-for-the-Law. The
girl will be named Non-napah, which means
White-Shell-Woman-of-the-Future. And these names must not be forgotten.”

 The two children went back in a flash on the rainbow to their home,
Kebeh-eteen. As they approached it, Hashje-altye gave his call four
times, and the people saw them coming all dressed in feathers.
Hashje-altye sang to the people the last hogahn-beyin (House Song), and
the children taught Estsan-ah-tlehay’s song to the head men. Two men
learned their song by heart and taught it to the other people. When all
the ceremonies, Yeh-bechai, <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> Bear
Cerernony, and all, had been learned, Begochiddy left the people and
never appeared again.

 Begochiddy said: “Possibly some day this world will be destroyed by
flood, fire or cyclone, and then I will come again. The Rainbow will
give you the signs, and if the Rainbow lasts all day long, that will
mean that something dreadful is going to happen. Two other bad signs are
a Rainbow around the Sun, which means rain or sandstorm, and if
Giss-dil-yessi does not grow.”

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ncm5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_40_fr_*) The Black God
sandpainting of the Tleji or Yehbechai ceremony has to do with this part
of the story.

<span id="footnotes_page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="page_43_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_43_fr_*) The sandpainting of
the place of emergence has to do with this part of the story.

<span id="page_43_note_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_43_fr_**) Female and male
respectively.

<span id="footnotes_page_46">p. 46</span>

<span id="page_46_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_46_fr_*) This was the first
mother-in-law trouble.

<span id="footnotes_page_47">p. 47</span>

<span id="page_47_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_47_fr_*) Hasteen Klah noted
that from this point present day Navajos know the story.

<span id="footnotes_page_104">p. 104</span>

<span id="page_104_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_104_fr_*) Hasteen Klah
said: “The only two people who know the Creation Song today are
Nakai-John (Klah’s older brother) and myself.” Klah died in 1936.

<span id="footnotes_page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="page_111_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_111_fr_*) Klah stated that
there are six of these feathers in existence.

<span id="footnotes_page_116">p. 116</span>

<span id="page_116_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_116_fr_*) Natahnapah, a
fire-dance priest of Nava, New Mexico, was of this clan.

<span id="footnotes_page_124">p. 124</span>

<span id="page_124_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_124_fr_*) Hasteen Klah sang
the Estsan-eh-beyin.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
