[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](ncm5) [Next](ncm8)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

# HOZHONJI—BLESSING CHANT

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

## HOZHONJI—BLESSING CHANT

### I

 The myth material of the Hozhonji is from the Navajo Creation Myth, or
Story of the Emergence. This is the foundation of the Navajo religion
and the explanation of the world as they know it. As told by Hasteen
Klah in the preceding pages, the story starts in a dark world in which
are the Great God, Begochiddy; the Fire God, Hashjeshjin; Salt Woman,
Asheen Assun; Coyote, Mah-ih; and First Man and First Woman, the
prototypes of Man on this earth. These pass upwards to the second blue
world, and there Begochiddy begins by creating twins, male and female.
Hashjeshjin, the Fire God, destroys them and out of their dead substance
Begochiddy creates the Ethkay-nah-ashi (literally the
two-who-go-together), and then, when he wishes to bring life to the rest
of creation, breathes his spirit into the Ethkay-nah-ashi, and through
them the newly created stars, nature, animals and finally Man, as he
exists now, come to life. I include below some information on the
mysterious Ethkay-nah-ashi, portrayed in the final sandpainting (Set I),
as they are evidently basically connected with the Hozhonji ceremony and
once apparently had a rite or ceremony of their own. This mystery of
life coming through dead substance from God to Creation I have mentioned
in my general introduction.

 Later, the myth tells how, after beginning creation, these first Powers
passed up to the third or yellow world where the first sin occurred, and
then up to this world, which is the white world. In the ceremony as
given by Hasteen Klah, the path upward is shown in the sandpaintings
(Set I) with the colors of the four worlds along the path. The Hozhonji
is the most universally <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> understandable
of all Navajo ceremonies, as it concerns the blessing of the path of
Man, or of life itself, and all who are present at the final ceremony,
whether initiate or not, are expected to walk along the path upward on
the sandpainting. The first three sandpaintings illustrated are not used
now, for the ceremony has become shortened so that it consists of an
evening of singing and ceremonial bathing, the making of the
sandpainting in the morning of the next day and singing all that night.

 The ceremony used to be at least four days long because the first
sandpainting in this series was made at quite a distance outside and
east of the ceremonial Hogahn, and the first rite took place there. On
the second day the second sandpainting was made nearer the Hogahn and
east of it, and on the third day the third sandpainting was made outside
the door of the Hogahn, and then the fourth sandpainting was made in the
Hogahn and west of the fire as it is today.

 Nowadays the ceremony is of one night and one day, and it has several
unusual features. It begins in the evening with blessing the Hogahn by
putting pollen up on the roof beams at the four directions, and singing.
Next day the sandpainting is made not, as usual, out of rock sand, but
of pollen and powdered plant substances. The person for whom the
ceremony is given sits south of it and sings, holding what I believe to
be the symbol of Estsan-ah-tlehay, the Changing Woman, who never appears
in any sandpainting, though she is very holy. This symbolic object is an
ear of corn, wreathed in strings of turquoise, white shell and other
beads; and Klah, the Medicine Man, held another similar ear of corn.
They also held pieces of so-called mirage stone, Hadahonigay, which look
like striped stalactite, and a pair of small images made of this stone
with inlaid features of turquoise. Tied together with prayer plumes,
these images are probably a male and female symbol of the
Ethkay-nah-ashi. After many songs had been sung, the person for whom the
<span id="page_167">p. 167</span> ceremony was being given, instead of
being placed on the sandpainting for treatment as in all other
ceremonies, walked in the footsteps on the painting up the path of life,
following the Medicine Man. After them, walking in the footsteps, passed
all the men, women, and children in the Hogahn, the women carrying the
seed corn. Then the painting was covered with a blanket, and the
patient, his family and Klah sat on it, facing east, and sang. The
painting was left there, covered with the blanket, so the painting
permanently blessed the Hogahn, becoming part of the earth floor.

 These Hozhonji sand paintings are a form of prayer showing in a set of
symbols the Navajos’ aspiration towards higher things, and the last
sandpainting, if understood, puts down the miracle of birth in a
wonderfully spiritual way. They are nearer to the idea expressed in the
Mandalas of Tibet than any of the other sandpaintings. Nearly all
Medicine Men know the Hozhonji ceremony, but most of them give it
without sandpaintings. Klah told me that one form of the Blessing Chant
used to be held to bless the tame animals and some of the sandpaintings
were made in the corral and along the path leading to it.

 The medicine articles of the Hozhonji are always kept by the Medicine
Man’s family after he dies, for even if they are not used they bring
blessing to those possessing them.

 I include here all the information I have been able to gather about the
Ethkay-nah-ashi and the ceremony connected with them. It is only the
older priests and those really initiated who know about them. Most would
call the figures in the last Hozhonji sandpainting (of set I)
Nayenezgani and Tobachischin, but the ones who know the inner meaning
say that the Ethkay-nah-ashi are in every ceremony, although exact
knowledge of them has been lost. Even the Hopis and the people of Taos
have heard of them.

 *Information from Hasteen Klah*. The ceremony of the Ethkay-nah-ashi
used to be given on the afternoon of the fourth sandpainting <span
id="page_168">p. 168</span> of the Yehbechai. Klah knew the prayers but
did not have the medicine which always descended through a woman from
the last expert who lived about 300 years ago. The medicine went to the
priest at that time and then to his daughter who married west of the
Chuskai Mountains.

 The ceremony took place outside the Hogahn. The priest held the
Ethkay-nah-ashi masks, and a man and the Yeh came up to him and danced
toward the Ethkay-nah-ashi from the east, south, west and north. The man
held a basket full of jewelry. The priest put the mask of the
Ethkay-nah-ashi on the man’s face and led him into the Hogahn. The
Ethkay-nah-ashi belong to Begochiddy, the Great God, and are next in
order to him in holiness. The earthly forms are small twins who ride on
little deer which bear twin male deer, and these, when they have been
smothered by pollen (killed without the shedding of blood) are made into
Yehbechai masks.

 In 1930, A. J. Newcomb and Klah went to see if they could find some
masks of the Ethkay-nah-ashi which Father Berard Haile knew of, and they
found them in the possession of a woman near Ganado who said they must
never pass into the hands of a man when not in use. As far as Klah knew,
there were two masks at Lukachukai and two near Houk.

 Another form of the Ethkay-nah-ashi ceremony given many years ago near
Crown Point was described by Klah as follows:

 They made two paths of white cornmeal, radiating from the Hogahn in all
four directions. There were two people who came from the east wearing
Yehbechai masks, and the patient and the Medicine Man came out of the
Hogahn wearing the masks of the Ethkay-nah-ashi, and they stood at the
meeting of the paths of white meal, the Medicine Man standing at the
north of the patient.

 Klah thought this ceremony was given only in the
Nan-tizi-hatral-nantso, which was like the ceremony of Kin-be-hatral
with the screen of reeds, and the birds hanging over it, only, <span
id="page_169">p. 169</span> instead of the snakes’ heads projecting from
the screen there were Yehs (gods) in the holes of the Kin (screen).
Behind the Kin there were two Yehs sitting facing each other who were
grinding the medicine, while at the north a man with pumpkin shells tied
all over him ground the incense.

 At sundown, there was a dance of six dancers, the Kin-nakai like the
Yehbechai, but painted differently. On the last day of the ceremony at
noon six groups danced. From the east the Ih-ahe-tso, a woman and a man,
arm in arm, the woman carrying a basket of beans, and these dancers came
from the south, west, and north and then went away. The Kin-nakai
dancers came next dancing at sundown. Afterward, the Willa-chee (red
ant) dancers, all painted red with white hands. After these the
Yah-da-del-trahe lifting their feet high. Then the Yeh-nant-eh in line,
facing the Hogahn. Then Hashje-hogahn, then four Atsathle dancers like
the first dance of the Yehbechai, then the Atsathle-etsosi, which are
the usual dancers of the last night of the Yehbechai as it is done now.

 *Information from Estsan Hatrali Begay, son of the Woman Singer of Red
Rock who gave the Kin-behatral and Tsilthkehji Nahtohe Ceremonies in
1937*. He gives the Hozhonji - Blessing Chant, but uses no sandpaintings
and no Kehtahns, and it is a prayer cerernony of only one day. The
Ethkay-nah-ashi belong to the Blessing Chant and they are in all
ceremonies. One of them comes from the morning light and one from the
evening light. The relatives of Akdilthly, who live near Lukachukai,
have two masks, one white, one blue. When these masks were investigated
by Clyde Beyal and Mrs. Newcomb, the man who directed them to the woman
who had the masks said no one dared to use them now because the last
people who tried to use them all died. The masks were to be used to make
someone who hated you friendly again, but when not used right the masks
were so powerful that they killed those who used them. There was no
sandpainting or ceremony used with them. The <span id="page_170">p.
170</span> last person who used these masks was Hatrali Nahkloi.
(Hasteen Nahkloi was Klah’s teacher and gave Washington Matthews his
version of the Yehbechai.)

 The old woman who holds the masks now belongs to the Kih-ahni Clan. She
had them in a roll of white cloth about fourteen inches long by eight
inches in thickness. There were three inside wrappings; the first inside
one must be white buckskin tied with buckskin thongs. When this was
opened there were two other buckskin wrapped bundles. She sprinkled the
whole thing with pollen, and then opened the two. Inside were two very
beautiful Yeh masks made of the whitest buckskin, with blue faces. One
was square and one round, each one surrounded with red hair which lobked
like lamb or mountain sheep wool dyed red. The design on the faces was
not visible because across each face lay four prayer-plume bundles. Mrs.
Newcomb thought it was a very old Yehbechai medicine. This old woman
said the bundles will go to her son if he ever learns to sing Yehbechai.
There is another pair of masks owned by the family of a man called
Denay-Nez-Begay who lived at Na-ah-tee.

 Evidently a man can use the masks and medicine, but they must be kept
in the hands of a woman when not in use.

### II

 The following description is of the Hozhonji ceremony as given by
Bitahni-bedugai, an old Medicine Man who lived near Tohatchi. He died in
1939. Bitahni said that he was the third member of his family who had
given this Blessing Chant. It came from Hasteen Tseh-nah-jinni, who was
the uncle of Bitahni-bedugai, and lived at Andilth Chilthly. The
sandpaintings mentioned are reproduced in Set <span
class="small">II</span>.

 Early in the morning of the first day, the patient takes the medicine
bundle in his hands and prays to Hashje-altye. Then a ceremonial bath is
given him and he is wiped off with white <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> meal, and puts on new clothes. His hair is untied. Then the
first sandpainting of Hahjeenah, the Emergence, is made, and the patient
holds pollen in his hands. The patient goes outside and ties up his
hair, then comes in and sits at west of painting facing east, holding
the medicine bundle, and prays. Afterwards he goes out of the Hogahn for
the rest of the day.

 In the evening the sandpainting of four mountains is made, with path
and footsteps on it leading into the sandpainting. The patient enters,
walking on the footsteps, and after him everyone in the Hogahn, with the
Medicine Man coming last and rubbing out the path behind him. The
patient sits on white circle in center and the Medicine Man on yellow
circle and they pray. Then the Medicine Man puts both circles together
and his patient sits on both and they sing and pray all night. The
person sitting next to the door at the south takes pollen and touches
his mouth and head with it, and all those in the Hogahn in turn do the
same. Twelve very holy Hogahn songs are sung, as well as many others.
Just before dawn twelve more very holy early morning songs are sung. The
sandpainting is piled together and the patient sleeps on it for four
nights, then he carries it out and puts it in the desert. After the
Medicine Man gets home he sings twelve finishing songs to guard himself
from trouble from Coyote.

### III

 Hasteen Yazzi, a Medicine Man who lives on the eastern side of the
reservation gave the following mythic origin of the sandpaintings used
in his ceremony of the Blessing Chant (Set <span
class="small">III</span>):

 “The story begins with the White Shell Woman. The earth people had the
chants and prayers belonging to the Hozhonji, but because they had no
paintings to guide them they constantly made mistakes. The White Shell
Woman told them that she <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> would help
them and have a ‘sing’ over herself and teach them the paintings.

 “First she took them to a field of white corn. She made her foot prints
in yellow pollen and then seated herself beneath a cornstalk. This stalk
of corn she had planted in the center of the cornfield. Here she said
all the chants and prayers and when she had finished, a bluebird came
and perched upon the flower tassel of the corn and sang. In this way she
knew that she had done everything perfectly.

 “Throughout the night the White Shell Woman prayed and the next day she
made the second painting of her house of the clouds. Again she made the
house of the clouds and the seat and place for the medicine basket. This
done, she took the seat and placed a medicine basket full of suds in
front of her and taking off her clothes, washed and bathed her body and
hair. She finished by chanting and prayers and then told the earth
people that she had now taught them the paintings and to use them
hereafter for blessings, crops, more children, or anything of that
kind.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ncm8)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
