[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe30118)  [Next](sbe30120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983862/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 2 (SBE30)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

# ÂPASTAMBA'S

# YA*GÑ*A-PARIBHÂSHÂ-SÛTRAS.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## GENERAL RULES OF THE SACRIFICE.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1">1</span></span>

### SÛTRA I.

We shall explain the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1_c">1<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Ya*gñ*a, sacrifice, is an act by which we surrender something for the
sake of the gods. Such an act must rest on a sacred authority (âgama),
and serve for man's salvation (*s*reyo<sup>ऽ</sup>rtha). The nature of
the gift is of less importance. It may be puro*d*â*s*a, cake; karu,
pulse; sâ*m*nâyya, mixed milk; pa*s*u, an animal; soma, the juice of the
Soma-plant, &c.; nay, the smallest offerings of butter, flour, and milk
may serve for the purpose of a sacrifice.

Ya*gñ*a, yâga, ya*g*ana, and ish*t*i are considered as synonymes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_2">2</span></span>

### SÛTRA II.

The sacrifice is for the three colours or castes (var*n*a), for
Brâhma*n*as and Râ*g*anyas, also for the Vai*s*ya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_2_c">2<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Though the sacrifice is meant for the three castes, here called var*n*a,
i.e. colour, the third caste, that of the Vai*s*ya or citizen, is
mentioned by itself, while the two castes, the Brâhma*n*as and
Râ*g*anyas (the Kshatriyas or nobles), are mentioned together. This is
done because there are certain sacrifices (bahuya*g*amâna), performed by
Brâhma*n*as and Râ*g*anyas together, in which Vai*s*yas take no part. In
the *S*âṅkhâyana-sûtras, I, 1, 3, also

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

the Vai*s*ya is mentioned by himself. In Kâtyâyana's Sûtras, however, no
such distinction is made. and we read, I, 6,
Brâhma*n*a-râ*g*anya-vai*s*yânâ*m* *s*rute*h*. Women, if properly
married, are allowed to participate in sacrifices, but no one is allowed
to be accompanied by a Sûdrâ woman, even though she be his wife.
Properly a Brâhma*n*a should marry a wife of his own caste only. A
Kshatriya may marry a woman of his own or of the Brâhma*n*a caste. A
Vai*s*ya's proper wife should be taken from his own caste. See, however,
Manu III, 12 seq.

The four castes, with the *S*ûdra as the fourth, are mentioned once in
the *Ri*g-veda, X, yo, 12. The opposition between Âryas and *S*ûdras
occurs in the Atharva-veda, XIX, 62, &c., and in most of the
Brâhma*n*as. In the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a we read of the four castes,
Brâhma*n*a, Râ*g*anya, Vai*s*ya, and *S*ûdra, and we are told that none
of them vomits the Soma. Kâtyâyana excludes from the sacrifice the
aṅgahîna, cripple, sha*nd*a, eunuch, and all a*s*rotriyas, persons
ignorant of the Veda, which would bar, of course, the whole class of the
*S*ûdras, but they are also specially excluded. Concessions, however,
had to be made at an early time, for instance, in the case of the
Rathakâra, who is admitted to the Agnyâdhâna, &c. This name means
chariot-maker, but Âpadeva, in his Mîmâ*m*sâ-nyâya-prakâ*s*a, remarks
that, though rathakâra means a chariot-maker etymologically, it should
be taken here as the name of a clan, namely that of the Saudhanvanas
(MS. Mill 46, p. 13<sup>b</sup>). Deva, in his commentary on the
Kâtyâyana-sûtras, makes the same remark. See also Weber, Ind. Stud. X,
12 seq. These Saudhanvanas, often identified with the *Ri*bhus, are
evidently the followers of B*ri*bu, mentioned RV. VI, 45, 31; 33, and
wrongly called B*ri*dhu in Manu X, 107; see M.M., Hist. of A.S.L., p.
494. In the *S*âṅkhâyana-*S*rauta-sûtras, XVI, 11, 11 (ed. Hillebrandt),
he is rightly called B*ri*bu. In later times Rathakâra is the name of a
caste, and its members are supposed to be the offspring of a marriage
between a Mâhishya and a Kara*n*î. A Mâhishya is the son of a Kshatriya
and a Vai*s*yâ,

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

a Kara*n*î the daughter of a Vai*s*ya and a *S*ûdrâ. Sudhanvan also is
used in Manu X, 23, as the name of a caste, namely the offspring of
fallen (vrâtya) Vai*s*yas.

Another exception is made in favour of a Nishâdasthapati, a Nishâda
chieftain. If it meant a chieftain of Nishâdas, it might be meant for a
Kshatriya who happens to be a chieftain of Nishâdas. Here it is meant
for a chieftain who is himself a Nishâda, a native settler. He is
admitted to the Gavedhuka sacrifice.

Again, although, as a rule, the sacrificer must have finished his study
of the Veda and be married, a sacrifice is mentioned which a
Brahma*k*ârin, a student, may perform. The case thus provided for is, yo
brahma*k*ârî striyam upeyât, sa gardabham pa*s*um âlabheta. As these
sacrificers are not upanîta, and therefore without the sacred fires,
their sacrifices have to be performed with ordinary fires, and the
sacrificial offerings, the puro*d*â*s*as, are not cooked in kapâlas,
jars, but on the earth, while the avadânas (cuttings), heart, tongue,
&c., are sacrificed in water, and not in fire. The Nishâda chieftain has
to learn the necessary Vedic verses by heart, without having passed
through a regular course of Vedic study. The same applies to women, who
have to recite certain verses during the sacrifice.

That certain women are admitted to the sacrifice, is distinctly stated
by Kâtyâyana, I, 1, 7, strî kâvi*s*eshât.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_3">3</span></span>

### SÛTRA III.

The sacrifice is prescribed by the three Vedas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_3_c">3<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

In order to know the whole of the sacrifice, one Veda is not sufficient,
still less one sâkhâ (recension) only. The sacrifice is conceived as a
whole, and its members (aṅgas) are described in different parts of the
three Vedas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4">4</span></span>

### SÛTRA IV.

By the *Ri*g-veda, the Ya*g*ur-veda, the Sâma-veda (is the sacrifice
prescribed).

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5">5</span></span>

### SÛTRA V.

The Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsau, the new and full-moon sacrifices, are
prescribed by the *Ri*g-veda and the Ya*g*ur-veda.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6">6</span></span>

### SÛTRA VI.

The Agnihotra is prescribed by the Ya*g*ur-veda.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7">7</span></span>

### SÛTRA VII.

The Agnish*t*oma is prescribed by all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7_c">7<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

By saying all, the Atharva-veda is supposed to be included, at least
according to one commentator.

The Agnish*t*oma requires sixteen priests, the Pa*s*u sacrifices six,
the *K*âturmâsyas five, the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsas four.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8">8</span></span>

### SÛTRA VIII.

With the *Ri*g-veda and Sâma-veda the performance takes place with a
loud voice (u*kk*ai*h*).

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8_c">8<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Even lines of the Ya*g*ur-veda, if they are contained in the *Ri*g-veda
and Sâma-veda, would have to be pronounced with a loud voice. Certain
mantras, however, are excepted, viz. the *g*apa, abhimantra*n*a, and
anumantra*n*a-mantras.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9">9</span></span>

### SÛTRA IX.

With the Ya*g*ur-veda the performance takes place by murmuring
(upâ*ms*u).

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9_c">9<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

This murmuring, upâ*ms*u, is described as a mere opus operatum, the
words being repeated without voice and without thought. One may see the
movements of the vocal organs in murmuring, but one should not hear them
at a distance. If verses from the *Ri*g-veda or Sâma-veda

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

occur in the Ya*g*ur-veda, they also have to be murmured. See Kâty. I,
3, 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10">10</span></span>

### SÛTRA X.

With the exception of addresses, replies, choosing of priests (pravara),
dialogues, and commands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10_c">10<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

As all these are meant to be understood by others, they have therefore
to be pronounced in a loud voice. The address (â*s*ruta) is o*m*
*s*râvaya; the reply (pratyâ*s*ruta) is astu *s*rausha*t* <span
id="fr_796"></span>[1](#fn_796); the choosing of priests (pravara) is
agnir devo hotâ; a dialogue (sa*m*vâda) is brahman prokshishyâmi, om
proksha; a command (sampresha) is proksha*n*îr âsâdaya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11">11</span></span>

### SÛTRA XI.

In the Sâmidhenî hymns the recitation is to be between (the high and the
low tone).

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11_c">11<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The Sâmidhenîs are the hymns used for lighting the fire. One commentator
explains antarâ, between, as between high tone (krush*t*a) and the
murmuring (upâ*ms*u). Another distinguishes three high tones, the
krush*t*a (also called târa or krau*ñk*a), the madhyama, and the mandra,
and assigns the madhyama to the Sâmidhenî hymns. The mandra notes come
from the chest, the madhyama notes from the throat, the uttama notes
from the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12">12</span></span>

### SÛTRA XII.

Before the Â*g*yabhâgas (such as the Â*g*ya-portions at the
Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa), and at the morning Savana (oblation of Soma), the
recitation is to be with the soft (mandra) voice.

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12_c">12<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The pronunciation is loud, u*kk*ai*h*, but soft, mandra. Satyavrata
restricts this rule to the passages mentioned in Sûtra X. He also treats
the second part of Sûtras XII, XIII, and XIV as separate Sûtras.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13">13</span></span>

### SÛTRA XIII.

Before the Svish*t*ak*ri*t (at the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa) sacrifice, and
at the midday Savana, the recitation is to be with the middle voice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14">14</span></span>

### SÛTRA XIV.

In the remainder and at the third Savana with the sharp (krush*t*a)
voice <span id="fr_797"></span>[1](#fn_797).

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14_c">14<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The remainder refers to the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa sacrifice, the three
Savanas to the Soma sacrifice. Satyavrata takes all these rules as
referring to the cases mentioned in Sûtra X.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_15">15</span></span>

### SÛTRA XV.

The movement of the voice is the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_15_c">15<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

In the three cases mentioned before, the voice moves quickly, when the
words are to be pronounced high; slowly, when low; and measuredly, when
neither loud nor low.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16">16</span></span>

### SÛTRA XVI.

The Hot*ri*-priest performs with the *Ri*g-veda.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_17">17</span></span>

### SÛTRA XVII.

The Udgât*ri*-priest with the Sâma-veda.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18">18</span></span>

### SÛTRA XVIII.

The Adhvaryu-priest with the Ya*g*ur-veda.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19">19</span></span>

### SÛTRA XIX.

The Brahma-priest with all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19_c">19<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

'With all' means with the three Vedas, because the Brahma-priest, or
superintendent of the whole sacrifice, must be acquainted with the three
Vedas. Others would include the Atharva-veda.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20">20</span></span>

### SÛTRA XX.

When it is expressly said, or when it is rendered impossible, another
priest also may act.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_20_c">20<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Vipratishedha is explained by asambhava and a*s*akti.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21">21</span></span>

### SÛTRA XXI.

The priestly office (ârtvi*g*ya) belongs to the Brâhma*n*as.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21_c">21<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Sacrifices may be performed for Kshatriyas, Vai*s*yas, and, in certain
cases, even for others, but never by any but Brâhma*n*as. The reason
given for this is curious,—because Brâhma*n*as only are able to eat the
remains of a sacrifice. See *S*atap. Br. II, 3, 1, 39; Kâtyâyana IV, 14,
11; also I, 2, 8, cont.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_22">22</span></span>

### SÛTRA XXII.

For all sacrifices the fires are laid once.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_22_c">22<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The sacrificial fires have to be arranged for the first time

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

by a peculiar ceremony, called the Agnyâdhâna. They are generally three
(Tretâ), the Gârhapatya, the father; the Dakshi*n*a, the son; and the
Âhavanîya, the grandson. The first laying of the Gârhapatya fire-altar
takes place in spring for a Brâhma*n*a, in summer for a Râ*g*anya, in
winter for a Vai*s*ya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23">23</span></span>

### SÛTRA XXIII.

If it is said, *g*uhoti, 'he sacrifices,' it should be known that sarpir
â*g*ya, melted butter, is meant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23_c">23<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Sarpis is here taken as an adjective, running; yad asarpat tat sarpir
abhavat. Â*g*ya is explained as navanîtavikâradravya*g*âtîyava*k*ana*h*
sabda*h*, i.e. a word signifying any kind of substance made of fresh
butter.

In the Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a I, 3, we read â*g*ya*m* vai devânâ*m*
surabhi, gh*ri*tam manushyâ*n*âm, ayutam pit*rîn*âm, navanîta*m*
garbhâ*n*âm, 'Â*g*ya is sweet or fragrant to the gods, gh*ri*ta to men,
ayuta to the manes, navanîta to children.' Here the commentator explains
that â*g*ya is butter, when melted (vilîna*m* sarpis), gh*ri*ta, when
hardened. Ayuta, sometimes called astu, is butter, when slightly melted,
nishpakva, when thoroughly melted. According to Kâtyâyana I, 8, 37,
â*g*ya is of different kinds. It may be simple gh*ri*ta, which, as a
rule, should be made of the milk of cows. But in the absence of â*g*ya,
the milk of buffaloes (mâhisha), or oil (taila), or sesam-oil
(*g*ârtila), or linseed oil (atasîsneha), &c., may be taken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24">24</span></span>

### SÛTRA XXIV.

If it is said, *g*uhoti, it should be known that the Adhvaryu is meant
as performer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24_c">24<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Though there is a man who offers the sacrifice, yet the actual homa, the
throwing of butter &c. into the fire, has to be performed by the
Adhvaryu priest.

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_25">25</span></span>

### SÛTRA XXV.

Likewise, the spoon (*g*uhû) as the vessel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_25_c">25<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

*G*uhû, the spoon, is so called because it is used for pouring out
(*g*uhoti, homa).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_796"></span>[319:1](sbe30119.htm#fr_796) See Hillebrandt,
Das Altind. Neu- and Vollmondsopfer, p. 94.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[320:1](sbe30119.htm#fr_797) See on this,
*Ri*g-veda Prâti*s*âkhya 13, 17; Â*s*val. I, 5, 27; Sâṅkh. I, 14;
Hillebrandt, l.c. p. 103.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sûtras 26-50](sbe30120)
