[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe30124)  [Next](sbe30126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983862/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 2 (SBE30)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ÂPASTAMBA'S YA*GÑ*A-PARIBHÂSHÂ-SÛTRAS. (*cont*.)

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_151">151</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLI.

From the end there takes place omission or addition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_151_c">151<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

This refers again to the same subject, namely what has to be done if
there are either more or less mantras than there are acts which they are
to accompany. In that case it is here allowed to use as many mantras as
there are acts, and to drop the rest of the mantras. Or, if there are
less mantras than there are acts, then, after the mantras have been
equally divided, the last verse is to be multiplied. For instance, in
the Dvikapâla sacrifice for the two A*s*vins, the placing of the two
kapâlas is accompanied by two mantras. The rest of the mantras enjoined
in the prak*ri*ti is left out. But if there are, for instance, twelve or
more ish*t*akâs, bricks, to be placed, while there are only ten mantras,
then the mantras are equally divided, and the fifth and tenth to be
repeated, as many times as is necessary to equal the number of the
ish*t*akâs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_152">152</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLII.

As the Prak*ri*ti has been told before, anything that has not been told
before, should be at the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_152_c">152<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

This seems to mean that anything new, peculiar to a Vik*ri*ti, and not
mentioned in the Prak*ri*ti, should come in at the end, that is, after
those portions of the sacrifice which are enjoined in the Prak*ri*ti.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_153">153</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLIII.

The rule should stand on account of the fitness of the Kumbhi, a large
pot, the *S*ûla, the spit for boiling the heart, and the two
Vapâ*s*rapa*n*îs, the spits for roasting the vapâ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_153_c">153<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Kumbhî is explained by sro*n*yâdipâkasamarthâ

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

b*ri*hatî sthâlî; *S*ûla by h*ri*dayapâkârthâ yash*t*i*h*, and
Vapâ*s*rapa*n*î by vapâ*s*rapa*n*ârthe yash*t*î dve. The exact object of
the Sûtra is not quite clear. Prabhutva is explained by samarthatva,
that is, fitness. This would mean, that on account of their fitness, or
because they can be used for the object for which they are intended, or,
so long as they can be used, the rule applying to them should remain.
The commentary explains tantram by tantratâ or ekatâ. It may mean that
the same pots and spits should be used, so long as they fulfil their
purpose. The next Sûtra would then form a natural limitation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_154">154</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLIV.

But if there is a different kind of animal, there is difference (in pots
and spits), owing to the diversity of cooking.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_154_c">154<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

If different animals are to be cooked, then there must be different pots
for each (pratipa*s*um), because each requires a different kind of
cooking. The commentary adds that, as the reason for using different
pots is given, that reason applies also to young and old animals of the
same kind (*g*âti), i, e. the young and small animal would require a
different pot and a different kind of cooking.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_155">155</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLV.

At the Vanaspati sacrifice, which is a modification (vikâra) of the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t, the addresses (nigama) of the deities should take place
in the Yâ*g*yâ, because they are included in the Prak*ri*ti.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_155_c">155<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

These nigamas of the deities are not mentioned in the rules of the
Vanaspati sacrifice, but they are mentioned in the rules for the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t sacrifice of the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa, which is the
Prak*ri*ti, and should therefore be taken over. Here again, because a
reason is given, it is

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

understood that the same reason would apply to other portions of
Svish*t*ak*ri*t also, such as the Dvir abhighâra*n*a, which is to be
retained in the Vanaspati sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_156">156</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLVI.

The Anvârambha*n*îyâ or initiatory ceremony does not take place in a
Vik*ri*ti, because the Vik*ri*tis would fall within the time of the
Prak*ri*ti, and the Anvârambha*n*îyâ has but one object, namely (the
initiation of) the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_156_c">156<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The Anvârambha*n*îyâ ceremony has to be performed by those who begin the
Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa sacrifice. It has thus one object only, and is never
enjoined for any other cause. It is not therefore transferred to any
Vik*ri*ti, such as the Saurya ceremony, &c. The Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa
sacrifice having to be performed during the whole of life, or during
thirty years, the Vik*ri*tis would necessarily fall within the same
space of time. The initiatory ceremony has reference to the
Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa sacrifice only, and thus serves as an introduction
to all the Vik*ri*tis, without having to be repeated for each.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_157">157</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLVII.

Or (according to others) the Anvârambha*n*îyâ should take place (in the
Vik*ri*tis also), because the time (of the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa) does not
form an essential part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_157_c">157<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

This Sûtra is not quite clear. It shows clearly enough that, according
to some authorities, the Anvârambha*n*îyâ or initiatory ceremony of the
Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa sacrifice should take place in the Vik*ri*tis also;
but why? Because the time has not the character of a *s*esha, which is
said to be a synonym of aṅga, an essential part of a sacrifice.

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When it is said
that the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa should be performed during life, this is
not meant as determining the time of the sacrifice. It only means that
so long as there is life a man should perform these sacrifices, and that
their non-performance would constitute a sin. The former argument,
therefore, that the time of the Vik*ri*ti sacrifices would fall within
the time of the Prak*ri*ti sacrifice is not tenable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_158">158</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLVIII.

And again, because there is difference in the undertaking.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_158_c">158<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Ârambha, the beginning, is explained as the determination to perform a
certain sacrifice (dar*s*apûr*n*amâsâbhyây*m* yakshya iti
ni*sk*ayapura*h*sara*h* saṅkalpa*h*). The object of the undertaking in
the case of the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa sacrifice, as the Prak*ri*ti, is
simply svarga, in the Vik*ri*tis it may be any kind of desire. Therefore
the Anvârambha*n*îyâ ceremony of the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsas should be
transferred to its Vik*ri*tis. This seems to have been the opinion of
the same authorities who are referred to in Sûtra CLVII. The final
outcome of the whole controversy, however, is clearly that our Â*k*ârya
is in favour of omitting the Anvârambha*n*îyâ in the Vik*ri*tis.
Anayo*h* pakshayor anvârambha*n*îyâbhâvapakshasyaiva balavattvam
â*k*âryâbhilashitam iti manyâmahe. The Anvârambha*n*îyâ is not to be
considered as an ordinary Aṅga, but as a special act to fit the
sacrificer to perform the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa and to perform it through
the whole of his life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_159">159</span></span>

### SÛTRA CLIX.

For every object (new sacrifice) let him bring forward the fire (let him
perform the Agnipra*n*ayana, the fetching of the Âhavanîya from the
Gârhapatya fire). When the sacrifice is finished

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

the fire becomes again ordinary fire, as when the (divine) fire has
returned (to the firesticks).

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_159_c">159<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The fire for a sacrifice is supposed to be set apart or consecrated
(*s*âstrîya), but it is so for a special sacrifice only, and when that
sacrifice is ended, it is supposed to become like ordinary fire again.
Artha is prayo*g*ana, the sacrifice for which the fire is intended
(agnisâdhyavihitakarmânush*th*ânam; tasya tasya vihitasya
karma*n*o<sup>ऽ</sup>nush*th*ânârtha*m* gârhapatyâdibhya
âhavanîyâdyagnim pra*n*ayet). The commentator remarks that there are two
Agnis, the one who is visible, the other who is the god. Now while the
divine Agni leaves the coals and ascends or is absorbed again in the two
firesticks (ara*n*î), the other remains like ordinary kitchen fire. See
on Samâroha*n*a, Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 311;
Â*s*valâyana-*S*rauta-sûtra III, 10, 4-5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](sbe30126)
