[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe30120)  [Next](sbe30122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983862/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 2 (SBE30)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ÂPASTAMBA'S YA*GÑ*A-PARIBHÂSHÂ-SÛTRAS. (*cont*.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_51">51</span></span>

### SÛTRA LI.

It is the same with numbers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_51_c">51<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

If we read that, as in the case of fees to be given to priests, two,
seven, eleven, twelve, twenty-one, sixty, or a hundred, this means that
either one or the other, not that all should be given at the same time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52">52</span></span>

### SÛTRA LII.

But accumulation is meant in the buying (of Soma), in the redemption,
and in initiation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52_c">52<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

When it is said that Soma is bought for a goat, gold, &c., that it is
re-bought from the priests by means of a fee, or that at the time of the
Dîkshâ, the purification and initiation of a sacrificer, clothes, gold,
grain, &c., should be given, these are cases not of aut-aut but of
et-et.

The Soma-plant, which is supposed to be bought from northern barbarians,
is botanically described in an Âyur-vedic extract, quoted in the
Dhûrtasvâmi-bhâshya*t*îkâ (MS. E.I.H. 531, p. 3<sup>b</sup>), as

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

*s*yâmâlâmlâ *k*a nishpatrâ kshîri*n*î tva*k*i mâ*m*salâ, *s*leshmalâ
vamanî vallî somâkhyâ *kh*âgabho*g*anam. 'The creeper called Soma is
dark, sour, without leaves, milky, fleshy on the surface, producing
phlegm and vomiting, food for goats.'

This passage, quoted from some Âyur-vedic text, is still the only one
which gives an approximative description of the Soma-plant. Dr. Hooker
says that the predicates 'sour and milky' point to Sarcostemma, but the
question is not decided yet. For further information see George Watt,
The Soma Plant, an extract from the third volume of the Dictionary of
Economic Products of India, and Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, pp. 14
seq.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_53">53</span></span>

### SÛTRA LIII.

If one has performed an offering to Rudra, to the Râkshasas, to
Nir*ri*ti, or to the Pit*ri*s, if one has cut or broken or thrown away
anything, or rubbed oneself, &c., one should touch water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_53_c">53<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The touching of water is for the sake of purification. Nirasana is left
out in some MSS. The *k*a, inserted after abhimar*s*anâni, is explained,
as usual, as including other acts also, corresponding to our etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_54">54</span></span>

### SÛTRA LIV.

All priestly performances take place on the northern side of the Vihâra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_54_c">54<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Uttarata-upa*k*âra*h* has to be taken as a compound. Vihâra is explained
as vihriyante<sup>ऽ</sup>gnaya*h* pâtrâ*n*i *k*a yasmin de*s*e, i.e. the
sacrificial ground. Upa*k*âra is explained as adhvaryvâdînâ*m*
sa*mk*ara*h*, and this sa*mk*ara, according to Kâtyâyana I, 3, 42, is
the path between the *K*âtvâla and Utkara, the Utkara being on the west,
the pra*n*îtâs on the east of the Vihâra. Kâtyâyana I, 8, 26, expresses
the same rule by uttarata-upa*k*âro ya*gñ*a*h*, the vihâra being the
place where the ya*gñ*a takes place.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_55">55</span></span>

### SÛTRA LV.

The priest should never turn away from the fire, i.e. should never turn
his back on the altar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56">56</span></span>

### SÛTRA LVI.

Nor from the Vihâra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57">57</span></span>

### SÛTRA LVII.

Sacrificial utensils should be turned inside, the performers being
outside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_57_c">57<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The meaning is that the priest should carry such things is spoons,
vessels, &c., holding them towards the altar. The sacrificer and his
wife should likewise be on the inside of the priest, and the priests
should take precedence sideways according to their rank.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58">58</span></span>

### SÛTRA LVIII.

After a sacrificial object has been hallowed by a Mantra, the priest
should not toss it about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_59">59</span></span>

### SÛTRA LIX.

Sacrificial acts intended for the gods, should be performed by the
priest towards the east or towards the north, after he has placed the
Brahmanic cord over the left and under the right arm (ya*gñ*opavîtin),
and turning towards the right.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_60">60</span></span>

### SÛTRA LX.

Sacrificial acts intended for the Fathers should be performed by the
priest towards the south, after he has placed the Brahmanic cord over
the right and

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

under the left arm (prâ*k*înâvîtin), and turning towards the left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61">61</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXI.

Ropes which have to be joined, should be joined by the priest from left
to right, after having tied them from right to left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_62">62</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXII.

Ropes which are not joined (single ropes), should be tied by the priest
from left to right.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_62_c">62<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The exact process here intended is not quite clear. The ropes seem to
have been made of vegetable fibres. See Katy. I, 3,15-17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63">63</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXIII.

Let a man sacrifice with the Amâvâsyâ sacrifice at the time of the
Amâvâsyâ, new moon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63_c">63<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Amâ-vâsyâ is the dwelling together, i.e. the conjunction, of sun and
moon, an astronomical expression which was adopted in the common
language of the people at a very early time. It does not occur, however,
in the *Ri*g-veda. In our Sûtra amâvâsyâ is used in the sense both of
new moon and new-moon sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64">64</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXIV.

And let a man sacrifice with the Paur*n*amâsyâ sacrifice at the time of
the Paur*n*amâsî, full moon, thus it is said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64_c">64<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Here the full moon is called paur*n*amâsî, the sacrifice paur*n*amâsyâ.
Satyavrata joins the two Sûtras in one, and leaves out ya*g*eteti, which
may have belonged to the commentary.

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_65">65</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXV.

Let a man observe that full-moon day as a day of abstinence on which the
moon comes out full before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_65_c">65<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The full moon (paur*n*amâsî) is really the very moment on which the moon
is full and therefore begins to decrease. That moment on which sun and
moon are, as the Hindus said, at the greatest distance from each other,
is called the parva-sandhi, the juncture of the two phases of the moon.
Thus the name of paur*n*amâsî belongs to the last day of the one and to
the first day (pratipad) of the other phase, and both days might be
called paur*n*amâsî. If therefore the moon is full on the afternoon, the
evening, or the twilight of one day, that day should be observed as a
fast-day, and the next day should be the day of sacrifice.

The meaning of purastâd, which I have translated by before, is doubtful.
One commentator says it has no object, and should be dropped, purastâd
ity etat padam asmin sûtra idânîm anvaya*m* na labhate
prayo*g*anâbhâvât. Purastâd, before, may, however, mean before the
second day, on which the real sacrifice takes place, and the commentator
mentions purastât-paur*n*amâsî as a name of the *k*aturda*s*î-yuktâ,
i.e. the full moon beginning on the fourteenth day. The same kind of
full moon is also called Anumati, Pûrvâ-paur*n*amâsî, and
Sandhyâ-paur*n*amâsî, while that which takes place on the pratipad, the
first day of the lunar phase, is called Râkâ, Uttarâ-paur*n*amâsî,
Astamitoditâ, and *S*va*h*pûritâ.

Corresponding to these two kinds of Paur*n*amâsî there are also two
kinds of Amâvâsyâ. That which falls on the fourteenth day is called
Pûrvâ-amâvâsyâ, or Sinîvâlî, the ἕνη καὶ νέα; that which falls on the
pratipad, the first day of the new phase, is called Kuhû,
Uttarâ-amâvâsyâ. *S*voyuktâ. See also Ait.-Brâhm. II, 4; Nir. XI, 31-32.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_66">66</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXVI.

Or the day when one says, To-morrow it will be full.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_66_c">66<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

In that case the day before should be observed as a day of abstinence.
The real full moon would then take place in the fore-noon, pûrvâh*n*e,
of the next day. Abstinence, upavâsa, consists in abstaining from meat
and from maithuna, in shaving beard and head, cutting the nails, and,
what seems a curious provision, in speaking the truth. See
Kâty.-*S*rauta-sûtras II, I, 8-12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_67">67</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXVII.

The Vâ*g*asaneyins mention a third, the Kharvikâ full moon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_67_c">67<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Kharva means small. If one divides the night into twelve parts, and if
in a portion of the twelfth part the greatest distance of sun and moon
takes place, then the full moon is called kharvikâ, also kshî*n*â. Or,
if on the sixteenth day, the full moon takes place before noon, that
also is called kharvikâ paur*n*amâsî. In that case abstinence or fasting
takes place on the sixteenth day (tasyâ*m* sho*d*a*s*e<sup>ऽ</sup>hany
upavâsa*h*). Both paur*n*amâsîs are also called sadyaskâlâ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_68">68</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXVIII.

Let a man observe that new-moon day (amâvâsyâ) as a day of abstinence,
on which the moon is not seen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_68_c">68<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

This Sûtra has to be connected with Sûtra LXV. The abstinence takes
place on the day, if the actual new moon, the nearest approach of sun
and moon, falls on the afternoon, at night, or at twilight. And this new
moon, the junction of the fifteenth day and the pratipad, is called
Kuhû. We should read amâvâsyâm.

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_69">69</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXIX.

Or the day when one says, To-morrow they will not see it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_69_c">69<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

In that case, when the real new moon takes place in the fore-noon,
abstinence is observed on the day before, and the new moon is called
Sinîvâlî. Satyavrata reads *s*vo yukta iti vâ instead of *s*vo na
drash*t*âra iti vâ. Drash*t*âra*h* should be explained as îkshitâra*h*,
'they will not see it.' There is much difference of opinion on this
subject among different *S*âkhâs, Sûtrakâras, and their commentators;
see Taitt. Sa*m*h. III, 4, 9; Weber, Ind. Stud., V, p. 228.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_70">70</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXX.

The principal acts (pradhâna), prescribed in one (typical) performance,
follow the same special rules (vidhâna).

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_70_c">70<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

This Sûtra is variously explained: Satyavrata's commentary, which I have
followed in the translation, explains pradhânâni as âgneyâdîni, i.e. the
chief parts of such a sacrifice as the Dar*s*a-pûr*n*amâsa; vidhânâni as
aṅgâni. Kapardisvâmin's commentary also explains vidhânâni as the aṅgâni
of a pradhânam; pradhânam as pûr*n*amâsa, &c. It would therefore mean
that such ceremonies as the âgneya (ash*t*a-kapâla), âgnîshomîya
(ekâda*s*a-kapâla), and upâ*ms*u, which form the pradhânas of the
Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa, retain throughout the same vidhânas or aṅgas as
prescribed in one Prakara*n*a, viz. the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa. The Aṅgas or
members are all the things used for sacrificial purposes, milk, butter,
grains, animals, &c.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_71">71</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXXI.

The special rules are limited by (the purpose of) the (typical)
performance (prakara*n*a).

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_71_c">71<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Here the rules (vidhis) are again the Aṅgas, which belong to a
sacrifice, as the members belong to the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72">72</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXXII.

If no special instruction is given (in the *S*ruti), the acts are
general.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_73">73</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXXIII.

If a special instruction is given, they are restricted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_73_c">73<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

Nirde*s*a is explained as vi*s*esha-*s*ruti, and the meaning is supposed
to be that unless such a special rule is given, the Aṅgas of all the
Pradhâna acts remain the same, as, for instance, the Paryagnikara*n*a,
the Prayâ*g*as, &c. Special instructions are when it is said: payasâ
maitravaru*n*a*m* srî*n*âti, sruve*n*a puro*d*â*s*am anakti, he cooks
the Maitravaru*n*a with milk, he anoints the Puro*d*â*s*a with the
spoon, &c.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_74">74</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXXIV.

The Ash*t*â-kapâla for Agni, the Ekâda*s*a-kapâla for Agnî-Shomau, and
the Upâ*ms*uyâga (the muttered offering of butter), form the principal
acts at the Paur*n*amâsî, the full moon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_74_c">74<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The Ash*t*â-kapâla is the cake baked in eight cups, the Ekâda*s*a-kapâla
that baked in eleven cups, and respectively destined for Agni and Soma.
What is meant are the sacrificial acts for which these cakes are used.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_75">75</span></span>

### SÛTRA LXXV.

The other Homas are Aṅga.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_75_c">75<sup>c</sup></span></span>

**Commentary.**

The other acts, such as the prayâ*g*as and anuyâ*g*as, are auxiliary,
and have no promise of reward by themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sûtras 76-100](sbe30122)
