[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe30002)  [Next](sbe30004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983862/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 2 (SBE30)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA OF GOBHILA.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### INTRODUCTION

###### TO THE

### G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA OF GOBHILA.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> G*ri*hya-sûtra of Gobhila differs
from those of *S*âṅkhâyana, Â*s*valâyana, Pâraskara, Hira*n*yake*s*in in
one essential point: while these texts presuppose only the same Vedic
Sa*m*hitâs on which also the corresponding *S*rauta-sûtras are based,
viz. the *Ri*g-veda-Sa*m*hitâ, the Vâ*g*asaneyi-Sa*m*hitâ, and the
Taittirîya-Sa*m*hitâ; the Sûtra of Gobhila, on the other hand,
presupposes, beside the Sa*m*hitâ of the Sâma-veda <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80), another collection of Mantras which
evidently was composed expressly with the purpose of being used at
G*ri*hya ceremonies: this collection is preserved to us under the title
of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, and it has been edited at Calcutta (1873),
with a commentary and Bengali translation by Satyavrata
Sâma*s*ramin <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81).

Prof. Knauer of Kiew, to whom all students of the G*ri*hya literature
are highly indebted for his very accurate edition and translation of
Gobhila, has been the first to

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

examine into the relation in which the two texts, the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a
and the Gobhilîya-sûtra, stand to each other. He has very kindly enabled
me to make use, before they were published, of the results of his
investigations, which he has laid down in the introduction to his
translation of Gobhila. While I wish, therefore, to acknowledge the
obligation under which Prof. Knauer has thus laid me, I must try, on the
other side, to state my own opinion as to the problem in question, which
in some points differs from, or is even opposed to, the theory by which
Prof. Knauer has tried to solve it.

To begin with that side of the question regarding which there can
scarcely be any doubt: it is certain, I believe, that Gobhila supposes
the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a to be known to the students of his Sûtra. The
reasons which show this are obvious enough <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82). By far the greater part of the Mantras of
which Gobhila quotes the first words, are not found in the Sâma-veda
nor, for the most part, in any other Vedic Sa*m*hitâ, except in the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, in which they stand in exactly the same order in
which they are referred to by Gobhila. The descriptions of the G*ri*hya
sacrifices by Gobhila would have been meaningless and useless, and the
sacrificer who had to perform his domestic ceremonies according to the
ritual of Gobhila, would have been unable to do so, unless he had known
those Mantras as contained in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a. And not only the
Mantras, but also the order in which the Mantras stood, for Sûtras such
as, for instance, Gobh. II, 1, 10 ('With the two following verses he
should wash,' &c.), would have no meaning except for one who had studied
the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a which alone could show which 'the two following
verses' were.

There are, consequently, two possibilities: either the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a
existed before the Gobhilîya-sûtra, or the two works have been composed
together and on one common plan. It is the first of these alternatives
which Prof. Knauer maintains; I wish, on the other hand, to call

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the attention of Vedic scholars to some facts which seem to me to render
the second more probable.

A great part of the Mantras which have to be recited, according to
Gobhila, at the performance of the G*ri*hya ceremonies, are not given in
the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, but they are either found in the
Sâma-veda-Sa*m*hitâ and then their Pratîkas are quoted by Gobhila, or
they are cited by Gobhila in extenso. Thus for the ceremonies described
in the first Prapâ*th*aka of Gobhila, such as the morning and evening
offerings and the sacrifices of the full and new moon, the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a gives, with one single exception, no Mantras at
all <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83); but those Mantras, most of
which consist only of a few words, are given by Gobhila only. It is
scarcely to be believed that in a Sa*m*hitâ which had to contain the
Mantras required for the performance of the G*ri*hya sacrifices, the
Mantras belonging to the two daily and the two fortnightly sacrifices,
which occupy one of the first places among all G*ri*hya ceremonies and
are treated of accordingly in all G*ri*hya-sûtras, should have been
omitted, unless that Sa*m*hitâ was intended to stand in relation to
another text by which that deficiency was supplied: and the
Gobhilîya-sûtra exactly supplies it. Prof. Knauer thinks that those
Mantras were omitted because they had already found their place in the
*S*rauta ritual; but we must not forget that in the *S*rauta ritual o f
the Sâma-vedins neither the Agnihotra nor the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa
sacrifices, which are performed without the assistance of priests of the
Udgât*ri* class, are treated of. Moreover the one Mantra to which we
have already alluded <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84), the single one
which corresponds in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a to the first book of Gobhila,
seems to me quite sufficient to show that it was not the intention of
the compiler of that text to disregard that group of sacrifices; he gave
that Mantra only, because the other Mantras, consisting of but a few
words, were given in extenso in the Gobhila text. The Mantra of which we
speak, belongs to the description

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of the paryuksha*n*a of the sacrificial fire. The sacrificer pours out
water to the south, the west, and the north of the fire, with the
Mantras, 'Adite<sup>ऽ</sup>numanyasva,' 'Anumate<sup>ऽ</sup>numanyasva,'
'Sarasvaty anumanyasva'; then he sprinkles water round the fire once or
three times with a longer Mantra, 'Deva Savita*h* prasuva ya*gñ*am
prasuva ya*gñ*apatim bhagâya. Divyo gandharva*h* ketapû*h* keta*m* na*h*
punâtu. Vâ*k*aspatir vâ*k*a*m* na*h* svadatu.' This last one is the
Mantra given in its entirety in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, while
Gobhila <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85) has only the first words of
it. To assume here that the author of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a knew only of
that one Mantra, and that at the time of Gobhila the custom of the
Sâma-vedins had undergone a change, so that they used four Mantras
instead of the one, would be, in my opinion, an artificial and not very
probable way of explaining the facts; a much more natural supposition
would be, I believe, that the Sûtra and the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a describe
one and the same form of the ceremony, so that the Brâhma*n*a, by
omitting the short Mantras, which were given in the Sûtra in their
entirety, implicitly refers to the Sûtra, and the Sûtra, on the other
hand, by quoting only the first words of the longer Mantra, refers to
the Brâhma*n*a in which the full text of that Mantra was given.

Among the numerous ceremonies described by Gobhila, which could furnish
the occasion for similar remarks, we select only two: the rites
performed in the evening of the wedding-day <span
id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86), and the sacrifice on the full-moon day of
Â*s*vayu*g*a <span id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87). The bridegroom, having
carried away his bride from her home, takes her to the house of a
Brâhma*n*a, and when the stars have appeared, he makes six oblations
with the six verses lekhâsandhishu pakshmasu (Mantra-Br. I, 3, 1-6):
these are given in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, and Gobhila has only the
Pratîka. Then follow two short Mantras: the bride, to whom the
polar-star has been shown, addresses that star with the words: dhruvam
asi dhruvâha*m* patikule bhûyâsam amushyâsâv iti;

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

and when she sees the star Arundhatî, she says, ruddhâham asmi. As the
full wording of these Mantras is given by Gobhila, they are omitted in
the Brâhma*n*a. Finally the bridegroom recites over the bride the *Rik*
dhruvâ dyaur dhruvâ p*ri*thivî, &c.; this we find in the M.-B. (I, 3,
7), the Pratîka only being quoted by Gobhila. If one were to suppose
here that in the two texts two different stages in the development of
this ceremony are represented, so that only the Mantras lekhâsandhishu
and dhruvâ dyau*h* would belong to the more ancient form of it, while
the Mantras dhruvam asi and ruddhâham asmi would have been introduced at
a later time, it may perhaps not be possible to disprove, in the
strictest sense of the word, such an opinion. But I think the data we
have given point to another solution of the problem which, if not the
only admissible, is yet the most probable and natural one. Gobhila gave
the full wording of the shorter Mantras with which the description of
the ceremony could be interwoven without becoming obscure or
disproportionate; the longer Mantras would have interrupted, rather
tediously and inconveniently, the coherency of his ritual statements; so
he separated them from the rest of his work and made a separate
Sa*m*hitâ of them. It is true that there are some exceptions to the rule
that all long Mantras are given in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a and all short
Mantras only in the Sara: on the one hand, there are some Mantras of
considerable extent that are given by Gobhila and omitted in the
Brâhma*n*a, thus, for instance, the Mantra yady asi saumî used at a
preparatory ceremony that belongs to the Pu*m*savana <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88). On the other hand, a number of short
Mantras which Gobhila gives in extenso, are found nevertheless also in
the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a: such is the case, for instance, with many of the
Mantras belonging to the worship of the Fathers, Gobhila IV, 2. 3,
Mantra-Br. II, 3.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It appears then,
that allowance must be made for a certain inconsistency or carelessness
in the distribution of the material between the two texts: and such an
assumption will easily be allowed by any one who does not entertain very
exaggerated ideas as to the care and reflection which presided over the
composition of the Sûtra texts.

I will add only a few words concerning a second G*ri*hya ceremony, which
calls for the same sort of comment as the rites which have just been
discussed. For the offering on the day of the full moon, Gobhila
prescribes (III, 8, 2) first the verse â no mitrâvaru*n*â, second the
verse mâ nastoke. The Mantra-Brâhma*n*a (II, 1, 8) has the second of
these verses only, not the first: conversely, the first verse alone, and
not the second, is to be found in the Sa*m*hitâ of the Sâma-veda (I,
220). We could hardly assume, as I think, that the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a
presupposed another form of the rite differing from Gobhila's; we should
be much more inclined to consider the leaving out of that matter, which
was contained in other texts of the Sâma-veda, as a proof that the
compiler of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a assumed that those texts were
known <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89).

And this brings me to one of Prof. Knauer's conjectures concerning the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a which I have not yet touched. According to tradition
we consider the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a as belonging to the Sâma-veda; in the
Calcutta edition it is designated as the 'Sâma-vedasya
Mantra-Brâhma*n*am.' Prof. Knauer thinks that it is doubtful whether the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a belonged to the Sâma-veda originally. He
conjectures <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90) 'that it existed already
in the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

period during which the separate schools were as yet in the process of
sifting, when there were as yet no Sâma-vedists in the later and
stricter sense of the term <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91).' For out
of 249 Mantras of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a there are only four which are
found in the Sâma-veda <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92), as Prof.
Knauer has shown, while a much greater number of these Mantras. occur in
the other Vedic Sa*m*hitâs. I should be inclined to conclude the other
way: just because the author of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a presupposed a
knowledge of the Sa*m*hitâ of the Sâma-veda, but not of the other
Vedas—or in other words because he destined his work for Sâma-vedins, he
did not need to repeat what was in the Sâma-veda, but was compelled to
incorporate in his compilation the Mantras out of the *Ri*g-veda or of
the Ya*g*ur-veda <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93). Moreover, I would
draw the same conclusions from the Mantras cited by Gobhila which are
absent in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, as I did from the Mantras which occur
in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, but are not to be found in the Sâma-veda.
Those Mantras are all to be found in the Sâma-veda with the exception of
those which Gobhila has in extenso, and which therefore could be omitted
in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a. If we examine the thirteen Mantras collected
by Prof. Knauer (p. 29), we find that in the case of nine of them the
passage of the Sâma-veda (always of the first Âr*k*ika of the Sâma-veda)
where they are to be found is quoted by Prof. Knauer.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The four other cases are:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*rik*a*m* sâma ya*g*âmahe, Gobh. III, 2, 48.

ta*k* *k*akshur devahitam, III, 8, 5.

sam anyâ yanti, III, 9, 7.

pra*g*âpataye, IV, 7, 36.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Of these Mantras
the first is contained in the Sâma-veda (I, 369) just as the nine
first-mentioned ones; the second is quoted by Gobhila in extenso; the
third is to be found in the Âra*n*yaka division of the Sâma-veda I (vol.
ii, p. 292, ed. Bibl. Ind.); in the fourth finally the text is corrupt;
it is intended for the verse out of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a Pra*g*âpate na
tvad etâny anya*h*. Thus the four apparent exceptions all vanish, and we
have in the Mantras which are absent in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a a new
proof that this text belongs to the literature of the Sâma-veda <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94).

Thus, according to my view, we may describe the origin of the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a as follows. The Sâma-veda contained in its Sa*m*hitâ a
much smaller number of Mantras applicable to the G*ri*hya rites than
either the *Ri*g-veda or the Ya*g*ur-veda; the peculiar character of the
Sâman texts, intended for musical recitations at the most important
sacrificial offerings, was quite remote from the character of formulas
suitable for the celebration of a wedding, for the birth of a child, for
the consecration of fields and flocks. Hence it is that, to a much
greater extent than Â*s*valâyana or Pâraskara, Gobhila mentions Mantras
for which a reference to the Sa*m*hitâ was not sufficient; and this led
to the compiling of a separate Sa*m*hitâ of such G*ri*hya-mantras, which
presupposes the G*ri*hya-sûtra, just as the latter presupposes this
Sa*m*hitâ. The almost perfect agreement of the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a with
Gobhila furnishes a valuable

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

warrant for the good preservation of the two texts; of small
discrepancies I have noted only two: Mantra-Brâhma*n*a I, 6, 15, the
formula âgantrâ samaganmahi is given for the ceremony of the Upanayana,
while Gobhila does not prescribe this Mantra for this ceremony, although
other G*ri*hya texts do; and secondly, the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a II, 5, 1-7
does not consist of six verses as Gobh. IV, 6, 5-6 allows us to assume,
but of seven verses.

In concluding this introduction notice is to be drawn to the fact that
the text of Gobhila has preserved for us the traces of a division
differing from the one into four Prapâ*th*akas which is handed down by
tradition: in a number of places certain Sûtras or the last words of
certain Sûtras are set down twice, a well-known way of indicating the
close of a chapter. This repetition, besides occurring at the end of the
first, third, and fourth Prapâ*th*aka (not at the end of the second), is
to be found in the following places which become more frequent towards
the close of the work: I, 4, 31; III, 6, 15; IV, 1, 22; 4, 34; 5, 34; 6,
16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[3:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_80) The term 'Sa*m*hitâ of
the Sâma-veda' ought to be understood here in its narrower sense as
denoting the so-called first book of the Sa*m*hitâ, the
*Kh*anda-âr*k*ika or collection of Yoni verses (see on the relation
between this collection and the second book my remarks in the
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, vol. xxxviii,
pp. 464. seq.). Prof. Knauer in his list of the verses quoted by Gobhila
(p. 29 of his translation of the Gobhilîya-G*ri*hya) states that
Sâma-veda II, 1138 (= I, 276) and 1139 is quoted in Gobhila III, 9, 6,
but an accurate analysis of the words of Gobhila shows that the verse
II, 1139 is not referred to, so that only the verse II, 1138 remains,
which occurs also in the first book of the Sa*m*hitâ. The 'dvika' of
which Gobhila speaks in that Sûtra is not a dv*rik*a, but, as the
commentators rightly understand it (see Knauer's edition of the text, p.
xii), it is a dyad of Sâmans or melodies, the two Kâvasha Sâmans which
are based on the text I, 276, and are given in the great Sâma-veda
edition of Satyavrata Sâma*s*ramin, vol. i, pp. 566, 567.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[3:2](sbe30003.htm#fr_81) In the same way the
G*ri*hya-sûtra of Âpastamba stands in connection with a similar
collection of G*ri*hya verses and formulas, the
Âpastambîya-Mantrapâ*th*a.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[4:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_82) Cf. Knauer's
Introduction, pp. 24, 31 seq.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[5:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_83) Cf. Knauer's
translation, Introduction, p. 25.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[5:2](sbe30003.htm#fr_84) Mantra-Brâhma*n*a I,
1, 1.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[6:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_85) Gobh. I, 3, 4.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[6:2](sbe30003.htm#fr_86) Gobh. II, 3, 17 seq.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[6:3](sbe30003.htm#fr_87) Gobh. III, 8.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[7:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_88) Gobh. II, 6, 7. It is
possible, though we have no positive evidence for this conjecture, that
such statements regarding preparatory or auxiliary ceremonies may here
and there have been added to the Sûtra collection in a later time. The
Khâdira-G*ri*hya (II, 2, 20) has instead of that long Mantra only a few
words which in the Gobhilîya-sûtra stand at the end of it.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[8:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_89) Any one who holds the
view that the ritualistic formulas, which are not contained in the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, represent later extensions of the ceremonies in
question, will do well to notice how in any one of the offerings of the
*S*rauta ritual which we possess, both in the old description of the
Sa*m*hitâ and Brâhma*n*a texts, and in the more recent description of
the Sûtra texts, Mantras have been added in more recent times to the
former ones. I think that it would be difficult to draw from such
observations any argument of analogy calculated to support Dr. Knauer's
opinion as to the relation of the Mantras in Gobhila and in the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[8:2](sbe30003.htm#fr_90) Introduction to his
translation, p. 23.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[9:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_91) Besides the reasons
given below in opposition to this conjecture, I may be permitted to
point out that this hypothesis is contrary to the whole chronology of
the G*ri*hya literature which we endeavoured to arrive at in the general
introduction. It is a priori extremely improbable that there was a
G*ri*hya Sa*m*hitâ at a time when there was as yet no Sâma-veda.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[9:2](sbe30003.htm#fr_92) Viz. (according to
Prof. Knauer's alphabetical list of the Mantras of the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a) ima*m* stomam arhate, M.-B. II, 4, s = Sv. I, 66; II,
414; tat savitur vare*n*yam, M.-B. I, 6, 29 = Sv. II, 812; bharâmedhmam,
M.-B. II, 4, 3 = Sv. II, 415; *s*akema tvâ, M.-B. II, 4, 4 = Sv. II,
416.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[9:3](sbe30003.htm#fr_93) Notice that of the
four exceptional cases which we put together in the previous note, three
cases are Mantras which are found only in the second Âr*k*ika of the
Sâma-veda, not in the first (cf. above, [p. 3](#page_3), note
[1](#fn_80)). The fourth verse (M.-B. II, 4, 2) is to be found in the
first Âr*k*ika, it is true, but it stands closely related to two verses
which are not to be found in that Âr*k*ika (M.-B. II, 4, 3. 4). This
explains why it was put into the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a, as well as those two
verses.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[10:1](sbe30003.htm#fr_94) One will not object
that the Mantras in question which are absent in the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a
are all to be found in the *Ri*g-veda as well as in the Sâma-veda. Since
almost all the verses of the Sâma-veda are taken from the *Ri*g-veda
there is nothing astonishing about this. Before one could conclude from
this that the Mantra-Brâhma*n*a belongs to the *Ri*g-veda he would have
to answer the question, How is it that the verses in question are always
verses of the Rim veda which are repeated in the Sâma-veda? Why are
there not among them verses which are not to be found in the Sâma-veda?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1](sbe30004)
