[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tantra](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htg00)  [Next](htg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8185988161/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Hymns to the Goddess*, by John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon), \[1913\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE

THE Goddess or Devī (as the Hindus call Her) is God (as the Western
worshippers address Him) in Its Mother aspect. The latter not uncommonly
deem such attribution of feminine quality to be "heathenish"; but this
condemnation (for the criticism has, of course, this intendment) is
itself singularly foolish in that it is thereby implied that of two sets
of terms (neither of which is in its strict sense applicable to the
Deity as the Author of forms), one is, in fact, a more correct
description than the other. In the Navaratneśvara it is said: "That
Devī, who is existence, consciousness, and bliss, should be thought of
as a female or as a male, or as pure Brahman. In reality, however, She
is neither male nor neuter (that is to say, that She is not bound to any
particular form)." No one contends that the Brahmatattva in the supreme
abode beyond appearances is masculine as opposed to feminine, or the
latter as contrasted with the former. Like all else in this matter,
words are but the babbling endeavour of our plane to express that which
is above it. It is not easy, then, to explain the condemnation except
upon the assumption that those who pronounce it think their mother's sex
to be inferior to their own, and that thus Deity is unworthily described
by any other terms than those of masculine excellence. But Hindus, who
ever place the name of mother before that of father, and to whom *garbha
dhāraṇapoṣābhyām pitur mātā gariyasi*, have no

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

partiality for such mistaken notions. On the other hand, it is possible
that they might not understand the Christian expression "Mother of God,"
nor approve it even after they had learnt the limited and special sense
which theology gives to this epithet. The Tāntrika would least of all
admit the insufficiency of the conception of God as Mother. For the Devī
manifests in his own mother, in his prakṛti (as he calls his wife), and
in all women. As the Kubjikā Tantra says: "Whosoever has seen the feet
of woman let him worship them as those of his guru" (*Strinām pādatalam
driṣtvāguruvadbhāvayet sadā*). Whilst male and female are both Her
aspects, yet Śakti is, in a sense, said to be more revealed in the
female than in the male form. And so the Muṇḍamāla Tantra says:
"Wherever there is a śaktī (female), there I am." On account of this
greater manifestation, women are called Śakti. From this, however, it
must not be supposed that Śakti is less present in such forms as Śiva
and Kṛṣṇa and others. If, as the author of the Tantra Tattva says, a
sādhaka who is a worshipper of the Kṛṣṇamūrti desires to see Him
[as](errata.htm#0) Kālī, Bhagavān, who fulfils the desires of devotees,
will assume that form. All forms come into existence upon the
manifestation of consciousness in the play of Her whose substance is
consciousness.

Though the Sāktānandataranginī says: Devī is worshipped on account of
Her soft heart (komalāntahkaraṇam), yet the use of the term "Mother" has
other grounds than those which are founded upon an appeal to the natural
feelings which the sweetness of the word "Mother" evokes. The meaning of
the term "Devī" is *prakāsātmikā*, or that which is by its nature Light
and Manifestation. And the word is used in the feminine gender because
the One, as Śakti and Prakṛti, bears and

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

nourishes all things as their Mother. The Devī is therefore the Brahman
revealed in Its Mother aspect (*Śrimātā*) as Creatrix and Nourisher of
the worlds.

Worshippers of Devī or Śakti are called Śāktas. But those who have a
true knowledge of Śakti-tattva without which, according to Śāstra,
Nirvānamokṣa is unattainable, will in thought surpass the sectarianism
which the terms "Śākta", "Vaiṣṇava" and "Śaiva" ordinarily connote.
Whatever forms the Devī assumes in Her aspect with attributes are but
Her forms. As the author last cited says, the sādhaka will know Her,
whether the appearance be that of Kṛṣṇa, Durgā, or Mahādeva. The
Vaiṣṇava may consider Her as Viṣṇu in the form of Śakti, or the Śākta
may look upon Her as Śakti in the form of Viṣṇu. To those who, immersed
in the ocean of Her substance, which is cits'akti, are forgetful of all
differences which appertain to the world of form, Kṛṣṇaśakti, Śivaśakti,
or Kāliśakti, and all other manifestations of śakti, are one and the
same. And so Rāmaprasāda, the Bengali poet and Tāntrik, sang: "Thou
assumeth five principal forms according to the differences of worship.
But, O Mother! how can you escape the hands of him who has dissolved the
five and made them into one?"

The hymns to the Devī in this volume (introduced by a *stotra* to Her
Spouse the Kālabhairava) are taken from the Tantra, Purāṇa, Mahābhārata,
and Śankarācārya, who was "the incarnation of devotion" (bhaktāvatāra)
as well as a great philosopher; a fact which is sometimes ignored by
those who do not wish to be reminded that he, whose speculative genius
they extol, was also the protagonist of the so-called "idolatrous
Hinduism." As his great example amongst many

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

others of differing race and creed tell us, it is not, from the view of
religion, the mark of discernment (even though it be the mode) to
neglect or disparage the ritual practice which all orthodoxies have
prescribed for their adherents. *Stava* and *pujā* are doubtless the
*sādhana* appropriate to the first of the several stages of an ascent
which gradually leads away from them; but they are in general as
necessary as the higher ones, which more immediately precede the
attainment of *brahmabhāva* and *siddhi*.

Apart, however, from this aspect of the matter, and to look at it from
the point of view of that modern product, the mere "student of
religions," who is not infrequently a believer in none, a knowledge of
ritual (to use that term in its widest sense) will help to a greater and
more real understanding of the *mahāvākya* of the Āryas than can be
gained from those merely theoretical expositions of them which are now
more popular. Those, again, whose interests are in what Verlaine called
"mere literature" will at least appreciate the mingled tenderness and
splendour of these Hymns, even in a translation which cannot reproduce
the majesty of the sanskrit ślokas of the Tantra and Purāṇa, or the
rhyme and sweet lilting rhythms of Śankara.

Of the Hymns now published, those from the Mahābhārata and Candī have
already been translated; the first, in the English edition of the
Mahābhārata, by Protap Chandra Roy and by Professor Muir in his
"Original Sanskrit Texts," and the second by Mr. Pargiter, whose
rendering of the Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa (of which it is the most celebrated
portion) has been printed by the Asiatic Society of Bengal.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Ādyākālisvarūpastotra has also been previously published as part of a
rendering by myself of the Mahānirvāṇa Tantra. The first two sets of
Hymns have been translated afresh. In the translation of such works a
Sanskrit dictionary (however excellent) is not either a sufficient or
reliable guide. It is necessary to study the Hindu commentators and to
seek the oral aid of those who possess the traditional interpretation of
the *Śāstra*. Without this and an understanding of what Hindu worship is
and means, absurd mistakes are likely to be made. I have thus, in
addition to such oral aid, availed myself of the Commentaries of
Nīlakanṭha on the Mahābhārata, of Gopāla Chakravarti and Nāgogī Bhatta
on Candī, and of Nīlakantha on the Devībhāgavata. As regards the Tantra,
the great Sādhana Śāstrā, nothing which is of both an understanding and
accurate character can be achieved without a study of the original texts
undertaken with the assistance of the Tāntrik gurus and pandits, who are
the authorized custodians of its traditions.

The other *stotras* are now rendered in English for the first time; at
least, I have come across no translation of them.

The text of the Tantrasāra which has been used is that edited by Shrījut
Rasik Mohun Chatterjee. It is not free from faults, which have
necessitated reference to other Manuscripts. A more correct text of the
Tārāshtakam, from the Nīla Tantra, is given in the
Brihatstotraratnākara, to which reference has also been made for the
hymns of Vālmīki and Indra.

Both Ellen Woodroffe and myself have collaborated in the translation of
the hymns by Śankara. For the

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

rest, as also for the Introduction and Commentary, I am alone
responsible. Some of the notes deal with matter familiar enough to the
Hindu reader but have been inserted for the use of his English friends.
Other portions of the commentary will, I believe, be found to be of use
to both.

JOHN WOODROFFE

*March 1, 1913*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](htg02)
