[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc45011)  [Next](cc45013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="v.ii.i"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 John
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)<span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life;

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Quod erat ab initio, quod audivimus,
quod vidimus oculis nostris, quod intuiti sumus, quod manus nostrae
contrectaverunt, de Sermone vitae;

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span>**2**. (For the life was manifested, and we
have seen *it*, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life,
which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;)

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et vita manifesta est, et vidimus et
testamur et annuntiamus vobis vitam aeternam, quae erat apud Patrem, et
manifesta est nobis.

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span>He shows, first, that life has been
exhibited to us in Christ; which, as it is an incomparable good, ought
to rouse and inflame all our powers with a marvelous desire for it, and
with the love of it. It is said, indeed, in a few and plain words, that
life is manifested; but if we consider how miserable and horrible a
condition death is, and also what is the kingdom and the glory of
immortality, we shall perceive that there is something here more
magnificent than what can be expressed in any words.

<span id="v.ii.i-p9"></span>Then the Apostle’s object, in setting before
us the vast good, yea, the chief and only true happiness which God has
conferred on us, in his own Son, is to raise our thoughts above; but as
the greatness of the subject requires that the truth should be certain,
and fully proved, this is what is here much dwelt upon. For these
words*, What we have seen, what we have heard, what we have looked on,*
serve to strengthen our faith in the gospel. Nor does he, indeed,
without reason, make so many asseverations; for since our salvation
depends on the gospel, its certainty is in the highest degree necessary;
and how difficult it is for us to believe, every one of us knows too
well by his own experience. To believe is not lightly to form an
opinion, or to assent only to what is said, but a firm, undoubting
conviction, so that we may dare to subscribe to the truth as fully
proved. It is for this reason that the Apostle heaps together so many
things in confirmation of the gospel.

<span id="v.ii.i-p10"></span>**1** *That which was from the beginning*
As the passage is abrupt and involved, that the sense may be made
clearer, the words may be thus arranged; “We announce to you the word of
life, which was from the beginning and really testified to us in all
manner of ways, that life has been manifested in him;” or, if you
prefer, the meaning may be thus given, “What we announce to you
respecting the word of life, has been from the beginning, and has been
openly shewed to us, that life was manifested in him.” But the words,
*That which was from the beginning,* refer doubtless to the divinity of
Christ, for God manifested in the flesh was not from the beginning; but
he who always was life and the eternal Word of God, appeared in the
fullness of time as man. Again, what follows as to the looking on and
the handling of the hands, refers to his human nature. But as the two
natures constitute but one person, and Christ is one, because he came
forth from the Father that he might put on our flesh, the Apostle
rightly declares that he is the same, and had been invisible, and
afterwards became visible.  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md)

<span id="v.ii.i-p12"></span>Hereby the senseless cavil of Servetus is
disproved, that the nature and essence of Deity became one with the
flesh, and that thus the Word was transformed into flesh, because the
life-giving Word was seen in the flesh.

<span id="v.ii.i-p13"></span>Let us then bear in mind, that this
doctrine of the Gospel is here declared, that he who in the flesh really
proved himself to be the Son of God, and was acknowledged to be the Son
of God, was always God’s invisible Word, for he does not refer here to
the beginning of the world, but ascends much higher.

<span id="v.ii.i-p14"></span>*Which we have heard, which we have seen.*
It was not the hearing of a report, to which little credit is usually
given, but John means, that he had faithfully learnt from his Master
those things which he taught, so that he alleged nothing thoughtlessly
and rashly. And, doubtless, no one is a fit teacher in the Church, who
has not been the disciple of the Son of God, and rightly instructed in
his school, since his authority alone ought to prevail.

<span id="v.ii.i-p15"></span>When he says, we have seen *with our eyes*,
it is no redundancy, but a fuller expression for the sake of amplifying;
nay, he was not satisfied with seeing only, but added, *which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled* By these words he shews that he
taught nothing but what had been really made known to him.

<span id="v.ii.i-p16"></span>It may seem, however, that the evidence of
the senses little availed on the present subject, for the power of
Christ could not be perceived by the eyes nor felt by the hands. To this
I answer, that the same thing is said here as in <span
id="v.ii.i-p16.1"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="v.ii.i-p16.1"></span>
the Gospel of John, “We have seen his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father;” for he was not known as the Son of God by the
external form of his body, but because he gave illustrious proofs of his
Divine power, so that in him shone forth the majesty of the Father, as
in a living and distinct image. As the words are in the plural number,
and the subject equally applies to all the apostles, I am disposed to
include them, especially as the authority of testimony is what is
treated of.

<span id="v.ii.i-p17"></span>But no less frivolous (as I have before
said) than impudent is the wickedness of Servetus, who urges these words
to prove that the Word of God became visible and capable of being
handled; he either impiously destroys or mingles together the twofold
nature of Christ. It is, therefore, a pure figment. Thus deifying the
humanity of Christ, he wholly takes away the reality of his human
nature, at the same time denying that Christ is for any other reason
called the Son of God, except that he was conceived of his mother by the
power of the Holy Spirit, and taking away his own subsistence in God. It
hence follows that he was neither God nor man, though he seems to form a
confused mass from both. But as the meaning of the Apostle is evident to
us, let us pass by that unprincipled man.

<span id="v.ii.i-p18"></span>*Of the Word of life* The genitive here is
used for an adjective, vivifying, or life-giving; for in him, as it is
said in the first chapter of John’s Gospel, was life. At the same time,
this distinction belongs to the Son of God on two accounts, because he
has infused life into all creatures, and because he now restores life to
us, which had perished, having been extinguished by the sin of Adam.
Moreover, the term *Word* may be explained in two ways, either of
Christ, or of the doctrine of the Gospel, for even by this is salvation
brought to us. But as its substance is Christ, and as it contains no
other thing than that he, who had been always with the Father, was at
length manifested to men, the first view appears to me the more simple
and genuine. Moreover, it appears more fully from the Gospel that the
wisdom which dwells in God is called the Word.

<span id="v.ii.i-p19"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p20"></span>**2** *For* (or, *and*) *the life was
manifested* The copulative is explanatory, as though he had said, “We
testify of the vivifying Word, as life has been manifested.” The sense
may at the same time be twofold, that Christ, who is life and the
fountain of life, has been manifested, or, that life has been openly
offered to us in Christ. The latter, indeed, necessarily follows from
the former. Yet as to the meaning, the two things differ, as cause and
effect. When he repeats, *We shew*, or *announce* *eternal life*, he
speaks, I have no doubt, of the effect, even that he announces that life
is obtained for us in Christ.

<span id="v.ii.i-p21"></span>We hence learn, that when Christ is
preached to us, the kingdom of heaven is opened to us, so that being
raised from death we may live the life of God.

<span id="v.ii.i-p22"></span>*Which was with the Father.* This is true,
not only from the time when the world was formed, but also from
eternity, for he was always God, the fountain of life; and the power and
the faculty of vivifying was possessed by his eternal wisdom: but he did
not actually exercise it before the creation of the world, and from the
time when God began to exhibit the Word, that power which before was
hid, diffused itself over all created things. Some manifestation had
already been made; the Apostle had another thing in view, that is, that
life was then at length manifested in Christ, when he in our flesh
completed the work of redemption. For though the fathers were even under
the law associates and partakers of the same life, yet we know that they
were shut up under the hope that was to be revealed. It was necessary
for them to seek life from the death and resurrection of Christ; but the
event was not only far remote from their eyes, but also hid from their
minds. They depended, then, on the hope of revelation, which at length
in due time followed. They could not, indeed, have obtained life, except
it was in some way manifested to them; but the difference between us and
them is, that we hold him already revealed as it were in our hands, whom
they sought obscurely promised to them in types.

<span id="v.ii.i-p23"></span>But the object of the Apostle is, to remove
the idea of novelty, which might have lessened the dignity of the
Gospel; he therefore says, that life had not now at length began to be,
though it had but lately appeared, for it was always with the Father.

<span id="v.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
1:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003.md)<span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. That which we have seen and heard
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly
our fellowship *is* with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p3"></span>**3**. Quod vidimus et audivimus,
annuntiamus vobis, ut et vos societatem habeatis nobiscum, et societas
nostra sit cum Patre et cure filio ejus Jesu Christo.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p4"></span>**4**. And these things write we unto you,
that your joy may be full.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p5"></span>**4**. Et hæc scribimus vobis, ut gaudium
vestrum sit completum.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p6"></span>**5**. This then is the message which we
have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him
is no darkness at all.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5**. Et haec est promissio quam
annuntiamus, quod Deus lux est, et tenebrae in eo non sunt ullae.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p8"></span>**6**. If we say that we have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth:

<span id="v.ii.ii-p9"></span>**6**. Si dixerimus quod societatem habemus
cum eo, et in tenebris ambulamus, mentimur, et veritatem non facimus.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p10"></span>**7**. But if we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p11"></span>**7**. Si autem in luce ambulamus, sicut
ipse in luce est, societatem habemus inter nos mutuam, et sanguis Jesu
Christi filii ejus emundat nos ab omni peccato.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.ii-p13"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p14"></span>**3** *That which we have seen.* He now
repeats the third time the words, *seen* and *heard*, that nothing might
be wanting as to the real certainty of his doctrine. And it ought to be
carefully noticed, that the heralds of the Gospel chosen by Christ were
those who were fit and faithful witnesses of all those things which they
were to declare. He also testifies of the feeling of their heart, for he
says that he was moved by no other reason to write except to invite
those to whom he was writing to the participation of an inestimable
good. It hence appears how much care he had for their salvation; which
served not a little to induce them to believe; for extremely ungrateful
we must be, if we refuse to hear him who wishes to communicate to us a
part of that happiness which he has obtained.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p15"></span>He also sets forth the fruit received from
the Gospel, even that we are united thereby to God, and to his Son
Christ in whom is found the chief good. It was necessary for him to add
this second clause, not only that he might represent the doctrine of the
Gospel as precious and lovely, but that he might also show that he
wished them to be his associates for no other end but to lead them to
God, so that they might be all one in him. For the ungodly have also a
mutual union between themselves, but it is without God, nay, in order to
alienate themselves more and more from God, which is the extreme of all
evils. It is, indeed, as it has been stated, our only true happiness, to
be received into God’s favor, so that we may be really united to him in
Christ; of which John speaks in <span id="v.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Joh
17:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020.md)<span
id="v.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p16"></span>In short, John declares, that as the
apostles were adopted by Christ as brethren, that being gathered into
one body, they might together be united to God, so he does the same with
other colleagues; though many, they are yet made partakers of this holy
and blessed union.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p17"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p18"></span>**4** *That your joy may be full* By full
joy, he expresses more clearly the complete and perfect happiness which
we obtain through the Gospel; at the same time he reminds the faithful
where they ought to fix all their affections. True is that saying,

<span id="v.ii.ii-p19"></span>“*Where* your treasure is, there will be
your heart also.”  
(<span id="v.ii.ii-p19.2"></span>[Mt
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="v.ii.ii-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.ii-p20"></span>Whosoever, then, really perceives what
fellowship with God is, will be satisfied with it alone, and will no
more burn with desires for other things.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p21"></span>“The Lord is my cup,” says David, “and my
heritage; the lines have fallen for me on an excellent lot.” (<span
id="v.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ps. 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.ii.ii-p22"></span>In the same manner does Paul declare that
all things were deemed by him as dung, in comparison with Christ alone.
(<span id="v.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>[Php
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>..md)
He, therefore, has at length made a proficiency in the Gospel, who
esteems himself happy in having communion with God, and acquiesces in
that alone; and thus he prefers it to the whole world, so that he is
ready for its sake to relinquish all other things.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p23"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p24"></span>**5** *This then is the message*, or
*promise*. I do not disapprove of the rendering of the old interpreter,
“This is the annunciation,” or *message*; for though <span
id="v.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>ἐπαγγελία means for the most part a promise,
yet, as John speaks here generally of the testimony before mentioned,
the context seems to require the other meaning, except you were to give
this explanation, “The promise which we bring to you, includes this, or
has this condition annexed to it.” Thus, the meaning of the Apostle
would become evident to us.  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) For
his object here was not to include the whole doctrine of the Gospel, but
to shew that if we desire to enjoy Christ and his blessings, it is
required of us to be conformed to God in righteousness and holiness.
Paul says the same thing in <span id="v.ii.ii-p25.3"></span>the second
chapter of the Epistle to Titus, “Appeared has the saving grace of God
to all, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may live soberly
and righteously and holily in this world;” except that here he says
metaphorically, that we are to walk in the light, because God is light.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p26"></span>But he calls God *light*, and says that he
is *in the light*; such expressions are not to be too strictly taken.
Why Satan is called the prince of darkness is sufficiently evident.
When, therefore, God on the other hand is called the Father of light,
and also light, we first understand that there is nothing in him but
what is bright, pure, and unalloyed; and, secondly, that he makes all
things so manifest by his brightness, that he suffers nothing vicious or
perverted, no spots or filth, no hypocrisy or fraud, to lie hid. Then
the sum of what is said is, that since there is no union between light
and darkness, there is a separation between us and God as long as we
walk in darkness; and that the fellowship which he mentions, cannot
exist except we also become pure and holy.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p27"></span>*In him is no darkness at all.* This mode
of speaking is commonly used by John, to amplify what he has affirmed by
a contrary negation. Then, the meaning is, that God is such a light,
that no darkness belongs to him. It hence follows, that he hates an evil
conscience, pollution, and wickedness, and everything that pertains to
darkness.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p28"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p29"></span>**6** *If we say* It is, indeed, an
argument from what is inconsistent, when he concludes that they are
alienated from God, who walk in darkness. This doctrine, however,
depends on a higher principle, that God sanctifies all who are his. For
it is not a naked precept that he gives, which requires that our life
should be holy; but he rather shews that the grace of Christ serves for
this end to dissipate darkness, and to kindle in us the light of God; as
though he had said, “What God communicates to us is not a vain fiction;
for it is necessary that the power and effect of this fellowship should
shine forth in our life; otherwise the possession of the gospel is
fallacious.” What he adds, *and do not the truth*, is the same as if he
had said, “We do not act truthfully. We do not regard what is true and
right.” And this mode of speaking, as I have before observed, is
frequently used by him.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p30"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p31"></span>**7** *But if we walk in the light.* He
now says, that the proof of our union with God is certain, if we are
conformable to him; not that purity of life conciliates us to God, as
the prior cause; but the Apostle means, that our union with God is made
evident by the effect, that is, when his purity shines forth in us. And,
doubtless, such is the fact; wherever God comes, all things are so
imbued with his holiness, that he washes away all filth; for without him
we have nothing but filth and darkness. It is hence evident, that no one
leads a holy life, except he is united to God.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p32"></span>In saying, *We have fellowship one with
another,* he does not speak simply of men; but he sets God on one side,
and us on the other.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p33"></span>It may, however, be asked, “Who among men
can so exhibit the light of God in his life, as that this likeness which
John requires should exist; for it would be thus necessary, that he
should be wholly pure and free from darkness.” To this I answer, that
expressions of this kind are accommodated to the capacities of men; he
is therefore said to be like God, who aspires to his likeness, however
distant from it he may as yet be. The example ought not to be otherwise
applied than according to this passage. He walks in darkness who is not
ruled by the fear of God, and who does not, with a pure conscience,
devote himself wholly to God, and seek to promote his glory. Then, on
the other hand, he who in sincerity of heart spends his life, yea, every
part of it, in the fear and service of God, and faithfully worships him,
walks in the light, for he keeps the right way, though he may in many
things offend and sigh under the burden of the flesh. Then, integrity of
conscience is alone that which distinguishes light from darkness.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p34"></span>*And the blood of Jesus Christ* After
having taught what is the bond of our union with God, he now shews what
fruit flows from it, even that our sins are freely remitted. And this is
the blessedness which David describes in <span
id="v.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>[Ps 32](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#000.md)<span
id="v.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>, in order that we may know that we are most
miserable until, being renewed by God’s Spirit, we serve him with a
sincere heart. For who can be imagined more miserable than that man whom
God hates and abominates, and over whose head is suspended both the
wrath of God and eternal death?

<span id="v.ii.ii-p35"></span>This passage is remarkable; and from it we
first learn, that the expiation of Christ, effected by his death, does
then properly belong to us, when we, in uprightness of heart, do what is
right and just for Christ is no redeemer except to those who turn from
iniquity, and lead a new life. If, then, we desire to have God
propitious to us, so as to forgive our sins, we ought not to forgive
ourselves. In short, remission of sins cannot be separated from
repentance, nor can the peace of God be in those hearts, where the fear
God does not prevail.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p36"></span>Secondly, this passage shews that the
gratuitous pardon of sins is given us not only once, but that it is a
benefit perpetually residing in the Church, and daily offered to the
faithful. For the Apostle here addresses the faithful; as doubtless no
man has ever been, nor ever will be, who can otherwise please God, since
all are guilty before him; for however strong a desire there may be in
us of acting rightly, we always go haltingly to God. Yet what is half
done obtains no approval with God. In the meantime, by new sins we
continually separate ourselves, as far as we can, from the grace of God.
Thus it is, that all the saints have need of the daily forgiveness of
sins; for this alone keeps us in the family of God.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p37"></span>By saying, *from all sin,* he intimates
that we are, on many accounts, guilty before God; so that doubtless
there is no one who has not many vices. But he shews that no sins
prevent the godly, and those who fear God, from obtaining his favor. He
also points out the manner of obtaining pardon, and the cause of our
cleansing, even because Christ expiated our sins by his blood; but he
affirms that all the godly are undoubtedly partakers of this cleansing.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p38"></span>The whole of his doctrine has been
wickedly perverted by the sophists; for they imagine that pardon of sins
is given us, as it were, in baptism. They maintain that there only the
blood of Christ avails; and they teach, that after baptism, God is not
otherwise reconciled than by satisfactions. They, indeed, leave some
part to the blood of Christ; but when they assign merit to works, even
in the least degree, they wholly subvert what John teaches here, as to
the way of expiating sins, and of being reconciled to God. For these two
things can never harmonize together, to be cleansed by the blood of
Christ, and to be cleansed by works: for John assigns not the half, but
the whole, to the blood of Christ.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p39"></span>The sum of what is said, then, is, that
the faithful know of a certainty, that they are accepted by God, because
he has been reconciled to them through the sacrifice of the death of
Christ. And sacrifice includes cleansing and satisfaction. Hence the
power and efficiency of these belong to the blood of Christ alone.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p40"></span>Hereby is disproved and exposed the
sacrilegious invention of the Papists as to indulgences; for as though
the blood of Christ were not sufficient, they add, as a subsidy to it,
the blood and merits of martyrs. At the same time, this blasphemy
advances much further among us; for as they say that their keys, by
which they hold as shut up the remission of sins, open a treasure made
up partly of the blood and merits of martyrs, and partly of the worlds
of supererogation, by which any sinner may redeem himself, no remission
of sins remains for them but what is derogatory to the blood of Christ;
for if their doctrine stands, the blood of Christ does not cleanse us,
but comes in, as it were, as a partial aid. Thus consciences are held in
suspense, which the Apostle here bids to rely on the blood of Christ.

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)<span id="v.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p2"></span>**8**. If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p3"></span>**8**. Si dixerimus quod peccatum non
habemus, nos ipsos decipimus, et veritas non est in nobis.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p4"></span>**9**. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us *our* sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p5"></span>**9**. Si confitemur peccata nostra,
fidelis est et justus, ut nobis peccata remittat; et purget nos ab omni
injustitia.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p6"></span>**10**. If we say that we have not sinned,
we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p7"></span>**10**. Si dixerimus quod non peccavimus,
mendacem facimus eum, et sermo ejus non est in nobis.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.ii.iii-p9"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p10"></span>**8.** *If we say.* He now commends grace
from its necessity; for as no one is free from sin, he intimates that we
are all lost and undone, except the Lord comes to our aid with the
remedy of pardon. The reason why he so much dwells on the fact, that no
one is innocent, is, that all may now fully know that they stand in need
of mercy, to deliver them from punishment, and that they may thus be
more roused to seek the necessary blessing.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p11"></span>By the word *sin*, is meant here not only
corrupt and vicious inclination, but the fault or sinful act which
really renders us guilty before God. Besides, as it is a universal
declaration, it follows, that none of the saints, who exist now, have
been, or shall be, are exempted from the number. Hence most fitly did
Augustine refute the cavil of the Pelagians, by adducing against them
this passage: and he wisely thought that the confession of guilt is not
required for humility’s sake, but lest we by lying should deceive
ourselves.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p12"></span>When he adds, *and the truth is not in
us*, he confirms, according to his usual manner, the former sentence by
repeating it in other words; though it is not a simple repetition, (as
elsewhere,) but he says that they are deceived who glory in falsehood.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p13"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p14"></span>**9** *If we confess* He again promises
to the faithful that God will be propitious to them, provided they
acknowledge themselves *to be sinners*. It is of great moment to be
fully persuaded, that when we have sinned, there is a reconciliation
with God ready and prepared for us: we shall otherwise carry always a
hell within us. Few, indeed, consider how miserable and wretched is a
doubting conscience; but the truth is, that hell reigns where there is
no peace with God. The more, then, it becomes us to receive with the
whole heart this promise which offers free pardon to all who confess
their sins. Moreover, this is founded even on the justice of God,
because God who promises is true and just. For they who think that he is
called *just*, because he justifies us freely, reason, as I think, with
too much refinement, because justice or righteousness here depends on
fidelity, and both are annexed to the promise. For God might have been
just, were he to deal with us with all the rigor of justice; but as he
has bound himself to us by his word, he would not have himself deemed
just, except he forgives.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p17"></span>But this confession, as it is made to
God, must be in sincerity; and the heart cannot speak to God without
newness of life. It then includes true repentance. God, indeed, forgives
freely, but in such a way, that the facility of mercy does not become an
enticement to sin.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p18"></span>*And to cleanse us* The verb, *to
cleanse*, seems to be taken in another sense than before; for he had
said, that we are cleansed by the blood of Christ, because through him
sins are not imputed; but now, having spoken of pardon, he also adds,
that God cleanses us from iniquity: so that this second clause is
different from the preceding. Thus he initiates that a twofold fruit
comes to us from confession, — that God being reconciled by the
sacrifice of Christ, forgives us, — and that he renews and reforms us.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p19"></span>Were any one to object and say, that as
long as we sojourn in the world, we are never cleansed from all
unrighteousness, with regard to our reformation: this is indeed true;
but John does not refer to what God now performs in us. He is faithful,
he says, to cleanse us, not today or tomorrow; for as long as we are
surrounded with flesh, we ought to be in a continual state of progress;
but what he has once begun, he goes on daily to do, until he at length
completes it. So Paul says, that we are chosen, that we may appear
without blame before God, (<span id="v.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>[Col
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022.md)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>;) and in another place he says, that the
Church is cleansed, that it might be without spot or wrinkle. (<span
id="v.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>[Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027.md)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p20"></span>If yet any one prefers another
explanation, that he says the same thing twice over, I shall not object.
 <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p22"></span><span id="v.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p23"></span>**10** *We make him a liar* He goes still
further, that they who claim purity for themselves blaspheme God. For we
see that he everywhere represents the whole race of man as guilty of
sin.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p24"></span>Whosoever then tries to escape this
charge carries on war with God, and accuses him of falsehood, as though
he condemned the undeserving. To confirm this he adds, *and his word is
not in us*; as though he had said, that we reject this great truth, that
all are under guilt.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p25"></span>We hence learn, that we then only make a
due progress in the knowledge of the word of the Lord, when we become
really humbled, so as to groan under the burden of our sins and learn to
flee to the mercy of God, and acquiesce in nothing else but in his
paternal favor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc45012.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p11"></span> It is more consistent with the passage to
take “from the beginning” here as from the beginning of the Gospel, from
the beginning of the ministry of our Savior, because what had been from
the beginning was what the apostles had *heard* and *seen*. That another
view has been taken of these words has been owing to an over-anxiety on
the part of many, especially of the Fathers, to establish the divinity
of our Savior; but this is what is sufficiently evident from the second
verse. See <span id="v.ii.i-p11.1"></span>[1 John
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#024.md)<span id="v.ii.i-p11.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc45012.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p25"></span> *Griesbach* has substituted <span
id="v.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>ἀγγελία for the word here used, as being most
approved; but the other, <span id="v.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>ἐπαγγελία, has
also a similar meaning, announcement, or message, or command, though in
the New Testament it is mostly taken in the sense of a promise. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc45012.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p15"></span> “Faithful” and “just” are nearly of the
same import, having both a regard to God’s *promise*, only the latter
affords a stronger or an additional ground of confidence, inasmuch as
the fulfillment of God’s gracious promise is set forth as an act of
justice. So that the penitent has here two of God’s attributes,
faithfulness and justice, to encourage and support his faith.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p16"></span>We may, at the same time, consider “just”
as having reference to forgiveness, and “faithful” to cleansing,
according to a very common mode of stating things both in the Old and
New Testament, the order in the second clause being reversed. Then
“*just*” means the same as when Paul says, “that he might be just and
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus,” <span
id="v.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Ro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026.md)<span id="v.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>.
Forgiveness is thus an act of justice, then, not to us, but to Christ,
who made an atonement for sins. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc45012.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p21"></span> That is, that he refers to forgiveness
in the two clauses. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc45013.md)
