[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc45025)  [Next](cc45027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Peter
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Simon Peter, a servant and an
apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith
with us through the righteousness of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ:

<span id="vii.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Simeon Petrus, et servus et
apostolus Jesu Christi, iis quid aequè pretiosam nobiscum sortiti sunt
fidem, per justitiam Dei nostri et Servatoris Jesu Christí,

<span id="vii.ii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Grace and peace be multiplied unto
you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord,

<span id="vii.ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Gratia vobis et pax multiplicetur
per cognitionem (*vel, cum cognitione*) Dei et Jesu Domini nostri;

<span id="vii.ii.i-p6"></span>**3.** According as his divine power hath
given unto us all things that *pertain* unto life and godliness, through
the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue:

<span id="vii.ii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quemadmodum divina ejus potentia
omnia nobis quae spectant ad vitam et pietatem dedit per cognitionem
ejus qui vocavit nos propria gloria et virtute (*vel, per gloriam
virtutem*):

<span id="vii.ii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Whereby are given unto us exceeding
great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the
divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world
through lust.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quibus et maximae pretiosae
promissiones nobis donatae sunt, ut per Haec fieretis divinae consortes
naturae, ubi fugeritis corruptionem quae in mundo est in concupiscentia.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii.i-p11"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p12"></span>**1.** *Simon Peter.* Prayer takes the
first place at the beginning of this Epistle, and then follows
thanksgiving, by which he excites the Jews to gratitude, lest they
should forget what great benefits they had already received from God's
hand. Why he called himself the *servant and an apostle of Jesus
Christ*, we have elsewhere stated, even because no one is to be heard in
the Church, except he speaks as from the mouth of Christ. But the word
*servant* has a more general meaning, because it includes all the
ministers of Christ, who sustain any public office in the Church. There
was in the apostleship a higher rank of honor. He then intimates, that
he was not one from the rank of ministers, but was made by the Lord an
apostle, and therefore superior to them.  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md)

<span id="vii.ii.i-p14"></span>*Like precious faith.* This is a
commendation of the grace which God had indiscriminately shewed to all
his elect people; for it was no common gift, that they had all been
called to one and the same faith, since faith is the special and chief
good of man. But he calls it *like* or equally *precious,* not that it
is equal in all, but because all possess by faith the same Christ with
his righteousness, and the same salvation. Though then the measure is
different, that does not prevent the knowledge of God from being common
to all, and the fruit which proceeds from it. Thus we have a real
fellowship of faith with Peter and the Apostles.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p15"></span>He adds, *through the righteousness of
God,* in order that they might know that they did not obtain faith
through their own efforts or strength, but through God's favor alone.
For these things stand opposed the one to the other, the righteousness
of God (in the sense in which it is taken here) and the merit of man.
For the efficient cause of faith is called God's righteousness for this
reason, because no one is capable of conferring it on himself. So the
righteousness that is to be understood, is not that which remains in
God, but that which he imparts to men, as in <span
id="vii.ii.i-p15.1"></span>[Ro
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.ii.i-p15.1"></span>.
Besides, he ascribes this righteousness in common to God and to Christ,
because it flows from God, and through Christ it flows down to us.
 <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md)

<span id="vii.ii.i-p17"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p18"></span>**2.** *Grace and peace.* By grace is
designated God’s paternal favor towards us. We have indeed been once for
all reconciled to God by the death of Christ, and by faith we come to
the possession of this so great a benefit; but as we perceive the grace
of God according to the measure of our faith, it is said to increase
according to our perception when it becomes more fully known to us.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p19"></span>*Peace* is added; for as the beginning of
our happiness is when God receives us into favor; so the more he
confirms his love in our hearts, the richer blessing he confers on us,
so that we become happy and prosperous in all things,

<span id="vii.ii.i-p20"></span>*Through the knowledge,* literally, *in
the knowledge*; but the preposition <span id="vii.ii.i-p20.1"></span>ἐν
often means “through” or “with:” yet both senses may suit the context. I
am, however, more disposed to adopt the former. For the more any one
advances in the knowledge of God, every kind of blessing increases also
equally with the sense of divine love. Whosoever then aspires to the
full fruition of the blessed life which is mentioned by Peter, must
remember to observe the right way. He connects together at the same time
the knowledge of God and of Christ; because God cannot be rightly known
except in Christ, according to that saying,

<span id="vii.ii.i-p21"></span>“No one knoweth the Father but the Son,
and he to whom  
the Son will reveal him.” (<span id="vii.ii.i-p21.2"></span>[Mt
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027.md)<span
id="vii.ii.i-p21.2"></span>)

<span id="vii.ii.i-p22"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p23"></span>**3.** *According as his divine power.*
He refers to the infinite goodness of God which they had already
experienced, that they might more fully understand it for the future.
For he continues the course of his benevolence perpetually to the end,
except when we ourselves break it off by our unbelief; for he possesses
exhaustless power and an equal will to do good. Hence the Apostle justly
animates the faithful to entertain good hope by the consideration of the
former benefits of God.  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) For the
same purpose is the amplification which he makes; for he might have
spoken more simply, “As he has freely given us all things.” But by
mentioning “divine power,” he rises higher, that is, that God has
copiously unfolded the immense resources of his power. But the latter
clause may be referred to Christ as well as to the Father, but both are
suitable. It may however be more fitly applied to Christ, as though he
had said, that the grace which is conveyed to us by him, is an evidence
of divinity, because it could not have done by humanity.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p25"></span>*That pertain to life and godliness*, or,
*as to life and godliness*. Some think that the present life is meant
here, as godliness follows as the more excellent gift; as though by
those two words Peter intended to prove how beneficent and bountiful God
is towards the faithful, that he brought them to light, that he supplies
them with all things necessary for the preservation of an earthly life,
and that he has also renewed them to a spiritual life by adorning them
with godliness. But this distinction is foreign to the mind of Peter,
for as soon as he mentioned life, he immediately added godliness, which
is as it were its soul; for God then truly gives us life, when he renews
us unto the obedience of righteousness. So Peter does not speak here of
the natural gifts of God, but only mentions those things which he
confers peculiarly on his own elect above the common order of nature.
 <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md)

<span id="vii.ii.i-p27"></span>That we are born men, that we are endued
with reason and knowledge, that our life is supplied with necessary
support, — all this is indeed from God. As however men, being perverted
in their minds and ungrateful, do not regard these various things, which
are called the gifts of nature, among God's benefits, the common
condition of human life is not here referred to, but the peculiar
endowments of the new and Spiritual life, which derive their origin from
the kingdom of Christ. But since everything necessary for godliness and
salvation is to be deemed among the supernatural gifts of God, let men
learn to arrogate nothing to themselves, but humbly ask of God whatever
they see they are wanting in, and to ascribe to him whatever good they
may have. For Peter here, by attributing the whole of godliness, and all
helps to salvation, to the divine power of Christ, takes them away from
the common nature of men, so that he leaves to us not even the least
particle of any virtue or merit.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p28"></span>*Through the knowledge of him*. He now
describes the manner in which God makes us partakers of so great
blessings, even by making himself known to us by the gospel. For the
knowledge of God is the beginning of life and the first entrance into
godliness. In short, spiritual gifts cannot be given for salvation,
until, being illuminated by the doctrine of the gospel, we are led to
know God. But he makes God the author of this knowledge, because we
never go to him except when called. Hence the effectual cause of faith
is not the perspicacity of our mind, but the calling of God. And he
speaks not of the outward calling only, which is in itself ineffectual;
but of the inward calling, effected by the hidden power of the Spirit
when God not only sounds in our ears by the voice of man, but draws
inwardly our hearts to himself by his own Spirit.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p29"></span>*To glory and virtue,* or, *by his own
glory and power*. Some copies have <span id="vii.ii.i-p29.1"></span>ἰδία
δόξὟ, “by his own glory," and it is so rendered by the old interpreter;
and this reading I prefer, because the sentence seems thus to flow
better For it was Peter's object expressly to ascribe the whole praise
of our salvation to God, so that we may know that we owe every thing to
him. And this is more clearly expressed by these words, — that he has
called us *by his own glory and power*. However, the other reading,
though more obscure, tends to the same thing; for he teaches us, that we
are covered with shame, and are wholly vicious, until God clothes us
with glory and adorns us with virtue. He further intimates, that the
effect of calling in the elect, is to restore to them the glorious image
of God, and to renew them in holiness and righteousness.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p30"></span><span id="vii.ii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p31"></span>**4.** *Whereby are given to us.* It is
doubtful whether he refers only to glory and power, or to the preceding
things also. The whole difficulty arises from this, — that what is here
said is not suitable to the glory and virtue which God confers on us;
but if we read, “by his own glory and power,” there will be no ambiguity
nor perplexity. For what things have been promised to us by God, ought
to be properly and justly deemed to be the effects of his power and
glory.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md)

<span id="vii.ii.i-p34"></span>At the same time the copies vary here
also; for some have <span id="vii.ii.i-p34.1"></span>δι ᾿ ὃν, “on
account of whom;” so the reference may be to Christ. Whichsoever of the
two readings you choose, still the meaning will be, that first the
promises of God ought to be most highly valued; and, secondly, that they
are gratuitous, because they are offered to us as gifts. And he then
shews the excellency of the promises, that they make us partakers of the
divine nature, than which nothing can be conceived better.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p35"></span>For we must consider from whence it is
that God raises us up to such a height of honor. We know how abject is
the condition of our nature; that God, then, should make himself ours,
so that all his things should in a manner become our things, the
greatness of his grace cannot be sufficiently conceived by our minds.
Therefore this consideration alone ought to be abundantly sufficient to
make us to renounce the world and to carry us aloft to heaven. Let us
then mark, that the end of the gospel is, to render us eventually
conformable to God, and, if we may so speak, to deify us.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p36"></span>But the word *nature* is not here essence
but *quality*. The Manicheans formerly dreamt that we are a part of God,
and that, after having run the race of life we shall at length revert to
our original. There are also at this day fanatics who imagine that we
thus pass over into the nature of God, so that his swallows up our
nature. Thus they explain what Paul says, that God will be all in all
(<span id="vii.ii.i-p36.1"></span>[1Co
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.ii.i-p36.1"></span>,) and in the same sense they take this
passage. But such a delirium as this never entered the minds of the holy
Apostles; they only intended to say that when divested of all the vices
of the flesh, we shall be partakers of divine and blessed immortality
and glory, so as to be as it were one with God as far as our capacities
will allow.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p37"></span>This doctrine was not altogether unknown
to Plato, who everywhere defines the chief good of man to be an entire
conformity to God; but as he was involved in the mists of errors, he
afterwards glided off to his own inventions. But we, disregarding empty
speculations, ought to be satisfied with this one thing, — that the
image of God in holiness and righteousness is restored to us for this
end, that we may at length be partakers of eternal life and glory as far
as it will be necessary for our complete felicity.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p38"></span>*Having escaped* We have already
explained that the design of the Apostle was, to set before us the
dignity of the glory of heaven, to which God invites us, and thus to
draw us away from the vanity of this world. Moreover, he sets the
corruption of the world in opposition to the divine nature; but he shews
that this corruption is not in the elements which surround us, but in
our heart, because there vicious and depraved affections prevail, the
fountain and root of which he points out by the word *lust.* Corruption,
then, is thus placed in the world, that we may know that the world is in
us.

<span id="vii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Peter
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** And beside this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Atque in hoc ipsum omne studium
applicantes, subministrate in fide vestra virtutem, in virtute autem
scientiam;

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p4"></span>**6.** And to knowledge temperance; and
to temperance patience; and to patience godliness;

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** In scientia verae temperantiam, in
temperantia autem patientiam, in patientia verò pietatem,

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** And to godliness brotherly
kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p7"></span>**7.** In pietate autem fraternum amorem,
in fraterno verò amore charitatem.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** For if these things be in you, and
abound, they make *you that ye shall* neither *be* barren nor unfruitful
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Haec enim si vobis adsint, et
abunde, suppetant, non otiosos neque infructuosos constituent vos in
cognitione Domini nostri Jesu Christi.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p10"></span>**9.** But he that lacketh these things
is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged
from his old sins.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Cui enim Haec non adsunt, caecus
est, manu palpans, purgationis oblitus veterum delictorum.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p13"></span><span id="vii.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p14"></span>**5** *And besides this.* As it is a
work arduous and of immense labor, to put off the corruption which is in
us, he bids us to strive and make every effort for this purpose. He
intimates that no place is to be given in this case to sloth, and that
we ought to obey God calling us, not slowly or carelessly, but that
there is need of alacrity; as though he had said, “Put forth every
effort, and make your exertions manifest to all.” — For this is what the
participle he uses imports.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p15"></span>*Add to your faith virtue,* or, *Supply
to your faith virtue*. He shews for what purpose the faithful were to
strive, that is, that they might have faith adorned with good morals,
wisdom, patience, and love. Then he intimates that faith ought not to be
naked or empty, but that these are its inseparable companions. To supply
to faith, is to add to faith. There is not here, however, properly a
gradation as to the sense, though it appears as to the words; for love
does not in order follow patience, nor does it proceed from it.
Therefore the passage is to be thus simply explained, “Strive that
virtue, prudence, temperance, and the things which follow, may be added
to your faith.”  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md)

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p17"></span>I take *virtue* to mean a life honest
and rightly formed; for it is not here <span
id="vii.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>ἐνέργεια, energy or courage, but <span
id="vii.ii.ii-p17.2"></span>ἀρετὴ, virtue, moral goodness. Knowledge is
what is necessary for acting prudently; for after having put down a
general term, he mentions some of the principal endowments of a
Christian. *Brotherly-kindness,* <span
id="vii.ii.ii-p17.3"></span>φιλαδελφία, is mutual affection among the
children of God. Love extends wider, because it embraces all mankind.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p18"></span>It may, however, be here asked, whether
Peter, by assigning to us the work of supplying or adding virtue, thus
far extolled the strength and power of free-will? They who seek to
establish free-will in man, indeed concede to God the first place, that
is, that he begins to act or work in us; but they imagine that we at the
same time co-operate, and that it is thus owing to us that the movements
of God are not rendered void and inefficacious. But the perpetual
doctrine of Scripture is opposed to this delirious notion: for it
plainly testifies, that right feelings are formed in us by God, and are
rendered by him effectual. It testifies also that all our progress and
perseverance are from God. Besides, it expressly declares that wisdom,
love, patience, are the gifts of God and the Spirit. When, therefore,
the Apostle requires these things, he by no means asserts that they are
in our power, but only shews what we ought to have, and what ought to be
done. And as to the godly, when conscious of their own infirmity, they
find themselves deficient in their duty, nothing remains for them but to
flee to God for aid and help.  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p20"></span><span id="vii.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p21"></span>**8.** *For if these things be in you.*
Then, he says, you will at length prove that Christ is really known by
you, if ye be endued with virtue, temperance, and the other endowments.
For the knowledge of Christ is an efficacious thing and a living root,
which brings forth fruit. For by saying that these things would make
them *neither barren nor unfruitful,* he shews that all those glory, in
vain and falsely, that they have the knowledge of Christ, who boast of
it without love, patience, and the like gifts, as Paul also says in
<span id="vii.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Eph
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p22"></span>“Ye have not so learned Christ, if so be
that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in
Jesus, that ye put off the old man,” etc.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p23"></span>For he means that those who possess
Christ without newness of life, have never been rightly taught his
doctrine.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p24"></span>But he would not have the faithful to be
only taught patience, godliness, temperance, love; but he requires a
continual progress to be made as to these endowments, and that justly,
for we are as yet far off from the goal. We ought, therefore, always to
make advances, so that God’s gifts may continually increase in us.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p25"></span><span id="vii.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p26"></span>**9.** *But he that lacketh these
things.* He now expresses more clearly that they who profess a naked
faith are wholly without any true knowledge. He then says that they go
astray like the blind in darkness, because they do not see the right way
which is shewn to us by the light of the gospel.  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) This he also confirms by adding this
reason, because such have forgotten that through the benefit of Christ
they had been cleansed from sin, and yet this is the beginning of our
Christianity. It then follows, that those who do not strive for a pure
and holy life, do not understand even the first rudiments of faith.

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p28"></span>But Peter takes this for granted, that
they who were still rolling in the filth of the flesh had forgotten
their own purgation. For the blood of Christ has not become a washing
bath to us, that it may be fouled by our filth. He, therefore, calls
them old sins, by which he means, that our life ought to be otherwise
formed, because we have been cleansed from our sins; not that any one
can be pure from every sin while he lives in this world, or that the
cleansing we obtain through Christ consists of pardon only, but that we
ought to differ from the unbelieving, as God has separated us for
himself. Though, then, we daily sin, and God daily forgives us, and the
blood of Christ cleanses us from our sins, yet sin ought not to rule in
us, but the sanctification of the Spirit ought to prevail in us; for so
Paul teaches us in <span id="vii.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>[1Co
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>, “And such were some of you; but ye are
washed,” *etc.*

<span id="vii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Peter 1:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Wherefore the rather, brethren,
give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do
these things, ye shall never fall:

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Quamobrem magis, fratres,
studete firmam vestram vocationem et electionem facere: Haec enim si
feceritis, non cadetis unquam:

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p4"></span>**11.** For so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p5"></span>**11**. Sic enim abundè subministrabitur
vobis ingressus in regnum eternum Domini nostri et Servatoris Jesu
Christi.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** Wherefore I will not be
negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye
know *them*, and be established in the present truth.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Itaque non negligam semper de
iis commonefacere, etiamsi noveritis, et confirmati sitis in praesenti
veritate.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** Yea, I think it meet, as long as
I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting *you* in remembrance;

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Justum autem arbitror, quandiu
sum in hoc tabernaculo, vos admonitione;

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p10"></span>**l4.** Knowing that shortly I must put
off *this* my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p11"></span>**14.** Quum sciam brevi me depositurum
hoc tabernaculum, quemadmodum et Dominus Jesus manifestavit mihi.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p12"></span>**15.** Moreover I will endeavour that
ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in
remembrance.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p13"></span>**15.** Dabo autem operam, ut etiam
semper post meum discessum possitis horum habere memoriam.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p15"></span><span id="vii.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p16"></span>**10.** *Wherefore the rather,
brethren, give diligence.* He draws this conclusion, that it is one
proof that we have been really elected, and not in vain called by the
Lord, if a good conscience and integrity of life correspond with our
profession of faith. And he infers, that there ought to be more labor
and diligence, because he had said before, that faith ought not to be
barren.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p17"></span>Some copies have, “by good works;” but
these words make no change in the sense, for they are to be understood
though not expressed.  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md)

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p19"></span>He mentions *calling* first, though the
last in order. The reason is, because election is of greater weight or
importance; and it is a right arrangement of a sentence to subjoin what
preponderates. The meaning then is, labor that you may have it really
proved that you have not been called nor elected in vain. At the same
time he speaks here of calling as the effect and evidence of election.
If any one prefers to regard the two words as meaning the same thing, I
do not object; for the Scripture sometimes merges the difference which
exists between two terms. I have, however, stated what seems to me more
probable.  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md)

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p21"></span>Now a question arises, Whether the
stability of our calling and election depends on good works, for if it
be so, it follows that it depends on us. But the whole Scripture teaches
us, first, that God's election is founded on his eternal purpose; and
secondly, that calling begins and is completed through his gratuitous
goodness. The Sophists, in order to transfer what is peculiar to God's
grace to ourselves, usually pervert this evidence. But their evasions
may be easily refuted. For if any one thinks that calling is rendered
sure by men, there is nothing absurd in that; we may however, go still
farther, that every one confirms his calling by leading a holy and pious
life. But it is very foolish to infer from this what the Sophists
contend for; for this is a proof not taken from the cause, but on the
contrary from the sign or the effect. Moreover, this does not prevent
election from being gratuitous, nor does it shew that it is in our own
hand or power to confirm election. For the matter stands thus, — God
effectually calls whom he has preordained to life in his secret counsel
before the foundation of the world; and he also carries on the perpetual
course of calling through grace alone. But as he has chosen us, and
calls us for this end, that we may be pure and spotless in his presence;
purity of life is not improperly called the evidence and proof of
election, by which the faithful may not only testify to others that they
are the children of God, but also confirm themselves in this confidence,
in such a manner, however, that they fix their solid foundation on
something else.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p22"></span>At the same time, this certainty,
mentioned by Peter, ought, I think, to be referred to the conscience, as
though the faithful acknowledged themselves before God to be chosen and
called. But I take it simply of the fact itself, that calling appears as
confirmed by this very holiness of life. It may, indeed, be rendered,
Labor that your calling may become certain; for the verb <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>ποιεῖσθαι is transitive or intransitive.
Still, however you may render it, the meaning is nearly the same.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p23"></span>The import of what is said is, that the
children of God are distinguished from the reprobate by this mark, that
they live a godly and a holy life, because this is the design and end of
election. Hence it is evident how wickedly some vile unprincipled men
prattle, when they seek to make gratuitous election an excuse for all
licentiousness; as though, forsooth! we may sin with impunity, because
we have been predestinated to righteousness and holiness!

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p24"></span>*For if ye do these things.* Peter
seems again to ascribe to the merits of works, that God furthers our
salvation, and also that we continually persevere in his grace. But the
explanation is obvious; for his purpose was only to shew that hypocrites
have in them nothing real or solid, and that, on the contrary, they who
prove their calling sure by good works, are free from the danger of
falling, because sure and sufficient is the grace of God by which they
are supported. Thus the certainty of our salvation by no means depends
on us, as doubtless the cause of it is beyond our limits. But with
regard to those who feel in themselves the efficacious working of the
Spirit, Peter bids them to take courage as to the future, because the
Lord has laid in them the solid foundation of a true and sure calling.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p25"></span><span id="vii.ii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p26"></span>He explains the way or means of
persevering, when he says, *an entrance shall be ministered to you.* The
import of the words is this: “God, by ever supplying you abundantly with
new graces, will lead you to his own kingdom.” And this was added, that
we may know, that though we have already passed from death into life,
yet it is a passage of hope; and as to the fruition of life, there
remains for us yet a long journey. In the meantime we are not destitute
of necessary helps. Hence Peter obviates a doubt by these words, “The
Lord will abundantly supply your need, until you shall enter into his
eternal kingdom.” He calls it the *kingdom of Christ,* because we cannot
ascend to heaven except under his banner and guidance.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p27"></span><span id="vii.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p28"></span>**12.** *Wherefore I will not be
negligent*. As we seem to distrust either the memory or the attention of
those whom we often remind of the same thing, the Apostle makes this
modest excuse, that he ceased not to press on the attention of the
faithful what was well known and fixed in their minds, because its
importance and greatness required this.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p29"></span>“Ye do, indeed,” he says, “fully
understand what the truth of the gospel is, nor have I to confirm as it
were the wavering, but in a matter so great, admonitions are never
superfluous; and, therefore, they ought never to be deemed vexatious.”
Paul also employs a similar excuse in <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>[Ro
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>,

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p30"></span>“I am persuaded of you, brethren,” he
says, “that ye are full of knowledge, so as to be able to admonish one
another: but I have more confidently written to you, as putting you in
mind.”

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p31"></span>He calls that *the present truth*, into
the possession of which they had already entered by a sure faith. He,
then, commends their faith, in order that they might remain fixed in it
more firmly.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p32"></span><span id="vii.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p33"></span>**13.** *Yea, I think it meet,* or
*right*. He expresses more clearly how useful and how necessary is
admonition, because it is needful to arouse the faithful, for otherwise
torpor will creep in from the flesh. Though, then, they might not have
wanted teaching, yet he says that the goads of admonitions were useful,
lest security and indulgence (as it is usually the case) should weaken
what they had learned, and at length extinguish it.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p34"></span>He adds another cause why he was so
intent on writing to them, because he knew that a short time remained
for him. “I must diligently employ my time,” he says; “for the Lord has
made known to me that my life in this world will not be long.”

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p35"></span>We hence learn, that admonitions ought
to be so given, that the people whom we wish to benefit may not think
that wrong is done to them, and also that offenses ought to be so
avoided, that yet the truth may have a free course, and exhortations may
not be discontinued. Now, this moderation is to be observed towards
those to whom a sharp reproof would not be suitable, but who ought on
the contrary to be kindly helped, since they are inclined of themselves
to do their duty. We are also taught by the example of Peter, that the
shorter term of life remains to us, the more diligent ought we to be in
executing our office. It is not commonly given to us to foresee our end;
but they who are advanced in years, or weakened by illness, being
reminded by such indications of the shortness of their life, ought to be
more sedulous and diligent, so that they may in due time perform what
the Lord has given them to do; nay, those who are the strongest and in
the flower of their age, as they do not render to God so constant a
service as it behooves them to do, ought to quicken themselves to the
same care and diligence by the recollection of approaching death; lest
the occasion of doing good may pass away, while they attend negligently
and slothfully to their work.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p36"></span>At the same time, I doubt not but that
it was Peter’s object to gain more authority and weight to his teaching,
when he said that he would endeavor to make them to remember these
things after his death, which was then nigh at hand. For when any one,
shortly before he quits this life, addresses us, his words have in a
manner the force and power of a testament or will, and are usually
received by us with greater reverence.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p37"></span><span id="vii.ii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p38"></span>**14** *I must put off this my
tabernacle.* Literally the words are, “Short is the putting; away of
this tabernacle.” By this mode of speaking, and afterwards by the word
“departing,” he designates death, which it behooves us to notice; for we
are here taught how much death differs from perdition. Besides, too much
dread of death terrifies us, because we do not sufficiently consider how
fading and evanescent this life is, and do not reflect on the perpetuity
of future life. But what does Peter say? He declares that death is
departing from this world, that we may remove elsewhere, even to the
Lord. It ought not, then, to be dreadful to us, as though we were to
perish when we die. He declares that it is the putting away of a
tabernacle, by which we are covered only for a short time. There is,
then, no reason why we should regret to be removed from it.

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p39"></span>But there is to be understood an
implied contrast between a fading tabernacle and a perpetual habitation,
which Paul explains in <span id="vii.ii.iii-p39.1"></span>[2Co
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iii-p39.1"></span>.  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md)

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p41"></span>When he says that *it had been revealed
to him by Christ*, he refers not to the kind of death, but to the time.
But if he received the oracle at Babylon respecting his death being
near, how was he crucified at Rome? It certainly appears that he died
very far from Italy, except he flew in a moment over seas and lands.
 <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) But the Papists, in order to
claim for themselves the body of Peter, make themselves Babylonians, and
say that Rome is called Babylon by Peter: this shall be refuted in its
proper place. What he says of remembering these things after his death,
was intended to shew, that posterity ought to learn from him when dead.
For the apostles had not regard only for their own age, but purposed to
do us good also. Though, then, they are dead, their doctrine lives and
prevails: and it is our duty to profit by their writings, as though they
were manifestly present with. us.

<span id="vii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2 Peter
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p2"></span>**16.** For we have not followed
cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p3"></span>**16.** Neque enim fabulas subtiliter
excogitatas (*vel, arte compositas*) sequuti, notam vobis fecimus Domini
nostri Jesu Christi potentiam et adventum; sed spectatores facti ejus
magnificentiae.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p4"></span>**17**. For he received from God the
Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Accepit enim à Deo Patre honorém
et gloriam, allata illi à magnifica gloria hujusmodi voce, Hie Filius
meus dilectus, in quo mihi complacui.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p6"></span>**18.** And this voice which came from
heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p7"></span>**18.** Et hanc vocem nos audivimus, dum
essemus in monte sancto cum illo.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p9"></span><span id="vii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p10"></span>**16.** *For we have not followed
cunningly devised fables.* It gives us much courage, when we know that
we labor in a matter that is certain. Lest, then, the faithful should
think that in these labors they were beating the air, he now comes to
set forth the certainty of the gospel; and he denies that anything had
been delivered by him but what was altogether true and indubitable: and
they were encouraged to persevere, when they were sure of the prosperous
issue of their calling.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p11"></span>In the first place, Peter indeed asserts
that he had been an eyewitness; for he had himself seen with his own
eyes the glory of Christ, of which he speaks. This knowledge he sets in
opposition to crafty fables, such as cunning men are wont to fabricate
to ensnare simple minds. The old interpreter renders the word “feigned,”
(<span id="vii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>*fictas*;) Erasmus, “formed by art.”
It seems to me that *what is subtle to deceive* is meant: for the Greek
word here used, <span id="vii.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>σοφίζεσθαι, sometimes
means this. And we know how much labor men bestow on frivolous
refinements, and only that they may have some amusement. Therefore no
less seriously ought our minds to be applied to know the truth which is
not fallacious, and the doctrine which is not nugatory, and which
discovers to us the glory of the Son of God and our own salvation.
 <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p13"></span>*The power and the coming.* No doubt he
meant in these words to include the substance of the gospel, as it
certainly contains nothing except Christ, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom. But he distinctly mentions two things, — that
Christ had been manifested in the flesh, — and also that power was
exhibited by him.  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md) Thus, then,
we have the whole gospel; for we know that he, the long-promised
Redeemer, came from heaven, put on our flesh, lived in the world, died
and rose again; and, in the second place, we perceive the end and fruit
of all these things, that is, that he might be God with us, that he
might exhibit in himself a sure pledge of our adoption, that he might
cleanse us from the defilement’s of the flesh by the grace of his
Spirit, and consecrate us temples to God, that he might deliver us from
hell, and raise us up to heaven, that he might by the sacrifice of his
death make an atonement for the sins of the world, that he might
reconcile us to the Father, that he might become to us the author of
righteousness and of life. He who knows and understands these things, is
fully acquainted with the gospel.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p15"></span>*Were eyewitnesses,* or *beholders*
 <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) We hence conclude, that they by
no means serve Christ, nor are like the apostles, who presumptuously
mount the pulpit to prattle of speculations unknown to themselves; for
he alone is the lawful minister of Christ, who knows the truth of the
doctrine which he delivers: not that all obtain certainty in the same
way; for what Peter says is that he himself was present, when Christ was
declared by a voice from heaven to be the Son of God. Three only were
then present, but they were sufficient as witnesses; for they had
through many miracles seen the glory of Christ, and had a remarkable
evidence of his divinity in his resurrection. But we now obtain
certainty in another way; for though Christ has not risen before our
eyes, yet we know by whom his resurrection has been handed down to us.
And added to this is the inward testimony of conscience, the sealing of
the Spirit, which far exceeds all the evidence of the senses. But let us
remember that the gospel was not at the beginning made up of vague
rumors, but that the apostles were the authentic preachers of what they
had seen.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p17"></span><span id="vii.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p18"></span>**17.** *For he received from God the
Father.* He chose one memorable example out of many, even that of
Christ, when, adorned with celestial glory, he conspicuously displayed
his divine majesty to his three disciples. And though Peter does not
relate all the circumstances, yet he sufficiently designates them when
he says, *that a voice came from the magnificent glory.* For the meaning
is, that nothing earthly was seen there, but that a celestial majesty
shone on every side. We may hence conclude what those displays of
greatness were which the evangelists relate. And it was necessarily thus
done, in order that the authority of that voice which came might be more
awful and solemn, as we see that it was done all at once by the Lord.
For when he spoke to the fathers, he did not only cause his words to
sound in the air, but by adding some symbols or tokens of his presence,
he proved the oracles to be his.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p19"></span>*This is my beloved Son.* Peter then
mentions this voice, as though it was sufficient alone, as a full
evidence for the gospel, and justly so. For when Christ is acknowledged
by us to be him whom the Father has sent, this is our highest wisdom.
There are two parts to this sentence. When he says, “This is,” the
expression is very emphatical, intimating, that he was the Messiah who
had been so often promised. Whatever, then, is found in the Law and the
Prophets respecting the Messiah, is declared here, by the Father, to
belong to him whom he so highly commended. In the other part of the
sentence, he announces Christ as his own Son, in whom his whole love
dwells and centres. It hence follows that we are not otherwise loved
than in him, nor ought the love of God to be sought anywhere else. It is
sufficient for me now only to touch on these things by the way.

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p20"></span><span id="vii.ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p21"></span>**18.** *In the holy mount.* He calls it
*the holy mount*, for the same reason that the ground was called holy
where God appeared to Moses. For wherever the Lord comes, as he is the
fountain of all holiness, he makes holy all things by the odor of his
presence. And by this mode of speaking we are taught, not only to
receive God reverently wherever he shews himself, but also to prepare
ourselves for holiness, as soon as he comes nigh us, as it was commanded
the people when the law was proclaimed on Mount Sinai. And it is a
general truth,

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p22"></span>“Be ye holy, for I am holy, who dwell in
the midst of you.”  
(<span id="vii.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>[Lev.
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044.md), [Lev.
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[2 Peter
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p2"></span>**19.** We have also a more sure word of
prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in
your hearts:

<span id="vii.ii.v-p3"></span>**19.** Et habemus firmiorem propheticum
sermonem, cui bene facitis attendentes, tanquam lucernae apparenti in
caliginoso loco, donee illuceat dies, et lucifer oriatur in cordibus
vestris;

<span id="vii.ii.v-p4"></span>**20.** Knowing this first, that no
prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p5"></span>**20.** Hoc primùm cognito, quòd omnis
prophetia scripturae privatae (*vel, proprii motus*) interpretationis
non est:

<span id="vii.ii.v-p6"></span>**21.** For the prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake *as they were* moved
by the Holy Ghost.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p7"></span>**21.** Neque enim voluntate hominis
allata est quondam prophetia; sed à Spiritu Sancto impulsi, loquuti sunt
sancti Dei homines.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii.v-p9"></span><span id="vii.ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p10"></span>**19.** *We have also.* He now shews that
the truth of the gospel is founded on the oracles of the prophets, lest
they who embraced it should hesitate to devote themselves wholly to
Christ: for they who waver cannot be otherwise than remiss in their
minds. But when he says, “We have,” he refers to himself and other
teachers, as well as to their disciples. The apostles had the prophets
as the patrons of their doctrine; the faithful also sought from them a
confirmation of the gospel. I am the more disposed to take this view,
because he speaks of the whole Church, and makes himself one among
others. At the same time, he refers more especially to the Jews, who
were well acquainted with the doctrine of the prophets. And hence, as I
think, he calls their word *more sure* or *firmer*

<span id="vii.ii.v-p11"></span>For they who take the comparative for a
positive, that is, “more sure,” for “sure,” do not sufficiently consider
the whole context. The sense also is a forced one, when it is said to be
“more sure,” because God really completed what he had promised
concerning his Son. For the truth of the gospel is here simply proved by
a twofold testimony, — that Christ had been highly approved by the
solemn declaration of God, and, then, that all the prophecies of the
prophets confirmed the same thing. But it appears at first sight
strange, that the word of the prophets should be said to be more sure or
firmer than the voice which came from the holy mouth of God himself;
for, first, the authority of God's word is the same from the beginning;
and, secondly, it was more confirmed than previously by the coming of
Christ. But the solution of this knot is not difficult: for here the
Apostle had a regard to his own nation, who were acquainted with the
prophets, and their doctrine was received without any dispute. As, then,
it was not doubted by the Jews but that all the things which the
prophets had taught, came from the Lord, it is no wonder that Peter said
that their word was more sure. Antiquity also gains some reverence.
There are, besides, some other circumstances which ought to be noticed;
particularly, that no suspicion could be entertained as to those
prophecies in which the kingdom of Christ had so long before been
predicted.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p12"></span>The question, then, is not here, whether
the prophets deserve more credit than the gospel; but Peter regarded
only this, to shew how much deference the Jews paid to those who counted
the prophets as God's faithful ministers, and had been brought up from
childhood in their school.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md)

<span id="vii.ii.v-p15"></span>*Whereunto ye do well.* This passage is,
indeed, attended with some more difficulty; for it may be asked, what is
the day which Peter mentions? To some it seems to be the clear knowledge
of Christ, when men fully acquiesce in the gospel; and the *darkness*
they explain as existing, when they, as yet, hesitate in suspense, and
the doctrine of the gospel is not received as indubitable; as though
Peter praised those Jews who were searching for Christ in the Law and
the Prophets, and were advancing, as by this preceding light towards
Christ, the Sun of righteousness, as they were praised by Luke, who,
having heard Paul preaching, searched the Scripture to know whether what
he said was true. (<span id="vii.ii.v-p15.1"></span>[Ac
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.ii.v-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="vii.ii.v-p16"></span>But in this view there is, first, an
inconsistency, because it thus seems that the use of the prophecies is
confined to a short time, as though they would be superfluous when the
gospel-light is seen. Were one to object and say, that this does not
necessarily follow, because *until* does not always denote the end. To
this I say, that in commands it cannot be otherwise taken: “Walk until
you finish your course;” “Fight until you conquer.” In such expressions
we doubtless see that a certain time is specified.  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) But were I to concede this point, that
the reading of the prophets is not thus wholly cast aside; yet every one
must see how frigid is this commendation, that the prophets are useful
until Christ is revealed to us; for their teaching is necessary to us
until the end of life. Secondly, we must bear in mind who they were whom
Peter addressed; for he was not instructing the ignorant and novices,
who were as yet in the first rudiments; but even those respecting whom
he had before testified, that they had obtained the same precious faith,
and were confirmed in the present truth. Surely the gross darkness of
ignorance could not have been ascribed to such people. I know what some
allege, that all had not made the same progress, and that here beginners
who were as yet seeking Christ, are admonished.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p18"></span>But as it is evident from the context,
that the words were addressed to the same persons, the passage must
necessarily be applied to the faithful who had already known Christ, and
had become partakers of the true light. I therefore extend this
darkness, mentioned by Peter, to the whole course of life, and *the
day,* I consider will then *shine* on us when we shall see face to face,
what we now see through a glass darkly. Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, indeed, shines forth in the gospel; but the darkness of
death will always, in part, possess our minds, until we shall be brought
out of the prison of the flesh, and be translated into heaven. This,
then, will be the brightness of day, when no clouds or mists of
ignorance shall intercept the bright shining of the Sun.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p19"></span>And doubtless we are so far from a
perfect day, as our faith is from perfection. It is, therefore, no
wonder that the state of the present life is called darkness, since we
are far distant from that knowledge to which the gospel invites us.
 <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md)

<span id="vii.ii.v-p21"></span>In short, Peter reminds us that as long
as we sojourn in this world, we have need of the doctrine of the
prophets as a guiding light; which being extinguished, we can do nothing
else but wander in darkness; for he does not disjoin the prophecies from
the gospel, when he teaches us that they shine to shew us the way. His
object only was to teach us that the whole course of our life ought to
be guided by God's word; for otherwise we must be involved on every side
in the darkness of ignorance; and the Lord does not shine on us, except
when we take his word as our light.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p22"></span>But he does not use the comparison,
*light,* or lamp, to intimate that the light is small and sparing, but
to make these two things to correspond,--that we are without light, and
can no more keep on the right way than those who go astray in a dark
night; and that the Lord brings a remedy for this evil, when he lights a
torch to guide us in the midst of darkness.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p23"></span>What he immediately adds respecting *the
day star* does not however seem altogether suitable to this explanation;
for the real knowledge, to which we are advancing through life, cannot
be called the beginning of the day. To this I reply, that different
parts of the day are compared together, but the whole day in all its
parts is set in opposition to that darkness, which would wholly
overspread all our faculties, were not the Lord to come to our help by
the light of his word.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p24"></span>This is a remarkable passage: we learn
from it how God guides us. The Papists have ever and anon in their
mouth, that the Church cannot err. Though the word is neglected, they
yet imagine that it is guided by the Spirit. But Peter, on the contrary,
intimates that all are immersed in darkness who do not attend to the
light of the word. Therefore, except thou art resolved wilfully to cast
thyself into a labyrinth, especially beware of departing even in the
least thing from the rule and direction of the word. Nay, the Church
cannot follow God as its guide, except it observes what the word
prescribes.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p25"></span>In this passage Peter also condemns all
the wisdom of men, in order that we may learn humbly to seek, otherwise
than by our own understanding, the true way of knowledge; for without
the word nothing is left for men but darkness.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p26"></span>It further deserves to be noticed, that
he pronounces on the clearness of Scripture; for what is said would be a
false eulogy, were not the Scripture fit and suitable to shew to us with
certainty the right way. Whosoever, then, will open his eyes through the
obedience of faith, shall by experience know that the Scripture has not
been in vain called a light. It is, indeed, obscure to the unbelieving;
but they who are given up to destruction are wilfully blind. Execrable,
therefore, is the blasphemy of the Papists, who pretend that the light
of Scripture does nothing but dazzle the eyes, in order to keep the
simple from reading it. But it is no wonder that proud men, inflated
with the wind of false confidence, do not see that light with which the
Lord favors only little children and the humble. With a similar eulogy
David commends the law of God in <span id="vii.ii.v-p26.1"></span>[Ps.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001.md), [Ps.
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.ii.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p27"></span><span id="vii.ii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p28"></span>**20.** *Knowing this first.* Here Peter
begins to shew how our minds are to be prepared, if we really wish to
make progress in scriptural knowledge. There may at the same time be two
interpretations given, if you read <span
id="vii.ii.v-p28.1"></span>ἐπηλύσεως as some do, which means
*occurrence*, *impulse*; or, as I have rendered it, *interpretation*,
<span id="vii.ii.v-p28.2"></span>ἐπιλύσεως. But almost all give this
meaning, that we ought not to rush on headlong and rashly when we read
Scripture, confiding in our own understanding. They think that a
confirmation of this follows, because the Spirit, who spoke by the
prophets, is the only true interpreter of himself.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p29"></span>This explanation contains a true, godly,
and useful doctrine, that then only are the prophecies read profitably,
when we renounce the mind and feelings of the flesh, and submit to the
teaching of the Spirit, but that it is an impious profanation of it;
when we arrogantly rely on our own acumen, deeming that sufficient to
enable us to understand it, though the mysteries contain things hidden
to our flesh, and sublime treasures of life far surpassing our
capacities. And this is what we have said, that the light which shines
in it, comes to the humble alone.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p30"></span>But the Papists are doubly foolish, when
they conclude from this passage, that no interpretation of a private man
ought to be deemed authoritative. For they pervert what Peter says, that
they may claim for their own councils the chief right of interpreting
Scripture; but in this they act indeed childishly; for Peter calls
interpretation *private,* not that of every individual, in order to
prohibit each one to interpret; but he shews that whatever men bring of
their own is profane. Were, then, the whole world unanimous, and were
the minds of all men united together, still what would proceed from
them, would be private or their own; for the word is here set in
opposition to divine revelation; so that the faithful, inwardly
illuminated by the Holy Spirit, acknowledge nothing but what God says in
his word.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p31"></span>However, another sense seems to me more
simple, that Peter says that Scripture came not from man, or through the
suggestions of man. For thou wilt never come well prepared to read it,
except thou bringest reverence, obedience, and docility; but a just
reverence then only exists when we are convinced that God speaks to us,
and not mortal men. Then Peter especially bids us to believe the
prophecies as the indubitable oracles of God, because they have not
emanated from men's own private suggestions.  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md)

<span id="vii.ii.v-p35"></span>To the same purpose is what immediately
follows, —

<span id="vii.ii.v-p36"></span><span id="vii.ii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p37"></span>*But holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.* They did not of themselves, or according to
their own will, foolishly deliver their own inventions. The meaning is,
that the beginning of right knowledge is to give that credit to the holy
prophets which is due to God. He calls them the *holy men of God,*
because they faithfully executed the office committed to them, having
sustained the person of God in their ministrations. He says that they
were — not that they were bereaved of mind, (as the Gentiles imagined
their prophets to have been,) but because they dared not to announce
anything of their own, and obediently followed the Spirit as their
guide, who ruled in their mouth as in his own sanctuary. Understand by
*prophecy of Scripture* that which is contained in the holy Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc45026.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p13"></span> Simeon, and not Simon, is the name as
here given, though a few copies and the *Vulg.* have Simon. His name is
given both ways elsewhere; see <span id="vii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>[Lu
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>,
and <span id="vii.ii.i-p13.2"></span>[Ac
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.ii.i-p13.2"></span>. Why he called himself Peter in the first
Epistle, and Simeon Peter here, does not appear. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc45026.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p16"></span> It has been maintained by many, that the
rendering of these words ought to be, “of our God and Savior Jesus
Christ,” In this case the <span id="vii.ii.i-p16.1"></span>ἐν before
“righteousness” would be rendered “in;” for it is more suitable to say
that faith is *in* than *through* the righteousness of Christ. Christ is
thus called here God as well as Savior; and so he is called “our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ” in <span id="vii.ii.i-p16.2"></span>[2Pe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.ii.i-p16.2"></span>,
the article being used in the same manner. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc45026.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p24"></span> The connection here is variously
regarded. Our version and Calvin seem to connect this verse with the
foregoing, in this sense, that the Apostle prays for the increase of
grace and peace from the consideration of what God had already done, or
in conformity with his previous benefits. Others, perhaps more
correctly, view this verse as connected with the 5th, and render <span
id="vii.ii.i-p24.1"></span>ὡς, “Since,” and the beginning of the 5th
verse, “Do ye also for this reason, giving all diligence, add,” etc.;
that is, “Since God has done so great things for you, ye also for this
reason ought to be diligent in adding to your faith virtue, etc.” But
<span id="vii.ii.i-p24.2"></span>ὡς and <span
id="vii.ii.i-p24.3"></span>καὶ may be rendered *as* and *so.* See <span
id="vii.ii.i-p24.4"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051.md)<span id="vii.ii.i-p24.4"></span>.
“As his divine power... so for this reason, giving all diligence, add,”
etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc45026.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p26"></span> The order is according to what is common
in Scripture; the chief thing is mentioned first, and then that which
leads to it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc45026.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="vii.ii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.i-p32"></span> The received text no doubt contains the
true rending. The word <span id="vii.ii.i-p32.1"></span>ἀρετὴ never
means “power” either in the classics, or in the *Sept*., or in the New
Testament. *Beza* and also *Schleusner,* regard <span
id="vii.ii.i-p32.2"></span>διὰ as expressing the final cause, to; it is
also used in the sense of “for the sake of,” or, “on account of.” “Glory
and virtue” are in a similar order as the previous words, “life and
godliness,” and also in the same order with the concluding words of the
next verse, “partakers of the divine nature,” and “escaping the
corruptions of the world.” So that there is a correspondence as to the
order of the words throughout the whole passage.

<span id="vii.ii.i-p33"></span>With respect to <span
id="vii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>δι ᾿ ὦν, the rendering may be, “for the sake
of which,” that is, for the purpose of leading us to “glory and
virtue,”“ many and precious promises have been given; and then the
conclusion of the verse states the object in other words, that we might
by these promises become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped
the pollutions of the world. Escaping the corruption of the world is
“godliness,” is “virtue;” and partaking of the divine nature is “life,”
is “glory.” This complete correspondence confirms the meaning which
*Beza* and our version give to the preposition <span
id="vii.ii.i-p33.2"></span>διὰ at the end of the third verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc45026.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="vii.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p16"></span> Some, like *Bishop Warburton*, have
very ingeniously attempted to shew that there is here a regular order
and gradation; but it is not the order of cause and effect. Different
things are mentioned, and what is added, has in some way or another a
connection with the previous word. To faith add virtue or moral conduct;
that virtue may be rightly formed, add knowledge; that knowledge may be
gained, add temperance; that temperance may continue, add patience or
perseverance; that perseverance may be retained, add godliness or piety,
that is, prayer to God; that godliness may not be alone, add
brotherly-kindness; and that brotherly kindness may he enlarged, add
love to all mankind. The word added has a connection with the
immediately previous word, as the way, means, or an addition. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc45026.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="vii.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p19"></span> The question of free-will does not
properly belong to this passage; for the Apostle writes, not to those in
their natural state, but to those whom he considered to be new
creatures. The question of free-will ought to be confined to conversion,
and not extended to the state of those who have been converted. The
tenth article of the Church of England nearly meets the question, yet
not wholly: it ascribes the will to turn most distinctly to God, and
says that man cannot turn himself; but it does not expressly say whether
man can resist the good-will given him, which is the very gist of the
question. But it says further, that the grace of God by Christ “worketh
with us when we have that good-will,” which seems certainly to imply,
that the good-will first given is made thereby effectual. If there be,
then, a cooperation, (as no doubt there is,) it is the cooperation,
according to this Article, of the good-will first given, and not of
anything in man by nature. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc45026.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="vii.ii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ii-p27"></span> “He is blind, (<span
id="vii.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>*manu palpans*) stroking with the hand,” is
Calvin's; the *Vulgate* is <span id="vii.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>*manu
tentans*, “feeling with the hand:” but the original word means, “closing
the eyes,” according to the Greek grammarians, *Hesychius* and *Suidas*:
“He is blind, closing his eyes.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc45026.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p18"></span> There is no sufficient authority for
introducing them. Besides, there is no need of them, for the word <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>ταῦτα, “these things,” has been often
previously repeated, and refers to the things mentioned in <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p18.2"></span>[2Pe
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iii-p18.2"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc45026.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p20"></span> The order is such as we often meet
with, the visible effect first, and then the cause, as in <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>[Ro
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>; confession, the ostensible act, is
mentioned first, and then faith, which precedes it. So here, calling,
the effect produced, is first mentioned, and then election, the cause of
it; as though he had said, “Make your calling, which has proceeded from
your election, sure.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc45026.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p40"></span> Paul, at the beginning of this
chapter, compares our state in this world in a fading body with our
state above after the resurrection in a glorified body, and takes no
account of the intervening time between death and the resurrection. By
keeping this in view, the whole passage, otherwise obscure, will appear
quite clear. He speaks of being unclothed and clothed, that is, of being
divested of one body, and of putting on another; and consistently with
this view he speaks of not being found naked, that is, without a body as
a covering. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc45026.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iii-p42"></span> It has been disputed, whether he
refers here to what is recorded in <span
id="vii.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>[John
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>, or to a new revelation. The latter was
the opinion of some of the ancient fathers; and not without reason, for
in John the manner of his death is what is mentioned, but here the near
approach of it, — two things wholly distinct. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc45026.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p12"></span> The verb <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>σοφίσω, once used by Paul in <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>[2Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>, means “to make wise,” and in this sense it
is used in the Sept.; and it may properly have a similar meaning here,
“myths (or, fables) made wise,” or made to appear wise a trade still
carried on in the world. The idea of craft and subtlety is what is given
to it in the classics. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc45026.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p14"></span> We have the same order as in several
previous instances; “power” first, then “coming.” It is the peculiar
style of Scripture. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc45026.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.iv-p16"></span> Spectators, <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>ἐπόπται, lookers on, inspectors, surveyors —
it betokens those who not only see or behold a thing, but who
attentively look on. It is more emphatical than <span
id="vii.ii.iv-p16.2"></span>αὐτόπται, “eye-witnesses.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc45026.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="vii.ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p13"></span> Much has been written on this subject;
and the difficulty has arisen from a wrong construction of the passage,
which is literally as follows: — “And we have more firm the prophetic
word,” <span id="vii.ii.v-p13.1"></span>Καὶ ἔχομεν βεβαιότερον τὸν
προφητικὸν λόγον, that is, we have rendered more firm the prophetic
word. This is confirmed by what follows; for the prophetic word is
compared to “a light shining in a dark place,” and, therefore, not clear
nor firm until it be fulfilled; but they were doing well to attend to
this light until the full light of the gospel shone in their hearts. As
*Scott* maintains, the reference here is clearly to the experience of
Christians to their real knowledge of divine truths; for it was to be
*in* their *hearts*, and not *before* their *eyes*

<span id="vii.ii.v-p14"></span>A great deal of learning has been spent
to no purpose on this passage. It has been by most taken as granted,
that “the power and coming of our Lord,” mentioned in verse 16th, is his
second coming, when the whole passage refers only and expressly to his
first coming. And on this gratuitous and even false supposition is
grounded the elaborate exposition of *Sherlock, Horsley*, and others. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc45026.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="vii.ii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p17"></span> There is no command here: the Apostle
only approves of what they were doing, “whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc45026.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="vii.ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p20"></span> The Apostle does not speak of the
perfect day, but of the dawn of it, and the daystar is that which ushers
in the perfect day. The gospel is the dawn and the daystar, compared
with the glimmering light of prophecy, and compared too with the perfect
day of the heavenly kingdom. Prophecy is useful still; for its
fulfillment, found in the gospel, greatly strengthens faith. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc45026.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="vii.ii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.v-p32"></span> There are in the main three renderings
of this passage: — l. “No Prophecy of Scripture is of a private
impulse,” or invention; — 2. “No prophecy of Scripture is of
self-interpretation,” that is, is its own interpreter; — 3. No prophecy
of Scripture is of private interpretation, that is, is not to be
interpreted according to the fancies of men, but according to the word
of God and the guidance of his Spirit. Now which of these corresponds
with the context? Clearly the first, the two others have nothing in the
passage to countenance them. The next verse is evidently explanatory of
this sentence, which seems at once to determine its meaning; and, as it
is often the case in Scripture, the explanation is given negatively and
positively. Prophecy *did not* come from the will of man; it *did* come
from the Spirit of God. Besides, the importance attached to the
announcement, “knowing this especially,” is not so clearly borne out as
by the first exposition, because the fact that prophecy did not come
from man, is everything in the question, while the other expositions
contain only things of subordinate importance. Thus what goes before and
comes after tends to confirm the same view.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p33"></span>Whether we take the conjectural reading
(which only differs from the other in one small letter) or that which is
found in all the MSS., it may admit of the meaning that has been given.
There is either an <span id="vii.ii.v-p33.1"></span>ἐκ, “from,”
understood, or the word *prophecy* is to be repeated: “No prophecy of
Scripture is *from* one's own explanation;” or, “No prophecy of
Scripture is a *prophecy* of one's own explanation,” or interpretation,
that is, as to things to come.

<span id="vii.ii.v-p34"></span>*Calvin* has been followed in his view of
this passage, among others, by *Grotius, Doddridge*, and *Macknight*. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc45027.md)
