[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45033)  [Next](cc45035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span>A Translation OF

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>John Calvin’s Version OF

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN

<span id="ix.ii.i"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="ix.ii.i-p3"></span>**1** What has been from the beginning,
what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have looked
on, what our hands have handled, concerning the word of life;

<span id="ix.ii.i-p4"></span>**2** (And the life has been manifested,
and we have seen, and do testify, and declare to you that eternal life,
which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us) —

<span id="ix.ii.i-p5"></span>**3** What we have seen and heard, declare
we to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ:

<span id="ix.ii.i-p6"></span>**4** And we write these things to you,
that your joy may be complete.

<span id="ix.ii.i-p7"></span>**5** And this is the message which we have
heard from him, and declare to you, that God is light, and in him there
is not any darkness.

<span id="ix.ii.i-p8"></span>**6** If we say that we have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not tell the truth.

<span id="ix.ii.i-p9"></span>**7** But if we walk in the light, as he is
in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.

<span id="ix.ii.i-p10"></span>**8** If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us:

<span id="ix.ii.i-p11"></span>**9** If we confess our sins, faithful is
he and just, so as to forgive us *our* sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness:

<span id="ix.ii.i-p12"></span>**10** If we say that we have not sinned,
we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

<span id="ix.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1** My little children, I write these
things to you, that you may not sin; but if any one sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous one:

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p4"></span>**2** And he is the propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for *the sins* of the whole world.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3** And by this we know that we have
known him, if we *keep* his commandments.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4** He who says, “I know him,” and keeps
not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him:

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5** But he who keeps his word, verily in
him the love of God is perfected;

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p8"></span>**6** By this we know that we are in him.
He who says that lie abides in him, ought also himself so to walk as he
walked.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p9"></span>**7** Brethren, no new commandment do I
write to you, but an old commandment, which you have had from the
beginning: the old commandment is the word which you have heard from the
beginning.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p10"></span>**8** Again, a new commandment do I write
to you; which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing
away, and the true light now shines.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9** He who says that he is in the
light, and hates his brother, is still in darkness.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p12"></span>**10** He who loves his brother abides in
the light, and to him there is no stumbling:

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p13"></span>**11** But lie who hates his brother,
walks in darkness; and he knows not where he goeth, because darkness
hath blinded his eyes.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p14"></span>**12** I write to you, little children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p15"></span>**13** I write to you, fathers, because
ye have known him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men,
because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write to you, children,
because ye have known the Father.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p16"></span>**14** I have written to you, fathers,
because ye have known him who is from the beginning. I have written to
you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in
you, and ye have overcome the evil one.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p17"></span>**15** Love not the world, nor the things
which are in the world: if any one loves the world, the love of the
Father is not in him.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p18"></span>**16** For whatever is in the world,
*(even* the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life,) is not from the Father, but from the world.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p19"></span>**17** And the world passeth away, and
the lust of it; but he who doeth the will of God, abides for ever.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p20"></span>**18** Little children, it is the last
hour; and as you have heard that Antichrist is to come, even now there
are many Antichrist is:

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p21"></span>**19** Hence we know that it is the last
hour. From us have they gone out, but of us they were not, for had they
been of us, they would *surely* have remained with us; but *they have
gone out,* that they might be made manifest that they were not of us.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p22"></span>**20** But ye have an unction from the
Holy One, and ye know all things.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p23"></span>**21** I have not written to you, because
ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that everything false
is not from the truth.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p24"></span>**22** Who is a liar, but he who denies
Jesus to be the Christ? He is an Antichrist, who denies the Father and
the Son:

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p25"></span>**23** Every one who denies the Son hath
not the Father.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p26"></span>**24** Let, then, what you have heard
from the beginning remain in you: if what you have heard from the
beginning remain in you, ye shall also remain in the Son, and in the
Father;

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p27"></span>**25** And this is the promise which he
hath promised to us. *even* eternal life.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p28"></span>**26** These things have I written to you
respecting them who seduce you: but the unction which ye have received
from him remains in you, so that ye have no need that any one should
teach you;

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p29"></span>**27** But as the unction teaches you all
things, and is truth, and is not a lie, and as it has taught you? *so*
remain in him.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p30"></span>**28** And now, little children, continue
in him, that when lie shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed at his presence.

<span id="ix.ii.ii-p31"></span>**29** Since ye know that he is
righteous, know ye that every one who doeth righteousness has been born
of him.

<span id="ix.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p3"></span>**1** See what manner of love the Father
hath bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons of God! the world
for this reason knoweth us not, because it did not know him.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p4"></span>**2** Beloved, we are now the sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when
lie shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is:

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3** And every one who hath this hope in
him purifieth himself, inasmuch as he is pure.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p6"></span>**4** Whosoever doeth sin, doeth also
iniquity; and sin is iniquity.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p7"></span>**5** But ye know that he appeared that
he might take away our sins, and sin is not in him.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p8"></span>**6** Whosoever abides in him doth not
sin; whosoever sins, hath not seen him, nor known him.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p9"></span>**7** Little children, let no one deceive
you, — he who doeth righteousness is righteous, inasmuch as he is
righteous:

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p10"></span>**8** He who doeth sin, is of the devil,
for the devil sins from the beginning. The Son of God was for this end
manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p11"></span>**9** Whosoever has been born of God,
doth not do sin, because his seed remains in him; and he cannot sin,
because he has been born of God.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p12"></span>**10** By this are made manifest the
sons of God, and the sons of the devil, — every one who doeth not
righteousness, is not of God, nor he who loves not his brother.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p13"></span>**11** For this is the message that ye
heard from the beginning, that we love one another:

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p14"></span>**12** Not as Cain, who was of the
wicked one, and slew his brother; and why did he slay him? because his
works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p15"></span>**13** Wonder not, my brethren, if the
world hate you.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p16"></span>**14** We know that we have passed from
death to life, because we love the brethren; he who loves not his
brother, remains in death.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p17"></span>**15** Every one who hates his brother,
is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p18"></span>**16** By this we know love, that he
laid down his own life for us; and we ought to lay down *our* lives for
the brethren.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p19"></span>**17** But when any one has this world’s
goods, and seeth his brother in want, and closeth up his bowels from
him, how abideth the love of God in him?

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p20"></span>**18** My little children, let us not
love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth:

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p21"></span>**19** And by this we know that we are
of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p22"></span>**20** For if our heart accuse us,
doubtless God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p23"></span>**21** Beloved, if our heart do not
accuse us, we have confidence towards God:

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p24"></span>**22** And if we ask anything, we
receive *it* from him, because we keep his commandments, and do the
things which are pleasing in his sight.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p25"></span>**23** And this is his commandment, that
we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as
he gave us commandment.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p26"></span>**24** And he who keepeth his
commandment, abideth in him, and he in him; and by this we know that he
abideth in us, *even* by the Spirit whom he hath given us.

<span id="ix.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p3"></span>**1** Beloved, believe not every spirit,
but prove the spirits whether they are from God; because many false
prophets have gone forth into the world.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p4"></span>**2** By this know ye the Spirit of God, —
Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh, is
from God;

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p5"></span>**3** And every spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh, is not from God; and this is
the Antichrist, of whom you have heard that he is to come, and he is now
already in the world.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p6"></span>**4** Ye are of God, little children, and
have overcome them; because greater is he who is in you than he who is
in the world.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p7"></span>**5** They are of the world; therefore of
the world do they speak, and the world heareth them.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p8"></span>**6** We are of God; he who knoweth God
heareth us; he who is not of God, doth not hear us: by this we know the
spirit of truth and the spirit of error.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p9"></span>**7** Beloved, let us love one another;
because love is from God; and every one who loveth has been born of God,
and knoweth God.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p10"></span>**8** He who loveth not, knoweth not God,
because God is love.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p11"></span>**9** In this has appeared the love of
God to us, that God has sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that
we may live through him.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p12"></span>**10** In this is love, not that we have
loved God, but that God has loved us and sent his Son a propitiation for
our sins.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p13"></span>**11** Beloved, if God has so loved us,
we ought also to hive one another.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p14"></span>**12** No one hath ever seen God: if we
love one another, God abides in us, and his love has been perfected in
us.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p15"></span>**13** By this we know that we abide in
him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p16"></span>**14** And we have seen and do testify,
that the Father has sent his Son to be the Saviour of the world.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p17"></span>**15** He who shall confess that Jesus is
the Son of God, God abideth in him, and he in God.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p18"></span>**16** And we have known and have
believed the love which God hath to us: God is love; and he who abideth
in love, abideth in God, and God in him.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p19"></span>**17** By this has love in us been
perfected, that we may have confidence in the day of judgment, because
as He is, so are we in this world.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p20"></span>**18** Fear is not in love: but perfect
love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment; and he who fears, has
not been perfected in love.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p21"></span>**19** We love him, because he has first
loved us.

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p22"></span>**20** If any one *say,* “I love *God,”*
and hate his neighbour, he is a liar; for he who loves not his brother
whom he sees, how can he love God whom he sees not?

<span id="ix.ii.iv-p23"></span>**21** And this commandment we have from
Him, that he who loves God should also love his brother.

<span id="ix.ii.v"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="ix.ii.v-p3"></span>**1** Every one who believes that Jesus is
the Christ has been born of God; and every one who loves Him who has
begotten, loves him also who has been begotten by Him.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p4"></span>**2** By this we know that we love the
children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments:

<span id="ix.ii.v-p5"></span>**3** For this is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments; and his commandments are not grievous.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p6"></span>**4** For, whatever has been born of God
overcometh the world; and this is the victory which overcometh the
world, our faith.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p7"></span>**5** Who is he who overcomes the world,
but he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="ix.ii.v-p8"></span>**6** This is he who has come by water and
blood, Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood; and the
Spirit is

<span id="ix.ii.v-p9"></span>**7** He who testifies, inasmuch as the
Spirit is truth. For there are three who testify in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these three are one.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p10"></span>**8** And there are three who testify on
earth, the Spirit, the water, and the blood;

<span id="ix.ii.v-p11"></span>**9** And these three agree in one. If we
receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p12"></span>**10** Moreover, this is the testimony of
God, which lie hath testified respecting his own Son (He who believes on
the Son of God hath the testimony in himself;

<span id="ix.ii.v-p13"></span>**11** He who believes not God, makes him
a liar, because he hath not believed the testimony which God hath
testified respecting his own Son,) even this is the testimony, that God
hath given to us eternal life;

<span id="ix.ii.v-p14"></span>**12** And this life is in his Son. He who
hath the Son, hath life; he who hath not the Son of God, hath not life.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p15"></span>**13** These things have I written to you
who believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p16"></span>**14** And this is the confidence which we
have towards Him, that when we ask anything according to his will, he
heareth us:

<span id="ix.ii.v-p17"></span>**15** And if we know that he hears us
when we ask any thing, we know that we have the petitions which we have
desired of him.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p18"></span>**16** If any one see his brother sinning
a sin not to death, he shall ask, and he will give to him life for him
who sins not to death: there is a sin to death, I do not say that any
one shall pray for that.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p19"></span>**17** Every unrighteousness is sin; and
there is a sin not to death.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p20"></span>**18** We know that every one who has been
born of God, sins not; but he who has been born of God, keeps himself,
and the wicked one touches him not.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p21"></span>**19** We know that we are of God; and the
whole world lieth in the wicked one.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p22"></span>**20** And we know that the Son of God has
come, and has given to us an understanding, that we may know him who is
true; anti we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ: this is
the true God and eternal life.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p23"></span>**21** Little children, keep yourselves
from idols. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James](cc45035)
