[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45004)  [Next](cc45006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
and Bithynia,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Petrus, apostolus Jesu Christi,
electis inquilinis qui dispersi sunt per Ponturn, Galatiam, Cappadociam,
Asiam et Bithyniam,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Elect according to the foreknowledge
of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience
and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace,
be multiplied.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Secundum precognitionem Dei Patris
in sanctificatione Spiritus, in obedientiam et aspersionem sanguinis
Jesu Christi; Gratia vobis et pax multiplicetur.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>**1** *Peter, an apostle* What in this
salutation is the same with those of Paul, requires no new explanation.
When Paul prayed for *grace* and *peace,* the verb is left out; but
Peter adds it, and says, *be multiplied;* still the meaning is the same;
for Paul did not wish to the faithful the beginning of grace and peace,
but the increase of them, that is, that God would complete what he had
begun.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p9"></span>*To the elect,* or *the elected*. It may be
asked, how could this be found out, for the election of God is hid, and
cannot be known without the special revelation of the Spirit; and as
every one is made sure of his own election by the testimony of the
Spirit, so he can know nothing certain of others. To this I answer, that
we are not curiously to inquire about the election of our brethren, but
ought on the contrary to regard their calling, so that all who are
admitted by faith into the church, are to be counted as the elect; for
God thus separates them from the world, which is a sign of election. It
is no objection to say that many fall away, having nothing but the
semblance; for it is the judgment of charity and not of faith, when we
deem all those elect in whom appears the mark of God’s adoption. And
that he does not fetch their election from the hidden counsel of God,
but gathers it from the effect, is evident from the context; for
afterwards he connects it with the *sanctification of the Spirit* As far
then as they proved that they were regenerated by the Spirit of God, so
far did he deem them to be the elect of God, for God does not sanctify
any but those whom he has previously elected.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p10"></span>However, he at the same time reminds us
whence that election flows, by which we are separated for salvation,
that we may not perish with the world; for he says, *according to the
foreknowledge of God* This is the fountain and the first cause: God knew
before the world was created whom he had elected for salvation.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p11"></span>But we ought wisely to consider what this
precognition or foreknowledge is. For the sophists, in order to obscure
the grace of God, imagine that the merits of each are foreseen by God,
and that thus the reprobate are distinguished from the elect, as every
one proves himself worthy of this or that lot. But Scripture everywhere
sets the counsel of God, on which is founded our salvation, in
opposition to our merits. Hence, when Peter calls them elect according
to the precognition of God, he intimates that the cause of it depends on
nothing else but on God alone, for he of his own free will has chosen
us. Then the foreknowledge of God excludes every worthiness on the part
of man. We have treated this subject more at large in the first chapter
of the Epistle to the Ephesians, and in other places.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p12"></span>As however in our election he assigns the
first place to the gratuitous favor of God, so again he would have us to
know it by the effects, for there is nothing more dangerous or more
preposterous than to overlook our calling and to seek for the certainty
of our election in the hidden prescience of God, which is the deepest
labyrinth. Therefore to obviate this danger, Peter supplies the best
correction; for though in the first place he would have us to consider
the counsel of God, the cause of which is alone in himself; yet he
invites us to notice the effect, by which he sets forth and bears
witness to our election. That effect is the sanctification of the
Spirit, even effectual calling, when faith is added to the outward
preaching of the gospel, which faith is begotten by the inward operation
of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p13"></span>*To the sojourners*  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) They who think that all the godly are thus
called, because they are strangers in the world, and are advancing
towards the celestial country, are much mistaken, and this mistake is
evident from the word *dispersion* which immediately follows; for this
can apply only to the Jews, not only because they were banished from
their own country and scattered here and there, but also because they
had been driven out of that land which had been promised to them by the
Lord as a perpetual inheritance. He indeed afterwards calls all the
faithful sojourners, because they are pilgrims on the earth; but the
reason here is different. They were sojourners, because they had been
dispersed, some in Pontus, some in Galatia, and some in Bithynia. It is
nothing strange that he designed this Epistle more especially for the
Jews, for he knew that he was appointed in a particular manner their
apostle, as Paul teaches us in <span id="iv.ii.i-p14.3"></span>[Ga
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.i-p14.3"></span>.
In the countries he enumerates, he includes the whole of Asia Minor,
from the Euxine to Cappadocia.  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p16"></span>*Unto obedience* He adds two things to
sanctification, and seems to understand newness of life by *obedience,*
and by the *sprinkling* of the blood of Christ the remission of sins.
But if these be parts or *effects* of sanctification, then
sanctification is to be taken here somewhat different from what it means
when used by Paul, that is, more generally. God then sanctifies us by an
effectual calling; and this is done when we are renewed to an obedience
to his righteousness, and when we are sprinkled by the blood of Christ,
and thus are cleansed from our sins. And there seems to be an implied
allusion to the ancient rite of sprinkling used under the law. For as it
was not then sufficient for the victim to be slain and the blood to be
poured out, except the people were sprinkled; so now the blood of Christ
which has been shed will avail us nothing, except our consciences are by
it cleansed. There is then to be understood here a contrast, that, as
formerly under the law the sprinkling of blood was made by the hand of
the priest; so now the Holy Spirit sprinkles our souls with the blood of
Christ for the expiation of our sins.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p17"></span>Let us now state the substance of the
whole; which is, that our salvation flows from the gratuitous election
of God; but that it is to be ascertained by the experience of faith,
because he sanctifies us by his Spirit; and then that there are two
effects or ends of our calling, even renewal into obedience and ablution
by the blood of Christ; and further, that both are the work of the Holy
Spirit.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) We hence conclude, that
election is not to be separated from calling, nor the gratuitous
righteousness of faith from newness of life.

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Blessed *be* the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead,

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Benedictus Deus et Pater Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, qui secundum multam suam misericordiam regenuit nos
in spem vivare, per resurrectionem Jesu Christi ex mortuis,

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** To an inheritance incorruptible,
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you,

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** In haereditatem incorruptibilem et
incontaminatam et immarcescibilem, repositum in caelis erga vos,

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>**5.** Who are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5.** Qui virtute Dei custodimini per
fidem in salutem, qut parata est revelari tempore ultimo.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p10"></span>**3** *Blessed be God* We have said that
the main object of this epistle is to raise us above the world, in order
that we may be prepared and encouraged to sustain the spiritual contests
of our warfare. For this end, the knowledge of God’s benefits avails
much; for, when their value appears to us, all other things will be
deemed worthless, especially when we consider what Christ and his
blessings are; for everything without him is but dross. For this reason
he highly extols the wonderful grace of God in Christ, that is, that we
may not deem it much to give up the world in order that we may enjoy the
invaluable treasure of a future life; and also that we may not be broken
down by present troubles, but patiently endure them, being satisfied
with eternal happiness.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p11"></span>Further, when he gives thanks to God, he
invites the faithful to spiritual joy, which can swallow up all the
opposite feelings of the flesh.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p12"></span>*And Father of our Lord Jesus Christ*
Understand the words thus, — “Blessed be God who is the Father of Jesus
Christ.” For, as formerly, by calling himself the God of Abraham, he
designed to mark the difference between him and all fictitious gods; so
after he has manifested himself in his own Son, his will is, not to be
known otherwise than in him. Hence they who form their ideas of God in
his naked majesty apart from Christ, have an idol instead of the true
God, as the case is with the Jews and the Turks. Whosoever, then, seeks
really to know the only true God, must regard him as the Father of
Christ; for, whenever our mind seeks God, except Christ be thought of,
it will wander and be confused, until it be wholly lost. Peter meant at
the same time to intimate how God is so bountiful and kind towards us;
for, except Christ stood as the middle person, his goodness could never
be really known by us.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p13"></span>*Who hath begotten us again* He shews
that supernatural life is a gift, because we are born the children of
wrath; for had we been born to the hope of life according to the flesh,
there would have been no necessity of being begotten again by God.
Therefore Peter teaches us, that we who are by nature destined to
eternal death, are restored to life by God’s mercy. And this is, as it
were, our second creation, as it is said in the first chapter of the
Epistle to the Ephesians. *Lively* or *living hope,* means the hope of
life.  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) At the same time there seems to
be an implied contrast between the hope fixed on the incorruptible
kingdom of God, and the fading and transient hopes of man.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15"></span>*According to his abundant mercy* He
first mentions the efficient cause, and then he points out the mediating
cause, as they say. He shews that God was induced by no merits of ours
to regenerate us unto a living hope, because he assigns this wholly to
his mercy. But that he might more completely reduce the merits of works
to nothing, he says, *great (*<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>*multam)
mercy.* All, indeed, confess that God is the only author of our
salvation, but they afterwards invent extraneous causes, which take away
so much from his mercy. But Peter commends mercy alone; and he
immediately connects the way or manner, *by the resurrection of Christ;*
for God does not in any other way discover his mercy; hence Scripture
ever directs our attention to this point. And that Christ’s death is not
mentioned, but his resurrection, involves no inconsistency, for it is
included; because a thing cannot be completed without having a
beginning; and he especially brought forward the resurrection, because
he was speaking of a new life.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17"></span>**4** *To an inheritance*  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) The three words which follow are intended to
amplify God’s grace; for Peter (as I have before said) had this object
in view, to impress our minds thoroughly as to its excellency. Moreover,
these two clauses, “to an inheritance incorruptible,” etc., and “to
salvation ready to be revealed,” I deem as being in apposition, the
latter being explanatory of the former; for he expresses the same thing
in two ways.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p19"></span>Every word which follows is weighty. The
inheritance is said to be *reserved,* or preserved, that we may know
that it is beyond the reach of danger. For, were it not in God’s hand,
it might be exposed to endless dangers. If it were in this world, how
could we regard it as safe amidst so many changes? That he might then
free us from every fear, he testifies that our salvation is placed in
safety beyond the harms which Satan can do. But as the certainty of
salvation can bring us but little comfort, except each one knows that it
belongs to himself, Peter adds, *for you* For consciences will calmly
recumb here, that is, when the Lord cries to them from heaven, “Behold,
your salvation is in my hand and is kept for you.” But as salvation is
not indiscriminately for all, he calls our attention to faith, that all
who are endued with faith, might be distinguished from the rest, and
that they might not doubt but that they are the true and legitimate
heirs of God. For, as faith penetrates into the heavens, so also it
appropriates to us the blessings which are in heaven.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21"></span>**5** *Who are kept by the power of God*
We are to notice the connection when he says, that we are kept while in
the world, and at the same time our inheritance is reserved in heaven;
otherwise this thought would immediately creep in, “What does it avail
us that our salvation is laid up in heaven, when we are tossed here and
there in this world as in a turbulent sea? What can it avail us that our
salvation is secured in a quiet harbour, when we are driven to and fro
amidst thousand shipwrecks?” The apostle, therefore, anticipates
objections of this kind, when he shews, that though we are in the world
exposed to dangers, we are yet kept by faith; and that though we are
thus nigh to death, we are yet safe under the guardianship of faith. But
as faith itself, through the infirmity of the flesh, often quails, we
might be always anxious about the morrow, were not the Lord to aid us.
 <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23"></span>And, indeed, we see that under the Papacy
a diabolical opinion prevails, that we ought to doubt our final
perseverance, because we are uncertain whether we shall be tomorrow in
the same state of grace. But Peter did not thus leave us in suspense;
for he testifies that we stand by the power of God, lest any doubt
arising from a consciousness of our own infirmity, should disquiet us.
How weak soever we may then be, yet our salvation is not uncertain,
because it is sustained by God’s power. As, then, we are begotten by
faith, so faith itself receives its stability from God’s power. Hence is
its security, not only for the present, but also for the future.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p24"></span>*Unto salvation* As we are by nature
impatient of delay, and soon succumb under weariness, he therefore
reminds us that salvation is not deferred because it is not yet
prepared, but because the time of its revelation is not yet come. This
doctrine is intended to nourish and sustain our hope. Moreover, he calls
the day of judgment *the last time,* because the restitution of all
things is not to be previously expected, for the intervening time is
still in progress. What is elsewhere called the last time, is the whole
from the coming of Christ; it is so called from a comparison with the
preceding ages. But Peter had a regard to the end of the world.

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>**6.** Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though
now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**6.** In quo exultatis, paulisper nunc,
si opus esti, contristati in variis tentationibus;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**7.** That the trial of your faith,
being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried
with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**7.** Ut probatio fidel vestrae multo
pretiosior auro, quod perit et tamen per ignem probatur, reperiatur in
laudem et honorem et gloriam, quum revelabitur Jesus Christus:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>**8.** Whom having not seen, ye love; in
whom, though now ye see *him* not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**8.** Quem quum non videritis,
diligitis, in quem nunc credentes, quum eum non aspicitis, exultatis
gaudio inenarrabili et glorificato;

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>**9.** Receiving the end of your faith,
*even* the salvation of *your* souls.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>**9.** Reportantes finem fidei vestrae,
salutem animarum.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>**6** *Wherein ye greatly rejoice,* or,
*In which ye exult*. Though the termination of the Greek verb is
doubtful, yet the meaning requires that we read, “ye exult,” rather than
“exult ye.” *In which* refers to the whole that is said of the hope of
salvation laid up in heaven. But he rather exhorts than praises them;
for his object was to shew what fruit was to come from the hope of
salvation, even spiritual joy, by which not only the bitterness of all
evil might be mitigated, but also all sorrow overcome. At the same time
to exult is more expressive than to rejoice.  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>But it seems somewhat inconsistent, when
he says that the faithful, who exulted with joy, were at the same time
sorrowful, for these are contrary feelings. But the faithful know by
experience, how these things can exist together, much better than can be
expressed in words. However, to explain the matter in a few words, we
may say that the faithful are not logs of wood, nor have they so
divested themselves of human feelings, but that they are affected with
sorrow, fear danger, and feel poverty as an evil, and persecutions as
hard and difficult to be borne. Hence they experience sorrow from evils;
but it is so mitigated by faith, that they cease not at the same time to
rejoice. Thus sorrow does not prevent their joy, but, on the contrary,
give place to it. Again, though joy overcomes sorrow, yet it does not
put an end to it, for it does not divest us of humanity. And hence it
appears what true patience is; its beginning, and, as it were, its root,
is the knowledge of God’s blessings, especially of that gratuitous
adoption with which he has favored us; for all who raise hither their
minds, find it an easy thing calmly to bear all evils. For whence is it
that our minds are pressed down with grief, except that we have no
participation of spiritual things? But all they who regard their
troubles as necessary trials for their salvation, not only rise above
them, but also turn them to an occasion of joy.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span>*Ye are in heaviness,* or, *Ye are made
sorrowful*. Is not sorrow also the common lot of the reprobate? for they
are not free from evils. But Peter meant that the faithful endure sorrow
willingly, while the ungodly murmur and perversely contend with God.
Hence the godly bear sorrow, as the tamed ox the yoke, or as a horse,
broken in, the bridle, though held by a child. God by sorrow afflicts
the reprobate, as when a bridle is by force put in the mouth of a
ferocious and refractory horse; he kicks and offers every resistance,
but all in vain. Then Peter commends the faithful, because they
willingly undergo sorrow, and not as though forced by necessity.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>By saying, *though now for a season,*
or, *a little while*, he supplied consolation; for the shortness of
time, however hard evils may be, does not a little lessen them; and the
duration of the present life is but a moment of time. *If need be;* the
condition is to be taken for a cause; for he purposed to shew, that God
does not, without reason, thus try his people; for, if God afflicted us
without a cause, to bear it would be grievous. Hence Peter took an
argument for consolation from the design of God; not that the reason
always appears to us, but that we ought to be fully persuaded that it
ought to be so, because it is God’s will.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span>We must notice that he does not mention
one temptation, but many; and not temptations of one kind, but *manifold
temptations* It is, however, better to seek the exposition of this
passage in the first chapter of James

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span>**7.** *Much more precious than of gold*
The argument is from the less to the greater; for if gold, a corruptible
metal, is deemed of so much value that we prove it by fire, that it may
become really valuable, what wonder is it that God should require a
similar trial as to faith, since faith is deemed by him so excellent?
And though the words seem to have a different meaning, he yet compares
faith to gold, and makes it more precious than gold, that hence he might
draw the conclusion, that it ought to be fully proved.  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) It is moreover uncertain how far he
extends the meaning of the words, “tried” <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>δοκιμάζεσθαι and “trial” <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p20.2"></span>δοκίμιον

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span>Gold is, indeed, tried twice by fire;
first, when it is separated from its dross; and then, when a judgment is
to be formed of its purity. Both modes of trial may very suitably be
applied to faith; for when there is much of the dregs of unbelief
remaining in us, and when by various afflictions we are refined as it
were in God’s furnace, the dross of our faith is removed, so that it
becomes pure and clean before God; and, at the same time, a trial of it
is made, as to whether it be true or fictitious. I am disposed to take
these two views, and what immediately follows seems to favor this
explanation; for as silver is without honor or value before it be
refined, so he intimates that our faith is not to be honored and crowned
by God until it be duly proved.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>*At the appearing of Jesus Christ,* or,
*when Jesus Christ shall be revealed*. This is added, that the faithful
might learn to hold on courageously to the last day. For our life is now
hidden in Christ, and will remain hidden, and as it were buried, until
Christ shall appear from heaven; and the whole course of our life leads
to the destruction of the external man, and all the things we suffer
are, as it were, the preludes of death. It is hence necessary, that we
should cast our own eyes on Christ, if we wish in our afflictions to
behold glory and praise. For trials as to us are full of reproach and
shame, and they become glorious in Christ; but that glory in Christ is
not yet plainly seen, for the day of consolation is not yet come.  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25"></span>**8** *Whom having not seen,* or, *Whom
though ye have not seen*. He lays down two things, that they loved
Christ whom they had not seen, and that they believed on him whom they
did not then behold. But the first arises from the second; for the cause
of love is faith, not only because the knowledge of those blessings
which Christ bestows on us, moves us to love him, but because he offers
us perfect felicity, and thus draws us up to himself. He then commends
the Jews, because they believed in Christ whom they did not see, that
they might know that the nature of faith is to acquiesce in those
blessings which are hid from our eyes. They had indeed given some proof
of this very thing, though he rather directs what was to be done by
praising them.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p26"></span>The first clause in order is, that faith
is not to be measured by sight. For when the life of Christians is
apparently miserable, they would instantly fail, were not their
happiness dependent on hope. Faith, indeed, has also its eyes, but they
are such as penetrate into the invisible kingdom of God, and are
contented with the mirror of the Word; for it is the demonstration of
invisible things, as it is said in <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.1"></span>[Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p26.1"></span>. Hence true is that saying of Paul, that

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27"></span>we are absent from the Lord while we are
in the flesh;  
for we walk by faith and not by sight.  
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27.3"></span>[2Co
5:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p27.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p28"></span>The second clause is, that faith is not
a cold notion, but that it kindles in our hearts love to Christ. For
faith does not (as the sophists prattle) lay hold on God in a confused
and implicit manner, (for this would be to wander through devious
paths;) but it has Christ as its object. Moreover, it does not lay hold
on the bare name of Christ, or his naked essence, but regards what he is
to us, and what blessings he brings; for it cannot be but that the
affections of man should be led there, where his happiness is, according
to that saying,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p29"></span>“Where your treasure is, there is also
your heart.” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>[Mt
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p30"></span>*Ye rejoice,* or, *Ye exult*. He again
refers to the fruit of faith which he had mentioned, and not without
reason; for it is an incomparable benefit, that consciences are not only
at peace before God, but confidently exult in the hope of eternal life.
And he calls it *joy unspeakable,* or unutterable, because the peace of
God exceeds all comprehension. What is added, *full of glory,* or
glorified, admits of two explanations. It means either what is
magnificent and glorious, or what is contrary to that which is empty and
fading, of which men will soon be ashamed. Thus *“glorified”* is the
same with what is solid and permanent, beyond the danger of being
brought to nothing.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) Those who are
not elevated by this joy above the heavens, so that being content with
Christ alone, they despise the world, in vain boast that they have
faith.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p32"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p33"></span>**9** *Receiving the end of your faith*
He reminds the faithful where they ought to direct all their thoughts,
even to eternal salvation. For this world holds all our affections
ensnared by is allurements; this life and all things belonging to the
body are great impediments, which prevent us from applying our minds to
the contemplation of the future and spiritual life. Hence the Apostle
sets before us this future life as a subject of deep meditation, and he
indirectly intimates that the loss of all other things is to be deemed
as nothing, provided our souls be saved. By saying *receiving,* he takes
away all doubt, in order that they might more cheerfully go on, being
certain of obtaining salvation.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) In
the meantime, however, he shews what the end of faith is, lest they
should be over-anxious, because it is as yet deferred. For our adoption
ought now to satisfy us; nor ought we to ask to be introduced before the
time into the possession of our inheritance. We may also take *the end*
for reward; but the meaning would be the same. For we learn from the
Apostle’s words, that salvation is not otherwise obtained than by faith;
and we know that faith leans on the sole promise of gratuitous adoption;
but if it be so, doubtless salvation is not owing to the merits of
works, nor can it be hoped for on their account.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p35"></span>But why does he mention *souls* only,
when the glory of a resurrection is promised to our bodies? As the soul
is immortal, salvation is properly ascribed to it, as Paul sometimes is
wont to speak, —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p36"></span>“That the soul may be saved in the day
of the Lord.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p36.2"></span>[1Co
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p36.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p37"></span>But it is the same as though he had said
“Eternal salvation.” For there is an implied comparison between it and
the mortal and fading life which belongs to the body. At the same time,
the body is not excluded from a participation of glory when annexed to
the soul.

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>**10**. Of which salvation the prophets
have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace *that
should come* unto you:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**10**. De qua salute exquisierunt et
scrutati sunt prophetee, qui de futura erga nos gratia vaticinati sunt;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>**11**. Searching what, or what manner of
time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**11**. Scrutantes in quem aut cujusmodi
temporis articulum significaret qui in illis erat Spiritus Christi;
prius testificans ventufas in Christum afflictiones, et quee sequuturae
erant glorias;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**12**. Unto whom it was revealed, that
not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are
now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you
with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels
desire to look into.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**12**. Quibus revelatum est quod non sibi
ipsis, sed nobis ministrabant haec, quae nunc annunciata sunt vobis per
cos qui vobis praedicarunt evangelitum, per Spiritum sanctum missum e
coelo; in quae desiderant angeli prospicere.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>He hence commends the value of salvation,
because the prophets had their minds intensely fixed on it; for it must
have been a great matter, and possessing peculiar excellency, which
could have thus kindled in the prophets a spirit of inquiry respecting
it. But still more clearly does God’s goodness toward us shine forth in
this case, because much more is now made known to us than what all the
prophets attained by their long and anxious inquiries. At the same time
he confirms the certainty of salvation by this very antiquity; for from
the beginning of the world it had received a plain testimony from the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>These two things ought to be distinctly
noticed: he declares that more has been given to us than to the ancient
fathers, in order to amplify by this comparison the grace of the gospel;
and then, that what is preached to us respecting salvation, cannot be
suspected of any novelty, for the Spirit had formerly testified of it by
the prophets. When, therefore, he says that the prophets searched and
sedulously inquired, this does not belong to their writings or doctrine,
but to the private desire with which every one boiled over. What is said
afterwards is to be referred to their public office.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>But that each particular may be more
evident, the passage must be arranged under certain propositions. Let
the first then be this, — that the Prophets who foretold of the grace
which Christ exhibited at his coming, diligently inquired as to the time
when full revelation was to be made. The second is, — that the Spirit of
Christ predicted by them of the future condition of Christ’s kingdom,
such as it is now, and such as it is expected yet to be, even that it is
destined that Christ and his whole body should, through various
sufferings, enter into glory. The third is, — that the prophets
ministered to us more abundantly than to their own age, and that this
was revealed to them from above; for in Christ only is the full
exhibition of those things of which God then presented but an obscure
image. The fourth is, — that in the Gospel is contained a clear
confirmation of prophetic doctrine, but also a much fuller and plainer
explanation; for the salvation which he formerly proclaimed as it were
at a distance by the prophets, he now reveals openly to us, and as it
were before our eyes. The last proposition is, — that it hence appears
evident how wonderful is the glory of that salvation promised to us in
the Gospel, because even angels, though they enjoy God’s presence in
heaven, yet burn with the desire of seeing it. Now all these things tend
to shew this one thing, that Christians, elevated to the height of their
felicity, ought to surmount all the obstacles of the world; for what is
there which this incomparable benefit does not reduce to nothing?

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>**10** *Of which salvation* Had not the
fathers the same salvation as we have? Why then does he say that the
fathers *inquired,* as though they possessed not what is now offered to
us? The answer to this is plain, that salvation is to be taken here for
that clear manifestation of it which we have through the coming of
Christ. The words of Peter mean no other thing than those of Christ,
when he said,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>“Many kings and prophets have desired to
see the things which ye see, and have not seen them.” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>[Mt
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span>As then the prophets had but a limited
knowledge of the grace brought by Christ, as to its revelation they
justly desired something more. When Simeon, after seeing Christ,
prepared himself calmly and with a satisfied mind for death, he shewed
that he was before unsatisfied and anxious. Such was the feeling of all
the godly.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>**11**. And what they inquired is pointed
out when he adds*, Searching what, or what manner of time* There was a
difference between the law and the gospel, a veil as it were being
interposed, that they might not see those things nearer which are now
set before our eyes. Nor was it indeed proper, while Christ the Sun of
righteousness was yet absent, that the full light should shine as at
mid-day. And though it was their duty to confine themselves within their
prescribed limits, yet it was no superstition to sigh with a desire of
having a nearer sight. For when they wished that redemption should be
hastened, and desired daily to see it, there was nothing in such a wish
to prevent them patiently to wait as long as it pleased the Lord to
defer the time. Moreover, to seek as to prophecies the particular time,
seems to me unprofitable; for what is spoken of here is not what the
prophets taught, but what they wished. Where the Latin interpreters
render, “of future grace,” it is literally, “of the grace which is to
you.” But as the meaning remains the same, I was not disposed to make
any change.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span>It is more worthy of observation, that he
does not say that the prophets searched according to their own
understanding as to the time when Christ’s kingdom would come, but that
they applied their minds to the revelation of the Spirit. Thus they have
taught us by their example a sobriety in learning, for they did not go
beyond what the Spirit taught them. And doubtless there will be no
limits to man’s curiosity, except the Spirit of God presides over their
minds, so that they may not desire anything else than to speak from him.
And further, the spiritual kingdom is a higher subject than what the
human mind can succeed in investigating, except the Spirit be the guide.
May we also therefore submit to his guidance.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span> *The Spirit of Christ which was in them*
First, “who was in them,” and secondly, “testifying,” that is, giving a
testimony, by which expression he intimates that the prophets were
endued with the Spirit of knowledge, and indeed in no common manner, as
those who have been teachers and witnesses to us, and that yet they were
not partakers of that light which is exhibited to us. At the same time,
a high praise is given to their doctrine, for it was the testimony of
the Holy Spirit; the preachers and ministers were men, but he was the
teacher. Nor does he declare without reason that the Spirit of Christ
then ruled; and he makes the Spirit, sent from heaven, to preside over
the teachers of the Gospel, for he shews that the Gospel comes from God,
and that the ancient prophecies were dictated by Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>*The sufferings of Christ* That they
might bear submissively their afflictions, he reminds them that they had
been long ago foretold by the Spirit. But he includes much more than
this, for he teaches us, that the Church of Christ has been from the
beginning so constituted, that the cross has been the way to victory,
and death a passage to life, and that this had been clearly testified.
There is, therefore, no reason why afflictions should above measure
depress us, as though we were miserable under them, since the Spirit of
God pronounces us blessed.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span>The order is to be noticed; he mentions
sufferings first, and then adds the glories which are to follow. For he
intimates that this order cannot be changed or subverted; afflictions
must precede glory. So there is to be understood a twofold truth in
these words, — that Christians must suffer many troubles before they
enjoy glory, — and that afflictions are not evils, because they have
glory annexed to them. Since God has ordained this connection, it does
not behove us to separate the one from the other. And it is no common
consolation, that our condition, such as we find it to be, has been
foretold so many ages ago.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22"></span>Hence we learn, that it is not in vain
that a happy end is promised to us; secondly, we hence know that we are
not afflicted by chance, but through the infallible providence of God;
and lastly, that prophecies are like mirrors to set forth to us in
tribulations the image of celestial glory.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23"></span>Peter, indeed, says, that the Spirit had
testified of the coming afflictions of Christ; but he does not separate
Christ from his body. This, then, is not to be confined to the person of
Christ, but a beginning is to be made with the head, so that the members
may in due order follow, as Paul also teaches us, that we must be
conformed to him who is the first-born among his brethren. In short,
Peter does not speak of what is peculiar to Christ, but of the universal
state of the Church. But it is much fitted to confirm our faith, when he
sets forth our afflictions as viewed in Christ, for we thereby see
better the connection of death and life between us and him. And,
doubtless, this is the privilege and manner of the holy union, that he
suffers daily in his members, that after his sufferings shall be
completed in us, glory also may have its completion. See more on this
subject in the third chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, and in
the fourth of the first Epistle to Timothy.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25"></span>**12** *Unto whom it was revealed* This
passage has been strangely perverted by fanatics, so as to exclude the
fathers who lived under the law from the hope of eternal salvation. For
it does not deny that the prophets usefully ministered to their own age,
and edified the church, but teaches us that their ministry is more
useful to us, because we are fallen on the ends of the world. We see how
highly they extolled the kingdom of Christ, how assiduous they were in
adorning it, how diligently they stimulated all to seek it; but they
were by death deprived of the privilege of seeing it as it now is. What
else then was this, but that they spread the table, that others might
afterwards feed on the provisions laid on it. They indeed tasted by
faith of those things which the Lord has by their hands transmitted to
be enjoyed by us; and they also partook of Christ as the real food of
their souls. But what is spoken of now is the exhibition of this
blessing, and we know that the prophetic office was confined as it were
within limits, in order that they might support themselves and others
with the hope of Christ, who was to come. They therefore possessed him
as one hidden, and as it were absent — absent, I say, not in power or
grace, but because he was not yet manifested in the flesh. Therefore his
kingdom also was as yet hid as it were under coverings. At length
descending on earth, he in a manner opened heaven to us, so that we
might have a near view of those spiritual riches, which before were
under types exhibited at a distance. This fruition then of Christ as
manifested, forms the difference between us and the prophets. Hence we
learn how they ministered to us rather than to themselves.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26"></span>But though the prophets were admonished
from above that the grace which they proclaimed would be deferred to
another age, yet they were not slothful in proclaiming it, so far were
they from being broken down with weariness. But if their patience was so
great, surely we shall be twice and thrice ungrateful, if the fruition
of the grace denied to them will not sustain us under all the evils
which are to be endured.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p27"></span>*Which are now reported to you,* or
*announced to you*. He again marks the difference between the ancient
doctrine and the preaching of the gospel. For as the righteousness of
God is revealed in the gospel, having a testimony from the law and the
prophets, so also the glory of Christ, of which the Spirit testified
formerly, is now openly proclaimed. And at the same time he hence proves
the certainty of the gospel, because it contains nothing but what had
been long ago testified by the Spirit of God. He further reminds them,
that under the banner of the same Spirit, by his dictation and guidance,
the gospel was preached, lest they might think of anything human in this
case.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p28"></span>*Which things the angels desire to look
into* It is indeed the highest praise to the gospel, that it contains
treasures of wisdom, as yet concealed and hidden from angels. But some
one may object, and say that it is not reasonable that things should be
open and known to us which are hidden from angels, who always see the
face of God, and are his ministers in ruling the church, and in the
administration of all his blessings. To this I answer, that things are
open to us as far as we see them in the mirror of the word; but our
knowledge is not said to be higher than that of angels; Peter only means
that such things are promised to us as angels desire to see fulfilled.
Paul says that by the calling of the Gentiles the wonderful wisdom of
God was made known to angels. for it was a spectacle to them, when
Christ gathered into one body the lost world, alienated for so many ages
from the hope of life. Thus daily they see with admiration the
magnificent works of God in the government of his church. How much
greater will their admiration be, at witnessing the last display of
divine justice, when the kingdom of Christ shall be completed! This is
as yet hidden, the revelation of which they still expect and justly wish
to see.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29"></span>The passage indeed admits of a twofold
meaning; either that the treasure we have in the gospel fills the angels
with a desire to see it, as it is a sight especially delightful to them;
or that they anxiously desire to see the kingdom of Christ, the living
image of which is set forth in the gospel. But the last seems to me to
be the most suitable meaning.

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013)<span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span>**13**. Wherefore gird up the loins of your
mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought
unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p3"></span>**13**. Quare succincti lumbis mentis
vestrae, sobrii, perfecte sperate in eam quae ad vos defertur gratiam,
in revelatione Jesu Christi;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p4"></span>**14**. As obedient children, not
fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p5"></span>**14**. Tanquam filii obedientes, non
conformati pristinis, quae in ignorantia vestra regnarunt,
cupiditatibus:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p6"></span>**15**. But as he which hath called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p7"></span>**15**. Sed quaemadmodum is qui vos vocavit
sanctus est, ita ipsi sancti in tota conversatione reddamini;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p8"></span>**16**. Because it is written, Be ye holy;
for I am holy.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p9"></span>**16**. Propterea quòd scriptum est, Sancti
estote, quia ego sanctus sum. (<span id="iv.ii.v-p9.1"></span>[Lev.
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044), [Lev.
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002), [Lev.
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.v-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.v-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p12"></span>From the greatness and excellency of grace
he draws an exhortation, that it surely behoved them the more readily to
receive the grace of God, as the more bountifully he bestowed it upon
them. And we must notice the connection: he had said, that so elevated
was the kingdom of Christ, to which the gospel calls us, that even
angels in heaven desire to see it; what then ought to be done by us who
are in the world? Doubtless, as long as we live on earth, so great is
the distance between us and Christ, that in vain he invites us to
himself. It is hence necessary for us to put off the image of Adam and
to cast aside the whole world and all hinderances, that being thus set
at liberty we may rise upwards to Christ. And he exhorted those to whom
he wrote, to be prepared and sober, and to hope for the graces offered
to them, and also to renounce the world and their former life, and to be
conformed to the will of God.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

<span id="iv.ii.v-p14"></span>Then the first part of the exhortation is,
to gird up the loins of their mind and to direct their thoughts to the
hope of the grace presented to them. In the second par, he prescribes
the manner, that having their minds changed, they were to be formed
after the image of God.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p15"></span>**13** *Wherefore gird up the loins of
your mind* It is a similitude taken from an ancient custom; for when
they had long garments, they could not make a journey, nor conveniently
do any work, without being girded up. Hence these expressions, to gird
up one’s-self for a work or an undertaking. He then bids them to remove
all impediments, that being set at liberty they might go on to God.
Those who philosophize more refinedly about the loins, as though he
commanded lusts to be restrained and checked, depart from the real
meaning of the Apostle, for these words mean the same with those of
Christ,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p16"></span>“Let your loins be girded about, and
burning lamps in your hands,”  
(<span id="iv.ii.v-p16.2"></span>[Lu
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ii.v-p16.2"></span>,)

<span id="iv.ii.v-p17"></span>except that Peter doubles the metaphor by
ascribing loins to the mind. And he intimates that our minds are held
entangled by the passing cares of the world and by vain desires, so that
they rise not upward to God. Whosoever, then, really wishes to have this
hope, let him learn in the first place to disentangle himself from the
world, and gird up his mind that it may not turn aside to vain
affections. And for the same purpose he enjoins sobriety, which
immediately follows; for he commends not temperance only in eating and
drinking, but rather spiritual sobriety, when all our thoughts and
affections are so kept as not to be inebriated with the allurements of
this world. For since even the least taste of them stealthily draws us
away from God, when one plunges himself into these, he must necessarily
become sleepy and stupid, and he forgets God and the things of God.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p18"></span>*Hope to the end,* or, *Perfectly hope*.
He intimates that those who let their minds loose on vanity, did not
really and sincerely hope for the grace of God; for though they had some
hope, yet as they vacillated and were tossed to and fro in the world,
there was no solidity in their hope. Then he says, *for the grace which
will be brought to you,* in order that they might be more prompt to
receive it. God ought to be sought, though far off; but he comes of his
own will to meet us. How great, then, must be our ingratitude if we
neglect the grace that is thus set before us! This amplification, then,
is especially intended to stimulate our hope.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p19"></span>What he adds, *At the revelation of Jesus
Christ,* may be explained in two ways: that the doctrine of the Gospel
reveals Christ to us; and that, as we see him as yet only through a
mirror and enigmatically, a full revelation is deferred to the last day.
The first meaning is approved by Erasmus, nor do I reject it. The second
seems, however, to be more suitable to the passage. For the object of
Peter was to call us away beyond the world; for this purpose the fittest
thing was the recollection of Christ’s coming. For when we direct our
eyes to this event, this world becomes crucified to us, and we to the
world. Besides, according to this meaning, Peter used the expression
shortly before. Nor is it a new thing for the apostles to employ the
preposition <span id="iv.ii.v-p19.1"></span>ἐν in the sense of <span
id="iv.ii.v-p19.2"></span>εἰς. Thus, then, I explain the passage, — “You
have no need to make a long journey that you may attain the grace of
God; for God anticipates you; inasmuch as he brings it to you.” But as
the fruition of it will not be until Christ appears from heaven, in whom
is hid the salvation of the godly, there is need, in the meantime, of
hope; for the grace of Christ is now offered to us in vain, except we
patiently wait until the coming of Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p20"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p21"></span>**14** *As obedient children* He first
intimates that we are called by the Lord to the privilege and honor of
adoption through the Gospel; and, secondly, that we are adopted for this
end, that he might have us as his obedient children. For though
obedience does not make us children, as the gift of adoption is
gratuitous, yet it distinguishes children from aliens. How far, indeed,
this obedience extends, Peter shews, when he forbids God’s children to
conform to or to comply with the desires of this world, and when he
exhorts them, on the contrary, to conform to the will of God. The sum of
the whole law, and of all that God requires of us, is this, that his
image should shine forth in us, so that we should not be degenerate
children. But this cannot be except we be renewed and put off the image
of old Adam.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p22"></span>Hence we learn what Christians ought to
propose to themselves as an object throughout life, that is, to resemble
God in holiness and purity. But as all the thoughts and feelings of our
flesh are in opposition to God, and the whole bent of our mind is enmity
to him, hence Peter begins with the renunciation of the world; and
certainly, whenever the Scripture speaks of the renewal of God’s image
in us, it begins here, that the old man with his lusts is to be
destroyed.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p23"></span>*In your ignorance* The time of ignorance
he calls that before they were called into the faith of Christ. We hence
learn that unbelief is the fountain of all evils. For he does not use
the word ignorance, as we commonly do; for that Platonic dogma is false,
that ignorance alone is the cause of sin. But yet, how much soever
conscience may reprove the unbelieving, nevertheless they go astray as
the blind in darkness, because they know not the right way, and they are
without the true light. According to this meaning, Paul says,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p24"></span>“Ye henceforth walk not as the Gentiles,
in the vanity of their mind, who have the mind darkened, being alienated
from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.v-p24.2"></span>[Eph
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.v-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.v-p25"></span>Where the knowledge of God is not, there
darkness, error, vanity, destitution of light and life, prevail. These
things, however, do not render it impossible that the ungodly should be
conscious of doing wrong when they sin, and know that their judge is in
heaven, and feel an executioner within them. In short, as the kingdom of
God is a kingdom of light, all who are alienated from him must
necessarily be blind and go astray in a labyrinth.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p26"></span>We are in the meantime reminded, that we
are for this end illuminated as to the knowledge of God, that we may no
longer be carried away by roving lusts. Hence, as much progress any one
has made in newness of life, so much progress has he made in the
knowledge of God.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p27"></span>Here a question arises, — Since he
addressed the Jews, who were acquainted with the law, and were brought
up in the worship of the only true God, why did he charge them with
ignorance and blindness, as though they were heathens? To this I answer,
that it hence appears how profitless is all knowledge without Christ.
When Paul exposed the vain boasting of those who wished to be wise apart
from Christ, he justly said in one short sentence, that they did not
hold the head. (<span id="iv.ii.v-p27.1"></span>[Col
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019)<span id="iv.ii.v-p27.1"></span>.)
Such were the Jews; being otherwise imbued with numberless corruptions,
they had a veil over the eyes, so that they did not see Christ in the
Law. The doctrine in which they had been taught was indeed a true light;
but they were blind in the midst of light, as long as the Sun of
Righteousness was hid to them. But if Peter declares that the literal
disciples even of the Law were in darkness like the heathens, as long as
they were ignorant of Christ, the only true wisdom of God, with how much
greater care it behoves us to strive for the knowledge of him!

<span id="iv.ii.v-p28"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p29"></span>**15** *He who hath called you is holy* He
reasons from the end for which we are called. God sets us apart as a
peculiar people for himself; then we ought to be free from all
pollutions. And he quotes a sentence which had been often repeated by
Moses. For as the people of Israel were on every side surrounded by
heathens, from whom they might have easily adopted the worst examples
and innumerable corruptions, the Lord frequently recalled them to
himself, as though he had said, “Ye have to do with me, ye are mine;
then abstain from the pollutions of the Gentiles.” We are too ready to
look to men, so as to follow their common way of living. Thus it
happens, that some lead others in troops to all kinds of evil, until the
Lord by his calling separates them.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p30"></span>In bidding us to be *holy* like himself,
the proportion is not that of equals; but we ought to advance in this
direction as far as our condition will bear. And as even the most
perfect are always very far from coming up to the mark, we ought daily
to strive more and more. And we ought to remember that we are not only
told what our duty is, but that God also adds, “I am he who sanctify
you.”

<span id="iv.ii.v-p31"></span>It is added, *In all manner of
conversation,* or, *in your whole conduct*. There is then no part of our
life which is not to be redolent with this good odour of holiness. For
we see that in the smallest things and almost insignificant, the Lord
accustomed his people to the practice of holiness, in order that they
might exercise a more diligent care as to themselves.

<span id="iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>**17**. And if ye call on the Father, who
without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass
the time of your sojourning *here* in fear:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>**17**. Et si Patrem invocatis, eum qui
sine personae acceptione secundum cujusque opus judicat, in timore
conversantes, tempus incolatus vestri transigite;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p4"></span>**18**. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, *as* silver and gold, from your
vain conversation *received* by tradition from your fathers;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p5"></span>**18**. Scientes quòd non corruptibilibus,
argento vel auro, redempti sitis à vana conversatione à patribus
tradita;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p6"></span>**19**. But with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p7"></span>**19**. Sed pretioso sanguine velut agni
immaculati et incontaminati Christi;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p8"></span>**20**. Who verily was foreordained before
the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for
you,

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p9"></span>**20**. Qui praeordinatus quidem fuerat
ante conditum mundum, manifestatus autem est extremis temporibus propter
vos;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p10"></span>**21**. Who by him do believe in God,
that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith
and hope might be in God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p11"></span>**21**. Qui per ipsum creditis in Deum,
qui eum suscitavit ex mortuis, et gloriam illi dedit, ut fides vestra et
spes sit in Deum;

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p12"></span>**22**. Seeing ye have purified your
souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the
brethren, *see that ye* love one another with a pure heart fervently:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p13"></span>**22**. Purificantes animas vestras in
obedientia veritatis per Spiritum, in fraternam charitatem non fictam,
ex puro corde diligite vos mutuò impensè.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16"></span>**17** *And if ye call on the Father*
They are said here to call on God the Father, who professed themselves
to be his children, as Moses says, that the name of Jacob was called on
Ephraim and Manasseh, that they might be counted his children. (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>[Ge
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>.) According to this meaning also, we say in
French <span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.2"></span>*reclamer* But he had a regard
to what he had said before, “as obedient children.” And from the
character of the Father himself, he shews what sort of obedience ought
to be rendered. He *judges,* he says, *without looking on the person,*
that is, no outward mask is of any account with him, as the case is with
men, but he sees the heart, (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.3"></span>[1Sa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.3"></span>;) and his eyes look on faithfulness. (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p16.4"></span>[Jer
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.4"></span>.)
This also is what Paul means when he says that God’s judgment is
according to truth, (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.5"></span>[Ro
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.5"></span>;)
for he there inveighs against hypocrites, who think that they deceive
God by a vain pretense. The meaning is, that we by no means discharge
our duty towards God, when we obey him only in appearance; for he is not
a mortal man, whom the outward appearance pleases, but he reads what we
are inwardly in our hearts. He not only prescribes laws for our feet and
hands, but he also requires what is just and right as to the mind and
spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p17"></span>By saying, *According to every man’s
work,* he does not refer to merit or to reward; for Peter does not speak
here of the merits of works, nor of the cause of salvation, but he only
reminds us, that there will be no looking to the person before the
tribunal of God, but that what will be regarded will be the real
sincerity of the heart. In this place faith also is included in the
work. It hence appears evident how foolish and puerile is the inference
that is drawn, — “God is such that he judges every one of us by the
integrity of his conscience, not by the outward appearance; then we
obtain salvation by works.”

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p18"></span>The *fear* that is mentioned, stands
opposed to heedless security, such as is wont to creep in, when there is
a hope of deceiving with impunity. For, as God’s eyes are such that they
penetrate into the hidden recesses of the heart, we ought to walk with
him carefully and not negligently. He calls the present life a
*sojourning,* not in the sense in which he called the Jews to whom he
was writing sojourners, at the beginning of the Epistle, but because all
the godly are in this world pilgrims. (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>[Heb.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p19"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p20"></span>**18** *Forasmuch as ye know,* or,
*knowing*. Here is another reason, drawn from the price of our
redemption, which ought always to be remembered when our salvation is
spoken of. For to him who repudiates or despises the grace of the
gospel, not only his own salvation is worthless, but also the blood of
Christ, by which God has manifested its value. But we know how
dreadfully sacrilegious it is to regard as common the blood of the Son
of God. There is hence nothing which ought so much to stimulate us to
the practice of holiness, as the memory of this price of our redemption.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p21"></span>*Silver and gold* For the sake of
amplifying he mentions these things in contrast, so that we may know
that the whole world, and all things deemed precious by men, are nothing
to the excellency and value of this price.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p22"></span>But he says that they had been *redeemed
from* their *vain conversation,*  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)
in order that we might know that the whole life of man, until he is
converted to Christ, is a ruinous labyrinth of wanderings. He also
intimates, that it is not through our merits that we are restored to the
right way, but because it is God’s will that the price, offered for our
salvation, should be effectual in our behalf. Then the blood of Christ
is not only the pledge of our salvation, but also the cause of our
calling.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24"></span>Moreover, Peter warns us to beware lest
our unbelief should render this price void or of no effect. As Paul
boasts that he worshipped God with a pure conscience from his
forefathers, (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>[2Ti
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>,)
and as he also commends to Timothy for his imitation the piety of his
grandmother Lois, and of his mother Eunice, (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p24.2"></span>[2Ti
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24.2"></span>,)
and as Christ also said of the Jews that they knew whom they worshipped
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24.3"></span>[Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p24.3"></span>,) it may seem strange that Peter should
assert that the Jews of his time learnt nothing from their fathers but
mere vanity. To this I answer, that Christ, when he declared that the
way or the knowledge of true religion belonged to the Jews, referred to
the law and the commandments of God rather than to the people; for the
temple had not to no purpose been built at Jerusalem, nor was God
worshipped there according to the fancies of men, but according to what
was prescribed in the Law; he, therefore, said that the Jews were not
going astray while observing the Law. As to Paul’s forefathers, and as
to Lois, Eunice, and similar cases, there is no doubt but that God ever
had at least a small remnant among that people, in whom sincere piety
continued, while the body of the people had become wholly corrupt, and
had plunged themselves into all kinds of errors. Innumerable
superstitions were followed, hypocrisy prevailed, the hope of salvation
was built on the merest trifles; they were not only imbued with false
opinions, but also fascinated with the grossest dotages; and they who
had been scattered to various parts of the world, were implicated in
still greater corruptions. In short, the greater part of that nation had
either wholly fallen away from true religion, or had much degenerated.
When, therefore, Peter condemned the doctrine of the fathers, he viewed
it as unconnected with Christ, who is the soul and the truth of the Law.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25"></span>But we hence learn, that as soon as men
depart from Christ, they go fatally astray. In vain is pretended in this
case the authority of the Fathers or an ancient custom. For the Prophet
Ezekiel cried to the Jews,

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p26"></span>“Walk ye not in the statutes of your
fathers.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p26.2"></span>[Eze
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p26.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27"></span>This ought also to be no less attended to
by us in the present day; for, in order that the redemption of Christ
may be effectual and useful to us, we must renounce our former life,
though derived from the teaching and practice of our fathers. Thrice
foolish, then, are the Papists, who think that the name of Fathers is a
sufficient defense for all their superstitions, so that they boldly
reject whatever is brought forward from the Word of God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p28"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29"></span>**19** *As of a lamb* He means by this
similitude, that we have in Christ whatever had been shadowed forth by
the ancient sacrifices, though he especially alludes to the Paschal
lamb. But let us hence learn what benefit the reading of the Law brings
us in this respect; for, though the rite of sacrificing is abolished,
yet it assists our faith not a little, to compare the reality with the
type, so that we may seek in the former what the latter contains. Moses
ordered a whole or perfect lamb, without blemish, to be chosen for the
Passover. The same thing is often repeated as to the sacrifices, as in
<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>[Le
23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>;
in <span id="iv.ii.vi-p29.2"></span>[Nu
28](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29.2"></span>;
and in other places. Peter, by applying this to Christ, teaches us that
he was a suitable victim, and approved by God, for he was perfect,
without any blemish; had he had any defect in him, he could not have
been rightly offered to God, nor could he pacify his wrath.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p30"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p31"></span>**20** *Who verily was foreordained* He
again by a comparison amplifies the grace of God, with which he had
peculiarly favored the men of that age. For it was not a common or a
small favor that God deferred the manifestation of Christ to that time,
when yet he had ordained him in his eternal council for the salvation of
the world. At the same time, however, he reminds us, that it was not a
new or a sudden thing as to God that Christ appeared as a Savior; and
this is what ought especially to be known. For, in addition to this,
that novelty is always suspicious, what would be the stability of our
faith, if we believed that a remedy for mankind had suddenly occurred at
length to God after some thousands of years? In short, we cannot
confidently recumb on Christ, except we are convinced that eternal
salvation is in him, and always has been in him. Besides, Peter
addressed the Jews, who had heard that he had already been long ago
promised; and though they understood nothing true or clear or certain
respecting his power and office, yet there remained among them a
persuasion, that a Redeemer had been promised by God to the fathers.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32"></span>It may yet be asked, As Adam did not fall
before the creation of the world, how was it that Christ had been
appointed the Redeemer? for a remedy is posterior to the disease. My
reply is, that this is to be referred to God’s foreknowledge; for
doubtless God, before he created man, foresaw that he would not stand
long in his integrity. Hence he ordained, according to his wonderful
wisdom and goodness, that Christ should be the Redeemer, to deliver the
lost race of man from ruin. For herein shines forth more fully the
unspeakable goodness of God, that he anticipated our disease by the
remedy of his grace, and provided a restoration to life before the first
man had fallen into death. If the reader wishes for more on this
subject, he may find it in my Institutes.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p33"></span>*But was manifest,* or *manifested*.
Included in these words, as I think, is not only the personal appearance
of Christ, but also the proclamation of the Gospel. For, by the coming
of Christ, God executed what he had decreed; and what he had obscurely
indicated to the fathers is now clearly and plainly made known to us by
the Gospel. He says that this was done *in these last times,* meaning
the same as when Paul says,

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p34"></span>“In the fullness of time,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p34.1"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p34.1"></span>;)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p35"></span>for it was the mature season and the full
time which God in his counsel had appointed.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p36"></span>*For you* He does not exclude the
fathers, to whom the promise had not been useless; but as God has
favored us more than them, he intimates that the greater the amplitude
of grace towards us, the more reverence and ardor and care are required
of us.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p37"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38"></span>**21** *Who believe* The manifestation of
Christ refers not to all indiscriminately, but belongs to those only on
whom he by the Gospel shines. But we must notice the words, *Who by him
believe in God:* here is shortly expressed what faith is. For, since God
is incomprehensible, faith could never reach to him, except it had an
immediate regard to Christ. Nay, there are two reasons why faith could
not be in God, except Christ intervened as a Mediator: first, the
greatness of the divine glory must be taken to the account, and at the
same time the littleness of our capacity. Our acuteness is doubtless
very far from being capable of ascending so high as to comprehend God.
Hence all knowledge of God without Christ is a vast abyss which
immediately swallows up all our thoughts. A clear proof of this we have,
not only in the Turks and the Jews, who in the place of God worship
their own dreams, but also in the Papists. Common is that axiom of the
schools, that God is the object of faith. Thus of hidden majesty, Christ
being overlooked, they largely and refinedly speculate; but with what
success? They entangle themselves in astounding dotages, so that there
is no end to their wanderings. For faith, as they think, is nothing else
but an imaginative speculation. Let us, therefore, remember, that Christ
is not in vain called *the image of the invisible God*, (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p38.1"></span>[Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p38.1"></span>;) but this name is given to him for this
reason, because God cannot be known except in him.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p39"></span>The second reason is, that as faith
unites us to God, we shun and dread every access to him, except a
Mediator comes who can deliver us from fear. For sin, which reigns in
us, renders us hateful to God and him to us. Hence, as soon as mention
is made of God, we must necessarily be filled with dread; and if we
approach him, his justice is like fire, which will wholly consume us.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p40"></span>It is hence evident that we cannot
believe in God except through Christ, in whom God in a manner makes
himself little, that he might accommodate himself to our comprehension;
and it is Christ alone who can tranquillize consciences, so that we may
dare to come in confidence to God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p41"></span>*That raised him up from the dead* He
adds, that Christ had been raised up from the dead, in order that their
faith and hope, by which they were supported, might have a firm
foundation. And hereby again is confuted the gloss respecting universal
and indiscriminate faith in God; for had there been no resurrection of
Christ, still God would remain in heaven. But Peter says that he would
not have been believed in, except Christ had risen. It is then evident,
that faith is something else than to behold the naked majesty of God.
And rightly does Peter speak in this manner; for it belongs to faith to
penetrate into heaven, that it may find the Father there: how could it
do so, except it had Christ as a leader?

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42"></span>“By him,” says Paul, “we have confidence
of access.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.2"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p43"></span>It is said also, in <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.1"></span>[Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p43.1"></span>,
that relying on our high priest, we can come with confidence to the
throne of grace. Hope is the anchor of the soul, which enter into the
inner part of the sanctuary; but not without Christ going before. (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.2"></span>[Heb
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.2"></span>.) Faith is our victory against the world,
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p43.3"></span>[1Jo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p43.3"></span>)
and what is it that makes it victorious, except that Christ, the Lord of
heaven and earth, has us under his guardianship and protection?

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p44"></span>As, then, our salvation depends on the
resurrection of Christ and his supreme power, faith and hope find here
what can support them. For, except he had by rising again triumphed over
death, and held now the highest sovereignty, to protect us by his power,
what would become of us, exposed to so great a power as that of our
enemies, and to such violent attacks? Let us, therefore, learn to what
mark we ought to direct our aim, so that we may really believe in God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p45"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p46"></span>**22** *Seeing ye have purified your
souls,* or, *Purifying your souls*. Erasmus badly renders the words,
“Who have purified,” *etc*. For Peter does not declare what they had
done, but reminds them of what they ought to do. The participle is
indeed in the past tense, but it may be rendered as a gerund, “By
purifying, *etc*.” The meaning is, that their souls would not be capable
of receiving grace until they were purified, and by this our uncleanness
is proved.  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) But that he might not
seem to ascribe to us the power of purifying our souls, he immediately
adds, *through the Spirit;* as though he had said, “Your souls are to be
purified, but as ye cannot do this, offer them to God, that he may take
away your filth by his Spirit.” He only mentions souls, though they
needed to be cleansed also from the defilements of the flesh, as Paul
bids the Corinthians, (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p48.1"></span>[2Co
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p48.1"></span>;)
but as the principal uncleanness is within, and necessarily draws with
it that which is outward, Peter was satisfied with mentioning only the
former, as though he had said, that not outward actions only ought to be
corrected, but the very hearts ought to be thoroughly reformed.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p49"></span>He afterwards points out the manner, for
purity of soul consists in obedience to God. *Truth* is to be taken for
the rule which God prescribes to us in the Gospel. Nor does he speak
only of works, but rather faith holds here the primacy. Hence Paul
specially teaches us in the first and last chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, that faith is that by which we obey God; and Peter in Acts,
<span id="iv.ii.vi-p49.1"></span>[Ac
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p49.1"></span>,
bestows on it this eulogy, that God by it purifies the heart.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p50"></span>*Unto love of the brethren,* or, *Unto
brotherly love*. He briefly reminds us what God especially requires in
our life, and the mark to which all our endeavors should be directed. So
Paul in <span id="iv.ii.vi-p50.1"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p50.1"></span>
the Epistle to the Ephesians, when speaking of the perfection of the
faithful, makes it to consist in love. And this is what we ought the
more carefully to notice, because the world makes its own sanctity to
consist of the veriest trifles, and almost overlooks this the chief
thing. We see how the Papists weary themselves beyond measure with
thousand invented superstitions: in the meantime, the last thing is that
love which God especially commends. This, then, is the reason why Peter
calls our attention to it, when speaking of a life rightly formed.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p51"></span>He had before spoken of the mortification
of the flesh, and of our conformity with the will of God; but he now
reminds us of what God would have us to cultivate through life, that is,
mutual love towards one another; for by that we testify also that we
love God; and by this evidence God proves who they are who really love
him.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52"></span>He calls it *unfeigned,* <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p52.1"></span>(ἀνυπόκριτον), as Paul calls faith in <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p52.2"></span>[1Ti
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52.2"></span>;
for nothing is more difficult than to love our neighbors in sincerity.
For the love of ourselves rules, which is full of hypocrisy; and
besides, every one measures his love, which he shews to others, by his
own advantage, and not by the rule of doing good. He adds, *fervently;*
for the more slothful we are by nature, the more ought every one to
stimulate himself to fervor and earnestness, and that not only once, but
more and more daily.

<span id="iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>**23**. Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth
and abideth for ever.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>**23**. Regeniti non ex semine
corruptibili, sed incorruptibili, per sermonem viventis Dei et manentis
in aeternum.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p4"></span>**24**. For all flesh *is* as grass, and
all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and
the flower thereof falleth away:

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p5"></span>**24**. Quandoquidem omnis caro tanquam
herba, et omnis gloria ejus tanquam flos herbae; exaruit herba et flos
ejus decidit:

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p6"></span>**25**. But the word of the Lord endureth
for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p7"></span>**25**. Verbum autem Domini manet in
aeternum; hoc autem est verbum quod annuntiatum est vobis.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p10"></span>**23** *Being born again* Here is
another reason for an exhortation, — that since they were new men and
born again of God, it behoved them to form a life worthy of God and of
their spiritual regeneration. And this seems to be connected with a
verse in <span id="iv.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>[1Pe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>
respecting the milk of the word, which they were to seek, that their way
of living might correspond with their birth. It may, however, be
extended wider, so as to be connected also with what has gone before;
for Peter collected together those things which may lead us to an
upright and a holy life. The object, then, of Peter was to teach us that
we cannot be Christians without regeneration; for the Gospel is not
preached, that it may be only heard by us, but that it may, as a seed of
immortal life, altogether reform our hearts.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) Moreover, the *corruptible seed* is set
in opposition to God’s word, in order that the faithful might know that
they ought to renounce their former nature, and that it might be more
evident how much is the difference between the children of Adam who are
born only into the world, and the children of God who are renewed into a
heavenly life. But as the construction of the Greek text is doubtful, we
may read, “the living word of God,” as well as, “the word of the living
God.” As, however, the latter reading is less forced, I prefer it;
though it must be observed, that the term is applied to God owing to the
character of the passage. For, as in <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p13.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p13.1"></span>, because God sees all things, and nothing
is hid from him, the apostle argues that the word of God penetrates into
the inmost marrow, so as to discern thoughts and feelings; so, when
Peter in this place calls him the living God, who abides for ever, he
refers to the word, in which the perpetuity of God shines forth as in a
living mirror.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p14"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p15"></span>**24** *For all flesh* He aptly quotes
the passage from Isaiah to prove both clauses; that is, to make it
evident how fading and miserable is the first birth of man, and how
great is the grace of the new birth. For as the Prophet there speaks of
the restoration of the Church, to prepare the way for it, he reduces men
to nothing lest they should flatter themselves. I know that the words
are wrongly turned by some to another sense; for some explain them of
the Assyrians, as though the Prophet said, that there was no reason for
the Jews to fear so much from flesh, which is like a fading flower.
Others think that the vain confidence which the Jews reposed in human
aids, is reproved. But the Prophet himself disproves both these views,
by adding, that the people were as grass; for he expressly condemns the
Jews for vanity, to whom he promised restoration in the name of the
Lord. This, then, is what I have already said, that until their own
emptiness has been shewn to men, they are not prepared to receive the
grace of God. In short, such is the meaning of the Prophet: as exile was
to the Jews like death, he promised them a new consolation, even that
God would send prophets with a command of this kind. The Lord, he says,
will yet say, “Comfort ye my people;” and that in the desert and the
waste, the prophetic voice would yet be heard, in order that a way might
be prepared for the Lord. (<span id="iv.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p16"></span>And as the obstinate pride which filled
them, must have been necessarily purged from their minds, in order that
an access might be open for God, the Prophet added what Peter relates
here respecting the vanishing glory of the flesh. What is man? he says —
*grass*; what is the glory of man? *the flower of the grass*. For as it
was difficult to believe that man, in whom so much excellency appears,
is like grass, the Prophet made a kind of concession, as though he had
said, “Be it, indeed, that flesh has some glory; but lest that should
dazzle your eyes, know that the flower soon withers.” He afterwards
shews how suddenly everything that seems beautiful in men vanishes, even
through the blowing of the Spirit of God; and by this he intimates, that
man seems to be something until he comes to God, but that his whole
brightness is as nothing in his presence; that, in a word, his glory is
in this world, and has no place in the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17"></span>*The grass withereth,* or, *has
withered*. Many think that this refers only to the outward man; but they
are mistaken; for we must consider the comparison between God’s word and
man. For if he meant only the body and what belongs to the present life,
he ought to have said, in the second place, that the soul was far more
excellent. But what he sets in opposition to the grass and its flower,
is the word of God. It then follows, that in man nothing but vanity is
found. Therefore, when Isaiah spoke of flesh and its glory, he meant the
whole man, such as he is in himself; for what he ascribed as peculiar to
God’s word, he denied to man. In short, the Prophet speaks of the same
thing as Christ does in <span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>[Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>,
that man is wholly alienated from the kingdom of God, that he is nothing
but an earthly, fading, and empty creature, until he is born again.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p18"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p19"></span>**25** *But the word of God* The Prophet
does not shew what the word of God is in itself, but what we ought to
think of it; for since man is vanity in himself, it remains that he
ought to seek life elsewhere. Hence Peter ascribes power and efficacy to
God’s word, according to the authority of the Prophet, so that it can
confer on us what is real, solid, and eternal. For this was what the
Prophet had in view, that there is no permanent life but in God, and
that this is communicated to us by the word. However fading, then, is
the nature of man, yet he is made eternal by the word; for he is
re-moulded and becomes a new creature.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p20"></span>*This is the word which by the gospel is
preached unto you,* or, *which has been declared to you*. He first
reminds us, that when the word of God is mentioned, we are very foolish
if we imagine it to be remote from us in the air or in heaven; for we
ought to know that it has been revealed to us by the Lord. What, then,
is this word of the Lord, which gives us life? Even the Law, the
Prophets, the Gospel. Those who wander beyond these limits of
revelation, find nothing but the impostures of Satan and his dotages,
and not the word of the Lord. We ought the more carefully to notice
this, because impious and Luciferian men, craftily allowing to God’s
word its own honor, at the same time attempt to draw us away from the
Scriptures, as that unprincipled man, Agrippa, who highly extols the
eternity of God’s word, and yet treats with scurrility the Prophets, and
thus indirectly laughs to scorn the Word of God.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p21"></span>In short, as I have already reminded
you, no mention is here made of the word which lies hid in the bosom of
God, but of that which has proceeded from his mouth, and has come to us.
So again it ought to be borne in mind, that God designed by the Apostles
and Prophets to speak to us, and their mouths is the mouth of the only
true God.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p22"></span>Then, when Peter says, *Which has been
announced,* or *declared*, *to you,* he intimates that the word is not
to be sought elsewhere than in the Gospel preached to us; and truly we
know not the way of eternal life otherwise than by faith. But there can
be no faith, except we know that the word is destined for us.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p23"></span>To the same purpose is what Moses said
to the people,

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p24"></span>“Say not in thine heart, Who shall
ascend into heaven, etc.; nigh is the word, in thy mouth and in thy
heart.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.vii-p24.2"></span>[De
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p25"></span>That these words agree with what Peter
says, Paul shews <span id="iv.ii.vii-p25.1"></span>[Ro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p25.1"></span>, where he teaches us that it was the word
of faith which he preached.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p26"></span>There is here, besides, no common eulogy
on preaching; for Peter declares that what is preached is the
life-giving word. God alone is indeed he who regenerates us; but for
that purpose he employs the ministry of men; and on this account Paul
glories that the Corinthians had been spiritually begotten by him.
(<span id="iv.ii.vii-p26.1"></span>[1Co
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p26.1"></span>.) It is indeed certain that those who plant
and those who water, are nothing; but whenever God is pleased to bless
their labor, he makes their doctrine efficacious by the power of his
Spirit; and the voice which is in itself mortal, is made an instrument
to communicate eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc45005.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.ii.i-p14.1"></span>*Inquilinis;* they are those who dwell in a
hired house, tenants. The original, <span
id="iv.ii.i-p14.2"></span>παρεπιδήμοις, means those who dwell among a
people, that is, not their own. Sojourners or pilgrims would be the best
word. The sentence literally is, “To the sojourners of the dispersion of
Pontus.” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc45005.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p15"></span> On this question both ancient and modern
divines have differed. It is to be decided by the contents of the
Epistle only. There is nothing *decisive* in favor of the opinion that
it was written only to believing Jews; but there is a passage, <span
id="iv.ii.i-p15.1"></span>[1Pe
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.i-p15.1"></span>,
which seems clearly to shew that Peter included the believing Gentiles;
for “the abominable idolatries” could only refer to them, as the Jews,
since the Babylonian captivity, had never fallen into idolatry. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc45005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p18"></span> The meaning would be more clear, were we
to make a change in the order of the words, “Elected, according to the
foreknowledge of God, unto obedience and the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, through *(or,* by) the sanctification of the Spirit,” that
is, they were elected in order that they might obey the gospel, and be
cleansed from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ, through the
sanctifying power of the Spirit. It was not their obedience that made
them the elect, but they were chosen that they might obey, and thus obey
through the influence of the Spirit. This is clearly the doctrine of
this passage. See <span id="iv.ii.i-p18.1"></span>[2Th
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013)<span id="iv.ii.i-p18.1"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc45005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14"></span>”This is a Hebraism,” says Macknight,
“for *a hope of life.* Accordingly, the Syriac version hath here, <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>*in spem vitae* — *to a hope of life.”* The
begetting again seems not to refer to inward renovation, but to what God
did by raising Christ from the dead. To beget, sometimes means to put
one in a new state or condition; as the expression, “This day have I
begotten thee,” means, that God had then constituted his Son a king,
publicly invested him, as it were, with that office. Similar is the
meaning here: God through the resurrection of Christ restored to the
hope of life his desponding followers: hence the import of the word
“again;” though *Macknight* thinks the reference to be to the covenant
of grace made with our first parents after the fall, and that believers
were begotten the second time to the same hope by the resurrection of
Christ. The word for “begetting again,” is only found here, and in a
passive sense in <span id="iv.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>[1Pe
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>,
where it has a different meaning, as it evidently refers to the
renovation of the heart. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc45005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p18"></span> Pareus puts, “that is, *to an
inheritance,”* making this sentence explanatory of “the hope,” as hope
here is a metonymy for its object. It is an inheritance “incorruptible,”
not to be destroyed by a flood or by fire, — “undefiled,” not like the
land of Canaan, its type, which was defiled by its inhabitants, —
“unfading,” different from any worldly inheritance, for the world
passeth away. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc45005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p22"></span> The meaning would be somewhat different,
but the sentence would be more intelligible, were we to render it thus,
“Who are kept by faith in the power of God unto salvation.” Salvation
here means that of the body as well as of the soul at the resurrection.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc45005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span> Some take the verb in a future sense,
“At which (time) ye shall exult;” and some as being an imperative, “On
account of which exult ye;” but neither of these comports with the
context; for the 8th verse proves that he speaks of present joy, and
that he states the case as it was among them. It is better with *Calvin*
to refer “wherein,” or, “on account of which,” to the fact stated in the
previous verse, that they were kept by God’s power for salvation ready
to be revealed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc45005.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span> The seeming difference in meaning
referred to, arises from this, that the Apostle uses two nouns (a common
thing in Scripture) instead of a noun and an adjective or participle —
“the trial of your faith,” instead of “your tried faith,” or, “your
faith when tried.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc45005.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span> The “praise, honor, and glory,” refer
to tried faith; it will be praised or approved by the Judge, honored
before men and angels, and followed by eternal glory. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc45005.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p31"></span> After “unspeakable,” “glorified” must
mean something greater, or it may be viewed as more specific, it is a
joy unspeakable, it being a glorified joy in a measure, or the joy of
the glorified in heaven. According to this view the words may be thus
rendered, “with joy unspeakable and heavenly.” *Doddridge* gives this
paraphrase, “With unutterable and even glorified joy, with such a joy as
seems to anticipate that of the saints in glory.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc45005.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p34"></span> It is necessary either to give a future
meaning to this participle, “Being about to receive;” or to view the
Apostle as speaking of the salvation of the soul now, as distinct from
the salvation of the soul and body hereafter. The latter view seems most
appropriate to the passage. The soul is now saved by faith. The end of
faith, its object and accomplishment, is reconciliation with God, and
reconciliation is salvation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc45005.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p13"></span> Pareus observes, that the Apostle, in
this part of the chapter, exhorted the faithful to sobriety, holiness,
humility, and brotherly love, by five reasons: 1, because they were the
children of God, <span id="iv.ii.v-p13.1"></span>[1Pe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.v-p13.1"></span>;
2, because God is holy, and requires holiness, <span
id="iv.ii.v-p13.2"></span>[1Pe
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#015)<span id="iv.ii.v-p13.2"></span>;
3, because God is no respecter of persons, <span
id="iv.ii.v-p13.3"></span>[1Pe
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.v-p13.3"></span>;
4, because of the value of the price for their redemption, <span
id="iv.ii.v-p13.4"></span>[1Pe
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018)<span id="iv.ii.v-p13.4"></span>;
and 5, because they had been born again of an immortal seed, <span
id="iv.ii.v-p13.5"></span>[1Pe
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.v-p13.5"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc45005.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p23"></span>‘The verb <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>λυτρόω means properly to redeem by a price
from tyranny or bondage, but its meaning here, and in <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p23.2"></span>[Lu
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p23.2"></span>, and <span id="iv.ii.vi-p23.3"></span>Titus
2:14, is merely to deliver. “Vain conversation” signifies a useless,
profitless mode of living. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc45005.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p47"></span> It is better to keep the tense of the
participle, — “Having purified (or, since ye have purified) your souls
by obeying the truth through the Spirit to an unfeigned love of the
brethren, love ye one another fervently from a pure heart; having been
born again,” etc.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p48"></span>The order here is similar to what is
often found in Scripture; purification is mentioned before regeneration,
as being the most visible and the effect; then what goes before it as
being in a manner the cause. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc45005.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p11"></span> Most commentators, like *Calvin,*
represent the *seed* as the word; but the construction does not admit
this; the words are, “Having been begotten from a seed, not corruptible,
but incorruptible, through the living word of God, and for-ever
abiding.” The “seed” denotes evidently the vital principle of grace, the
new nature, the restored image of God; it is the same with what John
means when he says,

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p12"></span>“His seed (that is, of God) remaineth in
him.” (<span id="iv.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>[1Jo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p13"></span>Then “the word” is set forth as the
means or instrument by which this seed is implanted. The “living” here
does not mean life-giving, as some interpret it, but stands opposed to
what ceases to be valid: and “for-ever abiding” more fully expresses its
meaning. The metaphor in the parable of the sower is quite different:
the word there is compared to a seed sown on bad or good ground; but
here the turning of a bad into a good ground is the subject; and in this
process the word is employed as an instrument. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc45006)
