[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45014)  [Next](cc45016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="v.v.i"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.v.i-p1.1"></span>[1 John
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)<span id="v.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p2"></span>**1**. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are
gone out into the world.

<span id="v.v.i-p3"></span>**1**. Dilecti, ne omni spiritui credatis,
sed probate spiritus, an ex Deo sint; quia multi pseudoprophetae
exierunt in mundum.

<span id="v.v.i-p4"></span>**2**. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God:
Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is
of God:

<span id="v.v.i-p5"></span>**2**. In hoc cognoscite Spiritum Dei; omnis
spiritus qui confitetur Jesum Christum in carne venisse, ex Deo est:

<span id="v.v.i-p6"></span>**3**. And every spirit that confesseth not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that
*spirit* of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and
even now already is it in the world.

<span id="v.v.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et omnis spiritus qui non confitetur
Jesum Christum in carne venisse, ex Deo non est; et hic est
antichristus, de quo audiistis quod venturus sit; et nunc jam in mundo
est.

<span id="v.v.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.v.i-p9"></span><span id="v.v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p10"></span>He returns to his former doctrine, which he
had touched upon in the second chapter; for many (as it is usual in new
things) abused the name of Christ for the purpose of serving their own
errors. Some made a half profession of Christ; and when they obtained a
place among his friends, they had more opportunity to injure his cause.
Satan took occasion to disturb the Church, especially through Christ
himself; for he is the stone of offense, against whom all necessarily
stumble who keep not on the right way, as shewn to us by God.

<span id="v.v.i-p11"></span>But what the Apostle says consists of three
parts. He first shews an evil dangerous to the faithful; and therefore
he exhorts them to beware. He *prescribes* how they were to beware, that
is, by making a distinction between the spirits; and this is the second
part. In the third place, he points out a particular error, the most
dangerous to them, he therefore forbids them to hear those who denied
that the Son of God appeared in the flesh. We shall now consider each in
order.

<span id="v.v.i-p12"></span>But though in the passage this reason is
added, that many false prophets had gone forth into the world, yet it is
convenient to begin with it. The announcement contains a useful
admonition; for if Satan had then already seduced many, who under the
name of Christ scattered their impostures, similar instances at this day
ought not to terrify us. For it is the case perpetually with the Gospel,
that Satan attempts to pollute and corrupt its purity by variety of
errors. This our age has brought forth some horrible and monstrous
sects; and for this reason many stand amazed; and not knowing where to
turn, they cast aside every care for religion; for they find no more
summary way for extricating themselves from the danger of errors. They
thus, indeed, act most foolishly; for by shunning the light of truth,
they cast themselves into the darkness of errors. Let, therefore, this
fact remain fixed in our minds, that from the time the Gospel began to
be preached, false prophets immediately appeared; and the fact will
fortify us against such offenses.

<span id="v.v.i-p13"></span>The antiquity of errors keeps many, as it
were, fast bound, so that they dare not emerge from them. But John
points out here all intestine evil which was then in the Church. Now, if
there were impostors mixed then with the Apostles and other faithful
teachers, what wonder is it, that the doctrine of the Gospel has been
long ago suppressed, and that many corruptions have prevailed in the
world? There is, then, no reason why antiquity should hinder us to
exercise our liberty in distinguishing between truth and falsehood.

<span id="v.v.i-p14"></span>**1** *Believe not every spirit* When the
Church is disturbed by discords and contentions, many, as it has been
said, being frightened, depart from the Gospel. But the Spirit
prescribes to us a far different remedy, that is, that the faithful
should not receive any doctrine thoughtlessly and without
discrimination. We ought, then, to take heed lest, being offended at the
variety of opinions, we should discard teachers, and, together with
them, the word of God. But this precaution is sufficient, that all are
not to be heard indiscriminately.

<span id="v.v.i-p15"></span>The word *spirit* I take metonymically, as
signifying him who boasts that he is endowed with the gift of the Spirit
to perform his office as a prophet. For as it was not permitted to any
one to speak in his own name, nor was credit given to speakers but as
far as they were the organs of the Holy Spirit, in order that prophets
might have more authority, God honored them with this name, as though he
had separated them from mankind in general. Those, then, were called
spirits, who, giving only a language to the oracles of the Holy Spirit,
in a manner represented him. They brought nothing of their own, nor came
they forth in their own name, but the design of this honorable title
was, that God’s word should not lose the respect due to it through the
humble condition of the minister. For God would have his word to be
always received from the mouth of man no otherwise than if he himself
had appeared from heaven.

<span id="v.v.i-p16"></span>Here Satan interposed, and having sent false
teachers to adulterate God’s word, he gave them also this name, that
they might more easily deceive. Thus false prophets have always been
wont superciliously and boldly to claim for themselves whatever honor
God had bestowed on his own servants. But the Apostle designedly made
use of this name, lest they who falsely pretend God’s name should
deceive us by their masks, as we see at this day; for many are so
dazzled by the mere name of a Church, that they prefer, to their eternal
ruin, to cleave to the Pope, than to deny him the least part of his
authority.

<span id="v.v.i-p17"></span>We ought, therefore, to notice this
concession: for the Apostle might have said that every sort of men ought
not to be believed; but as false teachers claimed the Spirit, so he left
them to do so, having at the same time reminded them that their claim
was frivolous and nugatory, except they really exhibited what they
professed, and that those were foolish who, being astonished at the very
sound of so honorable a name, dared not to make any inquiry on the
subject.

<span id="v.v.i-p18"></span>*Try the spirits* As all were not true
prophets, the Apostle here declares that they ought to have been
examined and tried. And he addresses not only the whole Church, but also
every one of the faithful.

<span id="v.v.i-p19"></span>But it may be asked, whence have we this
discernment? They who answer, that the word of God is the rule by which
everything that men bring forward ought to be tried, say something, but
not the whole. I grant that doctrines ought to be tested by God’s word;
but except the Spirit of wisdom be present, to have God’s word in our
hands will avail little or nothing, for its meaning will not appear to
us; as, for instance, gold is tried by fire or touchstone, but it can
only be done by those who understand the art; for neither the touchstone
nor the fire can be of any use to the unskillful. That we may then be
fit judges, we must necessarily be endowed with and directed by the
Spirit of discernment. But as the Apostle would have commanded this in
vain, were there no power of judging supplied, we may with certainty
conclude, that the godly shall never be left destitute of the Spirit of
wisdom as to what is necessary, provided they ask for him of the Lord.
But the Spirit will only thus guide us to a right discrimination, when
we render all our thoughts subject to God’s word; for it is, as it has
been said, like the touchstone, yea, it ought to be deemed most
necessary to us; for that alone is true doctrine which is drawn from it.

<span id="v.v.i-p20"></span>But here a difficult question arises: If
every one has the right and the liberty to judge, nothing can be settled
as certain, but on the contrary the whole of religion will be uncertain.
To this I answer, that there is a twofold trial of doctrine, private and
public. The private trial is that by which every one settles his own
faith, when he wholly acquiesces in that doctrine which he knows has
come from God; for consciences will never find a safe and tranquil port
otherwise than in God. Public trial refers to the common consent and
polity of the Church; for as there is danger lest fanatics should rise
up, who may presumptuously boast that they are endued with the Spirit of
God, it is a necessary remedy, that the faithful meet together and seek
a way by which they may agree in a holy and godly manner. But as the old
proverb is too true, “So many heads, so many opinions,” it is doubtless
a singular work of God, when he subdues our perverseness and makes us to
think the same thing, and to agree in a holy unity of faith.

<span id="v.v.i-p21"></span>But what Papists under this pretense hold,
that whatever has been decreed in councils is to be deemed as certain
oracles, because the Church has once proved them to be from God, is
extremely frivolous. For though it be the ordinary way of seeking
consent, to gather a godly and holy council, when controversies may be
determined according to God’s word; yet God has never bound himself to
the decrees of any council. Nor does it necessarily follow, that as soon
as a hundred bishops or more meet together in any place, they have duly
called on God and inquired at his mouth what is true; nay, nothing is
more clear that they have often departed from the pure word of God. Then
in this case also the trial which the Apostle prescribes ought to take
place, so that the spirits may be proved.

<span id="v.v.i-p22"></span><span id="v.v.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p23"></span>**2** *Hereby*, or *by this*, *know ye* He
lays down a special mark by which they might more easily distinguish
between true and false prophets. Yet he only repeats here what we have
met with before, that as Christ is the object at which faith aims, so he
is the stone at which all heretics stumble. As long then as we abide in
Christ, there is safety; but when we depart from him, faith is lost, and
all truth is rendered void.  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)

<span id="v.v.i-p27"></span>But let us consider what this confession
includes; for when the Apostle says that Christ *came*, we hence
conclude that he was before with the Father; by which his eternal
divinity is proved. By saying that he *came* *in the flesh*, he means
that by putting on flesh, he became a real man, of the same nature with
us, that he might become our brother, except that he was free from every
sin and corruption. And lastly, by saying that he *came*, the cause of
his coming must be noticed, for he was not sent by the Father for
nothing. Hence on this depend the office and merits of Christ.

<span id="v.v.i-p28"></span>As, then, the ancient heretics departed from
the faith, in one instance, by denying the divine, and in another by
denying the human nature of Christ; so do the Papists at this day:
though they confess Christ to be God and man, yet they by no means
retain the confession which the Apostle requires, because they rob
Christ of his own merit; for where freewill, merits of works, fictitious
modes of worship, satisfactions, the advocacy of saints, are set up, how
very little remains for Christ!

<span id="v.v.i-p29"></span>The Apostle then meant this, that since the
knowledge of Christ includes the sum and substance of the doctrine
respecting true religion, our eyes ought to be directed to and fixed on
that, so that we may not be deceived. And doubtless Christ is the end of
the law and the prophets; nor do we learn anything else from the gospel
but his power and grace.

<span id="v.v.i-p30"></span><span id="v.v.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p31"></span>**3.** *And this is that spirit of
Antichrist* The Apostle added this, to render more detestable the
impostures which lead us away from Christ. We have already said that the
doctrine respecting the kingdom of Antichrist was well known; so that
the faithful had been warned as to the future scattering of the Church,
in order that they might exercise vigilance. Justly then did they dread
the name as something base and ominous. The Apostle says now, that all
those who depreciated Christ were members of that kingdom.

<span id="v.v.i-p32"></span>And he says that the *spirit of antichrist
would* *come*, and that *it was already in the world*, but in a
different sense. He means that it was already in the world, because it
carried on in secret its iniquity. As, however, the truth of God had not
as yet been subverted by false and spurious dogmas, as superstition had
not as yet prevailed in corrupting the worship of God, as the world had
not as yet perfidiously departed from Christ, as tyranny, opposed to the
kingdom of Christ, had not as yet openly exalted itself, he therefore
says, that it *would come*.

<span id="v.v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004)<span id="v.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Ye are of God, little children, and
have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that
is in the world.

<span id="v.v.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Vos ex Deo estis, filioli, et
vicistis eos; quia major est qui est in vobis, quam qui in mundo.

<span id="v.v.ii-p4"></span>**5**. They are of the world: therefore
speak they of the world, and the world heareth them.

<span id="v.v.ii-p5"></span>**5**. Ipsi ex mundo sunt; propterea ex
mundo loquuntur, et mundus eos audit.

<span id="v.v.ii-p6"></span>**6**. We are of God: he that knoweth God
heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the
spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

<span id="v.v.ii-p7"></span>**6**. Nos ex Deo sumus; qui novit Deum,
audit nos; qui non est ex Deo, non audit nos: in hoc cognocimus spiritum
veritatis et spiritum erroris.

<span id="v.v.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.v.ii-p9"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p10"></span>**4** *Ye are of God* He had spoken of one
antichrist; he now mentions many. But the many were the false prophets
who had come forth before the head appeared.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) But the Apostle’s object was to animate
the faithful, that they might courageously and boldly resist impostors,
for alacrity is weakened when the issue of the contest is doubtful.
Besides, it might have caused the good to fear, when they saw that
hardly the kingdom of Christ had been set up, when enemies stood ready
to suppress it. Though then they must contend, yet he says that they had
conquered, because they would have a successful issue, as though he had
said that they were already, though in the middle of the contest;,
beyond any danger, because they would surely be conquerors.

<span id="v.v.ii-p12"></span>But this truth ought to be farther
extended, for whatever contests we may have with the world and the
flesh, a certain victory is to follow. Hard and fierce conflicts indeed
await us, and some continually succeed others; but as by Christ’s power
we fight and are furnished with God’s weapons, we even by fighting and
striving become conquerors. As to the main subject of this passage, it
is a great consolation, that with whatever wiles Satan may assail us, we
shall stand through the power of God.

<span id="v.v.ii-p13"></span>But we must observe the reason which is
immediately added, *because greater*, or *stronger*, *is he who is in
you than he who is in the world*. For such is our infirmity, that we
succumb before we engage with an enemy, for we are so immersed in
ignorance that we are open to all kinds of fallacies, and Satan is
wonderfully artful in deceiving. Were we to hold out for one day, yet a
doubt may creep into our minds as to what would be the case tomorrow; we
should thus be in a state of perpetual anxiety. Therefore the Apostle
reminds us that we become strong, not by our own power, but by that of
God. He hence concludes, that we can no more be conquered than God
himself, who has armed us with his own power to the end of the world.
But in this whole spiritual warfare this thought ought to dwell in our
hearts, that it would be all over with us immediately were we to fight
in our own strength; but that as God repels our enemies while we are
reposing, victory is certain.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="v.v.ii-p15"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p16"></span>**5** *They are of the world* It is no
small consolation that they who dare to assail God in us, have only the
world to aid and help them. And by the world the Apostle means that
portion of which Satan is the prince. Another consolation is also added,
when he says that the world embraces through the false prophets that
which it acknowledges as its own.  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)
We see what great propensity to vanity and falsehood there is in men.
Hence false doctrines easily penetrate and spread far and wide. The
Apostle intimates that there is no reason why we should on this account
be disturbed, for it is nothing new or unusual that the world, which is
wholly fallacious, should readily hearken to what is false.

<span id="v.v.ii-p18"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p19"></span>**6** *We are of God* Though this really
applies to all the godly, yet it refers properly to the faithful
ministers of the Gospel; for the Apostle, through the confidence
imparted by the Spirit, glories here that he and his fellow-ministers
served God in sincerity, and derived from him whatever they taught. It
happens that false prophets boast of the same thing, for it is their
custom to deceive under the mask of God; but faithful ministers differ
much from them, who declare nothing of themselves but what they really
manifest in their conduct.

<span id="v.v.ii-p20"></span>We ought, however, always to bear in mind
the subject which he here handles; small was the number of the godly,
and unbelief prevailed almost everywhere; few really adhered to the
Gospel, the greater part were running headlong into errors. Hence was
the occasion of stumbling. John, in order to obviate this, bids us to be
content with the fewness of the faithful, because all God’s children
honored him and submitted to his doctrine. For he immediately sets in
opposition to this a contrary clause, that they who are *not of God*, do
not hear the pure doctrine of the Gospel. By these words he intimates
that the vast multitude to whom the Gospel is not acceptable, do not
hear the faithful and true servants of God, because they are alienated
from God himself. It is then no diminution to the authority of the
Gospel that many reject it.

<span id="v.v.ii-p21"></span>But to this doctrine is added a useful
admonition, that by the obedience of faith we are to prove ourselves to
be of God. Nothing is easier than to boast that we are of God; and hence
nothing is more common among men, as the case is at this day with the
Papists, who proudly vaunt that they are the worshippers of God, and yet
they no less proudly reject the word of God. For though they pretend to
believe God’s word, yet when they are brought to the test, they close
their ears and will not hear, and yet to revere God’s word is the only
true evidence that we fear him. Nor can the excuse, made by many, have
any place here, that they shun the doctrine of the Gospel when
proclaimed to them, because they are not fit to form a judgment; for it
cannot be but that every one who really fears and obeys God, knows him
in his word.

<span id="v.v.ii-p22"></span>Were any one to object and say, that many
of the elect do not immediately attain faith, nay, that at first they
stubbornly resist; to this I answer, that at that time they are not to
be regarded, as I think, as God’s children; for it is a sign of a
reprobate man when the truth is perversely rejected by him.

<span id="v.v.ii-p23"></span>And by the way, it must be observed, that
the *hearing* mentioned by the Apostle, is to be understood of the
inward and real hearing of the heart, which is done by faith.

<span id="v.v.ii-p24"></span>*Hereby know we* The antecedent to
*hereby*, or, *by this*, is included in the two preceding clauses, as
though he had said, “Hence the truth is distinguished from falsehood,
because some speak from God, others from the world.” But by the *spirit
of truth and the spirit of error*, some think that hearers are meant, as
though he had said, that those who give themselves up to be deceived by
impostors, were born to error, and had in them the seed of falsehood;
but that they who obey the word of God shew themselves by this *very*
fact to be the children of the truth. This view I do not approve of. For
as the Apostle takes spirits here metonymically for teachers or
prophets, he means, I think, no other thing than that the trial of
doctrine must be referred to these two things, whether it be from God or
from the world.  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="v.v.ii-p26"></span>However, by thus speaking he seems to say
nothing; for all are ready to declare, that they do not speak except
from God. So the Papists at this day boast with magisterial gravity,
that all their inventions are the oracles of the Spirit. Nor does
Mahomet assert that he has drawn his dotages except from heaven. The
Egyptians also, in former times, pretended that all their mad
absurdities, by which they infatuated themselves and others, had been
revealed from above. But, to all this I reply, that we have the word of
the Lord, which ought especially to be consulted. When, therefore, false
spirits pretend the name of God, we must inquire from the Scriptures
whether things are so. Provided a devout attention be exercised,
accompanied with humility and meekness, the spirit of discernment will
be given us, who, as a faithful interpreter, will open to us the meaning
of what is said in Scripture.

<span id="v.v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
4:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)<span id="v.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p2"></span>**7**. Beloved, let us love one another:
for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and
knoweth God.

<span id="v.v.iii-p3"></span>**7**. Dilecti, diligamus nos mutuo, quia
dilectio ex Deo est; et omnis qui diligit ex Deo genitus est, et
cognoscit Deum.

<span id="v.v.iii-p4"></span>**8**. He that loveth not knoweth not God;
for God is love.

<span id="v.v.iii-p5"></span>**8**. Qui non diligit, non novit Deum;
quia Deus dilectio est.

<span id="v.v.iii-p6"></span>**9**. In this was manifested the love of
God toward us, because that God sent his only-begotten Son into the
world, that we might live through him.

<span id="v.v.iii-p7"></span>**9**. In hoc apparuit dilectio Dei in
nobis, quod Filium suum unigenitum misit Deus in mundum, ut per eum
vivamus.

<span id="v.v.iii-p8"></span>**10**. Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son *to be* the propitiation for
our sins.

<span id="v.v.iii-p9"></span>**10**. In hoc est dilectio, non quod nos
dilexerimus Deum, sed quod nos ipse dilexit, et misit Filium
propitiationem pro peccatis nostris.

<span id="v.v.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.v.iii-p11"></span><span id="v.v.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p12"></span>**7** *Beloved* He returns to that
exhortation which he enforces almost throughout the Epistle. We have,
indeed, said, that it is filled with the doctrine of faith and
exhortation to love. On these two points he so dwells, that he
continually passes from the one to the other.

<span id="v.v.iii-p13"></span>When he commands *mutual* love, he does
not mean that we discharge this duty when we love our friends, because
they love us; but as he addresses in common the faithful, he could not
have spoken otherwise than that they were to exercise mutual love. He
confirms this sentence by a reason often adduced before, even because no
one can prove himself to be the son of God, except he loves his
neighbors, and because the true knowledge of God necessarily produces
love in us.

<span id="v.v.iii-p14"></span><span id="v.v.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p15"></span>He also sets in opposition to this,
according to his usual manner, the contrary clause, that there is no
knowledge of God where there is no love. And he takes as granted a
general principle or truth, that God is love, that is, that his nature
is to love men. I know that many reason more refinedly, and that the
ancients especially have perverted this passage in order to prove the
divinity of the Spirit. But the meaning of the Apostle is simply this, —
that as God is the fountain of love, this effect flows from him, and is
diffused wherever the knowledge of him comes, as he had at the beginning
called him light, because there is nothing dark in him, but on the
contrary he illuminates all things by his own brightness. Here then he
does not speak of the essence of God, but only shews what he is found to
be by us.

<span id="v.v.iii-p16"></span>But two things in the Apostle’s words
ought to be noticed, — that the true knowledge of God is that which
regenerates and renews us, so that we become new creatures; and that
hence it cannot be but that it must conform us to the image of God.
Away, then, with that foolish gloss respecting unformed faith. For when
any one separates faith from love, it is the same as though he attempted
to take away heat from the sun.

<span id="v.v.iii-p17"></span><span id="v.v.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p18"></span>**9** *In this was manifested*, or, *has
appeared*. We have the love of God towards us testified also by many
other proofs. For if it be asked, why the world has been created, why we
have been placed in it to possess the dominion of the earth, why we are
preserved in life to enjoy innumerable blessings, why we are endued with
light and understanding, no other reason can be adduced, except the
gratuitous love of God. But the Apostle here has chosen the principal
evidence of it, and what far surpasses all other things. For it was not
only an immeasurable love, that God spared not his own Son, that by his
death he might restore us to life; but it was goodness the most
marvelous, which ought to fill our minds with the greatest wonder and
amazement. Christ, then, is so illustrious and singular a proof of
divine love towards us, that whenever we look upon him, he fully
confirms to us the truth that God is love.

<span id="v.v.iii-p19"></span>He calls him *his only begotten*, for the
sake of amplifying. For in this he more clearly shewed how singularly he
loved us, because he exposed his only Son to death for our sakes. In the
meantime, he who is his only Son by nature, makes many sons by grace and
adoption, even all who, by faith, are united to his body. He expresses
the end for which Christ has been sent by the Father, even that we may
live through him, for without him we are all dead, but by his coming he
brought life to us; and except our unbelief prevents the effect of his
grace, we feel it in ourselves.

<span id="v.v.iii-p20"></span><span id="v.v.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p21"></span>**10** *Herein is love* He amplifies God’s
love by another reason, that he gave us his own Son at the time when we
were enemies, as Paul teaches us, in <span id="v.v.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span id="v.v.iii-p21.1"></span>;
but he employs other words, that God, induced by no love of men, freely
loved them. He meant by these words to teach us that God’s love towards
us has been gratuitous. And though it was the Apostle’s object to set
forth God as an example to be imitated by us; yet the doctrine of faith
which he intermingles, ought not to be overlooked. God freely loved us,
— how so? because he loved us before we were born, and also when,
through depravity of nature, we had hearts turned away from him, and
influenced by no right and pious feelings.

<span id="v.v.iii-p22"></span>Were the prattlings of the Papists
entertained, that every one is chosen by God as he foresees him to be
worthy of love, this doctrine, that he first loved us, would not stand;
for then our love to God would be first in order, though in time
posterior. But the Apostle assumes this as an evident truth, taught in
Scripture (of which these profane Sophists are ignorant,) that we are
born so corrupt and depraved, that there is in us as it were an innate
hatred to God, so that we desire nothing but what is displeasing to him,
so that all the passions of our flesh carry on continual war with his
righteousness.

<span id="v.v.iii-p23"></span>*And sent his Son* It was then from God’s
goodness alone, as from a fountain, that Christ with all his blessings
has come to us. And as it is necessary to know, that we have salvation
in Christ, because our heavenly Father has freely loved us; so when a
real and full certainty of divine love towards us is sought for, we must
look nowhere else but to Christ. Hence all who inquire, apart from
Christ, what is settled respecting them in God’s secret counsel, are mad
to their own ruin.

<span id="v.v.iii-p24"></span>But he again points out the cause of
Christ’s coming and his office, when he says that he was sent to be a
*propitiation for our sins* And first, indeed, we are taught by these
words, that we were all through sin alienated from God, and that this
alienation and discord remains until Christ intervenes to reconcile us.
We are taught, secondly, that it is the beginning of our life, when God,
having been pacified by the death of his Son, receives us unto favor:
for *propitiation* properly refers to the sacrifice of his death. We
find, then, that this honor of expiating for the sins of the world, and
of thus taking away the enmity between God and us, belongs only to
Christ.

<span id="v.v.iii-p25"></span>But here some appearance of inconsistency
arises. For if God loved us before Christ offered himself to death for
us, what need was there for another reconciliation? Thus the death of
Christ may seem to be superfluous. To this I answer, that when Christ is
said to have reconciled the Father to us, this is to be referred to our
apprehensions; for as we are conscious of being guilty, we cannot
conceive of God otherwise than as of one displeased and angry with us,
until Christ absolves us from guilt. For God, wherever sin appears,
would have his wrath, and the judgment of eternal death, to be
apprehended. It hence follows, that we cannot be otherwise than
terrified by the present prospect. as to death, until Christ by his
death abolishes sin, until he delivers us by his own blood from death.
Further, God’s love requires righteousness; that we may then be
persuaded that we are loved, we must necessarily come to Christ, in whom
alone righteousness is to be found.

<span id="v.v.iii-p26"></span>We now see that the variety of
expressions, which occurs in Scripture, according to different aspects
of things, is most appropriate and especially useful with regard to
faith. God interposed his own Son to reconcile himself to us, because he
loved us; but this love was hid, because we were in the meantime enemies
to God, continually provoking his wrath. Besides, the fear and terror of
an evil conscience took away from us all enjoyment of life. Thence as to
the apprehension of our faith, God began to love us in Christ. And
though the Apostle here speaks of the first reconciliation, let us yet
know that to propitiate God to us by expiating sins is a perpetual
benefit proceeding from Christ.

<span id="v.v.iii-p27"></span>This the Papists also in part concede; but
afterwards they extenuate and almost annihilate this grace, by
introducing their fictitious satisfactions. For if men redeem themselves
by their works, Christ cannot be the only true propitiation, as he is
called here.

<span id="v.v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 John
4:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#011)<span id="v.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p2"></span>**11**. Beloved, if God so loved us, we
ought also to love one another.

<span id="v.v.iv-p3"></span>**11**. Dilecti, si ita Deus nos dilexit,
nos quoque debemus invicem diligere.

<span id="v.v.iv-p4"></span>**12**. No man hath seen God at any time. If
we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in
us.

<span id="v.v.iv-p5"></span>**12**. Deum nemo vidit unquam; si diligimus
nos invicem, Deus in nobis manet, et dilectio ejus perfecta est in
nobis.

<span id="v.v.iv-p6"></span>**13**. Hereby know we that we dwell in him,
and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.

<span id="v.v.iv-p7"></span>**13**. In hoc cognoscimus, quod in ipso
manemus, et ipse in nobis, quit ex Spiritu suo dedit nobis.

<span id="v.v.iv-p8"></span>**14**. And we have seen and do testify that
the Father sent the Son *to be* the Saviour of the world.

<span id="v.v.iv-p9"></span>**14**. Et nos vidimus et testamur, testify,
quod Pater misit Filium servatorem mundi.

<span id="v.v.iv-p10"></span>**15**. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus
is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.

<span id="v.v.iv-p11"></span>**15**. Qui confessus fuerit, quod Jesus
est Filius Dei, Deus in eo manet et ipse in Deo.

<span id="v.v.iv-p12"></span>**16**. And we have known and believed the
love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love
dwelleth in God, and God in him.

<span id="v.v.iv-p13"></span>**16**. Et nos cognovimus et credimus
dilectionem quam habet Deus in nobis: Deus charitas est; et qui manet in
charitate, in Deo manet, et Deus in eo.

<span id="v.v.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="v.v.iv-p15"></span><span id="v.v.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p16"></span>**11** *Beloved* Now the Almighty
accommodates to his own purpose what he has just taught us respecting
the love of God; for he exhorts us by God’s example to brotherly love;
as also Paul sets before us Christ, who offered himself to the Father a
sacrifice of pleasant fragrance, that every one of us might labor to
benefit his neighbors. (<span id="v.v.iv-p16.1"></span>[Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span id="v.v.iv-p16.1"></span>.)
And John reminds us, that our love ought not to be mercenary, when he
bids us to love our neighbors as God has loved us; for we ought to
remember this, that we have been loved freely. And doubtless when we
regard our own advantage, or return good offices to friends, it is
self-love, and not love to others.

<span id="v.v.iv-p17"></span><span id="v.v.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p18"></span>**12** *No man hath seen God* The same
words are found in <span id="v.v.iv-p18.1"></span>[Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="v.v.iv-p18.1"></span> of
John’s Gospel; but John the Baptist had not there exactly the same thing
in view, for he meant only that God could not be otherwise known, but as
he has revealed himself in Christ. The Apostle here extends the same
truth farther, that the power of God is comprehended by us by faith and
love, so as to know that we are his children and that he dwells in us.

<span id="v.v.iv-p19"></span>He speaks, however, first of love, when he
says, that *God dwells in us, if we love one another; for perfected,* or
*really proved to be*, *in us is then his love*; as though he had said,
that God shews himself as present, when by his Spirit he forms our
hearts so that they entertain brotherly love. For the same purpose he
repeats what he had already said, that we know by the Spirit whom he has
given us that he dwells in us; for it is a confirmation of the former
sentence, because love is the effect or fruit of the Spirit.

<span id="v.v.iv-p20"></span>The sum, then, of what is said is, that
since love is from the Spirit of God, we cannot truly and with a sincere
heart love the brethren, except the Spirit puts forth his power. In this
way he testifies that he dwells in us. But God by his Spirit dwells in
us; then, by love we prove that we have God abiding in us. On the other
hand, whosoever boasts that he has God and loves not the brethren, his
falsehood is proved by this one thing, because he separates God from
himself.

<span id="v.v.iv-p21"></span>When he says, *and his love is perfected*,
the conjunction is to be taken as a causative, *for*, or, *because* And
*love* here may be explained in two ways, either that which God shews to
us, or that which he implants in us. That God has given his Spirit to
us, or given us of his Spirit, means the same thing; for we know that
the Spirit in a measure is given to each individual.

<span id="v.v.iv-p22"></span><span id="v.v.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p23"></span>**14** *And we have seen* He now explains
the other part of the knowledge of God, which we have referred to, that
he communicates himself to us in his Son, and offers himself to be
enjoyed in him. It hence follows, that he is by faith received by us.
For the design of the Apostle is to shew, that God is so united to us by
faith and love, that he really dwells in us and renders himself in a
manner visible by the effect of his power, who otherwise could not be
seen by us.

<span id="v.v.iv-p24"></span>When the Apostle says, *We have, seen and
do testify*, he refers to himself and others. And by seeing, he does not
mean any sort of seeing, but what belongs to faith by which they
recognized the glory of God in Christ, according to what follows, that
he was *sent to be the Savior of the world*; and this knowledge flows
from the illumination of the Spirit.

<span id="v.v.iv-p25"></span><span id="v.v.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p26"></span>**15** *Whosoever shall confess* He repeats
the truth, that we are united to God by Christ, and that we cannot be
connected with Christ except, God abides in us. *Faith* and *confession*
are used indiscriminately in the same sense; for though hypocrites may
wisely boast of faith, yet the apostle here acknowledges none of those
who ordinarily confess, but such as truly and from the heart believe.
Besides, when he says *that Jesus is the Son of God*, he briefly
includes the sum and substance of faith; for there is nothing necessary
for salvation which faith finds not in Christ

<span id="v.v.iv-p27"></span>After having said in general, that men are
so united to Christ by faith, that Christ unites them to God, he
subjoined what they themselves had seen so that he accommodated a
general truth to those to whom he was writing. Then follows the
exhortation, to love one another as they were loved by God. Therefore
the order and connection of his discourse is this, — Faith in Christ,
makes God to dwell in men, and we are partakers of this grace; but as
God is love, no one dwells in him except he loves his brethren. Then
love ought to reign in us, since God unites himself to us.

<span id="v.v.iv-p28"></span><span id="v.v.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iv-p29"></span>**16** *And we have known and believed* It
is the same as though he had said, “We have known by believing;” for
such knowledge is not attained but by faith. But we hence learn how
different, is an uncertain or doubtful opinion from faith. Besides,
though he meant here, as I have already said, to accommodate the last
sentence to his readers, yet he defines faith in various ways. He had
said before, that it is to confess that Jesus is the Son of God; but, he
now says, We know by faith God’s love towards us. It hence appears, that
the paternal love of God is found in Christ, and that nothing certain is
known of Christ, except by those who know themselves to be the children
of God by his grace. For the Father sets his own Son daily before us for
this end, that he may adopt us in him.

<span id="v.v.iv-p30"></span>*God is love* This is as it were the minor
proposition in an argument; for from faith to love he reasons in this
way: By faith God dwells in us, and God is love; then, wherever God
abides, love ought to be there. Hence it follows that love is
necessarily connected with faith.

<span id="v.v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v.v-p1.1"></span>[1 John
4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017)<span id="v.v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p2"></span>**17**. Herein is our love made perfect, that
we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we
in this world.

<span id="v.v.v-p3"></span>**17**. In hoc perfecta est charitas
nobiscum, ut fiduciam habaemus in die judicii, quod sicut ille est, nos
quoque sumus in hoc mundo.

<span id="v.v.v-p4"></span>**18**. There is no fear in love; but perfect
love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not
made perfect in love.

<span id="v.v.v-p5"></span>**18**. Timor non est in charitate; sed
perfecta charitas foras pellit timorem: quia timor tormentum habet; qui
autem timet, non est perfectus in charitate.

<span id="v.v.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.v.v-p7"></span><span id="v.v.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p8"></span>**17** *Herein is our love made perfect*
There are two clauses in this passage, — that we are then partakers of
divine adoption, when we resemble God as children their father; and**,**
secondly, that this confidence is invaluable, for without it we must be
most miserable.

<span id="v.v.v-p9"></span>Then in the first place, he shews to what
purpose God has in love embraced us, and how we enjoy that grace
manifested to us in Christ. Then, God’s love to us is what is to be
understood here. He says it is *perfected*, because it is abundantly
poured forth and really given, that it appears to be complete. But he
asserts that no others are partakers of this blessing; but those who, by
being conformed to God, prove themselves to be his children. It is,
then, an argument taken from what is an inseparable condition.

<span id="v.v.v-p10"></span>*That we may have boldness* He now begins to
shew the fruit of divine love towards us, though he afterwards shews it
more clearly from the contrary effect. It is, however, an invaluable
benefit, that we can dare boldly to stand before God. By nature, indeed,
we dread the presence of God, and that justly; for, as he is the Judge
of the world, and our sins hold us guilty, death and hell must come to
our minds whenever we think of God. Hence is that dread which I have
mentioned, which makes men shun God as much as they can. But John says
that the faithful do not fear, when mention is made to them of the last
judgment, but that on the contrary they go to God’s tribunal confidently
and cheerfully, because they are assured of his paternal love. Every
one, then, has made so much proficiency in faith, as he is well prepared
in his mind to look forward to the day of judgment.

<span id="v.v.v-p11"></span>*As he is* By these words, as it has been
already said, he meant that it is required of us at our turn to resemble
the image of God. What God then in heaven is, such he bids us to be in
this world, in order that we may be deemed his children; for the image
of God, when it appears in us, is as it were the seal of his adoption.

<span id="v.v.v-p12"></span>But he seems thus to place a part of our
confidence on works. Hence the Papists raise their crests here, as
though John denied that we, relying on God’s grace alone, can have a
sure confidence as to salvation without the help of works. But in this
they are deceived, because they do not consider that the Apostle here
does not refer to the cause of salvation, but to what is added to it.
And we readily allow that no one is reconciled to God through Christ,
except he is also renewed after God’s image, and that the one cannot be
disjoined from the other. Right then is what is done by the Apostle, who
excludes from the confidence of grace all those in whom no image of God
is seen; for it is certain that such are wholly aliens to the Spirit of
God and to Christ. Nor do we deny that newness of life, as it is the
effect of divine adoption, serves to confirm confidence, as a prop, so
to speak, of the second order; but in the meantime we ought to have our
foundation on grace alone.  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) Nor
indeed does the doctrine of John appear otherwise consistent with
itself; for experience proves, and even Papists are forced to confess,
that as to works they always give an occasion for trembling. Therefore
no one can come with a tranquil mind to God’s tribunal, except he
believes that he is freely loved.

<span id="v.v.v-p14"></span>But that none of these things please the
Papists, there is no reason for any one to wonder, since being miserable
they know no faith except that which is entangled with doubts. Besides,
hypocrisy brings darkness over them, so that they do not seriously
consider how formidable is God’s judgment when Christ the Mediator is
not present, and some of them regard the resurrection as fabulous. But
that we may cheerfully and joyfully go forth to meet Christ, we must
have our faith fixed on his grace alone.

<span id="v.v.v-p15"></span><span id="v.v.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p16"></span>**18** *There is no fear* He now commends
the excellency of this blessing by stating the contrary effect, for he
says that we are continually tormented until God delivers us from misery
and anguish by the remedy of his own love towards us. The meaning is,
that as there is nothing more miserable than to be harassed by continual
inquietude, we obtain by knowing God’s love towards us the benefit of a
peaceful calmness beyond the reach of fear. It hence appears what a
singular gift of God it is to be favored with his love. Moreover from
this doctrine, he will presently draw an exhortation; but before he
exhorts us to duty, he commends to us this gift of God, which by faith
removes our fear.

<span id="v.v.v-p17"></span>This passage, I know, is explained otherwise
by many; but I regard what the Apostle means, not what others think.
They say that there is no fear in love, because, when we voluntarily
love God, we are not constrained by force and fear to serve him. Then
according to them, servile fear is here set in opposition to voluntary
reverence; and hence has arisen the distinction between servile and
filial fear. I indeed allow it to be true, that when we willingly love
God as a Father, we are no longer constrained by the fear of punishment;
but this doctrine has nothing in common with this passage, for the
Apostle only teaches us, that when the love of God is by us seen and
known by faith, peace is given to our consciences, so that they no
longer tremble and fear.

<span id="v.v.v-p18"></span>It may, however, be asked, when does perfect
love expel fear, for since we are endued with some taste only of divine
love towards us, we can never be wholly freed from fear? To this I
answer, that, though fear is not wholly shaken off, yet when we flee to
God as to a quiet harbor, safe and free from all danger of shipwreck and
of tempests, fear is really expelled, for it gives way to faith. Then
fear is not so expelled, but that it assails our minds, but it is so
expelled that it does not torment us nor impede that peace which we
obtain by faith.

<span id="v.v.v-p19"></span>*Fear hath torment* Here the Apostle
amplifies still further the greatness of that grace of which he speaks;
for as it is a most miserable condition to suffer continual torments,
there is nothing more to be wished than to present ourselves before God
with a quiet conscience and a calm mind. What some say, that servants
fear, because they have before their eyes punishment and the rod, and
that they do not their duty except when forced, has nothing to do, as it
has been already stated, with what the Apostle says here. So in the next
clause, the exposition given, that he who fears is not perfect in love,
because he submits not willingly to God, but would rather free himself
from his service, does not comport at all with the context. For the
Apostle, on the contrary, reminds us, that it is owing to unbelief when
any one fears, that is, has a disturbed mind; for the love of God,
really known, tranquilizes the heart.  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

<span id="v.v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.v.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 John
4:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019)<span id="v.v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.vi-p2"></span>**19**. We love him, because he first loved
us.

<span id="v.v.vi-p3"></span>**19**. Nos diligimus eum, quia prior
dilexit nos.

<span id="v.v.vi-p4"></span>**20**. If a man say, I love God, and hateth
his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he
hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?

<span id="v.v.vi-p5"></span>**20**. Si quis dicit, Deum diligo; et
proximum suum odio habeat, mendax est: qui enim non diligit fratrem suum
quem videt; Deum quem non videt, quomodo potest diligere?

<span id="v.v.vi-p6"></span>**21**. And this commandment have we from
him, That he who loveth God love his brother also.

<span id="v.v.vi-p7"></span>**21**. Et hoc præceptum habemus ab ipso, ut
qui Deum diligit, diligat et fratrem suum.

<span id="v.v.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.v.vi-p9"></span><span id="v.v.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.vi-p10"></span>**19** *We love him* The verb <span
id="v.v.vi-p10.1"></span>ἀγαπῶμεν may be either in the indicative or
imperative mood; but the former is the more suitable here, for the
Apostle, as I think, repeats the preceding sentence, that as God has
anticipated us by his free love, we ought to return to render love to
him, for he immediately infers that he ought to be loved in men, or that
the love we have for him ought to be manifested towards men. If,
however, the imperative mood be preferred, the meaning would be nearly
the same, that as God has freely loved us, we also ought now to love
him.

<span id="v.v.vi-p11"></span><span id="v.v.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.vi-p12"></span>But this love cannot exist, except it
generates brotherly love. Hence he says, that they are liars who boast
that they love God, when they hate their brethren.

<span id="v.v.vi-p13"></span>But the reason he subjoins seems not
sufficiently valid, for it is a comparison between the less and the
greater: If, he says, we love not our brethren whom we see, much less
can we love God who is invisible. Now there are obviously two
exceptions; for the love which God has to us is from faith and does not
flow from sight, as we find in <span id="v.v.vi-p13.1"></span>[1Pe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008)<span id="v.v.vi-p13.1"></span>;
and secondly, far different is the love of God from the love of men; for
while God leads his people to love him through his infinite goodness,
men are often worthy of hatred. To this I answer, that the Apostle takes
here as granted what ought no doubt to appear evident to us, that God
offers himself to us in those men who bear his image, and that he
requires the duties, which he does not want himself, to be performed to
them, according to <span id="v.v.vi-p13.2"></span>[Ps.
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)<span id="v.v.vi-p13.2"></span>,
where we read,

<span id="v.v.vi-p14"></span>“My goodness reaches not to thee, O Lord;  
towards the saints who are on the earth is my love.”

<span id="v.v.vi-p15"></span>And surely the participation of the same
nature, the need of so many things, and mutual intercourse, must allure
us to mutual love, except; we are harder than iron. But John meant
another thing: he meant to shew how fallacious is the boast of every one
who says that he loves God, and yet loves not God’s image which is
before his eyes.

<span id="v.v.vi-p16"></span><span id="v.v.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.vi-p17"></span>**21** *And this commandment* This is a
stronger argument, drawn from the authority and doctrine of Christ; for
he not only gave a commandment respecting the love of God, but bade us
also to love our brethren. We must therefore so begin with God, as that
there may be at the same time a transition made to men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc45015.htm#fr_81) <span
id="v.v.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p24"></span> It appears that by “spirit” throughout this
passage, we are to understand a teacher claiming, rightly or falsely, to
be influenced by God’s Spirit. Nor would it be improper, but suitable to
the context, to consider the spirit of God in this verse as meaning a
teacher guided by God. The meaning of the passage might be thus
expressed, —

<span id="v.v.i-p25"></span>**2**. “By this know ye the teacher of God;
every teacher who confesses Jesus Christ as having come in the flesh, is
from God; and

<span id="v.v.i-p26"></span>**3**. every teacher who does not confess
Jesus Christ as having come in the flesh, is not from God; and this is
the teacher of Antichrist, (or, the Anti Christian teacher,) of whom ye
have heard that he is coming, and he is now already in the world.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc45015.htm#fr_82) <span
id="v.v.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p11"></span> When it is said, ye “have overcome them,”
the antecedent to “them” is no doubt “the false prophets” in the first
verse. It is usual with John to refer to antecedents at some distance.
See <span id="v.v.ii-p11.1"></span>[Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span id="v.v.ii-p11.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc45015.htm#fr_83) <span
id="v.v.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p14"></span> “The world” is in this verse identified
with “the false prophets;” true Christians had overcome these for this
reason, because greater was he that was in them than he that was in the
world, that is, in the unbelieving and ungodly, of whom the false
prophets formed a part. Hence it follows, “They are of the world,” that
is, they are of the number of those who are ungodly and wicked, who make
up the kingdom of darkness. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc45015.htm#fr_84) <span
id="v.v.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p17"></span> The clause, “therefore speak they of the
world,” is hardly a true rendering, for <span
id="v.v.ii-p17.1"></span>ἐκ never means “of,” in the sense of
“concerning.” *Macknight* renders it “from.” *Grotius* paraphrases the
sentence thus, “They preach things agreeable to the dispositions of the
world;” and *Doddridge* thus, “They speak as of the world, as taking
their instructions from it.” But <span id="v.v.ii-p17.2"></span>ἐκ, like
<span id="v.v.ii-p17.3"></span>*ex* in Latin, means sometimes “according
to,” as in <span id="v.v.ii-p17.4"></span>[Mt
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)<span id="v.v.ii-p17.4"></span>,
“For by (or, according to) thy words thou shalt be justified.” See also
<span id="v.v.ii-p17.5"></span>[Mt
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="v.v.ii-p17.5"></span>,
“but of (or, according to) the abundance,” etc. Then this sentence may
be thus rendered, “Therefore speak they according to the world:” that
is, according to the views and principles of the superstitious and
ungodly men of the world. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc45015.htm#fr_85) <span
id="v.v.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p25"></span> According to this view, “the spirit of
truth” means the teacher of truth, and “the spirit of error” the teacher
of error; and this is agreeable to the whole tenor of the context, the
spirit throughout denoting the person who claimed, rightly or falsely,
to be under the direction of the divine Spirit. “By this,” refers to
what had been just stated, that is, that false teachers were of the
world, and spake things agreeable to the worldly-minded, and were heard
by the world, and that the true teachers were from God, and were heard
or attended to by those who knew God, and were not attended to by such
as were ignorant of him. It was by this statement which he had made,
they could distinguish between the teacher of truth and the teacher of
error. The teacher of truth was one from God, and was attended to by
those who knew God, and not by those who knew him not; on the other
hand, the teacher of error was from the world, preached what was
agreeable to the men of the world, and was hearkened to by them. The
order, as it is often the case, is inverted; the teacher of error,
mentioned last, is described in the fifth verse, and the teacher of
truth, mentioned first, at the beginning of the sixth. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc45015.htm#fr_86) <span
id="v.v.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p13"></span> What is love? It is as much a gift, a
grace, as faith; it constitutes a fitness for heaven, but is in no way
meritorious; and were it perfect, there would be nothing of merit in it;
for the highest degrees of it come far short of what is due to God. To
set up merit of any kind on the part of man, betokens extreme blindness,
for salvation from first to last is altogether gratuitous. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc45015.htm#fr_87) <span
id="v.v.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p20"></span> *Beza*, *Doddridge*, *Scott*, and most
commentators, regard *love* here as that which is in us, and not the
love of God as apprehended by faith. The *main* subject of the Apostle
is love in us, and the words “perfected” and “*perfect*,” as applied to
it, seem inappropriate to God’s love towards us; and this perfection is
said in verse 17th to consist in this, that as God is, so are we in this
world; that is, like him in love, as God is said in the previous verse
to be love.

<span id="v.v.v-p21"></span>“Fear” is the fear of judgment, mentioned in
verse 17th, and he who fears is said to be not perfected or made perfect
in love, which obviously refers to love in us. And then it immediately
follows, “We *love* him,” and the reason is assigned, “because he first
loved us.” He afterwards proceeds to show the indispensable necessity of
having love to God and to the brethren — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc45016)
