[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45026)  [Next](cc45028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Peter
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** But there were false prophets also
among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who
privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fuerunt autem et falsi prophetae
in populo, sicuti et inter vos erunt falsi doctores, qui subinducent
sectas perditionis, et etiam Dominum qui eos redemit abnegantes,
accersentes sibi celerem interitum.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And many shall follow their
pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken
of.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et multi sequentur eorum exitia,
per quos via veritatis blasphemabitur;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And through covetousness shall
they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a
long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et in avaritia fictis sermonibus
de vobis negotiabuntur; quorum judicium pridem non cessat, et quorum
perditio non dormitat.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.i-p9"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p10"></span>**1.** *But there were.* As weak
consciences are usually very grievously and dangerously shaken, when
false teachers arise, who either corrupt or mutilate the doctrine of
faith, it was necessary for the Apostle, while seeking to encourage the
faithful to persevere, to remove out of the way an offense of this kind.
He, moreover, comforted those to whom he was writing, and confirmed them
by this argument, that God has always tried and proved his Church by
such a temptation as this, in order that novelty might not disturb their
hearts. “Not different,” he says, “will be the condition of the Church
under the gospel, from what it was formerly under the law; false
prophets disturbed the ancient Church; the same thing must also be
expected by us.”

<span id="vii.iii.i-p11"></span>It was necessary expressly to shew this,
because many imagined that the Church would enjoy tranquillity under the
rein of Christ; for as the prophets had promised that at his coming
there would be real peace, the highest degree of heavenly wisdom, and
the full restoration of all things, they thought that the Church would
be no more exposed to any contests. Let us then remember that the Spirit
of God hath once for all declared, that the Church shall never be free
from this intestine evil; and let this likeness be always borne in mind,
that the trial of our faith is to be similar to that of the fathers, and
for the same reason — that in this way it may be made evident, whether
we really love God, as we find it written in <span
id="vii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p12"></span>But it is not necessary here to refer to
every example of this kind; it is enough, in short, to know that, like
the fathers, we must contend against false doctrines, that our faith
ought by no means to be shaken on account of discords and sects, because
the truth of God shall remain unshaken notwithstanding the violent
agitations by which Satan strives often to upset all things.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p13"></span>Observe also, that no one time in
particular is mentioned by Peter, when he says *there shall be false
teachers*, but that all ages are included; for he makes here a
comparison between Christians and the ancient people. We ought, then, to
apply this truth to our own time, lest, when we see false teachers
rising up to oppose the truth of God, this trial should break us down.
But the Spirit reminds us, in order that we may take the more heed; and
to the same purpose is the whole description which follows.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p14"></span>He does not, indeed, paint each sect in
its own colors, but particularly refers to profane men who manifested
contempt towards God. The advice, indeed, is general, that we ought to
beware of false teachers; but, at the same time, he selected one kind of
such from whom the greater danger arose. What is said here will
hereafter become more evident from the words of Jude, \[<span
id="vii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>[Jude
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004)<span
id="vii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>,\] who treats exactly of the same subject.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p15"></span>*Who privily shall bring in.* By these
words he points out the craftiness of Satan, and of all the ungodly who
militate under his banner, that they would creep in by oblique turnings,
as through burrows under ground.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) The more watchful, then, ought the
godly to be, so that they may escape their hidden frauds: for however
they may insinuate themselves, they cannot circumvent those who are
carefully vigilant.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p17"></span>He calls them *opinions of perdition,*
or *destructive opinions*, that every one, solicitous for his salvation,
might dread such opinions as the most noxious pests. As to the word
*opinions* or heresies, it has not, without reason, been always deemed
infamous and hateful by the children of God; for the bond of holy unity
is the simple truth. As soon as we depart from that, nothing remains but
dreadful discord.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p18"></span>*Even denying the Lord that bought
them.* Though Christ may be denied in various ways, yet Peter, as I
think, refers here to what is expressed by Jude, that is, when the grace
of God is turned into lasciviousness; for Christ redeemed us, that he
might have a people separated from all the pollutions of the world, and
devoted to holiness and innocency. They, then, who throw off the bridle,
and give themselves up to all kinds of licentiousness, are not unjustly
said to deny Christ by whom they have been redeemed. Hence, that the
doctrine of the gospel may remain whole and complete among us, let this
be fixed in our minds, that we have been redeemed by Christ, that he may
be the Lord of our life and of our death, and that our main object ought
to be, to live to him and to die to him. He then says, that their *swift
destruction* was at hand, lest others should be ensnared by them.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="vii.iii.i-p20"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p21"></span>**2.** *And many shall follow*. It is,
indeed, no slight offense to the weak, when they see that false
doctrines are received by the common consent of the world, that a large
number of men are led astray, so that few continue in true obedience to
Christ. So, at this day, there is nothing that more violently disturbs
pious minds than such a defection. For hardly one in ten of those who
have once made a profession of Christ, retains the purity of faith to
the end. Almost all turn aside into corruptions, and being deluded by
the teachers of licentiousness, they become profane. Lest this should
make our faith to falter, Peter comes to our help, and in due time
foretells that this very thing would be, that is, that false teachers
would draw many to perdition.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p22"></span>But there is a double reading even in
the Greek copies; for some read, “lasciviousness,” and others,
“perdition.” I have, however, followed what has been mostly approved.
 <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)

<span id="vii.iii.i-p24"></span>*By reason of whom the way of truth.*
This I consider to have been said for this reason, because as religion
is adorned when men are taught to fear God, to maintain uprightness of
life, a chaste and virtuous conduct, or when at least the mouth of the
wicked is closed, that they do not speak evil of the gospel; so when the
reins are let loose, and every kind of licentiousness is practiced, the
name and the doctrine of Christ are exposed to the reproaches of the
ungodly. Others give a different explanation — that these false
teachers, like filthy dogs, barked at sound doctrine. But the words of
Peter appear to me on the contrary to intimate, that these would give
occasion to enemies insolently to assail the truth of God. Though then
they would not themselves assail the Christian faith with calumnies, yet
they would arm others with the means of reproaching it.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p25"></span><span id="vii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p26"></span>**3.** *With feigned words.* Peter
endeavors by all means to render the faithful displeased with ungodly
teachers, that they might resist them more resolutely and more
constantly. It is especially an odious thing that we should be exposed
to sale like vile slaves. But he testifies that this is done, when any
one seduces us from the redemption of Christ. He calls those *feigned
words* which are artfully formed for the purpose of deceiving.  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) Unless then one is so mad as to sell
the salvation of his soul to false teachers, let him close up every
avenue that may lead to their wicked inventions. For the same purpose as
before he repeats again, that their destruction delayed not, that is,
that he might frighten the good from their society. For since they were
given up to a sudden destruction, every one who connected himself with
them, must have perished with them.

<span id="vii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Peter 2:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** For if God spared not the angels
that sinned, but cast *them* down to hell, and delivered *them* into
chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Si enim Angelis qui peccaverant,
Deus non perpercit, sed catenis caliginis in tartarum praecipitatos
tradidit servandos in judicium;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p4"></span>**5.** And spared not the old world, but
saved Noah the eighth *person*, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in
the flood upon the world of the ungodly;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Et prisco mundo non pepercit, sed
octavum justitiae praeconem Noe servavit, diluvio in mundum impiorum
inducto;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p6"></span>**6.** And turning the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrha into ashes, condemned *them* with an overthrow, making
*them* an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p7"></span>**6.** Et civitates Sodomorum et
Gomorrae in cinerem redactas, subversione damnavit, easque statuit
exemplum iis qui impia acturi forent;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** And delivered just Lot, vexed
with the filthy conversation of the wicked:

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** Et justum Lot qui opprimebatur à
nefariis per libidinosam conversationem eripuit;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p10"></span>**8.** (For that righteous man dwelling
among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed *his* righteous soul from day
to day with *their* unlawful deeds;)

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p11"></span>**8.** Nam oculis et auribus justus
ille, quum habitaret inter ipsos quotidie animam justam iniquis illorum
operibus excruciabat;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p13"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p14"></span>**4.** *For if.* We have stated how
much it behoves us to know that the ungodly, who by their mischievous
opinions corrupt the Church, cannot escape God’s vengeance; and this he
proves especially by three remarkable examples of God's judgment, — that
he spared not even angels, that he once destroyed the whole world by a
deluge, that he reduced Sodom to ashes, and other neighboring cities.
But Peter thought it sufficient to take as granted what ought to be
never doubted by us, that is, that God is the judge of the whole world.
It hence follows that the punishment he formerly inflicted on the
ungodly and wicked, he will now also inflict on the like characters. For
he can never be unlike himself, nor does he shew respect of persons, so
as to forgive the same wickedness in one which he has punished in
another; but he hates injustice and wrong equally, whenever it is found.
 <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166)

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p16"></span>For we must always bear in mind that
there is a difference between God and men; for men indeed judge
unequally, but God keeps the same course in judging. For that he
forgives sins, this is done because he blots them out through repentance
and faith. He therefore does not otherwise reconcile himself to us than
by justifying us; for until sin is taken away, there is always an
occasion of discord between us and Him.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p17"></span>As to *the angels.* The argument is
from the greater to the less; for they were far more excellent than we
are, and yet their dignity did not preserve them from the hand of God;
much less then can mortal men escape, when they follow them in their
impiety. But as Peter mentions here but briefly the fall of angels, and
as he has not named the time and the manner and other circumstances, it
behoves us soberly to speak on the subject. Most men are curious and
make no end of inquiries on these things; but since God in Scripture has
only sparingly touched on them, and as it were by the way, he thus
reminds us that we ought to be satisfied with this small knowledge. And
indeed they who curiously inquire, do not regard edification, but seek
to feed their souls with vain speculations. What is useful to us, God
has made known, that is, that the devils were at first created, that
they might serve and obey God, but that through their own fault they
apostatized, because they would not submit to the authority of God; and
that thus the wickedness found in them was accidental, and not from
nature, so that it could not be ascribed to God.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18"></span>All this Peter declares very clearly,
when he says that angels fell, though superior to men; and Jude is still
more express when he writes, that they kept not their first estate, or
their pre-eminence. \[<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Jude
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>.\] Let those who are not satisfied with
these testimonies have recourse to the Sorbonian theology, which will
teach them respecting angels to satiety, so as to precipitate them to
hell together with the devils.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p19"></span>*Chains of darkness.* This metaphor
intimates that they are held bound in darkness until the last day. And
the comparison is taken from malefactors, who, after having been
condemned, suffer half of their punishment by the severity of the
prison, until they are drawn forth to their final doom. We may hence
learn, not only what punishment the wicked suffer after death, but also
what is the condition of the children of God: for they calmly acquiesce
in the hope of sure and perfect blessedness, though they do not as yet
enjoy it; as the former suffer dreadful agonies on account of the
vengeance prepared for them.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p20"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p21"></span>**5.** *The old world.* The import of
what he says is, that God, after having drowned the human race, formed
again as it were a new world. This is also an argument from the greater
to the less; for how can the wicked escape the deluge of divine wrath,
since the whole world was once destroyed by it? For by saying that eight
only were saved, he intimates that a multitude would not be a shield
against God to protect the wicked; but that as many as sin shall be
punished, be they few or many in number.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p22"></span>But it may be asked why he calls Noah
*the preacher of righteousness.* Some understand that he was the
preacher of the righteousness of God, inasmuch as Scripture commends
God's righteousness, because he defends his own and restores them, when
dead, to life. But I rather think that he is called the preacher of
righteousness, because he labored to restore a degenerated world to a
sound mind, and this not only by his teaching and godly exhortations,
but also by his anxious toil in building the ark for the term of a
hundred and twenty years. Now, the design of the Apostle is to set
before our eyes God’s wrath against the wicked, so as to encourage us at
the same time to imitate the saints.  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p24"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p25"></span>**6** *The cities of Sodom.* This was
so memorable an example of Divine vengeance, that when the Scripture
speaks of the universal destruction of the ungodly, it alludes commonly
to this as the type. Hence Peter says, that these cities were made an
example. This may, indeed, be truly said of others; but Peter points out
something singular, because it was the chief and a lively image; yea,
rather, because the Lord designed that his wrath against the ungodly
should be made known to all ages; as when he redeemed his people from
Egypt, he has set forth to us by that one favor the perpetual safety of
his Church. Jude has also expressed the same thing, calling it the
punishment of eternal fire. \[<span id="vii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Jude
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>.\]

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p26"></span><span id="vii.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p27"></span>**8.** *In seeing and hearing.* The
common explanation is, that Lot was just in his eyes and ears, because
all his senses abhorred the crimes of Sodom. However, another view may
be taken of his *seeing and hearing*, so as to make this the meaning,
that when the just man lived among the Sodomites, he tormented his soul
by seeing and hearing; for we know that he was constrained to see and
hear many things which greatly vexed his mind. The purport of what is
said then is, that though the holy man was surrounded with every kind of
monstrous wickedness, he yet never turned aside from his upright course.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p28"></span>But Peter expresses more than before,
that is, that just Lot underwent voluntary sorrows; as it is right that
all the godly should feel no small grief when they see the world rushing
into every kind of evil, so the more necessary it is that they should
groan for their own sins. And Peter expressly mentioned this, lest when
impiety everywhere prevails, we should be captivated and inebriated by
the allurements of vices, and perish together with others, but that we
might prefer this grief, blessed by the Lord, to all the pleasures of
the world.

<span id="vii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Peter 2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009)<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** The Lord knoweth how to deliver
the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished:

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p3"></span>**9.** Novit Dominus pios ex tentatione
eripere; injustos autem in diem judicii puniendos servare;

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p4"></span>**10.** But chiefly them that walk
after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government.
Presumptuous *are they*, selfwilled, they are not afraid to speak evil
of dignities.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p5"></span>**10.** Praesertim verò eos qui post
carnem in concupiscentia pollutionis ambulant, dominationem despiciunt,
audaces, praefracti, qui excellentias non verentur probro afficere;

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p6"></span>**11.** Whereas angels, which are
greater in power and might, bring not railing accusation against them
before the Lord.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p7"></span>**11.** Quum angeli, qui sunt robore et
potentia majores, non ferant adversus illas coram Domino contumeliosum
judicium.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p10"></span>**9.** *The Lord knoweth.* What first
offends the weak is, that when the faithful anxiously seek aid, they are
not immediately helped by God; but on the contrary he suffers them
sometimes as it were to pine away through daily weariness and languor;
and secondly, when the wicked grow wanton with impunity and God in the
meantime is silent, as though he connived at their evil deeds. This
double offense Peter now removes; for he testifies that the Lord knows
when it is expedient to deliver the godly from temptation. By these
words he reminds us that this office ought to be left to him, and that
therefore we ought to endure temptations, and not to faint, when at any
time he defers his vengeance against the ungodly.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p11"></span>This consolation is very necessary for
us, for this thought is apt to creep in, “If the Lord would have his own
to be safe, why does he not gather them all into some corner of the
earth, that they may mutually stimulate one another to holiness? why
does he mingle them with the wicked by whom they may be defiled?” But
when God claims to himself the office of helping, and protecting his
own, that they may not fail in the contest, we gather courage to fight
more strenuously. The meaning of the first clause is, that this law is
prescribed by the Lord to all the godly, that they are to be proved by
various temptations, but that they are to entertain good hope of
success, because they are never to be deprived of his aid and help.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p12"></span>*And to reserve the unjust.* By this
clause he shews that God so regulates his judgments as to bear with the
wicked for a time, but not to leave them unpunished. Thus he corrects
too much haste, by which we are wont to be carried headlong, especially
when the atrocity of wickedness grievously wounds us, for we then wish
God to fulminate without delay; when he does not do so, he seems no
longer to be the judge of the world. Lest, then, this temporary impunity
of wickedness should disturb us, Peter reminds us that a day of judgment
has been appointed by the Lord; and that, therefore, the wicked shall by
no means escape punishment, though it be not immediately inflicted.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p13"></span>There is an emphasis in the word
*reserve,* as though he had said, that they shall not escape the hand of
God, but be held bound as it were by hidden chains, that they may at a
certain time be drawn forth to judgment. The participle <span
id="vii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>κολαζομένους, though in the present tense,
is yet to be thus explained, that they are reserved or kept to be
punished, or, that they may be punished. For he bids us to rely on the
expectation of the last judgment, so that in hope and patience we may
fight till the end of life.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p14"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p15"></span>**10.** *But chiefly them.* He comes
here to particulars, accommodating a general doctrine to his own
purpose; for he had to do with men of desperate wickedness. He then
shews that dreadful vengeance necessarily awaited them. For since God
will punish all the wicked, how can they escape who abandon themselves
like brute beasts to every kind of iniquity? *To walk after the flesh,*
is to be given up to the flesh, like brute animals, who are not led by
reason and judgment, but have the natural desire of their flesh as their
chief guide. By *the lust of uncleanness* understand filthy and
unbridled gratifications, when men, having cast away every virtuous
feeling, and shaken off shame, are carried away into every uncleanness.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p16"></span>This is the first mark by which he
brands them, that they are impure men, given up to wickedness. Other
marks follow, that they despised government, and feared not to
calumniate and reproach men whom God had favored with honorable stations
in life. But these words refer to the same thing; for after having said
that they held government in contempt, he immediately points out the
fountain of this evil, that they were *presumptuous,* or *audacious*,
and *self-willed,* or *refractory*;  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) and lastly, that he might more fully
exhibit their pride, he says that they did not fear nor tremble when
they treated dignities with contempt. For it is a monstrous arrogance to
regard as nothing the glory which shines forth in dignities appointed by
God.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p18"></span>But there is no doubt but that in
these words he refers to the imperial and magisterial power; for though
there is no lawful station in life which is not worthy of respect, yet
we know that the magisterial office excels every other, because in
governing mankind God himself is represented. Then truly glorious is
that power in which God himself appears.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p19"></span>We now perceive what the Apostle meant
in this second clause, even that they of whom he speaks were frantic
men, lovers of tumults and confusion; for no one can introduce anarchy
(<span id="vii.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>ἀναρχίαν) into the world without
introducing disorder (<span id="vii.iii.iii-p19.2"></span>ἀταξίαν.) Now,
these with bold effrontery vomited forth reproaches against magistrates,
that they might take away every respect for public rights; and this was
openly to fight against God by their blasphemies. There are also many
turbulent men of this sort at the present day, who proudly declare that
the power of the sword is heathen and unlawful, and furiously attempt to
subvert all government. Such furies Satan excites, in order to disturb
and prevent the progress of the gospel. But the Lord hath dealt
favorably with us; for he hath not only warned us to beware of this
deadly poison, but hath also by this ancient example fortified us
against this scandal. Hence the Papists act very dishonestly, when they
accuse us, and say that seditious men are made so by our doctrine. The
same thing might indeed have been alleged against the apostles formerly;
and yet they were as far as possible from encouraging any such
wickedness.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p20"></span><span id="vii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p21"></span>**11.** *Whereas angels.* He hence
shews their rash arrogance, because they dared to assume more liberty
than even angels. But it seems strange that he says that angels do not
bring a railing accusation against magistrates; for why should they be
adverse to that sacred order, the author of which they know to be God?
Why should they oppose rulers whom they know to be exercising the same
ministry with themselves? This reasoning has made some to think that the
devils are meant; but they do not thus by any means escape the
difficulty. For how could Satan be so moderate as to spare men, since he
is the author of every blasphemy against God? And further, their opinion
is refuted by what Jude says. \[<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>[Jude
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009)<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>.\]

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p22"></span>But when we consider the circumstances
of the time, what is said applies very suitably to holy angels. For all
the magistrates were then ungodly, and bloody enemies to the gospel.
They must, therefore, have been hateful to angels, the guardians of the
Church. He, however, says, that men deserving hatred and execration,
were not condemned by them in order that they might shew respect to a
power divinely appointed. While such moderation, he says, is shewn by
angels, these men fearlessly give vent to impious and unbridled
blasphemies.

<span id="vii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Peter 2:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** But these, as natural brute
beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that
they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption;

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p3"></span>**12.** Isti autem tanquam bruta
animalia, naturaliter genita in capturam et perniciem, in quibus nihil
intelligunt maledicentes, in sua corruptione peribunt

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p4"></span>**13.** And shall receive the reward of
unrighteousness, *as* they that count it pleasure to riot in the day
time. Spots *they are* and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own
deceivings while they feast with you;

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p5"></span>**13.** Recipientes mercedem
injustitiae, pro voluptate ducentes in diem frui deliciis, labes et
maculae, deliciantes in erroribus suis, conviventes vobiscum;

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p6"></span>**14.** Having eyes full of adultery,
and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they
have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p7"></span>**14.** Oculos habentes plenos
adulterae, et inquietos ad peccandum, inescantes animas instabiles, cor
habentes exercitatum cupiditatibus, execrabiles: filii;

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p8"></span>**15.** Which have forsaken the right
way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam *the son* of
Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness;

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p9"></span>**15.** Qui relicta via aberraverunt,
sequuti viam Balaam, filii Bozor, qui mercedem injustitiae dilexit;

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p10"></span>**16.** But was rebuked for his
iniquity: the dumb ass speaking with man’s voice forbade the madness of
the prophet.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p11"></span>**16.** Sed redargutus fuit de sua
iniquitate; animal subjugale mutum, humana voce loquens, prohibuit
prophetae dementiam. (<span id="vii.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Nu
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#016)<span
id="vii.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p13"></span><span id="vii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p14"></span>**12.** *But these.* He proceeds with
what he had begun to say respecting impious and wicked corrupters. And,
first, he condemns their loose manners and the obscene wickedness of
their whole life; and then he says that they were audacious and
perverse, so that by their scurrilous garrulity they insinuated
themselves into the favor of many.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p15"></span>He especially compares them to those
*brute animals,* which seem to have come to existence to be ensnared,
and to be driven to their own ruin by their own instinct; as though he
had said, that being induced by no allurements, they of themselves
hasten to throw themselves into the snares of Satan and of death. For
what we render, *naturally born,* Peter has literally, “natural born.”
But there is not much difference in the sense, whether one of the two
has been by somebody else supplied, or by putting down both he meant
more fully to express his meaning.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p19"></span>What he adds, *speaking evil of the
things that they understand not,* refers to the pride and presumption he
mentioned in the preceding verse. He then says that all excellency was
insolently despised by them, because they were become wholly stupefied,
so that they differed nothing from beasts. But the word I have rendered
for destruction, and afterwards in corruption, is the same, <span
id="vii.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>φθορὰ; but it is variously taken: but when
he says that they would perish in their own corruption, he shews that
their corruptions would be ruinous or destructive.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p20"></span><span id="vii.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p21"></span>**13.** *Count it pleasure*  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) As though he had said, “They place
their happiness in their present enjoyments.” We know that men excel
brute animals in this, that they extend their thoughts much farther. It
is, then, a base thing in man to be occupied only with present things.
Here he reminds us that our minds ought to be freed from the
gratifications of the flesh, except we wish to be reduced to the state
of beasts.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p25"></span>The meaning of what follows is this,
“These are filthy spots to you and your assembly; for while they feast
with you, they at the same time luxuriate in their errors, and shew by
their eyes and gestures their lascivious lusts and detestable
incontinency.” Erasmus has rendered the words thus, “Feasting in their
errors, they deride you.” But this is too forced. It may not unaptly be
thus explained, “Feasting with you, they insolently deride you by their
errors.” I, however, have given the version which seems the most
probable, “luxuriating in their errors, feasting with you.” He calls the
libidinous such as had eyes full of adultery, and who were incessantly
led to sin without restraint, as it appears from what is afterwards
said.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p26"></span><span id="vii.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p27"></span>**14.** *Beguiling,* or *baiting*,
*unstable souls.* By the metaphor of *baiting* he reminds the faithful
to beware of their hidden and deceitful arts; for he compares their
impostures to hooks which may catch the unwary to their destruction. By
adding *unstable souls* he shews the reason for caution, that is, when
we have not struck firm roots in faith and in the fear of the Lord: and
he intimates at the same time, that they have no excuse who suffer
themselves to be baited or lured by such flatteries; for this must have
been ascribed to their levity. Let there be then a stability of faith,
and we shall be safe from the artifices of the ungodly.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p28"></span>*An heart they have exercised with
covetous practices,* or, *with lusts*. Erasmus renders the last word,
“rapines.” The word is of a doubtful meaning. I prefer “lusts.” As he
had before condemned incontinence in their eyes, so he now seems to
refer to the vices latent in their hearts. It ought not, however, to be
confined to covetousness. By calling them *cursed* or execrable
*children*, he may be understood to mean, that they were so either
actively or passively, that is, that they brought a curse with them
wherever they went, or that they deserved a curse.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p29"></span><span id="vii.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p30"></span>As he has hitherto referred to the
injury they did by the example of a perverse and corrupt life, so he
again repeats, that they spread by their teaching the deadly poison of
impiety, in order that they might destroy the simple. He compares them
to Balaam, the son of Bozor, who employed a venal tongue to curse God’s
people. And to shew that they were not worthy of a long refutation, he
says that Balaam was reproved by an ass, and that thus his madness was
condemned. But by this means also he restrains the faithful from
associating with them. For it was a dreadful judgment of God, that the
angel made himself known to the ass before he did to the prophet, so
that the ass, perceiving God displeased, dared not to advance farther,
but went back, when the prophet, under the blind impulse of his own
avarice, pushed forward against the evident prohibition of the Lord. For
what was afterwards answered to him, that he was to proceed, was an
evidence of God's indignation rather than a permission. In short, as the
greatest indignity to him, the mouth of the ass was opened, that he who
had been unwilling to submit to God's authority might have that as his
teacher. And by this miracle the Lord designed to shew how monstrous a
thing it was to change the truth to a lie.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p31"></span><span id="vii.iii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p32"></span>It may be here asked, by what right
Balaam had the name of a prophet, when it appears that he was addicted
to many wicked superstitions. To this I reply, that the gift of prophecy
was so special, that though he did not worship the true God, and had not
true religion, he might yet have been endued with it. Besides, God has
sometimes caused prophecy to exist in the midst of idolatry, in order
that men might have less excuse.

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p33"></span>Now, if any one considers the chief
things which Peter says, he will see that his warning is equally
suitable to the present age; for it is an evil which prevails
everywhere, that men use scurrilous raillery for the purpose of deriding
God and the Savior; nay, they ridicule all religion under the cloak of
wit; and when addicted, like beasts, to their own lusts, they will
mingle with the faithful; they prattle something about the gospel, and
yet they prostitute their tongue to the service of the devil, that they
may bring the whole world, as far as they can, to eternal perdition.
They are in this respect worse than Balaam himself, because they
gratuitously pour forth their maledictions, when he, induced by reward,
attempted to curse.

<span id="vii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[2 Peter
2:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)<span
id="vii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p2"></span>**17.** These are wells without water,
clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is
reserved for ever.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p3"></span>**17.** Ii sunt fontes sine aqua, nebulae
quae turbine aguntur; quibus caligo tenebrarum in aeternum parata est.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p4"></span>**18.** For when they speak great
swelling *words* of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh,
*through much* wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who
live in error.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p5"></span>**18.** Nam ubi plusqum fastuosa
vanitatis verba sonuerint, inescant per concupiscentias carnis,
lasciviis, eos qui verè aufugerant ab iis qui in errore versantur.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p6"></span>**19.** While they promise them liberty,
they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p7"></span>**19.** Dum libertatem illis promittunt,
quum ipsi sint servi corruptionis: a quo enim quis superatus est, huie
in servitutem est addictus.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.v-p9"></span><span id="vii.iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p10"></span>**17.** *These are wells,* or
*fountains*, *without water.* He shews by these two metaphors, that they
had nothing within, though they made a great display. A fountain, by its
appearance, draws men to itself, because it promises them water to
drink, and for other purposes; as soon as clouds appear, they give hope
of immediate rain to irrigate the earth. He then says that they were
like fountains, because they excelled in boasting, and displayed some
acuteness in their thoughts and elegance in their words; but that yet
they were dry and barren within: hence the appearance of a fountain was
fallacious.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p11"></span>He says that they were *clouds carried*
by the wind, either without rain, or which burst forth into a calamitous
storm. He thereby denotes that they brought nothing useful, and that
often they were very hurtful. He afterwards denounces on them the
dreadful judgment of God, that fear might restrain the faithful. By
naming *the mist* or *the blackness* *of darkness,* he alludes to the
clouds which obscure the air; as though he had said, that for the
momentary darkness which they now spread, there is prepared for them a
much thicker darkness which is to continue for ever.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p12"></span><span id="vii.iii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p13"></span>**18.** *For when they speak great
swelling words of vanity.*  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) He
means that they dazzled the eyes of the simple by high-flown stuff of
words, that they might not perceive their deceit, for it was not easy to
captivate their minds with such dotages, except they were first besotted
by some artifice. He then says that they used an inflated kind of words
and speech, that they might fill the unwary with admiration. And then
this grandiloquence, which the ample lungs of the soul send forth, (as
Persius says,  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) ) was very
suitable to cover their shifts and trumperies. There was formerly a
craft of this kind in Valentinus, and in those like him, as we learn
from the books of Irenaeus. They made words unheard of before, by the
empty sound of which, the unlearned being smitten, they were ensnared by
their reveries.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p18"></span>There are fanatics of a similar kind at
this day, who call themselves by the plausible title of Libertines or
free-men. For they talk most confidently of the Spirit and of spiritual
things, as though they roared out from above the clouds, and fascinate
many by their tricks and wiles, so that you may say that the Apostle has
correctly prophesied of them. For they treat all things jocosely and
scoffingly; and though they are great simpletons, yet as they indulge in
all vices, they find favor with their own people by a sort of drollery.
The state of the case is this, that when the difference between good and
evil is removed, everything becomes lawful; and men, loosed from all
subjection to laws, obey their own lusts. This Epistle, therefore, is
not a little suitable to our age.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p19"></span>*They allure,* or *bait*, *through the
lusts of the flesh.* He strikingly compares to hooks the allurements of
the ungodly, when they make anything they please lawful; for as the
lusts of men are headstrong and craving, as soon as liberty is offered,
they lay hold on it with great avidity; but soon afterwards the
strangling hook within is perceived. But we must consider the whole
sentence of the Apostle.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p20"></span>He says that they who had really escaped
from the society of those in error were again deceived by a new kind of
error, even when the reins were let loose to them for the indulgence of
every sort of intemperance. He hereby reminds us how dangerous are the
wiles of these men. For it was already a dreadful thing that blindness
and thick darkness possessed almost all mankind. It was, therefore, in a
manner a double prodigy, that men, freed from the common errors of the
world, should, after having received the light of God, be brought back
to a beastly indifference. Let us be reminded of what we ought
especially to beware of, after having been once enlightened, that is,
lest Satan entice us under the pretense of liberty, so as to give
ourselves up to lasciviousness to gratify the lusts of the flesh. But
they are safe from this danger who seriously attend to the study of
holiness.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p21"></span><span id="vii.iii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p22"></span>**19.** *While they promise them
liberty.* He shews their inconsistency, that they falsely promised
liberty, while they themselves served sin, and were in the worst
bondage; for no one can give what he has not. This reason, however, does
not seem to be sufficiently valid, because it sometimes happens that
wicked men, and wholly unacquainted with Christ, preach usefully
concerning the benefits and blessings of Christ. But we must observe,
that what is condemned here is vicious doctrine, connected with impurity
of life; for the Apostle's design was to obviate the deceptive
allurements by which they ensnared the foolish. The name of liberty is
sweet, and they abused it for this end, that the hearer, being loosed
from the fear of the divine law, might abandon himself unto unbridled
licentiousness. But the liberty which Christ has procured for us, and
which he offers daily by the gospel, is altogether different, for he has
exempted us from the yoke of the law as far as it subjects us to a
curse, that he might also deliver us from the dominion of sin, as far as
it subjects us to its own lusts. Hence, where lusts reign, and therefore
where the flesh rules, there the liberty of Christ has no place
whatever. The Apostle then declares this to all the godly, that they
might not desire any other liberty but that which leads those, who are
set free from sin, to a willing obedience to righteousness.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p23"></span>We hence learn that there have ever been
depraved men who made a false pretense to liberty, and that this has
been an old cunning trick of Satan. We need not wonder that at this day
the same filth is stirred up by fanatical men.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p24"></span>The Papists turn and twist this passage
against us, but they thereby betray their ridiculous impudence. For in
the first place, men of the filthiest life, in public-houses and
brothels, belch out this charge, that we are the servants of corruption,
in the life of whom they cannot point out anything reproachful. In the
second place, since we teach nothing respecting Christian liberty but
what is derived from Christ and his Apostles, and at the same time
require the mortification of the flesh, and the proper exercises for
subduing it, much more strictly than they do who slander us, they vomit
forth their curses, not so much against us as against the Son of God,
whom we have as our certain teacher and authority.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p25"></span>*For of whom a man is overcome.* This
sentence is derived from military law; but yet it is a common saying
among heathen writers, that there is no harder or a more miserable
bondage than when lusts rule and reign. What then ought to be done by
us, on whom the Son of God has bestowed his Spirit, not only that we may
be freed from the dominion of sin, but that we may also become the
conquerors of the flesh and the world?

<span id="vii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[2
Peter 2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020)<span
id="vii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p2"></span>**20.** For if after they have escaped
the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome,
the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p3"></span>**20.** Nam si ii qui sufugerant ab
inquinamentis mundi per cognitionem Domini et Servatoris Jesu Christi,
rursum iisdem impliciti superantur, facta sunt illis postrema pejora
prioribus.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p4"></span>**21.** For it had been better for them
not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known
*it*, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p5"></span>**21.** Melius enim ipsis esset non
cognovisse viam justitiae, qum ubi cognoverunt converti ab eo, quod
illis traditum fuit, sancto praecepto.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p6"></span>**22.** But it is happened unto them
according to the true proverb, The dog *is* turned to his own vomit
again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p7"></span>**22.** Sed accidit illis quod vero
proverbio dicitur, Canis reversus ad proprium vomitum; et sus lota, ad
volutabrum coeni.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p9"></span><span id="vii.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p10"></span>**20.** *For if after.* He again shews
how pernicious was the sect which led men consecrated to God back again
to their old filth and the corruptions of the world. And he exhibits the
heinousness of the evil by a comparison; for it was no common sin to
depart from the holy doctrine of God. It would have been better for
them, he says, not to have known the way of righteousness; for though
there is no excuse for ignorance, yet the servant who knowingly and
wilfully despises the commands of his lord, deserves a twofold
punishment. There was besides ingratitude, because they wilfully
extinguished the light of God, rejected the favor conferred on them, and
having shaken off the yoke, became perversely wanton against God; yea,
as far as they could, they profaned and abrogated the inviolable
covenant of God, which had been ratified by the blood of Christ. The
more earnest then ought we to be, to advance humbly and carefully in the
course of our calling. We must now consider each sentence.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p11"></span>By naming *the pollutions of the
world,* he shews that we roll in filth and are wholly polluted, until we
renounce the world. By *the knowledge of Christ* he no doubt understands
the gospel. He testifies that the design of it is, to deliver us from
the defilements of the world, and to lead us far away from them. For the
same reason he afterwards calls it *the way of righteousness.* He then
alone makes a right progress in the gospel who faithfully learns Christ;
and he truly knows Christ, who has been taught by him to put off the old
man and to put on the new man, as Paul reminds us in <span
id="vii.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>[Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="vii.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p13"></span><span id="vii.iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p14"></span>**21.** By saying that having forsaken
*the commandment delivered unto them,* they returned to their own
pollutions, he intimates first, how inexcusable they were; and secondly,
he reminds us that the doctrine of a holy and virtuous life, though
common to all and indiscriminately belonging to all, is yet peculiarly
taught to those whom God favors with the light of his gospel. But he
declares that they who make themselves slaves again to the pollutions of
the world fall away from the gospel. The faithful also do indeed sin;
but as they allow not dominion to sin, they do not fall away from the
grace of God, nor do they renounce the profession of sound doctrine
which they have once embraced. For they are not to be deemed conquered,
while they strenuously resist the flesh and its lusts.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p15"></span><span id="vii.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p16"></span>**22.** *But it has happened unto
them.* As the example disturbs many, when men who had submitted to the
obedience of Christ, rush headlong into vices without fear or shame, the
Apostle, in order to remove the offense, says that this happens through
their own fault, and that because they are pigs and dogs. It hence
follows that no part of the sin can be ascribed to the gospel.

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p17"></span>For this purpose he quotes two ancient
proverbs, the first of which is found as the saying of Solomon in <span
id="vii.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>[Pr
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011)<span
id="vii.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>. But what Peter meant is briefly this,
that the gospel is a medicine which purges us by wholesome vomiting, but
that there are many dogs who swallow again what they have vomited to
their own ruin; and that the gospel is also a laver which cleanses all
our uncleanness, but that there are many swine who, immediately after
washing, roll themselves again in the mud. At the same time the godly
are reminded to take heed to themselves, except they wish to be deemed
dogs or swine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc45027.htm#fr_162) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p16"></span> “Peter intimated that the heresies of
which he speaks were to be introduced under the color of true doctrine,
in the dark. as it were, and by little and little; so that the people
would not discern their real nature.” — *Macknight.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc45027.htm#fr_163) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p19"></span> The word here for “Lord” is <span
id="vii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>δεσπότης, which is more expressive of power
and authority than <span id="vii.iii.i-p19.2"></span>Κύριος, commonly
rendered “Lord.” This seems to intimate the character of the men alluded
to: they denied Christ as their sovereign, as they rendered no obedience
to him, though they may have professed to believe in him as a Savior. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc45027.htm#fr_164) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p23"></span> Few copies have “perdition,” or
perditions, for the word is in the plural number; and very many have
“lasciviousness,” and also the *Vulg*. and *Syr*. versions. Having
before mentioned their destructive opinions or heresies, which involved
the denial of the Lord who bought them, he now refers to the immorality
which accompanied their false doctrines; and that immorality is here
referred to is evident from this, that the way of truth would be evil
spoken of or calumniated. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc45027.htm#fr_165) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p27"></span> Either “feigned” or “invented” may be
meant by <span id="vii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>πλαστοῖς: if “feigned,” then
they were words used not conveying their real sentiments, but adopted
for the purpose of alluring others, as is the case with those who
pretend great zeal for truth and great love for souls, when their object
is to gain adherents for filthy lucre’s sake. But if “invented” be
adopted, then <span id="vii.iii.i-p27.2"></span>λόγοι must mean
narratives or fables, — “invented (or fictitious) fables,” or tales. And
this is the rendering of *Macknight.* And he says, that the Apostle had
probably in view the fables concerning the visions of angels and the
miracles performed at the sepulchres of departed saints, which the false
teachers in the early ages, and the monks in latter times, fabricated,
to draw money from the people. Similar are the devices of superstitious
men, greedy of gain, in every age. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc45027.htm#fr_166) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p15"></span> The “if” at the beginning of the verse
requires a corresponding clause. Some, as *Piscator* and *Macknight*,
supply at the end of <span id="vii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>[2Pe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>, “he will not spare thee,” or, “will he
spare thee?” But there is no need of this, the corresponding clause is
in <span id="vii.iii.ii-p15.2"></span>[2Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p15.2"></span>; and this is our version. The deliverance
of the just is there first mentioned, as that of Lot was the subject of
the previous verse, and then the reservation of the unjust for judgment,
examples of which he had before given. This sort of arrangement is
common in Scripture. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc45027.htm#fr_167) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p23"></span> There is a difference of opinion as to
the word “eighth:” some think that the sense is, that Noah was the
eighth person who was saved at the deluge, being one of the eight who
were preserved. Others render the words, “Noah, the eighth preacher of
righteousness,” calculating from Enos, in whose time as it is said, “men
began to call upon the name of the Lord.” (<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Ge
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026)<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>.) *Lightfoot* and some others, have held
the latter opinion, though the former has been more generally approved.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc45027.htm#fr_168) <span
id="vii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p17"></span> Rather, “self-pleasing,” <span
id="vii.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>αὐθάδεις, whose ruling principle was to
please and gratify themselves, without regarding God's will or the good
of others whose god was self. In a second sense, the word designates
those who are haughty, arrogant, supercilious, refractory; and such is
commonly the character of selfish men. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc45027.htm#fr_169) <span
id="vii.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p16"></span> The words may be thus rendered, —

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p17"></span>“But these, as natural unreasoning
animals, born for capture and destruction, speaking evil of things which
they understand not, shall utterly perish through their own corruption.”

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p18"></span>They are compared to animals which are
by nature without reason, and such as live on prey, wild and rapacious,
which seem to have been made to be taken and destroyed; and they are
often taken and destroyed while committing plunder. So these men, their
wickedness would be the means of ensnaring and destroying them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc45027.htm#fr_170) <span
id="vii.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p22"></span> It is better to connect the first
words of this verse, “receiving the reward of unrigrhteousness,” with
the foregoing, and to begin another period with this clause, and to
render this verse and the following thus, —

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p23"></span>“Counting (or, deeming) riot in the
day-time a pleasure, they are spots and stains, rioting in their own
delusions, feasting together with (14) you; having eyes full of adultery
and which cease not from sin, ensnaring unstable souls, having a heart
inured to covetous desires, being children of the curse.”

<span id="vii.iii.iv-p24"></span>The various things said of them are
intended to shew that they were “spots and stains,” disgraceful and
defiling: they rioted in carnal pleasure, and rioted in delusion, and
associated with the faithful, feasting with them; they were libidinous,
and led unstable souls to follow their ways; they were covetous, and
shewed that they were heirs to the curse of God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc45027.htm#fr_171) <span
id="vii.iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p14"></span> The words are, —

<span id="vii.iii.v-p15"></span>“For uttering bombasts of vanity, they
allure,” etc.

<span id="vii.iii.v-p16"></span>The word <span
id="vii.iii.v-p16.1"></span>ὒπέρογκα, being a neuter plural, may be
rendered as a noun; literally, “overswellings of vanity;” but when
applied to words, it means what is pompous, inflated, bombastic; but
these bombasts were those of vanity, being empty, useless, unprofitable;
or as some render the words, they were the bombasts of falsehood,
according to the meaning of the word as used often in the *Sept*.; they
spoke false things in a bombastic and inflated strain. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc45027.htm#fr_172) <span
id="vii.iii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.v-p17"></span> Sat. 1:14.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc45027.htm#fr_173) <span
id="vii.iii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.vi-p12"></span> The end of this verse is not
explained, but the words of the version, <span
id="vii.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>*facta sunt illis postrema pejora
prioribus*, seem to mean, that their last pollutions would become worse
to them than their former pollutions; and this is the rendering of
*Macknight*. The sentence is commonly taken in the same sense as in
<span id="vii.iii.vi-p12.2"></span>[Mt
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045)<span
id="vii.iii.vi-p12.2"></span>, but the words are somewhat different. —
*Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc45028)
