[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc45001)  [Next](cc45003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>DEDICATION

<span id="iii-p2"></span>TO HIS MOST SERENE HIGHNESS,

<span id="iii-p3"></span>EDWARD THE SIXTH

<span id="iii-p4"></span>THE KING OF ENGLAND, THE LORD OF IRELAND, AND A
MOST CHRISTIAN PRINCE,

<span id="iii-p5"></span>JOHN CALVIN.

<span id="iii-p6"></span>Behold, I return to you again, most excellent
King. For though I did not expect that the Commentaries on Isaiah, which
I lately dedicated to your Majesty, were a worthy gift, yet it was
offered with my hearty good wishes. I have, therefore, thought of adding
the Catholic Epistles, as they are commonly called, as a supplement to
make up a full measure, so that both might come to your hands at the
same time. And doubtless, since they were written either to Gentiles far
distant, or to such as inhabited various countries far asunder, it is
nothing new to them to pass over the sea, and to make a long circuit in
coming to your Majesty. At the same time I thus as a private individual
offer to you, most illustrious King, my labors, that being published
under your name, they may profit all.

<span id="iii-p7"></span>And truly, if there has ever been a time when
the truth of God ought to have been freely and boldly maintained, it has
never been more necessary than in the present day, as all must see. Not
to mention the atrocious cruelty exercised towards its professors, to
omit also all those machinations by which Satan fights against it,
sometimes covertly and sometimes openly, there are places in which the
pure doctrine of Religion lately prevailed, but where now the satellites
of the Roman Antichrist, by their spurious deformations so mock Christ
as though they gave a reed in his hand instead of a scepter, and laid a
crown of thorns on his head. When these crafty corrupters of the purity
of the Gospel hope by their arts gradually to extinguish it, with what
cowardice do they connive at these mockeries offered to Christ, who
ought to have hazarded their life a hundred times rather than to redeem
it for a very short time by their perfidious silence?

<span id="iii-p8"></span>In the meantime, the Pope himself, to complete
the last tragedy of crucifying the Son of God, is said to have summoned
again his own masked council. Though he marches with his savage soldiery
to obliterate the name of Christ and to destroy his Church, yet every
kind of council is to him as a sacred sword, to make slaughter as it
were a solemn rite. Thus Paulus the Third, when he had resolved to kill
and destroy all by whom the defense of truth was preferred to their own
life, made a show at Trent of that odious spectre, though disguised in
fine colors, that he might put an end to the Gospel as it were by its
thunders. But all that preparation, when the good fathers had begun,
through some gleams emitted at the sessions, to dazzle the eyes of the
simple, was put an end to by a secret and sudden blast from the holy
seat, and vanished into smoke, except that for the purpose of continuing
the terror, a little cloud rested for a time on Bononia.

<span id="iii-p9"></span>Hence Julius, his successor, who had performed
his part previously at Trent, is said to be preparing himself now for
this stratagem, as though this only remained as means to obliterate the
Gospel from the memory of men, that is, to fulminate against us with the
horrible and terrific decrees of council; though many think that he only
makes a pretense. But it signifies but little whether he pretends or
really means to call a council. It is indeed a thing clear and well
proved, that since the Papacy began to decline through the efforts of
Luther, whoever occupied that citadel of tyranny, though they might hope
to obtain some support from a council, they yet have shunned this kind
of remedy in way similar to a sick man, who, being all over full of
ulcers, dreads even the touch of the most tender physician. Therefore
common even among children is the saying, that the Papacy cannot
otherwise be assisted by a council than by cauterizing or amputation.

<span id="iii-p10"></span>But I see no cause why the Popes dread
councils so much, except that fear is an inseparable companion of a bad
conscience. For what, I pray, was the late rabble at Trent, (to which
yet they gave the name of a holy, general, and ecumenical synod,) but a
sort of empty apparition, which no more disturbed the pleasures of the
Pope than the clangor of trumpets, or the sound of drums, with which he
daily amuses himself? Were, indeed, a synod from all parts really
assembled, here might be some cause of fear, lest a disturbance, arising
in so great a multitude, should occasion a greater tumult. But by such
fictitious councils as that of Trent, who can believe that a Pope could
be terrified any more than by children’s rattles, but that on the
contrary he would sweetly slumber as through the blandishments of a
quieter sleep? For example, two or three cardinals shall be chosen by
the Pope, being his bosom friends, who shall wield all the authority.
The same tyrant will hire from his courtiers some greedy fellow for a
few ducats a month, who, being clothed in the mask of a patriarch, will
servilely declare as his own opinion what had been dictated to him. Such
was that blind Robert at Trent, whom I saw some time ago at Ratisbon,
busying himself, not less foolishly than wickedly, in behalf of the
Pope, when by his inveiglements he tried to draw me to a conference with
Contarenus. There will fly together from all Italy the three-halfpenny
bishops, of whom there will be a vast abundance. There will come also
from France and Spain some of the light-headed and fatuitous, and others
infamous for the vices of their former life; who afterwards returning
home will boast that they had rendered a good and faithful service to
the Catholic Church. Moreover, there will come forth from the caves of
monks a great conflux of frogs into that marsh, who by their eager
croaking will banish far away every truth. What! do I imagine here a new
thing, or do I not, on the contrary, correctly describe the assembly
which was lately seen at Trent?

<span id="iii-p11"></span>Why then is it that the Pope dreads these
guardians of his own tribunal, who are all, in the *first* place, his
own servile creatures; and who, in the *second* place, seek no other
thing than to gain by any means his favor?

<span id="iii-p12"></span>Our Julius especially, who is a veteran in
matters of this kind, can in mockery, whenever he pleases, compose such
a council as this, so as, in the meantime, to leave as usual the thing
undone. And, indeed, as he has given to many of the Dominicans the red
cap, it seems to be no obscure prelude of such an event. This order, as
they say, has ever been in favor with him; but such profusion arises
from a higher cause. He, indeed, knows well, that none are more
shameless than these beggarly fellows, as he has often employed at his
nod their illiberal and sordid services. When he raised them again to
this dignity, he knew that whatever he might bid them to do, none would
be more audacious or more cruel than they. Besides, he is not ignorant
that most of these hungry dogs, feeding on the same rewards, would rush
into any contentions he wishes. I do not, however, say that they are
mistaken who declare that he does not desire a council. But when he has
arranged his own theater, some sudden storm will be raised with no great
trouble, which will disturb the whole proceeding. Hence, at the very
beginning, if his own advantage so require it, he will fold up the
curtains. A council, however, though an empty phantom, he thinks to be
to him like Hercules’s club, to lay Christ prostrate, and to break in
pieces the remnant of the Church.

<span id="iii-p13"></span>When this prince of impiety so wickedly
tramples upon the glory of our God and the salvation of men, does it
become us by silence to betray the sacred cause? nay, we ought to
undergo hundred deaths, were that possible, rather than to suffer so
unworthy, wicked, and barbarous oppression of sound doctrine to continue
unknown through our sloth.

<span id="iii-p14"></span>But let us grant what is hardly credible, that
the Pope with his band does seriously intend to call a council. In that
case Christ will not, at the first view, be so grossly mocked; yet in
this way a wicked conspiracy would be formed against him: nay, the
greater the fame of the gravity and splendor of the Papal council, the
more injurious would it be to the Church, and a more dreadful pest would
it prove. For it cannot possibly be hoped, that an assembly gathered
under the authority of Antichrist, should be governed by the Spirit, or
that the slaves of Satan should exercise any moderation. In the first
place, the Pope, the professed and sworn enemy of Christ, would occupy
there the chief place of authority. Though he would especially pretend
to ask the opinions of the Fathers sitting there, yet being terrified by
his presence, they would all follow what would please him. But in an
assembly fully agreeing in every impiety, what need would there be of
dissimulation? Such, I have no doubt, is every one of the cardinals. In
that very college, which pretends to be a holier senate, there prevails,
it is evident, an Epicurean contempt of God, a savage hatred of truth, a
rabid fury against all the pious. Then the order of bishops, does it not
consist nearly of the same monsters? except that many among them are
slothful asses, who neither openly despise God, nor hostilely oppose
sound doctrine; yet they are so enamoured with their own depraved state,
that they cannot endure any reformation. Add to this, that authority
will reside almost wholly with the few, who, being indeed altogether
destitute of any concern for true religion, will shew themselves the
most fierce supporters of the Roman See: others will make up the number.
As every one of these will speak the most atrocious things against us,
there will be many not only of those who may only give their votes, but
also of the princes, who will subscribe either willingly and gladly
according to their own inclinations, or from ambition, or from fear.

<span id="iii-p15"></span>I am not however, so unjust as not to concede
that some of these have a sounder judgment and are not otherwise ill
disposed; but they do not possess so much courage, that they will dare
to resist the wickedness of the whole body. There will be perhaps,
amidst a thousand, two or three who may dare to give a half-uttered word
for Christ, (as Peter Paul Vergerius at Trent) but the holy council of
the Fathers will have a remedy at hand, so that such may not create any
further trouble; for being cast into prison, they will be presently
driven to a recantation, or they will have to pay the penalty of death
for too much freedom of speech, or they will have to drink the cup of
perpetual silence.

<span id="iii-p16"></span>But such is the equity with which we are
treated, that we are untameable and hopelessly perverse heretics, except
we seek from the holy council the rule for the necessary reformation,
except we acquiesce without any demur in its decrees, whatever they may
be. We, indeed, do not shun the authority of a legitimate council, (if
such could be had,) as we have already made sufficiently evident by
clear proofs. But when they require that we are to bow to the judgment
of the chief adversary of Christ without any appeal, and indeed on this
condition, that religion is to be defined at their will and pleasure,
and not by the Word of God, what reason have we for submission, except
we are prepared willingly and knowingly to deny Christ? There is no
reason for any one to object and say, that we distrust before the time.
Let them give us a council in which there will be a free liberty given
to defend the cause of truth: if to that we refuse to come, and to give
a reason for all that we have done, then they will justly charge us with
contumacy. But so far will a permission be given us freely to speak,
that there is no doubt but that we shall be prevented from making even a
suitable defense. For how can they listen to the clear-sounding thunders
of truth, who can by no means bear warnings however bland and conveyed
in soft whispers? But this they publicly do — They invite us; is it that
they may grant us some place on the lowest seats? Nay, they declare that
it is not lawful to admit any one to their sittings except the anointed
and the mitred. Then let them sit, provided we are heard, declaring the
truth while standing. They answer, that they freely promise a hearing;
that is, that having presented a suppliant petition, being ordered
immediately to depart, after the turbulent clamours of some days, we
shall be recalled for the purpose of being condemned. I say clamours,
not that any altercation of dissidents is to be in that assembly, but
that the sacred ears of bishops having been so irreverently offended by
us, the indignity will appear to them intolerable. It is not unknown how
tumultuous is their violence. Surely, when they ought to determine the
cause with reason, this can never be obtained from them, when not even a
slight hearing can be hoped for.

<span id="iii-p17"></span>We shall endeavor to restore God’s worship to
its purity, purged from the innumerable superstitions by which it has
been corrupted. Here the profane orators will chatter about nothing but
the institutes, the old rites and ceremonies of the Fathers, as though
the Church taught by the celestial ministry of the prophets and of
Christ knew no other way of worshipping God than by adopting, in brutal
stupidity, the dregs of Romulus, made fascinating by the anile dotages
of Numa Pompilius. But where is that simplicity of obedience which the
Lord everywhere makes so much of and so distinctly requires?

<span id="iii-p18"></span>If the controversy be concerning the depravity
of human nature, the miserable and lost state of mankind, the grace and
power of Christ, or the freeness of our salvation, they will immediately
bring forward and dogmatically allege the putrid axioms of the schools,
as things that ought to be received without dispute. The Holy Spirit
teaches us in Scripture, that our mind is smitten with so much
blindness, that the affections of our heart are so depraved and
perverted, that our whole nature is so vitiated, that we can do nothing
but sin, until he forms a new will within us. He constrains us,
condemned to eternal death, to renounce all confidence in our own works,
and to flee to our only asylum, the mercy of God, and to trust in it for
all our righteousness. He also, inviting us to God, testifies that God
is reconciled to us only through the blood of Christ, and bids us to
rely on Christ’s merits, and to come boldly to the heavenly tribunal.
That none of these things may be heard, those endless decrees are
adduced, to violate which is deemed more unlawful than to disbelieve God
and all his angels.

<span id="iii-p19"></span>Of the sacraments they will not permit a word
to be said, differing from the notions entertained of them. And what
else is this but to preclude the possibility of any reformation? But it
is easy to show how preposterous is the administration of the sacraments
under the Papacy, so that hardly anything bears an affinity to the
genuine doctrine of Christ. What spurious corruptions have crept in,
nay, what disgraceful sacrileges have entered! It is not lawful to move
a question on this subject. Hence it is a common saying with
theologians, which they have published everywhere in their books: That
the Church may remain safe, care must especially be taken that the
council should not admit a doubt respecting the chief controversies of
the present day. Come forth also has lately, in the Italian language,
the insipid book of one Mutius, witlessly breathing nothing but carnage,
in which he dwells profusely on this point, that nothing else is to be
done by the reverend Fathers, when they meet in council, but to
pronounce what already appears to them right on the whole subject, and
to compel us to subscribe to their sanguinary edicts. I should not
indeed have thought it necessary to mention the hoarse chatterings of
this unlucky owl, had not Pope Julius recommended the work. Hence
readers may judge what sort of council Mutius recommends, and is to be
expected from Julius his approver.

<span id="iii-p20"></span>As then we see that these antichrists rush on
with desperate pertinacity in order to destroy sound doctrine, and with
equal insolence boldly exult that they will set up a masked council for
no other purpose than that, having put to flight the gospel, they may
celebrate their own victory; let us also in our turn gather courage to
follow the banner of our leader, having put on the armor of truth. Were
only the pure and simple doctrine of Scripture to shine forth as it
ought, every one, who refuses not to open his eyes, would acknowledge
the Papacy to be a savage and an execrable monster, made up, through
Satan’s arts, of innumerable masses of errors. For we make it evident by
the most solid proofs, that the glory of God is so distributed by a
sacrilegious rending among fictitious idols, that hardly a hundredth
portion of his right remains to him. And further, when they reserve for
him some portion of worship, we can show that no part of it is sincere,
inasmuch as all things are full of the superstitious inventions of men;
the law of God is also loaded with similar devices, for miserable
consciences are held bound under the yoke of men, rather than ruled by
God’s commandments; and they groan and toil under the unjust burden of
so many traditions, nay, they are oppressed with a cruel tyranny. We
declare that, prevaricating obedience can avail nothing except to lead
men to a deeper labyrinth. We shew clearly from Scripture, that Christ’s
power under the Papacy is almost abolished, that his grace is in a great
measure made void, that unhappy souls removed from him, are inflated
with a fatal confidence in their own power and works. We prove that
prayer to God, such as is prescribed by his word, (which yet is the only
true asylum of salvation) is wholly subverted. We plainly shew that the
sacraments are adulterated by extraneous inventions, and are also
transferred to a foreign purpose; for the power of the Spirit is
impiously tied to them, and what is peculiar to Christ is ascribed to
them. Then we disown the number *seven,* which they have presumptuously
adopted. The mass also, which they imagine to be a sacrifice, we prove
to be a disgraceful denial of the sacrifice of Christ. There are many
other sacrilegious things of which we make it evident that they are
guilty.

<span id="iii-p21"></span>Doubtless, were only the Scripture allowed its
own authority, there are none of these things respecting which our
adversaries would not be constrained to be mute. And this is what they
by no means dissemble, when they contend that owing to the ambiguous
meaning of Scripture, we ought to stand solely on the judgment of the
Church. Who, I pray, does not see, that by laying aside the word of God,
the whole right of defining things is thus transferred to them? Though
they may kiss the closed copies of the Scripture as a kind of worship,
when yet they charge it with being obscure and ambiguous, they allow it
no more authority than if no part of it existed in writing. Let them
assume specious titles as they please, that they may not appear to
allege anything besides the dictates of the Spirit, (as they are wont to
boast,) yet it is a settled and fixed thing with them, that all reasons
being laid aside, their will alone ought to be believed (<span
id="iii-p21.1"></span>αὐτόπιστος.)

<span id="iii-p22"></span>Then, lest the faithful should be carried
about by every wind of imposture, lest they should be exposed to the
crafty cavils of the ungodly, being taught by the sure experiment of
faith, let them know that nothing is more firm or certain than the
teaching of Scripture, and on that support let them confidently recumb.
And since we see that it is shamefully deformed by the false comments of
the Sophists, and that at this day the hired rabble of the Pope are bent
on this artifice, in order that by their smoke they may obscure the
light, it behoves us to be more intent on the restoration of its
brightness.

<span id="iii-p23"></span>I, indeed, have in an especial manner resolved
to devote myself to this work, as long as I live, whenever time and
opportunity shall be afforded me. In the first place, the Church to
which I belong shall thus receive the fruit of this labor, so that it
may hereafter continue the longer; for though a small portion of time
remains to me from the duties of my office, yet that, how small soever
it may be, I have determined to devote to this kind of writing.

<span id="iii-p24"></span>But to return to you, most, illustrious King,
here you have a small pledge, my Commentaries on the Catholic Epistles,
where many things have been deemed obscure and recondite, which I have
endeavored so to explain, that an easy access to the true meaning might
be open to a reader not altogether slothful. And as interpreters of
Scripture, according to their opportunity, are to supply weapons to
fight against Antichrist, so also you must bear in mind that it is a
duty which belongs to your Majesty, to vindicate from unworthy calumnies
the true and genuine interpretation of Scripture, so that pure religion
may flourish. It was not without reason that God commanded by Moses,
that as soon as a king was appointed over his people, he should take
care to have a copy of the Law written out for himself. Why so, if he
had, as a private individual, already exercised himself diligently in
this work, but that he might know that kings have themselves need of
this remarkable doctrine, and are especially enjoined to defend and
maintain it; the Lord has assigned to his Law a sacred habitation in
their palaces. Moreover, since the heroic greatness of your mind far
surpasses the measure of your age, there is no reason why I should add
more words to stimulate you.

<span id="iii-p25"></span>Farewell, most noble King. May the Lord
protect your Majesty as he has already done, govern you and your
counsellors with the spirit of wisdom and fortitude, and keep your whole
kingdom in safety and peace.

<span id="iii-p26"></span>Geneva, Jan. 24, 1551.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on First Peter](cc45003.md)
