[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45006)  [Next](cc45008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Likewise, ye wives, *be* in
subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they
also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Similiter mulieres subjectae sint
propriis maritis; ut etiam siqui sunt increduli sermoni, per uxorum
conversationem absque sermone lucrifiant;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** While they behold your chaste
conversation *coupled* with fear.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Considerantes puram *(vel, castam*)
vestram in timore conversationem;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Whose adorning let it not be that
outward *adorning* of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of
putting on of apparel;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quarum ornatus sit non externus, in
plicatura capillorum et circumpositione auri, aut palliorum amictu;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** But *let it be* the hidden man of
the heart, in that which is not corruptible, *even the ornament* of a
meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Sed interior cordis homo, qui in
incorruptione situs est placidi et quieti spiritus, qui spiritus coram
Deo pretiosus est *(vel, quod est coram Deo pretiosum*.)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span>He proceeds now to another instance of
subjection, and bids wives to be subject to their husbands. And as those
seemed to have some pretense for shaking off the yoke, who were united
to unbelieving men, he expressly reminds them of their duty, and brings
forward a particular reason why they ought the more carefully to obey,
even that they might by their probity allure their husbands to the
faith. But if wives ought to obey ungodly husbands, with much more
promptness ought they to obey, who have believing husbands.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span>But it may seem strange that Peter should
say, that a husband might be *gained* to the Lord *without the word;*
for why is it said, that “faith cometh by hearing?” <span
id="iv.iv.i-p13.1"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.i-p13.1"></span>.
To this I reply, that Peter’s words are not to be so understood as
though a holy life alone could lead the unbelieving to Christ, but that
it softens and pacifies their minds, so that they might have less
dislike to religion; for as bad examples create offenses, so good ones
afford no small help. Then Peter shews that wives by a holy and pious
life could do so much as to prepare their husbands, without speaking to
them on religion, to embrace the faith of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span>**2** *While they behold* For minds,
however alienated from the true faith, are subdued, when they see the
good conduct of believers; for as they understood not the doctrine of
Christ, they form an estimate of it by our life. It cannot, then, be but
that they will commend Christianity, which teaches purity and fear.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span>**3** *Whose adorning* The other part of
the exhortation is, that wives are to adorn themselves sparingly and
modestly: for we know that they are in this respect much more curious
and ambitious than they ought to be. Then Peter does not without cause
seek to correct in them this vanity. And though he reproves generally
sumptuous or costly adorning, yet he points out some things in
particular, — that they were not artificially to curl or wreath their
hair, as it was usually done by crisping-pins, or otherwise to form it
according to the fashion; nor were they to set gold around their head:
for these are the things in which excesses especially appear.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span>It may be now asked, whether the Apostle
wholly condemns the use of gold in adorning the body. Were any one to
urge these words, it may be said, that he prohibits precious garments no
less than gold; for he immediately adds, *the putting on of apparel,*
or, of clothes. But it would be an immoderate strictness wholly to
forbid neatness and elegance in clothing. If the material is said to be
too sumptuous, the Lord has created it; and we know that skill in art
has proceeded from him. Then Peter did not intend to condemn every sort
of ornament, but the evil of vanity, to which women are subject. Two
things are to be regarded in clothing, usefulness and decency; and what
decency requires is moderation and modesty. Were, then, a woman to go
forth with her hair wantonly curled and decked, and make an extravagant
display, her vanity could not be excused. They who object and say, that
to clothe one’s-self in this or that manner is an indifferent thing, in
which all are free to do as they please, may be easily confuted; for
excessive elegance and superfluous display, in short, all excesses,
arise from a corrupted mind. Besides, ambition, pride, affectation of
display, and all things of this kind, are not indifferent things.
Therefore they whose minds are purified from all vanity, will duly order
all things, so as not to exceed moderation.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span>**4** *But let it be the hidden, man of
the heart* The contrast here ought to be carefully observed. Cato said,
that they who are anxiously engaged in adorning the body, neglect the
adorning of the mind: so Peter, in order to restrain this desire in
women, introduces a remedy, that they are to devote themselves to the
cultivation of their minds. The word *heart,* no doubt means the whole
soul. He at the same time shews in what consists the spiritual adorning
of women, even in *the incorruptness of a meek and quiet spirit*
“Incorruptness,” as I think, is set in opposition to things which fade
and vanish away, things which serve to adorn the body. Therefore the
version of Erasmus departs from the real meaning. In short, Peter means
that the ornament of the soul is not like a fading flower, nor consists
in vanishing splendor, but is incorruptible. By mentioning *quiet* and a
tranquil *spirit,* he marks out what especially belongs to women; for
nothing becomes them more than a placid and a sedate temper of mind.
 <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) For we know how outrageous a being
is an imperious and a self-willed woman. And further, nothing is more
fitted to correct the vanity of which Peter speaks than a placid
quietness of spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p24"></span>What follows, that it is *in the sight of
God of great price,* may be referred to the whole previous sentence as
well as to the word *spirit;* the meaning indeed will remain the same.
For why do women take so much care to adorn themselves, except that they
may turn the eyes of men on themselves? But Peter, on the contrary, bids
them to be more anxious for what is before God of a great price.

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For after this manner in the old
time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being
in subjection unto their own husbands:

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Sic enim aliquando et sanctae
mulieres quae sperabant in Deum, ornabant seipsas, subjectae propriis
maritis:

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>**6.** Even as Sara obeyed Abraham,
calling him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are
not afraid with any amazement.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Quemadmodum et Sara obediebat
Abrahae, dominum ipsum appellans, cujus filiae estis factae, si
benefeceritis, et non terreamini ullo pavore.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span>He sets before them the example of pious
women, who sought for spiritual adorning rather than outward
meretricious ornaments. But he mentions Sarah above all others, who,
having been the mother of all the faithful, is especially worthy of
honor and imitation on the part of her sex. Moreover, he returns again
to subjection, and confirms it by the example of Sarah, who, according
to the words of Moses, called her husband Lord. (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ge
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>.) God, indeed, does not regard such titles;
and it may sometimes be, that one especially petulant and disobedient
should use such a word with her tongue; but Peter means, that Sarah
usually spoke thus, because she knew that a command had been given her
by the Lord, to be subject to her husband. Peter adds, that they who
imitated her fidelity would be her daughters, that is, reckoned among
the faithful.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>**6** *And are not afraid* The weakness
of the sex causes women to be suspicious and timid, and therefore
morose; for they fear lest by their subjection, they should be more
reproachfully treated. It was this that Peter seems to have had in view
in forbidding them to be disturbed by any fear, as though he had said,
“Willingly submit to the authority of your husbands, nor let fear
prevent your obedience, as though your condition would be worse, were
you to obey.” The words may be more general, “Let them not raise up
commotions at home.” For as they are liable to be frightened, they often
make much of a little thing, and thus disturb themselves and the family.
Others think that the timidity of women, which is contrary to faith, is
generally reproved, as though Peter exhorted them to perform the duties
of their calling with a courageous and intrepid spirit. However, the
first explanation is what I prefer, though the last does not differ much
from it.  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**7.** Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with
*them* according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the
weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that
your prayers be not hindered.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**7.** Viri similiter cohabitent secundum
scientiam, tanquam infirmiori vasi, muliebri impertientes honorem,
tanquam etiam cohaeredes gratiae vitae (*vel*, *multiplicis gratiae et
vitae,*) ne preces vestrae interrumpantur.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>**7** *Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with
them*. From husbands he requires prudence; for dominion over their wives
is not given them, except on this condition, that they exercise
authority prudently. Then let husbands remember that they need prudence
to do rightly their duty. And doubtless many foolish things must be
endured by them, many unpleasant things must be borne with; and they
must at the same time beware lest their indulgence should foster folly.
Hence the admonition of Peter is not in vain, that the husbands ought to
cohabit with them as with a *weaker vessel.* Part of the prudence which
he mentions, is, that the husbands honor their wives. For nothing
destroys the friendship of life more than contempt; nor can we really
love any but those whom we esteem; for love must be connected with
respect.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>Moreover, he employs a twofold argument,
in order to persuade husbands to treat their wives honourably and
kindly. The first is derived from the weakness of the sex; the other,
from the honor with which God favors them. These things seem indeed to
be in a manner contrary, — that honor ought to be given to wives,
because they are weak, and because they excel; but these things well
agree together where love exists. It is evident, that God is despised in
his gifts, except we honor those on whom he has conferred any
excellency. But when we consider that we are members of the same body,
we learn to bear with one another, and mutually to cover our
infirmities. This is what Paul means when he says that greater honor is
given to the weaker members, (<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>;) even because we are more careful in
protecting them from shame. Then Peter does not without reason command
that women should be cared for, and that they should be honored with a
kind treatment, because they are weak. And then as we more easily
forgive children, when they offend through inexperience of age; so the
weakness of the female sex ought to make us not to be too rigid and
severe towards our wives.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>The word *vessel,* as it is well known,
means in Scripture any sort of instrument.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span>*Being heirs together (or co-heirs) of
the grace of life* Some copies have “of manifold grace;” others, instead
of “life,” have the word “living.” Some read “co-heirs” in the dative
case, which makes no difference in the sense. A conjunction is put by
others between manifold grace and life; which reading is the most
suitable.  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) For since the Lord is
pleased to bestow in common on husbands and wives the same graces, he
invites them to seek an equality in them; and we know that those graces
are manifold in which wives are partakers with their husbands. For some
belong to the present life, and some to God’s spiritual kingdom. He
afterwards adds, that they are co-heirs also of life, which is the chief
thing. And though some are strangers to the hope of salvation, yet as it
is offered by the Lord to them no less than to their husbands, it is a
sufficient honor to the sex.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11"></span>*That your prayers be not hindered* For
God cannot be rightly called upon, unless our minds be calm and
peaceable. Among strifes and contentions there is no place for prayer.
Peter indeed addresses the husband and the wife, when he bids them to be
at peace one with another, so that they might with one mind pray to God.
But we may hence gather a general doctrine — that no one ought to come
to God except he is united to his brethren. Then as this reason ought to
restrain all domestic quarrels and strifes, in order that each one of
the family may pray to God; so in common life it ought to be as it were
a bridle to check all contentions. For we are more than insane, if we
knowingly and wilfully close up the way to God’s presence by prayer,
since this is the only asylum of our salvation.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p12"></span>Some give this explanation, that an
intercourse with the wife ought to be sparing and temperate, lest too
much indulgence in this respect should prevent attention to prayer,
according to that saying of Paul,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13"></span>“Defraud not one another, unless by
consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer.”
(<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>[1Co
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p14"></span>But the doctrine of Peter extends wider:
and then Paul does not mean that prayers are interrupted by mutual
cohabitation. Therefore the explanation which I have given ought to be
retained.

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>**8.** Finally, *be ye* all of one mind,
having compassion one of another; love as brethren, *be* pitiful, *be*
courteous:

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span>**8.** Denique sitis omnes idem
sentientes, compatientes, fraternè vos diligentes, misericordes,
humiles;

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span>**9.** Not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are
thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span>**9.** Non reddentes malum pro malo, vel
convitium pro convitio; imo potius benedicentes, scientes quod in hoc
vocati sitis, ut benedictionem hereditate consequamini.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span>Now follow general precepts which
indiscriminately belong to all.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)
Moreover he summarily mentions some things which are especially
necessary to foster friendship and love. The first is, *Be ye all of one
mind,* or, *think ye all the same thing*. For though friends are at
liberty to think differently, yet to do so is a cloud which obscures
love; yea, from this seed easily arises hatred. Sympathy (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>συμπάθεια) extends to all our faculties, when
concord exists between us; so that every one condoles with us in
adversity as well as rejoices with us in prosperity, so that every one
not only cares for himself, but also regards the benefit of others.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13"></span>What next follows, *Love as brethren,*
belongs peculiarly to the faithful; for where God is known as a Father,
there only brotherhood really exists. Be *pitiful,* or *merciful*, which
is added, means that we are not only to help our brethren and relieve
their miseries, but also to bear with their infirmities. In what follows
there are two readings in Greek; but what seems to me the most probable
is the one I have put as the text; for we know that it is the chief bond
to preserve friendship, when every one thinks modestly and humbly of
himself; as there is nothing on the other hand which produces more
discords than when we think too highly of ourselves. Wisely then does
Peter bid us to be humble-minded (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>ταπεινόφρονες,) lest pride and haughtiness
should lead us to despise our neighbors.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16"></span>**9** *Not rendering evil for evil* In
these words every kind of revenge is forbidden; for in order to preserve
love, we must bear with many things. At the same time he does not speak
here of mutual benevolence, but he would have us to endure wrongs, when
provoked by ungodly men. And though it is commonly thought that it is an
instance of a weak and abject mind, not to avenge injuries, yet it is
counted before God as the highest magnanimity. Nor is it indeed enough
to abstain from revenge; but Peter requires also that we should pray for
those who reproach us; for to *bless* here means to pray, as it is set
in opposition to the second clause. But Peter teaches us in general,
that evils are to be overcome by acts of kindness. This is indeed very
hard, but we ought to imitate in this case our heavenly Father, who
makes his sun to rise on the unworthy. What the sophists imagine to be
the meaning, is a futile evasion; for when Christ said, “Love your
enemies,” he at the same time confirmed his own doctrine by saying,
“That ye might be the children of God.”

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p17"></span>*Knowing that ye are thereunto called* He
means that this condition was required of the faithful when they were
called by God, that they were not only to be so meek as not to retaliate
injuries, but also to bless those who cursed them; and as this condition
may seem almost unjust, he calls their attention to the reward; as
though he had said, that there is no reason why the faithful should
complain, because their wrongs would turn to their own benefit. In
short, he shews how much would be the gain of patience; for if we
submissively bear injuries, the Lord will bestow on us his blessing.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p18"></span>The verb, <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>κληρονόμειν, *to inherit*, seems to express
perpetuity, as though Peter had said, that the blessing would not be for
a short time, but perpetual, if we be submissive in bearing injuries.
But God blesses in a way different, from men; for we express our wishes
to him, but he confers a blessing on us. And on the other hand, Peter
intimates that they who seek to revenge injuries, attempt what will
yield them no good, for they thus deprive themselves of God’s blessing.

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>**10**. For he that will love life, and see
good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they
speak no guile:

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span>**10**. Qui enim vult vitam diligere, et
videre dies bonos, contineat linguam suam à malo, et labia sua, ne
loquantur dolum;

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span>**11**. Let him eschew evil, and do good;
let him seek peace, and ensue it.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span>**11**. Declinet à malo et faciat bonum,
quaerat pacem et persequatur eam:

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span>**12**. For the eyes of the Lord *are* over
the righteous, and his ears *are open*, unto their prayers: but the face
of the Lord *is* against them that do evil.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span>**12**. Quoniam oculi Domini super justos,
et aures ejus in preces eorum; vultus autem Domini super facientes mala.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span>**13**. And who *is* he that will harm you,
if ye be followers of that which is good?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p9"></span>**13**. Et quis est qui vobis malè faciat,
si boni aemuli sitis?

<span id="iv.iv.v-p10"></span>**14**. But and if ye suffer for
righteousness’ sake, happy *are ye*: and be not afraid of their terror,
neither be troubled;

<span id="iv.iv.v-p11"></span>**14**. Verum etiam si patiamini propter
justitiam, beati; timorem vero eorum ne timeatis neque turbemini;

<span id="iv.iv.v-p12"></span>**15**. But sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts:

<span id="iv.iv.v-p13"></span>**15**. Sed Dominum exercituum
sanctificate in cordibus vestris.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.v-p15"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p16"></span>**10** *For he* He confirms the last
sentence by the testimony of David. The passage is taken from the
thirty-fourth Psalm, \[<span id="iv.iv.v-p16.1"></span>[Ps
34:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p16.1"></span>,\] where the Spirit testifies that it will be
well with all who keep themselves from all evil-doing and wrong-doing.
The common feeling indeed favors what is very different; for men think
that they expose themselves to the insolence of enemies, if they do not
boldly defend themselves. But the Spirit of God promises a happy life to
none except to the meek, and those who endure evils; and we cannot be
happy except God prospers our ways; and it is the good and the
benevolent, and not the cruel and inhuman, that he will favor.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p17"></span>Peter has followed the Greek version,
though the difference is but little. David’s words are literally these,
— “He who loves life and desires to see good days,” etc. It is indeed a
desirable thing, since God has placed us in this world, to pass our time
in peace. Then, the way of obtaining this blessing is to conduct
ourselves justly and harmlessly towards all.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p18"></span>The first thing he points out are the
vices of the tongue; which are to be avoided, so that we may not be
contumelious and insolent, nor speak deceitfully and with duplicity.
Then he comes to deeds, that we are to injure none, or cause loss to
none, but to endeavor to be kind to all, and to exercise the duties of
humanity.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p19"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p20"></span>**11** *Let him seek peace* It is not
enough to embrace it when offered to us, but it ought to be followed
when it seems to flee from us. It also often happens, that when we seek
it as much as we can, others will not grant it to us. On account of
these difficulties and hindrances, he bids us to seek and pursue it.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p21"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p22"></span>**12** *For the eyes of the Lord are over
the righteous,* or, *on the righteous*. It ought to be a consolation to
us, sufficient to mitigate all evils, that we are looked upon by the
Lord, so that he will bring us help in due time. The meaning then is,
that the prosperity which he has mentioned depends on the protection of
God; for were not the Lord to care for his people, they would be like
sheep exposed to wolves. And that we for little reason raise a clamor,
that we suddenly kindle unto wrath, that we burn with the passion of
revenge, all this, doubtless, happens, because we do not consider that
God cares for us, and because we do not acquiesce in his aid. Thus in
vain we shall be taught patience, except our minds are first imbued with
this truth, that God exercises such care over us, that he will in due
time succor us. When, on the contrary, we are fully persuaded that God
defends the cause of the righteous, we shall first attend simply to
innocence, and then, when molested and hated by the ungodly, we shall
flee to the protection of God. And when he says, that the *ears* of the
Lord are open to our prayers, he encourages us to pray.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p23"></span>*But the face of the Lord* By this clause
he intimates that the Lord will be our avenger, because he will not
always suffer the insolence of the ungodly to prevail; and at the same
time he shews how it will be, if we seek to defend our life from
injuries, even that God will be an adversary to us. But it may, on the
other hand, be objected and said, that we experience it daily far
otherwise, for the more righteous any one is, and the greater lover of
peace he is, the more he is harassed by the wicked. To this I reply,
that no one is so attentive to righteousness and peace, but that he
sometimes sins in this respect. But it ought to be especially observed,
that the promises as to this life do not extend further than as to what
is expedient for us to be fulfilled. Hence, our peace with the world is
often disturbed, that our flesh may be subdued, in order that we may
serve God, and also for other reasons; so that nothing may be a loss to
us.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p24"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p25"></span>**13** *Who is he that will harm you* He
further confirms the previous sentence by an argument drawn from common
experience. For it happens for the most part, that the ungodly disturb
us, or are provoked by us, or that we do not labor to do them good as it
behoves us; for they who seek to do good, do even soften minds which are
otherwise hard as iron. This very thing is mentioned by Plato in his
first book on the Republic, “Injustice,” he says, “causes seditions and
hatreds and fightings one with another; but justice, concord and
friendship.”  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) However, though this
commonly happens, yet it is not always the case; for the children of
God, how much soever they may strive to pacify the ungodly by kindness,
and shew themselves kind towards all, are yet often assailed
undeservedly by many.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p27"></span><span id="iv.iv.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p28"></span>**14**. Hence Peter adds, *But if ye
suffer for righteousness’ sake* The meaning is, that the faithful will
do more towards obtaining a quiet life by kindness, than by violence and
promptitude in taking revenge; but that when they neglect nothing to
secure peace, were they to suffer, they are still blessed, because they
suffer for the sake of righteousness. Indeed, this latter clause differs
much from the judgment of our flesh; but Christ has not without reason
thus declared; nor has Peter without reason repeated the sentence from
his mouth; for God will at length come as a deliverer, and then openly
will appear what now seems incredible, that is, that the miseries of the
godly have been blessed when endured with patience.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p29"></span>To *suffer for righteousness,* means not
only to submit to some loss or disadvantage in defending a good cause,
but also to suffer unjustly, when any one is innocently in fear among
men on account of the fear of God.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p30"></span>*Be not afraid of their terror* He again
points out the fountain and cause of impatience, that we are beyond due
measure troubled, when the ungodly rise up against us. For such a dread
either disheartens us, or degrades us, or kindles within us a desire for
revenge. In the meantime, we do not acquiesce in the defense of God.
Then the best remedy for checking the turbulent emotions of our minds
will be, to conquer immoderate terrors by trusting in the aid of God.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p31"></span>But Peter no doubt meant to allude to a
passage in the eighth chapter of Isaiah; \[<span
id="iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>[Isa
8:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>;\] for when the Jews against the prohibition
of God sought to fortify themselves by the aid of the Gentile world, God
warned his Prophet not to fear after their example. Peter at the same
time seems to have turned “fear” into a different meaning; for it is
taken passively by the Prophet, who accused the people of unbelief,
because, at a time when they ought to have relied on the aid of God and
to have boldly despised all dangers, they became so prostrate and broken
down with fear, that they sent to all around them for unlawful help. But
Peter takes fear in another sense, as meaning that terror which the
ungodly are wont to fill us with by their violence and cruel
threatenings. He then departs from the sense in which the word is taken
by the Prophet; but in this there is nothing unreasonable; for his
object was not to explain the words of the Prophet; he wished only to
shew that, nothing is fitter to produce patience than what Isaiah
prescribes, even to ascribe to God his honor by recumbing in full
confidence on his power.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p32"></span>I do not, however, object, if any one
prefers to render Peter’s words thus, *Fear ye not their fear;* as
though he had said, “Be ye not afraid as the unbelieving, or the
children of this world are wont to be, because they understand nothing
of God’s providence.” But this, as I think, would be a forced
explanation. There is, indeed, no need for us to toil much on this
point, since Peter here did not intend to explain every word used by the
Prophet, but only referred to this one thing, that the faithful will
firmly stand, and can never be moved from a right course of duty by any
dread or fear, if they will sanctify the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p33"></span>But this sanctification ought to be
confined to the present case. For whence is it that we are overwhelmed
with fear, and think ourselves lost, when danger is impending, except
that we ascribe to mortal man more power to injure us than to God to
save us? God promises that he will be the guardian of our salvation; the
ungodly, on the other hand, attempt to subvert it. Unless God’s promise
sustain us, do we not deal unjustly with him, and in a manner profane
him? Then the Prophet teaches us that we ought to think honourably of
the Lord of hosts; for how much soever the ungodly may contrive to
destroy us, and whatever power they may possess, he alone is more than
sufficiently powerful to secure our safety.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) Peter then adds, *in your hearts.* For if
this conviction takes full possession of our minds, that the help
promised by the Lord is sufficient for us, we shall be well fortified to
repel all the fears of unbelief.

<span id="iv.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p2"></span>**15**. And *be* ready always to *give* an
answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you
with meekness and fear:

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p3"></span>**15** Parati autem sitis ad responsionem
cuivis poscenti à vobis rationem ejus quae in vobis est spei;

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p4"></span>**16**. Having a good conscience; that,
whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed
that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p5"></span>**16**. Cum mansuetudine et timore,
conscientiam habentes bonam; ut in quo de vobis obtrectant, tanquam
maleficis, pudefiant dum infamant bonam vestram in Christo
conversationem.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p8"></span>Though this is a new precept, it yet
depends on what is gone before, for he requires such constancy in the
faithful, as boldly to give a reason for their faith to their
adversaries. And this is a part of that sanctification which he had just
mentioned; for we then really honor God, when neither fear nor shame
hinders us from making a profession of our faith. But Peter does not
expressly bid us to assert and proclaim what has been given us by the
Lord everywhere, and always and among all indiscriminately, for the Lord
gives his people the spirit of discretion, so that they may know when
and how far and to whom it is expedient to speak. He bids them only to
be ready to give an answer, lest by their sloth and the cowardly fear of
the flesh they should expose the doctrine of Christ, by being silent, to
the derision of the ungodly. The meaning then is, that we ought to be
prompt in avowing our faith, so as to set it forth whenever necessary,
lest the unbelieving through our silence should condemn the religion we
follow.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p9"></span>But it ought to be noticed, that Peter
here does not command us to be prepared to solve any question that may
be mooted; for it is not the duty of all to speak on every subject. But
it is the general doctrine that is meant, which belongs to the ignorant
and the simple. Then Peter had in view no other thing, than that
Christians should make it evident to unbelievers that they truly
worshipped God, and had a holy and good religion. And in this there is
no difficulty, for it would be strange if we could bring nothing to
defend our faith when any one made inquiries respecting it. For we ought
always to take care that all may know that we fear God, and that we
piously and reverently regard his legitimate worship.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p10"></span>This was also required by the state of
the times: the Christian name was much hated and deemed infamous; many
thought the sect wicked and guilty of many sacrileges. It would have
been, therefore, the highest perfidy against God, if, when asked, they
had neglected to give a testimony in favor of their religion. And this,
as I think, is the meaning of the word *apology,* which Peter uses, that
is, that the Christians were to make it evident to the world that they
were far off from every impiety, and did not corrupt true religion, on
which account they were suspected by the ignorant.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p11"></span>*Hope* here is by a metonymy to be taken
for faith. Peter, however, as it has been said, does not require them to
know how to discuss distinctly and refinedly every article of the faith,
but only to shew that their faith in Christ was consistent with genuine
piety. And hence we learn how all those abuse the name of Christians,
who understand nothing certain respecting their faith, and have nothing
to give as an answer for it. But it behoves us again carefully to
consider what he says, when he speaks of *that hope that is in you;* for
he intimates that the confession which flows from the heart is alone
that which is approved by God; for except faith dwells within, the
tongue prattles in vain. It ought then to have its roots within us, so
that it may afterwards bring forth the fruit of confession.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p12"></span><span id="iv.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p13"></span>**16** *With meekness* This is a most
necessary admonition; for unless our minds are endued with meekness,
contentions will immediately break forth. And meekness is set in
opposition to pride and vain ostentation, and also to excessive zeal. To
this he justly adds *fear;* for where reverence for God prevails, it
tames all the ferocity of our minds, and it will especially cause us to
speak calmly of God’s mysteries. For contentious disputes arise from
this, because many think less honourably than they ought of the
greatness of divine wisdom, and are carried away by profane audacity.
If, then, we would render approved of God the confession of our faith,
all boasting must be put aside, all contention must be relinquished.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p14"></span>*Having a good conscience* What we say
without a corresponding life has but little weight; hence he joins to
confession a good conscience. For we see that many are sufficiently
ready with their tongue, and prate much, very freely, and yet with no
fruit, because the life does not correspond. Besides, the integrity of
conscience alone is that which gives us confidence in speaking as we
ought; for they who prattle much about the gospel, and whose dissolute
life is a proof of their impiety, not only make themselves objects of
ridicule, but also expose the truth itself to the slanders of the
ungodly. For why did he before bid us to be ready to defend the faith,
should any one require from us a reason for it, except that it is our
duty to vindicate the truth of God against those false suspicions which
the ignorant entertain respecting it. But the defense of the tongue will
avail but little, except the life corresponds with it.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p15"></span>He therefore says, *that they may be
ashamed,* who blame your good conversation in Christ, and who speak
against you as evil-doers; as though he had said, “If your adversaries
have nothing to allege against you, except that you follow Christ, they
will at length be ashamed of their malicious wickedness, or at least,
your innocence will be sufficient to confute them.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>**17**. For *it is* better, if the will
of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, than for evil doing.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>**17**. Praestat enim benefaciendo (si
ita fert voluntas Dei) pati quàm malefaciendo:

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p4"></span>**18**. For Christ also hath once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit:

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5"></span>**18**. Quia et Christus semel pro
peccatis passus est, justus pro injustis, ut nos adduceret Deo;
mortificatus quidem carne, vivificatus autem spiritu.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>**17** *For it is better* This belongs
not only to what follows but to the whole context. He had spoken of the
profession of faith, which at that time was attended with great danger;
he says now that it is much better, if they sustained any loss in
defending a good cause, to suffer thus unjustly than to be punished for
their evil deeds. This consolation is understood rather by secret
meditation, than by many words. It is what indeed occurs everywhere in
profane authors, that there is a sufficient defense in a good
conscience, whatever evils may happen, and must be endured. These have
spoken courageously; but then the only really bold man is he who looks
to God. Therefore Peter added this clause, *If the will of God be so*
For in these words he reminds us, that if we suffer unjustly, it is not
by chance, but according to the divine will; and he assumes, that God
wills nothing or appoints nothing but for the best reason. Hence the
faithful have always this comfort in their miseries, that they know that
they have God as their witness, and that they also know that they are
led by him to the contest, in order that they may under his protection
give a proof of their faith.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p9"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p10"></span>**18** *For Christ also* It is another
comfort, that if in our afflictions we are conscious of having done
well, we suffer according to the example of Christ; and it hence follows
that we are blessed. At the same time he proves, from the design of
Christ’s death, that it is by no means consistent with our profession
that we should suffer for our evil deeds. For he teaches us that Christ
suffered in order to bring us to God. What does this mean, except that
we have been thus consecrated to God by Christ’s death, that we may live
and die to him?

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p11"></span>There are, then, two parts in this
sentence; the first is, that persecutions ought to be borne with
resignation, because the Son of God shews the way to us; and the other
is, that since we have been consecrated to God’s service by the death of
Christ, it behoves us to suffer, not for our faults, but for
righteousness’ sake.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p12"></span>Here, however, a question may be raised,
Does not God chastise the faithful, whenever he suffers them to be
afflicted? To this I answer, that it indeed often happens, that God
punishes them according to what they deserve; and this is not denied by
Peter; but he reminds us what a comfort it is to have our cause
connected with God. And how God does not punish sins in them who endure
persecution for the sake of righteousness, and in what sense they are
said to be innocent, we shall see in the next chapter.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p13"></span>*Being put to death in the flesh* Now
this is a great thing, that we are made conformable to the Son of God,
when we suffer without cause; but there is added another consolation,
that the death of Christ had a blessed issue; for though he suffered
through the weakness of the flesh, he yet rose again through the power
of the Spirit. Then the cross of Christ was not prejudicial, nor his
death, since life obtained the victory. This was said (as Paul also
reminds us in <span id="iv.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>[2Co
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>) that we may know that we are to bear in
our body the dying of Christ, in order that his life may be manifested
in us. *Flesh* here means the outward man; and *Spirit* means the divine
power, by which Christ emerged from death a conqueror.

<span id="iv.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[1
Peter 3:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p2"></span>**19**. By which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison;

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p3"></span>**19**. In quo et iis qui in specula
*(vel, in excubiis, vel, carcere*) erant spiritibus, profectus
prædicavit;

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p4"></span>**20**. Which sometime were disobedient,
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while
the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by
water.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p5"></span>**20**. Quum inereduli fuissent olim,
quum semel expectabatur Dei patientia in diebus Noe; dum apparabatur
arca, in qua paucae, hoc est, octo animae servatae sunt per aquam.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p6"></span>**21**. The like figure whereunto *even*
baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ:

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7"></span>**21**. Cujus figura respondens
baptismus, nos quoque salvos reddit, non abjectio sordium carnis, sed
bonae conscientiae examen apud Deum, per resurrectionem Jesu Christi:

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p8"></span>**22**. Who is gone into heaven, and is
on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made
subject unto him.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p9"></span>**22**. Qui est in dextera Dei profectus
in coelum, subjectis sibi angelis, et potestatibus et virtutibus.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p11"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p12"></span>**19** *By which also* Peter added
this, that we might know that the vivifying power of the Spirit of which
he spoke, was not only put forth as to Christ himself, but is also
poured forth with regard to us, as Paul shews in <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>[Ro
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>. He then says, that Christ did not rise
only for himself, but that he made known to others the same power of his
Spirit, so that it penetrated to the dead. It hence follows, that we
shall not less feel it in vivifying whatever is mortal in us.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p13"></span>But as the obscurity of this passage
has produced, as usual, various explanations, I shall first disprove
what has been brought forward by some, and secondly, we shall seek its
genuine and true meaning.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p14"></span>Common has been the opinion that
Christ’s descent into hell is here referred to; but the words mean no
such thing; for there is no mention made of the soul of Christ, but only
that he went by the Spirit: and these are very different things, that
Christ’s soul went, and that Christ preached by the power of the Spirit.
Then Peter expressly mentioned *the Spirit,* that he might take away the
notion of what may be called a real presence.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p15"></span>Others explain this passage of the
apostles, that Christ by their ministry appeared to the dead, that is,
to unbelievers. I, indeed, allow that Christ by means of his apostles
went by his Spirit to those who were kept as it were in prison; but this
exposition appears incorrect on several accounts: First, Peter says that
Christ went *to spirits,* by which he means souls separated from their
bodies, for living men are never called spirits; and secondly, what
Peter repeats in the fourth chapter on the same subject, does not admit
of such an allegory. Therefore the words must be properly understood of
the dead. Thirdly, it seems very strange, that Peter, speaking of the
apostles, should immediately, as though forgetting himself, go back to
the time of Noah. Certainly this mode of speaking would be most
unsuitable. Then this explanation cannot be right.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p16"></span>Moreover, the strange notion of those
who think that unbelievers as to the coming of Christ, were after his
death freed from their sin, needs no long refutation; for it is an
indubitable doctrine of Scripture, that we obtain not salvation in
Christ except by faith; then there is no hope left for those who
continue to death unbelieving. They speak what is somewhat more
probable, who say, that the redemption obtained by Christ availed the
dead, who in the time of Noah were long unbelieving, but repented a
short time before they were drowned by the deluge. They then understood
that they suffered in the flesh the punishment due to their
perverseness, and yet were saved by Christ, so that they did not perish
for ever. But this interpretation cannot stand; it is indeed
inconsistent with the words of the passage, for Peter ascribes salvation
only to the family of Noah, and gives over to ruin all who were not
within the ark.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p17"></span>I therefore have no doubt but Peter
speaks generally, that the manifestation of Christ’s grace was made to
godly spirits, and that they were thus endued with the vital power of
the Spirit. Hence there is no reason to fear that it will not flow to
us. But it may be inquired, Why he puts in prison the souls of the godly
after having quitted their bodies? It seems to me that <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>φυλακὴ rather means a watchtower in which
watchmen stand for the purpose of watching, or the very act of watching,
for it is often so taken by Greek authors; and the meaning would be very
appropriate, that godly souls were watching in hope of the salvation
promised them, as though they saw it afar off. Nor is there a doubt but
that the holy fathers in life, as well as after death, directed their
thoughts to this object. But if the word *prison* be preferred, it would
not be unsuitable; for, as while they lived, the Law, according to Paul,
(<span id="iv.iv.viii-p17.2"></span>[Ga
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p17.2"></span>,) was a sort of prison in which they were
kept; so after death they must have felt the same desire for Christ; for
the spirit of liberty had not as yet been fully given. Hence this
anxiety of expectation was to them a kind of prison.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p18"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p19"></span>Thus far the Apostle’s words seem to
agree together, and with the thread of the argument; but what follows is
attended with some difficulty; for he does not mention the faithful
here, but only the unbelieving; and this seems to overturn the preceding
exposition. Some have for this reason been led to think that no other
thing is said here, but that the unbelieving, who had formerly
persecuted the godly, found the Spirit of Christ an accuser, as though
Peter consoled the faithful with this argument, that Christ, even when
dead, punished them. But their mistake is discovered by what we shall
see in the next chapter, that the Gospel was preached to the dead, that
they might live according to God in the spirit, which peculiarly applies
to the faithful. And it is further certain that he repeats there what he
now says. Besides, they have not considered that what Peter meant was
especially this, that as the power of the Spirit of Christ shewed itself
to be vivifying in him, and was known as such by the dead, so it will be
towards us.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p20"></span>Let us, however, see why it is that he
mentions only the unbelieving; for he seems to say, that Christ in
spirit appeared to those who formerly were unbelieving; but I understand
him otherwise, that then the true servants of God were mixed together
with the unbelieving, and were almost hidden on account of their number.
I allow that the Greek construction is at variance with this meaning,
for Peter, if he meant this, ought to have used the genitive case
absolute. But as it was not unusual with the Apostles to put one case
instead of another, and as we see that Peter here heaps together many
things, and no other suitable meaning can be elicited, I have no
hesitation in giving this explanation of this intricate passage; so that
readers may understand that those called unbelieving are different from
those to whom he said the Gospel was preached.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p21"></span>After having then said that Christ was
manifested to the dead, he immediately adds, *When there were formerly
unbelievers;* by which he intimated, that it was no injury to the holy
fathers that they were almost hidden through the vast number of the
ungodly. For he meets, as I think, a doubt, which might have harassed
the faithful of that day. They saw almost the whole world filled with
unbelievers, that they enjoyed all authority, and that life was in their
power. This trial might have shaken the confidence of those who were
shut up, as it were, under the sentence of death. Therefore Peter
reminds them, that the condition of the fathers was not different, and
that though the multitude of the ungodly then covered the whole earth,
their life was yet preserved in safety by the power of God.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p22"></span>He then comforted the godly, lest they
should be cast down and destroyed because they were so few; and he chose
an example the most remarkable in antiquity, even that of the world
drowned by the deluge; for then in the common ruin of mankind, the
family of Noah alone escaped. And he points out the manner, and says
that it was a kind of baptism. There is then in this respect also
nothing unsuitable.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p23"></span>The sum of what is said is this, that
the world has always been full of unbelievers, but that the godly ought
not to be terrified by their vast number; for though Noah was surrounded
on every side by the ungodly, and had very few as his friends, he was
not yet drawn aside from the right course of his faith.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p27"></span>*When once the long-suffering of God
waited* This ought to be applied to the ungodly, whom God’s patience
rendered more slothful; for when God deferred his vengeance and did not
immediately execute it, the ungodly boldly disregarded all threatenings;
but Noah, on the contrary, being warned by God, had the deluge for a
long time before his eyes. Hence his assiduity in building the ark; for
being terrified by God’s judgment, he shook off all torpidity.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p28"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p29"></span>**21** *The like figure whereunto* I
fully think that the relative ought to be read in the dative case, and
that it has happened, through a mistake, that <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p29.1"></span>ὃ is put, and not <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p29.2"></span>ᾧ. The meaning, however, is not ambiguous,
that Noah, saved by water, had a sort of baptism. And this the Apostle
mentions, that the likeness between him and us might appear more
evident. It has already been said that the design of this clause is to
shew that we ought not to be led away by wicked examples from the fear
of God, and the right way of salvation, and to mix with the world. This
is made evident in baptism, in which we are buried together with Christ,
so that, being dead to the world, and to the flesh, we may live to God.
On this account, he says that our baptism is an antitype (<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p29.3"></span>ἀντίτυπον) to the baptism of Noah, not that
Noah’s baptism was the first pattern, and ours an inferior figure, as
the word is taken in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where the ceremonies of
the law are said to be antitypes of heavenly things, (<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p29.4"></span>[Heb.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p29.4"></span>.) Greek writers apply the same word to
sacraments, so that, when they speak of the mystical bread of the holy
Supper, they call it the antitype. But here there is no comparison made
between the greater and the less; the Apostle only means that there is a
likeness, and as they commonly say, a correspondence. Perhaps it might
more properly be said to be correspondency, (<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p29.5"></span>ἀντίστροφον,) as Aristotle makes Dialectics
to be the antistrophè of Rhetoric. But we need not labor about words,
when there is an agreement about the thing itself. As Noah, then,
obtained life through death, when in the ark, he was enclosed not
otherwise than as it were in the grave, and when the whole world
perished, he was preserved together with his small family; so at this
day, the death which is set forth in baptism, is to us an entrance into
life, nor can salvation be hoped for, except we be separated from the
world.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p30"></span>*Not the putting away of the filth of
the flesh* This was added, because it might be that the greatest part of
men would profess the name of Christ; and so it is with us, almost all
are introduced into the church by baptism. Thus, what he had said before
would not be appropriate, that few at this day are saved by baptism, as
God saved only eight by the ark. This objection Peter anticipates, when
he testifies that he speaks not of the naked sign, but that the effect
must also be connected with it, as though he had said, that what
happened in the age of Noah would always be the case, that mankind would
rush on to their own destruction, but that the Lord would in a wonderful
way deliver His very small flock.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p31"></span>We now see what this connection means;
for some one might object and say, “Our baptism is widely different from
that of Noah, for it happens that most are at this day baptized.” To
this he replies, that the external symbol is not sufficient, except
baptism be received really and effectually: and the reality of it will
be found only in a few. It hence follows that we ought carefully to see
how men commonly act when we rely on examples, and that we ought not to
fear though we may be few in number.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p32"></span>But the fanatics, such as
Schuencfeldius, absurdly pervert this testimony, while they seek to take
away from sacraments all their power and effect. For Peter did not mean
here to teach that Christ’s institution is vain and inefficacious, but
only to exclude hypocrites from the hope of salvation, who, as far as
they can, deprave and corrupt baptism. Moreover, when we speak of
sacraments, two things are to be considered, the sign and the thing
itself. In baptism the sign is water, but the thing is the washing of
the soul by the blood of Christ and the mortifying of the flesh. The
institution of Christ includes these two things. Now that the sign
appears often inefficacious and fruitless, this happens through the
abuse of men, which does not take away the nature of the sacrament. Let
us then learn not to tear away the thing signified from the sign. We
must at the same time beware of another evil, such as prevails among the
Papists; for as they distinguish not as they ought between the thing and
the sign, they stop at the outward element, and on that fix their hope
of salvation. Therefore the sight of the water takes away their thoughts
from the blood of Christ and the power of the Spirit. They do not regard
Christ as the only author of all the blessings therein offered to us;
they transfer the glory of his death to the water, they tie the secret
power of the Spirit to the visible sign.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p33"></span>What then ought we to do? Not to
separate what has been joined together by the Lord. We ought to
acknowledge in baptism a spiritual washing, we ought to embrace therein
the testimony of the remission of sin and the pledge of our renovation,
and yet so as to leave to Christ his own honor, and also to the Holy
Spirit; so that no part of our salvation should be transferred to the
sign. Doubtless when Peter, having mentioned baptism, immediately made
this exception, that it is not the putting off of the filth of the
flesh, he sufficiently shewed that baptism to some is only the outward
act, and that the outward sign of itself avails nothing.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p34"></span>*But the answer of a good conscience*
The word *question,* or *questioning*, is to be taken here for “answer,”
or testimony. Now Peter briefly defines the efficacy and use of baptism,
when he calls attention to conscience, and expressly requires that
confidence which can sustain the sight of God and can stand before his
tribunal. For in these words he teaches us that baptism in its main part
is spiritual, and then that it includes the remission of sins and
renovation of the old man; for how can there be a good and pure
conscience until our old man is reformed, and we be renewed in the
righteousness of God? and how can we answer before God, unless we rely
on and are sustained by a gratuitous pardon of our sins? In short, Peter
intended to set forth the effect of baptism, that no one might glory in
a naked and dead sign, as hypocrites are wont to do.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p35"></span>But we must notice what follows, *by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ* By these words he teaches us that we
are not to cleave to the element of water, and that what is thereby
typified flows from Christ alone, and is to be sought from him.
Moreover, by referring to the resurrection, he has regard to the
doctrine which he had taught before, that Christ was vivified by the
Spirit; for the resurrection was victory over death and the completion
of our salvation. We hence learn that the death of Christ is not
excluded, but is included in his resurrection. We then cannot otherwise
derive benefit from baptism, than by having all our thoughts fixed on
the death and the resurrection of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p36"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37"></span>**22** *Who is on the right hand of
God.* He recommends to us the ascension of Christ unto heaven, lest our
eyes should seek him in the world; and this belongs especially to faith.
He commends to our notice his session on the Father’s right hand, lest
we should doubt his power to save us. And what his *sitting* at the
right hand of the Father means, we have elsewhere explained, that is,
that Christ exercises supreme power everywhere as God’s representative.
And an explanation of this is what follows, *angels being made subject
to him;* and he adds *powers and authorities* only for the sake of
amplification, for angels are usually designated by such words. It was
then Peter’s object to set forth by these high titles the sovereignty of
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc45007.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span> The best construction is to regard
“adorning,” or ornament, as understood after “incorruptible:”

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span>“But the hidden man of the heart,
*clothed* in (or with) the incorruptible *adorning* of a mild and quiet
spirit.”

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span>“Mild” or meek, not given to passion or
wrath, patient, not proud nor arrogant; quiet, peaceable, not garrulous,
not turbulent, nor given to strife and contention. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc45007.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span> The words are, “Whose daughters ye
become, when ye do well and fear no terror.” Terror here stands for what
terrifies. The paraphrase of *Macknight* seems to give the real and
simple meaning of the passage, “Whose daughters ye Christian women have
become, by behaving well towards your husbands, and not being frightened
to actions contrary to your religion through fear of displeasing them.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc45007.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span> The received text is the most approved,
and there is no different reading of any importance. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc45007.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span> In the previous statements of particular
duties belonging to various relations in life, the duty of masters
towards their servants is omitted. Some have hence inferred that there
were no masters who were Christians among those to whom Peter wrote. But
this could not have been the ease, and for this reason, because Paul, in
his Epistles to the Ephesians and Colossians, expressly specifies the
duty of masters towards their servants; and Ephesus and Colosse were
included in Asia Minor, and it was to Christians scattered throughout
that country that Peter wrote his Epistle.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span>But this omission is somewhat singular.
At the same time, though the master’s duty is not specifically
mentioned, we may yet consider this verse as having a special reference
to masters, as sympathy, brotherly love, and compassion or
commiseration, are here inculcated.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span>The construction of the whole passage,
beginning at the 17th verse of the last chapter, and ending at the 12th
of this (for at the 13th of this, he resumes the subject he left off at
the end of the 16th of the last) deserves to be noticed. “Honour all,”
is the injunction which he afterwards exemplifies as to servants, wives,
and husbands; for the construction is “Honour all — the servants being
subject, etc. — in like manner, the wives being subject, etc. — in like
manner, the husbands, cohabiting according to knowledge, giving honor,
etc.” Then follows this verse in the same form, “And finally, all being
of one mind, sympathizing, loving the brethren, compassionate,
friendly-minded (or humble-minded,) not rendering, etc.” And thus he
proceeds to the end of the 12th verse. Afterwards he resumes the subject
respecting the treatment the Christians met with from the world.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p12"></span>May we not then conclude, that as the
duty of masters does not come under the idea of *honoring,* he did not
specifically mention them, but referred only to the spirit and temper
they ought to have exhibited? — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc45007.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14"></span> *Griesbach* has given the preference to
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>ταπεινόφρονες and has introduced it
into the text. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc45007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p26"></span> <span id="iv.iv.v-p26.1"></span>Στάσεις
γάρ που ἥγε ἀδικία καὶ μίσεα καὶ μάχας ἐν ἀλλήλοις παρέχει, ἡδὲ
δικαιοσύνη ὁμόνοιαν καὶ φιλίαν. — Rep. lib. 1.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc45007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p34"></span>”Sanctify” here, seems to have the same
meaning as in our Lord’s prayer, “Hallowed,” or sanctified “be thy
name;” where it means honored or glorified. And to honor or glorify God
in our hearts is what Calvin very correctly explains. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc45007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p24"></span> The most satisfactory explanation of
this passage is that of *Beza, Doddridge, Macknight,* and *Scott;* that
the reference is to what was done in the time of Noah, that is, that
Christ by his Spirit employed him as a preacher of righteousness, though
with no success, as the spirits of the men to whom he preached were then
in prison, reserved, as the fallen angels are represented to be, for the
judgment of the last day. The Apostle had before said that Christ’s
Spirit was in the prophets who foretold his coming, <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>[1Pe
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>. The passage may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p25"></span>**19**. “By which also he, having gone,
preached to the spirits who are in prison, formerly disobedient, when
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,” etc.; or,
according to *Mackight,* “to the spirits *now* in prison, who formerly
were disobedient,” etc. The word “formerly” seems to require “now” in
the previous clause, or, “who are,” as rendered by *Beza.* “He, having
gone, preached,” is similar to a phrase in <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p25.1"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p25.1"></span>, “And came and preached,” etc.; or,
literally, “And having come he preached,” etc. Paul does not speak of
his coming personally, but by his ministers: and Peter evidently speaks
of his going in the same sense.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p26"></span>For <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p26.1"></span>ἅπαξ ἐξεδέχετο, *Griesbach* substitutes
<span id="iv.iv.viii-p26.2"></span>ἀπεξεδέχετο as being the most
approved reading. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc45008)
