[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45034)  [Next](cc45036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>THE EPISTLE OF JAMES.

<span id="ix.iii.i"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="ix.iii.i-p3"></span>**1** James, a servant of God and of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are in the dispersion,
health:

<span id="ix.iii.i-p4"></span>**2** Count it all joy, my brethren, when
ye fall into various temptations;

<span id="ix.iii.i-p5"></span>**3** Knowing that the trying of your
faith works patience:

<span id="ix.iii.i-p6"></span>**4** But let patience have its perfect
work, so that ye may be perfect and entire, in nothing deficient.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p7"></span>**5** But if any of you be deficient in
wisdom, let him ask *it from* God, who giveth to all freely, and does
not upbraid: and it shall be given to him.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p8"></span>**6** But let him ask in faith, by no
means doubting; for he who doubts, is like a wave of the sea, which by
the wind is driven and tossed to and fro.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p9"></span>**7** Let not, then, that man think that
he shall receive anything from the Lord.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p10"></span>**8** A man of a double mind is unstable
in all his ways.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p11"></span>**9** Now, let a brother who is low,
rejoice in his exaltation; and the rich in his lowness:

<span id="ix.iii.i-p12"></span>**10** Because as a flower of grass shall
he pass away:

<span id="ix.iii.i-p13"></span>**11** For the sun rises with heat and
withers the grass, and the flower falls, and the beauty of its
appearance perishes; so also shall the rich fade away in his riches.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p14"></span>**12** Blessed *is* the man, who endures
temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life:
which the Lord hath promised to them who love him.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p15"></span>**13** Let no one, when he is tempted,
say, “By God I am tempted:” for God cannot be tempted by evils, nor does
he tempt any one.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p16"></span>**14** But every one is tempted, when he
is drawn away by his own lusts, and is ensnared.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p17"></span>**15** Then lust, having conceived,
brings forth sin; and sin, being perfected, begets death.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p18"></span>**16** Do not err, my beloved brethren:

<span id="ix.iii.i-p19"></span>**17** Every good gift and every perfect
gift is from above, descending from the Father of lights, with whom
there is no change nor shadow of turning.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p20"></span>**18** Of his own will has he begotten us
by the word of truth, that we might be some firstfruits of his
creatures.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p21"></span>**19** Let every man, therefore, my
beloved brethren, be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath:

<span id="ix.iii.i-p22"></span>**20** For the wrath of man worketh not
the righteousness of God.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p23"></span>**21** *Laying* aside then all filthiness
and redundancy of wickedness, receive with meekness the implanted word,
which is able to save your souls.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p24"></span>**22** And be ye doers of the word and
not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p25"></span>**23** For if any one be a hearer of the
word and not a doer, he is like a man who looks on his natural face in a
glass;

<span id="ix.iii.i-p26"></span>**24** For he hath looked on himself and
departed, and hath immediately forgotten what manner of man he was.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p27"></span>**25** But he who attentively looks on
the perfect law of liberty and continues *to do* so,--this *man,* being
not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his
work.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p28"></span>**26** If any one seems to be religious
among you and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, his
religion is vain.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p29"></span>**27** Pure religion and undefiled before
God even the Father, is this,--To visit the orphans and widows in their
affliction, to keep himself unspotted from the world.

<span id="ix.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p3"></span>**1** My brethren, have not the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons on account of reputation.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p4"></span>**2** For if there enter into your
assembly a man wearing gold rings, having on a splendid dress, and there
enter in also a poor man in sordid clothing;

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p5"></span>**3** And ye have respect to him who
wears a splendid dress, and say to him, “Sit thou here honorably,” and
ye say to the poor, “Stand thou there,” or, “Sit here under my foot-
stool;”

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Are ye not condemned in yourselves,
and become judges of evil thoughts?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p7"></span>**5** Hear, my beloved brethren, Has not
God chosen the poor of this world *to be* rich in faith and heirs of the
kingdom which he hath promised to them who love Him?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p8"></span>**6** But ye have despised the poor. Do
not the rich domineer over you, and draw you before judgment-seats?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p9"></span>**7** Do they not blaspheme the good name
which is called on you?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p10"></span>**8** If indeed ye fulfill the royal
law, according to Scripture,

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p11"></span>**9** “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself,” ye do well: but if ye respect persons, ye commit sin, and are
reproved by the law as transgressors.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p12"></span>**10** For whosoever shall keep the
whole law, and yet offend in one thing, becomes guilty of all:

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p13"></span>**11** For he who hath said, “Thou shalt
not commit adultery,” hath said also, “Thou shalt not kill.” Now if thou
committest no adultery, yet if thou killest, thou becomest a
transgressor of the law.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p14"></span>**12** So speak ye and so do, as those
who shall be judged by the law of liberty.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p15"></span>**13** For judgment will be without
mercy to him who hath not shewed mercy; and mercy glorieth against
judgment.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p16"></span>**14** What does it avail, my brethren,
if any one say that he hath faith, and have not works? Can faith save
him?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p17"></span>**15** Now, if a brother or a sister be
naked and in want of daily bread, and one of you say to them, “Go away
in peace, be warmed and be filled;*”*

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p18"></span>**16** Though ye give them not those
things which are necessary for the body, what does it avail?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p19"></span>**17** Even so faith, if it hath no
works, being by itself, is dead.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p20"></span>**18** Nay, rather, one may say, *“Thou*
hast faith and I have works; shew me thy faith without thy works, and I
will by my works shew thee my faith.”

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p21"></span>**19** Then believest that there is one
God; thou doest right: the devils also believe and tremble.

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p22"></span>**20** But wilt thou know, O vain man,
that faith without works is dead?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p23"></span>**21** Abraham our father, was he not
justified by works, when he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p24"></span>**22** Seest thou that faith co-operated
with his works, and faith was by works made perfect?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p25"></span>**23** And fulfilled was the Scripture
which saith, “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness:” and he was called the Friend of God

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p26"></span>**24** Ye then see, that by works is man
justified, and not by faith only

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p27"></span>**25** In like manner also Rahab the
harlot, was not she justified by works, when she received the
messengers, and sent them forth another way?

<span id="ix.iii.ii-p28"></span>**26** For as the body without the soul
is dead, so also faith without works is dead.

<span id="ix.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p3"></span>**1** Be not many masters, my brethren,
knowing that we shall receive greater judgment:

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p4"></span>**2** For in many things we all offend.
If any one offend not in word, he is a perfect man, as one who can
bridle also the whole body.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Behold, we put bridles in horses’
months, that they may obey us, and we turn about their whole body.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p6"></span>**4** Behold also the ships, however
large they may be and driven by fierce winds, yet they are turned about
by a very small helm wherever the will of the pilot wishes.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p7"></span>**5** So also the tongue is a very small
member and boasts great things.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p8"></span>**6** Behold, a little fire, what
quantity of wood it burns! And the tongue is a fire, and a world of
iniquity. So is the tongue among our members; it defiles the whole body
and sets on fire the whole course of nature, and it is set on fire by
hell.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p9"></span>**7** For every kind of beasts, and of
birds, and of serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed and has been
tamed by mankind:

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p10"></span>**8** But the tongue no man can tame,
an unrestrainable evil, full of deadly poison.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p11"></span>**9** By it we bless God, even the
Father; and by it we curse men made after his likeness!

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p12"></span>**10** From the same mouth proceeds
blessing and cursing! These things, my brethren, ought not to be so.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p13"></span>**11** Does a fountain from the same
opening send forth the sweet and the bitter?

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p14"></span>**12** Can a fig-tree, my brethren,
bear olive-berries; or a vine, figs? so no fountain can bring forth
briny and sweet water.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p15"></span>**13** Who is wise and intelligent
among you? Let him shew by a good conduct his works with meekness of
wisdom.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p16"></span>**14** But if ye have bitter emulation
and contention in your heart, glory not, and lie not against the truth.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p17"></span>**15** This is not the wisdom which
comes from above, but earthly, animal, demoniacal:

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p18"></span>**16** For where emulation and
contention *are,* there is confusion and every evil work.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p19"></span>**17** But the wisdom which is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, humane, tractable, full of mercy
and of good works, not officiously prying, not dissembling:

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p20"></span>**18** And the fruit of righteousness
is sown in peace by those who make peace.

<span id="ix.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p3"></span>**1** Whence wars and fightings among
you? are they not hence,--from your lusts which war in your members?

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p4"></span>**2** Ye covet and have not; ye envy and
emulate, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because
ye do not ask;

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p5"></span>**3** Ye ask and receive not, because ye
ask amiss, that ye may spend it on your lusts.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p6"></span>**4** Adulterers and adulteresses! know
ye not, that the friendship of the world is enmity to God? Whosoever
then will be a friend of the world, becomes the enemy of God.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p7"></span>**5** Do ye think that the Scripture
speaks in vain? Does the Spirit who dwells in us, lust to envy?

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p8"></span>**6** Nay, he giveth more grace: hence He
saith, God resists the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p9"></span>**7** Be ye then subject to God; resist
the devil and he will flee from you.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p10"></span>**8** Draw nigh to God, and he will draw
nigh to you: cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify *your* hearts,
ye double-minded.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p11"></span>**9** Be afflicted and mourn and weep;
let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to sorrow.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p12"></span>**10** Be humbled before God, and he
will exalt you.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p13"></span>**11** Defame not one another, brethren;
he who defames a brother and judges his brother, defames the law and
judges the law; but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the
law, but a judge.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p14"></span>**12** One is the lawgiver, who can save
and destroy; who art thou who judgest another?

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p15"></span>**13** Come now ye who say, “To-day, or,
to-morrow, we shall go into the city and pass there a year, and trade
and make gain:” who know not what is to be to-morrow; for what is your
life?

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p16"></span>**14** It is indeed a vapor, which for a
short time appears, and then vanishes away.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p17"></span>**15** On the contrary ye ought to say,
“If the Lord will, and we live, we shall do this or that.” But now ye
glory in your presumptions: all such glorying is evil. He then who knows
to do good and doeth it not, is guilty of sin.

<span id="ix.iii.v"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="ix.iii.v-p3"></span>**1** Come now ye rich, weep and howl for
your miseries, which shall come upon *you.*

<span id="ix.iii.v-p4"></span>**2** Your riches are become rotten, and
your garments are eaten by moths;

<span id="ix.iii.v-p5"></span>**3** Your gold and silver are rusted, and
their rust will be a witness against you, and shall eat all your flesh
as fire: ye have heaped together a treasure for the last days.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p6"></span>**4** Behold the wages of the workmen, who
have reaped your fields, fraudulently kept back by you, loudly cry; and
the cries of those who have been reaping have entered into the ears of
the Lord of Sabaoth.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p7"></span>**5** In pleasures have ye lived on the
earth, and have been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in a day
of slaughter.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p8"></span>**6** Ye have condemned *and* killed the
just; and he does not resist you.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p9"></span>**7** Be patient then, brethren, until the
coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waits for the precious fruit
of the earth, having long patience for it, until he receives the early
and the latter rain.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p10"></span>**8** Be ye then also patient; strengthen
your hearts; because the coming of the Lord is nigh.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p11"></span>**9** Groan not one against another,
brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold, the Judge stands before the
door.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p12"></span>**10** Take, my brethren, the prophets,
who have spoken in the name of the Lord, as an example of suffering
affliction, and of patience.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p13"></span>**11** Behold, we count them blessed who
endure: ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord, that he is very merciful and compassionate.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p14"></span>**12** But above all things, my brethren,
swear not, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath;
but let yours be, yea, yea; no, no; lest ye fall into condemnation.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p15"></span>**13** Is any one afflicted among you?
let him pray: is any cheerful? let him sing psalms:

<span id="ix.iii.v-p16"></span>**14** Is any sick among you? let him
call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing
him with oil in the name of the Lord;

<span id="ix.iii.v-p17"></span>**15** And the prayer of faith shall save
the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p18"></span>**16** Confess mutually your sins, and
pray for one another, that ye may be healed: the efficacious prayer of a
righteous man availeth much.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p19"></span>**17** Elias was a man subject to
passions in the like manner as we; and he earnestly prayed that it might
not rain; and it rained not on the earth for three years and six months:

<span id="ix.iii.v-p20"></span>**18** And he prayed again, and the
heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth its fruit.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p21"></span>**19** My brethren, if any one among you
err from the truth, and some one convert him;

<span id="ix.iii.v-p22"></span>**20** Let him know, that he who converts
a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and
shall cover a multitude of sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Peter](cc45036)
