[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc45013)  [Next](cc45015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="v.iv.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Behold, what manner of love the
Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God:
therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.

<span id="v.iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Videte (*vel, videtis*) qualem
charitatem dedit nobis Pater, ut filii Dei nominemur: propterea mundus
non novit nos, quia non novit ipsum.

<span id="v.iv.i-p4"></span>**2**. Beloved, now are we the sons of God,
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

<span id="v.iv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Dilecti, nunc filii Dei sumus; et
nondum apparuit quid erimus: scimus antera quod si apparuerit, similes
ei erimus; quia videbimus eum sicuti est.

<span id="v.iv.i-p6"></span>**3**. And every man that hath this hope in
him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

<span id="v.iv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et omnis qui habet hanc spem in eo,
purificat seipsum, quemadmodum ille purus est.

<span id="v.iv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.i-p9"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p10"></span>**1** *Behold* The second argument is from
the dignity and excellency of our calling; for it was not common honor,
he says, that the heavenly Father bestowed on us, when he adopted us as
his children. This being so great a favor, the desire for purity ought
to be kindled in us, so as to be conformed to his image; nor, indeed,
can it be otherwise, but that he who acknowledges himself to be one of
God’s children should purify himself. And to make this exhortation more
forcible, he amplifies the favor of God; for when he says, that *love
has been bestowed*, he means that it is from mere bounty and benevolence
that God makes us his children; for whence comes to us such a dignity,
except from the love of God? Love, then, is declared here to be
gratuitous. There is, indeed, an impropriety in the language; but the
Apostle preferred speaking thus rather than not to express what was
necessary to be known. He, in short, means that the more abundantly
God’s goodness has been manifested towards us, the greater are our
obligations to him, according to the teaching of Paul, when he besought
the Romans by the mercies of God to present themselves as pure
sacrifices to him. (<span id="v.iv.i-p10.1"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.i-p10.1"></span>..md)
We are at the same time taught, as I have said, that the adoption of all
the godly is gratuitous, and does not depend on any regard to works.

<span id="v.iv.i-p11"></span>What the sophists say, that God foresees
those who are worthy to be adopted, is plainly refuted by these words,
for, in this way the gift would not be gratuitous. It behooves us
especially to understand this doctrine; for since the only cause of our
salvation is adoption, and since the Apostle testifies that this flows
from the mere love of God alone, there is nothing left to our worthiness
or to the merits of works. For why are we sons? Even because God began
to love us freely, when we deserved hatred rather than love. And as the
Spirit is a pledge of our adoption, it hence follows, that if there be
any good in us, it ought not to be set up in opposition to the grace of
God, but, on the contrary, to be ascribed to him.

<span id="v.iv.i-p12"></span>When he says that we are *called*, or
*named*, the expression is not without its meaning; for it is God who
with his own mouth declares us to be sons, as he gave a name to Abraham
according to what he was.  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p14"></span>*Therefore the world* It is a trial that
grievously assaults our faith, that we are not so much regarded as God’s
children, or that no mark of so great an excellency appears in us, but
that, on the contrary, almost the whole world treats us with ridicule
and contempt. Hence it can hardly be inferred from our present state
that God is a Father to us, for the devil so contrives all things as to
obscure this benefit. He obviates this offense by saying that we are not
as yet acknowledged to be such as we are, because the world knows not
God: a remarkable example of this very thing is found in Isaac and
Jacob; for though both were chosen by God, yet Ishmael persecuted the
former with laughter and taunts; and Esau, the latter with threats and
the sword. However, then, we may be oppressed by the world, still our
salvation remains safe and secure.

<span id="v.iv.i-p15"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p16"></span>**2** *Now are we the sons of God* He comes
now to what every one knows and feels himself; for though the ungodly
may not entice us to give up our hope, yet our present condition is very
short of the glow of God’s children; for as to our body we are dust and
a shadow, and death is always before our eyes; we are also subject to
thousand miseries, and the soul is exposed to innumerable evils; so that
we find always a hell within us. The more necessary it is that all our
thoughts should be withdrawn from the present view of things, lest the
miseries by which we are on every side surrounded and almost
overwhelmed, should shake our faith in that felicity which as yet lies
hid. For the Apostle’s meaning is this, that we act very foolishly when
we estimate what God has bestowed on us according to the present state
of things, but that we ought with undoubting faith to hold to that which
does not yet appear.

<span id="v.iv.i-p17"></span>*But we know that when he shall appear* The
conditional particle ought to be rendered as an adverb of time, *when*
But the verb *appear* means not the same thing as when he used it
before. The Apostle has just said, *it does not yet appear what we shall
be*, because the fruit of our adoption is as yet hid, for in heaven is
our felicity, and we are now far away traveling on the earth; for this
fading life, constantly exposed to hundred deaths, is far different from
that eternal life which belongs to the children of God; for being
enclosed as slaves in the prison of our flesh, we are far distant from
the full sovereignty of heaven and earth. But the verb now refers to
Christ, *when*, *he shall appear*; for he teaches the same thing with
Paul, in Colossians, where he says,

<span id="v.iv.i-p18"></span>“Your life is hid with Christ in God: when
Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory.”  
(<span id="v.iv.i-p18.2"></span>[Col.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.i-p18.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p19"></span>For our faith cannot stand otherwise than
by looking to the coming of Christ. The reason why God defers the
manifestation of our glory is this, because Christ is not manifested in
the power of his kingdom. This, then, is the only way of sustaining our
faith, so that we may wait patiently for the life promised to us. As
soon as any one turns away the least from Christ, he must necessarily
fail.  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p21"></span>The word *to know*, shews the certainty of
faith, in order to distinguish it from opinion. Neither simple nor
universal knowledge is here intended, but that which every one ought to
have for himself, so that he may feel assured that he will be sometime
like Christ. Though, then, the manifestation of our glory is connected
with the coming of Christ, yet our knowledge of this is well founded.

<span id="v.iv.i-p22"></span>*We shall be like him* He does not
understand that we shall be equal to him; for there must be some
difference between the head and the members; but we shall be like him,
because *he will make our vile body conformable to his glorious body*,
as Paul also teaches us in <span id="v.iv.i-p22.1"></span>[Php
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span id="v.iv.i-p22.1"></span>.
For the Apostle intended shortly to shew that the final end of our
adoption is, that what has in order preceded in Christ, shall at length
be completed in us.

<span id="v.iv.i-p23"></span>The reason that is added may, however, seem
inappropriate. For if to see Christ makes us like him, we shall have
this in common with the wicked, for they shall also see his glory. To
this I reply, that this is to see him as a friend, which will not be the
*case* with the wicked, for they will dread his presence; nay, they will
shun God’s presence, and be filled with terror; his glow will so dazzle
their eyes, that they will be stupefied and confounded. For we see that
Adam, conscious of having done wrong, dreaded the presence of God. And
God declared this by Moses, as a general truth as to men,

<span id="v.iv.i-p24"></span>“No man shall see me and live.” (<span
id="v.iv.i-p24.1"></span>[Ex
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.i-p24.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p25"></span>For how can it be otherwise but that God’s
majesty, as a consuming fire, will consume us as though we were stubble,
so great is the weakness of our flesh. But as far as the image of God is
renewed in us, we have eyes prepared to see God. And now, indeed, God
begins to renew in us his own image, but in what a small measure! Except
then we be stripped of all the corruption of the flesh, we shall not be
able to behold God face to face.

<span id="v.iv.i-p26"></span>And this is also expressed here, *as he is*
He does not, indeed, say, that there is no seeing of God now; but as
Paul says,

<span id="v.iv.i-p27"></span>“We see now through a glass, darkly.”  
(<span id="v.iv.i-p27.2"></span>[1Co
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.i-p27.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iv.i-p28"></span>But he elsewhere makes a difference between
this way of living, and the seeing of the eye. In short, God now
presents himself to be seen by us, not such as he is, but such as we can
comprehend. Thus is fulfilled what is said by Moses, that we see only as
it were his back, (<span id="v.iv.i-p28.1"></span>[Ex
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.i-p28.1"></span>;.md)
for there is too much brightness in his face.

<span id="v.iv.i-p29"></span>We must further observe, that the manner
which the Apostle mentions is taken from the effect, not from the cause;
for he does not teach us, that we shall be like him, because we shall
see him; but he hence proves that we shall be partakers of the divine
glory, for except our nature were spiritual, and endued with a heavenly
and blessed immortality, it could never come so nigh to God yet the
perfection of glory will not be so great in us, that our seeing will
enable us to comprehend all that God is; for the distance between us and
him will be even then very great.

<span id="v.iv.i-p30"></span>But when the Apostle says, that *we shall
see him as he is*, he intimates a new and an ineffable manner of seeing
him, which we enjoy not now; for as long as we walk by faith, as Paul
teaches us, we are absent from him. And when he appeared to the fathers,
it was not in his own essence, but was ever seen under symbols. Hence
the majesty of God, now hid, will then only be in itself seen, when the
veil of this mortal and corruptible nature shall be removed.

<span id="v.iv.i-p31"></span>Refined questions I pass by: for we see how
Augustine tormented himself with these, and yet never succeeded, both in
his Epistles to Paulus and Fortunatus, and in the City of God, (2:2,)
and in other places. What he says, however, is worthy of being observed,
that the way in which we live avails more in this inquiry than the way
in which we speak, and that we must beware, lest by wrangling as to the
manner in which God can be seen, we lose that peace and holiness without
which no one shall see him.

<span id="v.iv.i-p32"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p33"></span>**3** *And every man that hath this hope*
He now draws this inference, that the desire for holiness should not
grow cold in us, because our happiness has not as yet appeared, for that
hope is sufficient; and we know that what is hoped for is as yet hid.
The meaning then is, that though we have not Christ now present before
our eyes, yet if we hope in him, it cannot be but that this hope will
excite and stimulate us to follow purity, for it leads us straight to
Christ, whom we know to be a perfect pattern of purity.

<span id="v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004.md)<span id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Whosoever committeth sin
transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Quicunque facit peccatum, etiam
iniquitatem facit; et peccatum est iniquitas.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p4"></span>**5**. And ye know that he was manifested
to take away our sins; and in him is no sin.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p5"></span>**5**. Porro nostis quod ille apparuit ut
peccata nostra tolleret; et peccatum in eo non est.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p6"></span>**6**. Whosoever abideth in him sinneth
not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p7"></span>**6**. Quisquis in eo manet, non peccat;
quisquis peccat, non vidit eum, nec novit eum.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.ii-p9"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p10"></span>**4** *Whosoever committeth*, or *doeth,
sin*. The Apostle has already shown how ungrateful we must be to God, if
we make but little account of the honor of adoption, by which he of his
own goodwill anticipates us, and if we do not, at least, render him
mutual love. He, at the same time, introduced this admonition, that our
love ought not to be diminished, because the promised happiness is
deferred. But now, as men are wont to indulge themselves more than they
ought, in evils, he reproves this perverse indulgence, declaring that
all they who sin are wicked and transgressors of the law. For it is
probable that there were then those who extenuated their vices by this
kind of flattery, “It is no wonder if we sin, because we are men; but
there is a great difference between sin and iniquity.”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p11"></span>This frivolous excuse the Apostle now
dissipates, when he defines sin to be a transgression of the divine law;
for his object was to produce hatred and horror as to sin. The word
*sin* seems light to some; but iniquity or transgression of the law
cannot appear to be so easily forgiven. But the Apostle does not make
sins equal, by charging all with iniquity who sin; but he means simply
to teach us, that sin arises from a contempt of God, and that by
sinning, the law is violated. Hence this doctrine of John has nothing in
common with the delirious paradoxes of the Stoics.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p12"></span>Besides, to *sin* here, does not mean to
offend in some instances; nor is the word *sin* to be taken for every
fault or wrong a man may commit.; but he calls that sin, when men with
their whole heart run into evil, nor does he understand that men sin,
except those who are given up to sin. For the faithful, who are as yet
tempted by the lusts of the flesh, are not to be deemed guilty of
iniquity, though they are not pure or free from sin, but as sin does not
reign in them, John says that they do not sin, as I shall presently
explain more fully.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p13"></span>The import of the passage is, that the
perverse life of those who indulge themselves in the liberty of sinning,
is hateful to God, and cannot be borne with by him, because it is
contrary to his Law. It does not hence follow, nor can it be hence
inferred, that the faithful are iniquitous; because they desire to obey
God, and abhor their own vices, and that in every instance; and they
also form their own life, as much as in *them* lieth, according to the
law. But when there is a deliberate purpose to sin, or a continued
course in sin, then the law is transgressed.  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md)

<span id="v.iv.ii-p19"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p20"></span>**5** *And ye know that he was
manifested,* or, *hath appeared*. He shews by another argument how much
sin and faith differ from one another; for it is the office of Christ to
take away sins, and for this end was he sent by the Father; and it is by
faith we partake of Christ’s virtue. Then he who believes in Christ is
necessarily cleansed from his sins. But it is said in <span
id="v.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>[Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md)<span id="v.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>,
that Christ takes away sins, because he atoned for them by the sacrifice
of his death, that they may not be imputed to us before God: John means
in this place that Christ really, and, so to speak, actually takes away
sins, because through him our old man is crucified, and his Spirit, by
means of repentance, mortifies the flesh with all its lusts. For the
context does not allow us to explain this of the remission of sins; for,
as I have said, he thus reasons, “They who cease not to sin, render void
the benefits derived from Christ, since he came to destroy the reigning
power of sin.” This belongs to the sanctification of the Spirit.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p21"></span>*And in him is no sin* He does not speak
of Christ personally, but of his whole body.  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) Wherever Christ diffuses his efficacious
grace, he denies that there is any more room for sin. He, therefore,
immediately draws this inference, that they sin not who remain in
Christ. For if he dwells in us by faith, he performs his own work, that
is, he cleanses us from sins. It hence appears what it is to *sin* For
Christ by his Spirit does not perfectly renew us at once, or in an
instant, but he continues our renovation throughout life. It cannot then
be but that the faithful are exposed to sin as long as they live in the
world; but as far as the kingdom of Christ prevails in them, sin is
abolished. In the meantime they are designated according to the
prevailing principle, that is, they are said to be righteous and to live
righteously, because they sincerely aspire to righteousness.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p23"></span>They are said *not to sin*, because they
consent not to sin, though they labor under the infirmity of the flesh;
but, on the contrary, they struggle with groaning, so that they can
truly testify with Paul that they do the evil they would not.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p24"></span>He says that the faithful *abide* in
Christ, because we are by faith united to him, and made one with him.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p25"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p26"></span>**6** *Whosoever sinneth hath not seen
him.* According to his usual manner he added the opposite clause, that
we may know that faith in Christ and knowledge of him are vainly
pretended, except there be newness of life. For Christ is never dormant
where he reigns, but the Spirit renders effectual his power. And it may
be rightly said of him, that he puts sin to flight, not otherwise than
as the sun drives away darkness by its own brightness. But we are again
taught in this place how strong and efficacious is the knowledge of
Christ; for it transforms us into his image. So by *seeing* and
*knowing* we are to understand no other thing than faith.

<span id="v.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007.md)<span id="v.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p2"></span>**7**. Little children, let no man deceive
you: he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p3"></span>**7**. Filioli, nemo vos decipiat; qai
facit justitiam justus est, quemadmodum ille justus est.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p4"></span>**8**. He that committeth sin is of the
devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p5"></span>**8**. Qui facit peccatum, ex diabolo est;
quia ab initio diabolus peccat: in hoc manifestus est Filius Dei, ut
solvat opera diaboli.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p6"></span>**9**. Whosoever is born of God doth not
commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he
is born of God.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p7"></span>**9**. Quisquis natus est ex Deo, peccatum
non facit, quoniam semen ejus in ipso manet; et non potest peccare, quia
ex Deo genitus est.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p8"></span>**10**. In this the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the devil:

<span id="v.iv.iii-p9"></span>**10**. In hoc manifesti sunt filii Dei et
filii Diaboli, —

<span id="v.iv.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.iii-p11"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p12"></span>**7.** *He that doeth righteousness* The
Apostle shews here that newness of life is testified by good works; nor
does that likeness of which he has spoken, that is between Christ and
his members, appear, except by the fruits they bring forth; as though he
had said, “Since it behooves us to be conformed to Christ, the truth and
evidence of this must appear in our life.” The exhortation is the same
with that of Paul in Galatians

<span id="v.iv.iii-p13"></span>“If ye live in the Spirit, walk also in
the Spirit.”  
(<span id="v.iv.iii-p13.2"></span>[Ga
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)<span id="v.iv.iii-p13.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.iv.iii-p14"></span>For many would gladly persuade themselves
that they have this righteousness buried in their hearts, while iniquity
evidently occupies their feet, and hands, and tongue, and eyes.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p15"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p16"></span>**8** *He that committeth sin,* This
word, *to commit*, or *to do*, refers also to outward works, so that the
meaning is, that there is no life of God and of Christ, where men act
perversely and wickedly, but that such are, on the contrary, the slaves
of the devil; and by this way of speaking he sets forth more fully how
unlike they are to Christ. For as he has before represented Christ as
the fountain of all righteousness, so now, on the other hand, he
mentions the devil as the beginning of sin. He denied that any one
belongs to Christ except he who is righteous and shews himself to be
such by his works; he now assigns to the devil all others, and subjects
them to his government, in order that we may know that there is no
middle condition, but that Satan exercises his tyranny where the
righteousness of Christ possesses not the primacy.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p17"></span>There are not however two adverse
principles, such as the Manicheans have imagined; for we know that the
devil is not wicked by nature or by creation, but became so through
defection. We know also that he is not equal to God, so that he can with
equal right or authority contend with him, but that he is unwillingly
under restraint, so that he can do nothing except at the nod and with
the permission of his Creator. John, in the last place, in saying that
some were born of God and some of the devil, imagined no tradition such
as the Manicheans dreamt of; but he means that the former are governed
and guided by the Spirit of God, and that the others are led astray by
Satan, as God grants to him this power over the unbelieving.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p18"></span>*For the Devil sinneth from the
beginning* As before he spoke not of Christ personally, when he said
that he is righteous, but mentioned him as the fountain and the cause of
righteousness; so now, when he says that the Devil sins, he includes his
whole body, even all the reprobate; as though he had said, this belongs
to the Devil, to entice men to sin. It hence follows, that his members,
and all who are ruled by him, give themselves up to commit sin. But the
beginning which the Apostle mentions, is not from eternity, as when he
says that the Word is from the beginning, for there is a wide difference
between God and creatures. Beginning as to God, refers to no time.
Since, then, the Word was always with God, you can find no point of time
in which he began to be, but you must necessarily admit his eternity.
But here John meant no other thing than that the Devil had been an
apostate since the creation of the world, and that from that time he had
never ceased to scatter his poison among men.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p19"></span>*For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested* He repeats in other words what he had before said, that
Christ came to take away sins. Hence two conclusions are to be drawn,
that those in whom sin reigns cannot be reckoned among the members of
Christ, and that they can by no means belong to his body; for wherever
Christ puts forth his own power, he puts the Devil to flight as well as
sin. And this is what John immediately adds; for the next sentence,
where he says that those who sin not are born of God, is a conclusion
from what is gone before. It is an argument drawn from what is
inconsistent, as I have already said; for the kingdom of Christ, which
brings righteousness with it, cannot admit of sin. But I have already
said what *not to sin* means. He does not make the children of God
wholly free from all sin; but he denies that any can really glory in
this distinction, except those who from the heart strive to form their
life in obedience to God.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p20"></span>The Pelagians, indeed, and the Catharians
did formerly make a wrong use of this passage, when they vainly imagined
that the faithful are in this world endued with angelic purity; and in
our own age some of the Anabaptists have renewed this dotage. But all
those who dream of a perfection of this kind, sufficiently shew what
stupid consciences they must have. But the words of the Apostle are so
far from countenancing their error, that they are sufficient to confute
it.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p21"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p22"></span>He says that they *sin not* who are born
of God. Now, we must consider, whether God wholly regenerates us at
once, or whether the remains of the old man continue in us until death.
If regeneration is not as yet full and complete, it does not exempt us
from the bondage of sin except in proportion to its own extent. It hence
appears that it cannot be but that the children of God are not free from
sins, and that they daily sin, that is, as far as they have still some
remnants of their old nature. Nevertheless, what the Apostle contends
for stands unalterable, that the design of regeneration is to destroy
sin, and that all who are born of God lead a righteous and a holy life,
because the Spirit of God restrains the lusting of sin.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p23"></span>The Apostle means the same thing by *the
seed* of God; for God’s Spirit so forms the hearts of the godly for holy
affections, that the flesh and its lusts do not prevail, but being
subdued and put as it were under a yoke, they are checked and
restrained. In short, the Apostle ascribes to the Spirit the sovereignty
in the elect, who by his power represses sin and suffers it not to rule
and reign.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p24"></span>*And he cannot sin* Here the Apostle
ascends higher, for he plainly declares that the hearts of the godly are
so effectually governed by the Spirit of God, that through an inflexible
disposition they follow his guidance. This is indeed far removed from
the doctrine of the Papists. The Sorbons, it is true, confess that the
will of man, unless assisted by God’s Spirit, cannot desire what is
right; but they imagine such a motion of the Spirit as leaves to us the
free choice of good and evil. Hence they draw forth merits, because we
willingly obey the influence of the Spirit, which it is in our power to
resist. In short, they desire the grace of the Spirit to be only this,
that we are thereby enabled to choose right if we will. John speaks here
far otherwise; for he not only shews that we cannot sin, but also that
the power of the Spirit is so effectual, that it necessarily retains us
in continual obedience to righteousness. Nor is this the only passage of
Scripture which teaches us that the will is so formed that it cannot be
otherwise than right. For God testifies that he gives a new heart to his
children, and promises to do this, that they may walk in his
commandments. Besides, John not only shews how efficaciously God works
once in man, but plainly declares that the Spirit continues his grace in
us to the last, so that inflexible perseverance is added to newness of
life. Let us not, then, imagine with the Sophists that it is some
neutral movement, which leaves men free either to follow or to reject;
but let us know that our own hearts are so ruled by God’s Spirit, that
they constantly cleave to righteousness.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p25"></span>Moreover; what the Sophists absurdly
object, may be easily refuted: they say that thus the will is taken away
from man; but they say so falsely: for the will is a natural power; but,
as nature is corrupted, it has only depraved inclinations. It is hence
necessary that the Spirit of God should renew it, in order that it may
begin to be good. And, then, as men would immediately fall away from
what is good, it is necessary that the same Spirit should carry on what
he has begun, to the end.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p26"></span>As to merit, the answer is obvious, for
it cannot be deemed strange that men merit nothing; and yet good works,
which flow from the grace of the Spirit, do not cease to be so deemed,
because they are voluntary. They have also a reward, for they are by
grace ascribed to men as though they were their own.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p27"></span>But here a question arises, Whether the
fear and love of God can be extinguished in any one who has been
regenerated by the Spirit of God? for that this cannot be, seems to be
the import of the Apostle’s words. They who think otherwise refer to the
example of David, who for a time labored under such a beastly stupor,
that not a spark of grace appeared in him. Moreover, in <span
id="v.iv.iii-p27.1"></span>[Ps
51:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.iv.iii-p27.1"></span>, he prays for the restoration of the Spirit.
It hence follows that he was deprived of him. I, however, doubt not but
that the seed, communicated when God regenerates his elect, as it is
incorruptible, retains its virtue perpetually. I, indeed, grant that it
may sometimes be stifled, as in the case of David; but still, when all
religion seemed to be extinct in him, a live coal was hid under the
ashes. Satan, indeed, labors to root out whatever is from God in the
elect; but when the utmost is permitted to him, there ever remains a
hidden root, which afterwards springs up. But John does not speak of one
act, as they say, but of the continued course of life.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p28"></span>Some fanatics dream of something I know
not what, that is, of an eternal seed in the elect, which they always
bring from their mother’s womb; but for this purpose they very
outrageously pervert the words of John; for he does not speak of eternal
election, but begins with regeneration.

<span id="v.iv.iii-p29"></span>There are also those who are doubly
frantic, who hold, under this pretense, that, everything is lawful to
the faithful, that is, because John says that they cannot sin. They then
maintain that we may follow indiscriminately whatever our inclinations
may lead us to. Thus they take the liberty to commit adultery, to steal,
and to murder, because there can be no sin where God’s Spirit reigns.
But far otherwise is the meaning of the Apostle; for he denies that the
faithful sin for this reason, because God has engraven his law on their
hearts, according to what the Prophet says (<span
id="v.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033.md)<span
id="v.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv.iii-p30"></span><span id="v.iv.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iii-p31"></span>**10** *In this the children of God are
manifest.* He shortly draws this conclusion, that those in vain claim a
place and a name among the children of God, who do not prove themselves
to be such by a pious and holy life, since by this evidence they shew
that they differ from the children of the devil. But he does not mean
that they are thus manifested, so as to be openly recognized by the
whole world; but his meaning is only this, that the fruit and adoption
always appear in the life.

<span id="v.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010.md)<span id="v.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p2"></span>**10**. — Whosoever doeth not righteousness
is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p3"></span>**10**. — Quisquis non facit justitiam, non
est ex Deo, et qui non diligit fratrem suum.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p4"></span>**11**. For this is the message that ye
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p5"></span>**11**. Quia haec est praedicatio quam
audistis ab initio, ut mutuo nos diligamus.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p6"></span>**12**. Not as Cain, *who* was of that
wicked one, and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because his
own works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p7"></span>**12**. Non sicut Cain, qui ex maligno
erat, occidit fratrem suum; et qua de causa eum occidit? Quia opera ejus
mala erant, fratris autem justa.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p8"></span>**13**. Marvel not, my brethren, if the
world hate you.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p9"></span>**13**. Ne miremini, fratres mei, si vos
mundus odit.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.iv-p11"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p12"></span>**10** *Whosoever doeth not
righteousness.* To do righteousness and to do sin, are here set in
opposition the one to the other. Then, to do righteousness is no other
thing than to fear God from the heart, and to walk in his commandments
as far as human weakness will permit; for though righteousness in a
strict sense is a perfect keeping of the law, from which the faithful
are always far off; yet as offenses and fallings are not imputed to them
by God, righteousness is that imperfect obedience which they render to
him. But John declares that all who do not live righteously are not of
God, because all those whom God calls, he regenerates by his Spirit.
Hence newness of life is a perpetual evidence of divine adoption.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p13"></span>*Neither he who loveth not his brother*.
He accommodates a general doctrine to his own purpose. For hitherto he
has been exhorting the faithful to brotherly love; now, for the same
end, he refers to true righteousness. Hence this clause is added instead
of an explanation. But I have already stated the reason why the whole of
righteousness is included in brotherly love. The love of God holds,
indeed, the first place; but as on it depends love towards men, it is
often, as a part for the whole, comprehended under it, and also the
latter under the former. Then he declares that every one who is endued
with benevolence and humanity, is thus just, and is to be so deemed,
because love is rite fulfillment of the law. He confirms this
declaration by saying that the faithful had been so *taught* from the
beginning; for by these words he intimates that the statement which he
made ought not to have appeared new to them.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p14"></span><span id="v.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p15"></span>**12** *Not as Cain* This is another
confirmation, taken from what is contrary; for in the reprobate and the
children of the devil hatred reigns, and it holds, as it were, the chief
place in their life; and he brings forward Cain as an instance. It
served in the meantime to give them consolation, as he at length
concluded by saying, *Marvel not, if the world hate you.*

<span id="v.iv.iv-p16"></span>This explanation ought to be carefully
noticed, for men ever blunder as to the way of living, because they make
holiness to consist of fictitious works, and while they torment
themselves with trifles, they think themselves doubly acceptable to God,
as the monks, who proudly call their mode of living a state of
perfection; nor is there any other worship of God under the Papacy but a
mass of superstitions. But the Apostle testifies that this righteousness
alone is approved by God, that is, if we love one another; and further,
that the devil reigns where hatred, dissimulation, envy, and enmity
prevail. We ought, however, at the same time, to bear in mind what I
have already touched upon, that brotherly love, as it proceeds from the
love of God as an effect from a cause, is not disjoined from it, but on
the contrary is commended by John on this account, because it is an
evidence of our love to God.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p17"></span>By saying that *Cain was driven to slay
his brother, because his works were evil*, he intimates what I have
already stated, that when impiety rules, hatred occupies the first
place. He refers to Abel’s *righteous* works, that we may learn to
endure patiently when the world hates us gratuitously, without any just
provocation.

<span id="v.iv.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p2"></span>**14**. We know that we have passed from
death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not *his*
brother abideth in death.

<span id="v.iv.v-p3"></span>**14**. Nos scimus quod transierimus a morte
in vitam, quia diligimus fratres: qui non diligit fratrem, manet in
morte.

<span id="v.iv.v-p4"></span>**15**. Whosoever hateth his brother is a
murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.

<span id="v.iv.v-p5"></span>**15**. Omnis qui odit fratrem suum,
homicida est; et nostis quod omnis homicida, non habet vitam aeternam in
se manentem.

<span id="v.iv.v-p6"></span>**16**. Hereby perceive we the love *of
God*, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down
*our* lives for the brethren.

<span id="v.iv.v-p7"></span>**16**. In hoc cognoscimus charitatem, quod
ille pro nobis animam suam posuit: et nos debemus pro fratribus animas
ponere.

<span id="v.iv.v-p8"></span>**17**. But whoso hath this world’s good,
and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels *of
compassion* from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?

<span id="v.iv.v-p9"></span>**17**. Si quis habeat victum mundi, et
videat fratrem suum egentem, et claudat viscera sua ab eo, quomodo
charitas Dei in ipso manet?

<span id="v.iv.v-p10"></span>**18**. My little children, let us not love
in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.

<span id="v.iv.v-p11"></span>**18**. Filioli mei, ne diligamus sermone,
neque lingua, sed opere et veritate.

<span id="v.iv.v-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.v-p13"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p14"></span>**14** *We know.* He commends love to us by
a remarkable eulogy, because it is an evidence of a transition from
death to life. It hence follows that if we love the brethren we are
blessed, but that we are miserable if we hate them. There is no one who
does not wish to be freed and delivered from death. Those then who by
cherishing hatred willingly give themselves up to death, must be
extremely stupid and senseless. But when the Apostle says, that it is
known by love that we have passed into life, he does not mean that man
is his own deliverer, as though he could by loving the brethren rescue
himself from death, and procure life for himself; for he does not here
treat of the cause of salvation, but as love is the special fruit of the
Spirit, it is also a sure symbol of regeneration. Then the Apostle draws
an argument from the sign, and not from the cause. For as no one
sincerely loves his brethren, except he is regenerated by the Spirit of
God, he hence rightly concludes that the Spirit of God, who is life,
dwells in all who love the brethren. But it would be preposterous for
any one to infer hence, that life is obtained by love, since love is in
order of time posterior to it.

<span id="v.iv.v-p15"></span>The argument would be more plausible, were
it said that love makes us more certain of life: then confidence as to
salvation would recumb on works. But the answer to this is obvious; for
though faith is confirmed by all the graces of God as aids, yet it
ceases not to have its foundation in the mercy of God only. As for
instance, when we enjoy the light, we are certain that the sun shines;
if the sun shines on the place in which we are, we have a clearer view
of it; but *yet* when the visible rays do not come to us, we are
satisfied that the sun diffuses its brightness for our benefit. So when
faith is founded on Christ, some things may happen to assist it, still
it rests on Christ’s grace alone.

<span id="v.iv.v-p16"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p17"></span>**15** *Is a murderer* To stimulate us
still more to love, he shews how detestable before God is hatred. There
is no one who dreads not a murderer; nay, we all execrate the very name.
But the Apostle declares that all who hate their brethren are murderers.
He could have said nothing more atrocious; nor is what is said
hyperbolical, for we wish him to perish whom we hate. It does not matter
if a man keeps his hands from mischief; for the very desire to do harm,
as well as the attempt, is condemned before God: nay, when we do not
ourselves seek to do an injury, yet if we wish an evil to happen to our
brother from some one else, we are murderers.

<span id="v.iv.v-p18"></span>Then the Apostle defines the thing simply
as it is, when he ascribes murder to hatred. Hence is proved the folly
of men, that though they abominate the name, they yet make no account of
the crime itself. Whence is this? even because the external face of
things engrosses our thoughts; but the inward feeling comes to an
account before God. Let no one therefore extenuate any more so grievous
an evil. Let us learn to refer our judgments to the tribunal of God.

<span id="v.iv.v-p19"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p20"></span>**16** *Hereby perceive we*, or, *By this
we know*. He now shews what true love is; for it would not have been
enough to commend it, unless its power is understood. As an instance of
perfect love, he sets before us the example of Christ; for he, by not
sparing his own life, testified how much he loved us. This then is the
mark to which he bids them to advance. The sum of what is said is, that
our love is approved, when we transfer the love of ourselves to our
brethren, so that every one, in a manner forgetting himself, should seek
the good of others.  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md)

<span id="v.iv.v-p22"></span>It is, indeed, certain, that we are far
from being equal to Christ: but the Apostle recommends to us the
imitation of him; for though we do not overtake him, it is yet meet,
that we should follow his steps, though at a distance. Doubtless, since
it was the Apostle’s object to beat down the vain boasting of
hypocrites, who gloried that they had faith in Christ though without
brotherly love, he intimated by these words, that except this feeling
prevails in our hearts, we have no connection with Christ. Nor does he
yet, as I have said, set before us the love of Christ, so as to require
us to be equal to him; for what would this be but to drive us all to
despair? But he means that our feelings should be so formed and
regulated, that we may desire to devote our life and also our death,
first to God, and then to our neighbors.

<span id="v.iv.v-p23"></span>There is another difference between us and
Christ, — the virtue or benefit of our death cannot be the same. For the
wrath of God is not pacified by our blood, nor is life procured by our
death, nor is punishment due to others suffered by us. But the Apostle,
in this comparison, had not in view the end or the effect of Christ’s
death; but he meant only that our life should be formed according to his
example.

<span id="v.iv.v-p24"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p25"></span>**17** *But whose hath this world’s good*,
or, *If any one has the world’s sustenance*. He now speaks of the common
duties of love, which flow from that chief foundation, that is, when we
are prepared to serve our neighbors even to death. He, at the same time,
seems to reason from the greater to the less; for he who refuses to
alleviate by his goods the want of his brother, while his life is safe
and secure, much less would he expose for him his life to danger. Then
he denies that there is love in us, if we withhold help from our
neighbors. But he so recommends this external kindness, that at the same
time he very fitly expresses the right way of doing good, and what sort
of feeling ought to be in us.

<span id="v.iv.v-p26"></span>Let this, then, be the first proposition,
that no one truly loves his brethren, except he really shews this
whenever an occasion occurs; the second, that as far as any one has the
means, he is bound so far to assist his brethren, for the Lord thus
supplies us with the opportunity to exercise love; the third, that the
necessity of every one ought to be seen to, for as any one needs food
and drink or other things of which we have abundance, so he requires our
aid; the fourth, that no act of kindness, except accompanied with
sympathy, is pleasing to God. There are many apparently liberal, who yet
do not feel for the miseries of their brethren. But the Apostle requires
that our bowels should be opened; which is done, when we are endued with
such a feeling as to sympathize with others in their evils, no otherwise
than as though they were our own.

<span id="v.iv.v-p27"></span>*The love of God* Here he speaks of loving
the brethren; why then does he mention the love of God? even because
this principle is to be held, that it cannot be but that the love of God
will generate in us the love of the brethren.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) And thus God tries our love to him, when
he bids us to love men from a regard to himself, according to what is
said in <span id="v.iv.v-p28.1"></span>[Ps
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p28.1"></span>,

<span id="v.iv.v-p29"></span>“My goodness reaches not to thee, but
towards the saints who are on the earth is my will and my *care*.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p30"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p31"></span>**18.** *Let us not love in word* There is
a concession in this first clause; for we cannot love in tongue only;
but as many falsely pretend this, the Apostle *concedes*, according to
what is often done, the name of the thing to their dissimulation,
though, in the second clause, he reproves their vanity, when he denies
that there is reality except in the deed. For thus ought the words to be
explained, — Let us not profess by the tongue that we love, but prove it
by the deed; for this is the only true way of shewing love.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md)

<span id="v.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#019.md)<span id="v.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p2"></span>**19**. And hereby we know that we are of
the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p3"></span>**19**. Et in hoc cognoscimus quod ex
veritate sumus, et coram ipso persuadebimus corda nostra.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p4"></span>**20**. For if our heart condemn us, God is
greater than our heart, and knoweth all things.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p5"></span>**20**. Quod si accuset nos cor nostrum,
certe major est Deus corde nostro et novit omnia.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p6"></span>**21**. Beloved, if our heart condemn us
not, *then* have we confidence toward God.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p7"></span>**21**. Dilecti, si cor nostrum non
accuset, fiduciam habemus erga Deum:

<span id="v.iv.vi-p8"></span>**22**. And whatsoever we ask, we receive
of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are
pleasing in his sight.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p9"></span>**22**. Et siquid petierimus, accipimus ab
eo, quia praecepta ejus servamus, et quæ coram co placent facimus.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.vi-p11"></span><span id="v.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p12"></span>**19** *And hereby we know*, or, *by this
we know*. The word *truth*, he takes now in a different sense; but there
is a striking similarity in the words, — If we, in truth, love our
neighbors, we have an evidence that we are born of God, who is truth, or
that the truth of God dwells in us. But we must ever remember, that we
have not from love the knowledge which the Apostle mentions, as though
we were to seek from it the certainty of salvation. And doubtless we
know not otherwise that we are the children of God, than as he seals his
free adoption on our hearts by his own Spirit., and as we receive by
faith the sure pledge of it offered in Christ. Then love is accessory or
an inferior aid, a prop to our faith, not a foundation on which it
rests.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p13"></span>Why then does the Apostle say, *We shall
assure our hearts before God*? He reminds us by these words, that faith
does not exist without a good conscience; not that assurance arises from
it or depends on it, but that then only we are really and not falsely
assured of our union with God, when by the efficacy of his Holy Spirit
he manifests himself in our love. For it is ever meet and proper to
consider what the Apostle handles; for as he condemns feigned and false
profession of faith, he says that a genuine assurance before God we
cannot have, except his Spirit produces in us the fruit of love.
Nevertheless, though a good conscience cannot be separated from faith,
yet no one should hence conclude that we must look to our works in order
that our assurance may be certain.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p14"></span><span id="v.iv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p15"></span>**20.** *For if our heart condemn us* He
proves, on the other hand, that they in vain possess the name and
appearance of Christians, who have not the testimony of a good
conscience. For if any one is conscious of guilt, and is condemned by
his own heart, much less can he escape the judgment of God. It hence
follows, that faith is subverted by the disquiet of an evil conscience.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p16"></span>He says, that *God is greater than our
heart*, with reference to judgment, that is, because he sees much more
keenly than we do, and searches more minutely and judges more severely.
For this reason, Paul says, that though he was not conscious of wrong
himself, yet he was not therefore justified, (<span
id="v.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>[1Co
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>;.md)
for he knew that however carefully attentive he was to his office, he
erred in many things, and through inadvertence was ignorant of mistakes
which God perceived. What then the Apostle means is, that he who is
harassed and condemned by his own conscience, cannot escape the judgment
of God.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p17"></span>To the same purpose is what immediately
follows, that God *knoweth* or *seeth* *all things* For how can those
things be hid from him which we, who in comparison with him are dull and
blind, are constrained to see? Then take this explanation, “Since God
sees all things, he is far superior to our hearts.” For to render a
copulative as a causal particle is no new thing. The meaning is now
clear, that since the knowledge of God penetrates deeper than the
perceptions of our conscience, no one can stand before him except the
integrity of his conscience sustains him.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p18"></span>But here a question may be raised. It is
certain that the reprobate are sometimes sunk by Satan into such stupor,
that they are no longer conscious of their own evils, and. without alarm
or fear, as Paul says, rush headlong into perdition; it is also certain,
that hypocrites usually flatter themselves, and proudly disregard the
judgment of God, for, being inebriated by a false conceit as to their
own righteousness, they feel no convictions of sin. The answer to these
things is not difficult; hypocrites are deceived because they shun the
light; and the reprobate feel nothing, because they have departed from
God; and, indeed there is no security for an evil conscience but in
hiding-places.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p19"></span>But the Apostle speaks here of consciences
which God draws forth to the light, forces to his tribunal, and fills
with an apprehension of his judgment. Yet; it is at the same time
generally true, that we cannot have a calm peace except that which God’s
Spirit gives to purified hearts; for those who, as we have said, are
stupefied, often feel secret compunctions, and torment themselves in
their lethargy.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p20"></span><span id="v.iv.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p21"></span>**21** *If our heart condemns not* I have
already explained that this refers not to *hypocrites* nor to the gross
despisers of God. For how muchsoever the reprobate may approve of their
own lives, yet *the Lord*, as Solomon says, *weigheth their hearts*.
(<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>[Pr
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>..md)
This balance of God, by which he tries men, is such, that no one can
boast that he has a clean heart. The meaning, then, of the Apostle’s
words is, that then only we come in calm confidence into God’s presence,
when we bring with us the testimony of a heart conscious of what is
right and honest. That saying of Paul is indeed true, that by faith,
which relies on the grace of Christ, an *access* to God with confidence
is opened to us, (<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.2"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.2"></span>;.md)
and also, that peace is given us by faith, that our consciences may
stand peaceably before God. (<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.3"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.3"></span>..md)
But there is not much difference between these sentences; for Paul shews
the cause of confidence, but John mentions only an inseparable addition,
which necessarily adheres to it, though it be not the cause.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p22"></span>Here, however, arises a greater
difficulty, which seems to leave no confidence in the whole world; for
who can be found whose heart reproves him in nothing? To this I answer,
that the godly are thus reproved, that they may at the same time be
absolved. For it is indeed necessary that they should be seriously
troubled inwardly for their sins, that terror may lead them to humility
and to a hatred of themselves; but they presently flee to the sacrifice
of Christ, where they have sure peace. Yet the Apostle says, in another
sense, that they are not condemned, because however deficient they may
confess themselves to be in many things, they are still relieved by this
testimony of conscience, that they truly and from the heart fear God and
desire to submit to his righteousness. All who possess this godly
feeling, and at the same time know that all their endeavors, how
muchsoever they come short of perfection, yet please God, are justly
said to have a calm or a peaceful heart, because there is no inward
compunction to disturb their calm cheerfulness.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p23"></span><span id="v.iv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p24"></span>**22** *And whatsoever we ask* These two
things are connected, *confidence* and *prayer*. As before he shewed
that an evil conscience is inconsistent with confidence, so now he
declares that none can really pray to God but those who with a pure
heart, fear and rightly worship him. The latter follows from the former.
It is a general truth taught in Scripture, that the ungodly are not
heard by God, but that on the contrary, their sacrifices and prayers are
an abomination to him. Hence the door is here closed up against
hypocrites, lest they should in contempt of him rush into his presence.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p25"></span>He does not yet mean that a good
conscience must be brought, as though it obtained favor to our prayers.
Woe to us if we look on works, which have nothing in them but what is a
cause of fear and trembling. The faithful, then, cannot otherwise come
to God’s tribunal than by relying on Christ the Mediator. But as the
love of God is ever connected with faith, the Apostle, in order that he
might the more severely reprove hypocrites, deprives them of that
singular privilege with which God favors his own children; that is, lest
they should think that their prayers have an access to God.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p26"></span>By saying, *because we keep his
commandments*, he means not that confidence in prayer is founded on our
works; but he teaches this only, that true religion and the sincere
worship of God cannot be separated from faith. Nor ought it to appear
strange that he uses a causal particle, though he does not speak of a
cause; for an inseparable addition is sometimes mentioned as a cause as
when one says, Because the sun shines over us at midday, there is more
heat; but it does not follow that heat comes from light.

<span id="v.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
3:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023.md)<span
id="v.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii-p2"></span>**23**. And this is his commandment, That
we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another, as he gave us commandment.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p3"></span>**23**. Et hoc est praeceptum ejus, ut
eredamns riomini Filii ejus Jesu Christi, et nos diligamus invicem,
sicuti praeceptum dedit nobis.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p4"></span>**24**. And he that keepeth his
commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he
abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p5"></span>**24**. Qui servat praecepta ejus, in ipso
manet, et ipse in eo; atque in hoc cognoscimus quod manet in nobis, ex
Spiritu quem nobis dedit.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.vii-p7"></span><span id="v.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii-p8"></span>**23** *And this is his commandment* He
again accommodates a general truth to his own purpose. The meaning is,
that such is the discord between us and God, that we are kept off from
an access to him, except we are united by love to one another. At the
same time he does not here commend love alone, as before, but joins it
as the companion and attendant of faith.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p9"></span>The Sophists by their glosses distort
these words, as though liberty to pray were obtained by us, partly by
faith and partly by works. As John requires us to keep God’s
commandments that we may pray aright, and afterwards teaches us that
this keeping refers to faith and love, they conclude, that from these
two things ought we to derive confidence in prayer. But I have already
several times reminded you, that the subject here is not how or by what
means men may prepare themselves so that they may have confidence to
pray to God, for he speaks not here of the cause of ills or of any
worthiness. John only shews, that God favors none with the honor and
privilege of intercourse with himself but his own children, even those
who have been regenerated by his Spirit. The import, then, of what is
said is, Where the fear and love of God do not prevail, it cannot be
that God will hear prayer.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p10"></span>But if it be our purpose to obey his
commandments, let us see what he commands. He does not, however,
separate faith from love; but he requires both together from us. And
this is the reason why he uses the word *commandment* in the singular
number.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p11"></span>But this is a remarkable passage; for he
defines briefly as well as lucidly in what the whole perfection of a
holy life consists. There is then no reason that we should allege any
difficulty, since God does by no means lead us about through long
labyrinths, but simply and shortly sets before us what is right and what
he approves. Besides, in this brevity there is no obscurity, for he
shews to us clearly the beginning and the end of a life rightly formed.
But that a mention is here only made of brotherly love, while the love
of God is omitted**,** the reason is, as we have elsewhere said, that as
brotherly love flows from the love of God, so it is a sure and real
evidence of it.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p12"></span>*On the name of his Son* The name refers
to preaching; and this connection deserves to be noticed, for few
understand what it is to believe on Christ; but from this mode of
speaking, we may easily conclude that the only right faith is that which
embraces Christ as he is set forth in the Gospel. Hence also it is, that
there is no faith without teaching, as Paul also shews to us in <span
id="v.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>. We must at the same time observe, that the
Apostle includes faith in the knowledge of Christ; for he is the living
image of the Father, and in him are laid up all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. As soon, then, as we turn aside from him, we cannot do
anything else but wander in error.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p13"></span><span id="v.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vii-p14"></span>**24** *And he that keepeth his
commandments* He confirms what I have already stated, that the union we
have with God is evident when we entertain mutual love: not that our
union begins thereby, but that it cannot be fruitless or without effect
whenever it begins to exist. And he proves this by adding a reason,
because God does not abide in us, except his Spirit dwells in us. But
wherever the Spirit is, he necessarily manifests his power and
efficiency. We hence readily conclude, that none abide in God and are
united to him, but those who keep his commandments.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p15"></span>When, therefore, he says, *and by this we
know*, the copulative, *and*, as a reason is here given, is to be
rendered, “for,” or, “because.” But the character of the present reason
ought to be considered; for though the sentence in words agrees with
that of Paul, when he says that the Spirit testifies to our hearts that
we are the children of God, and that we through him cry to God, Abba,
Father, yet there is some difference in the sense; for Paul speaks of
the certainty of gratuitous adoption, which the Spirit of God seals on
our hearts; but John here regards the effects which the Spirit produces
while dwelling in us, as Paul himself does, when he says, that those are
God’s children who are led by the Spirit of God; for there also he is
speaking of the mortification of the flesh and newness of life.

<span id="v.iv.vii-p16"></span>The sum of what is said is, that it hence
appears that we are God’s children, that is, when his Spirit rules and
governs our life. John at the same time teaches us, that whatever good
works are done by us, proceed from the grace of the Spirit, and that the
Spirit is not obtained by our righteousness, but is freely given to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc45014.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p13"></span> *Calvin*, like our version, renders <span
id="v.iv.i-p13.1"></span>τέκνα, “sons;” but the word would be better
rendered “children,” “That we should be called the children of God.” The
passage might be thus paraphrased, “See what great proof of love the
Father hath given us, that we should be made the children of God” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc45014.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p20"></span> “When he shall appear,” refers to Christ,
mentioned in the 28th verse of the last chapter; what intervenes seems
to have been parenthetically introduced. This is often the manner of
writing found in this apostle. The end of the 8th verse, in this
chapter, is connected with the 16th; for the antecedent to <span
id="v.iv.i-p20.1"></span>ἐκεῖνος, *he*, in the latter verse, is “the Son
of God” in the former. \[<span id="v.iv.i-p20.2"></span>[1 John
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028.md), [1 John
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iv.i-p20.2"></span>.\]
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc45014.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p14"></span> To do, or to commit, or to work, or to
practice, sin, and to sin, are evidently used in the same sense by the
Apostle: and to commit or practice sin, according to what he says in his
Gospel, (<span id="v.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>[Joh
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034)<span id="v.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>,.md)
is the same with being “the servant of sin.” It is hence evident, that
in the language of John, to do sin, or to sin, means a prevailing or an
habitual course of sinning.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p15"></span>We might render the fourth verse thus, —

<span id="v.iv.ii-p16"></span>“Every doer of sin, is also the doer of
unrighteousness;  
for sin is unrighteousness,”

<span id="v.iv.ii-p17"></span>or iniquity, as *Calvin* renders it.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p18"></span>The word <span
id="v.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>ἀνομία, literally, is lawlessness, but it is
never used strictly in this sense either in the *Sept* or the New
Testament. The terms by which it is commonly expressed, are, wickedness,
iniquity, transgression, unrighteousness. See <span
id="v.iv.ii-p18.2"></span>[1Jo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007.md)<span id="v.iv.ii-p18.2"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc45014.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p22"></span> It is generally taken as referring to
Christ personally; he being mentioned here as having no sin, because he
is in this respect an example to his people; or, according to some,
because he was thereby fitted for the office of taking away our sins;
or, because he had no sin of his own to take away. *Grotius* viewed the
present as used here for the past tense, — “and sin was not in him.” See
a similar instance in <span id="v.iv.ii-p22.1"></span>[Joh
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027.md)<span id="v.iv.ii-p22.1"></span>
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc45014.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p21"></span> There is no authority for adding *of God*
after *love* in this verse; nor indeed is it right, for what follows
clearly shows that the love of Christ is what is referred to. The
antecedent to “he,” (“because he laid down,” &e.) is “the Son of God” in
<span id="v.iv.v-p21.1"></span>[1Jo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p21.1"></span>.
The passage may be thus rendered, “By this we know love, that he laid
down his own life for us; and we ought to lay down *our* lives for *our*
brethren.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc45014.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p28"></span> “The love of God” here is love of which
God is the object, that is, love to God. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc45014.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p32"></span> *Beza* and others regard “only,” or
“merely,” as understood in the first clause, according to a mode of
speaking which often occurs in Scripture, as “Labor not,” etc., (<span
id="v.iv.v-p32.1"></span>[Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="v.iv.v-p32.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iv.v-p33"></span>“My dear children, let us love, not only by
word, or with the tongue, but by work and in truth.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p34"></span>That is, let us not love only by making in
words fair promises, or by expressing sympathy with the tongue, but by
giving effect to our sympathy by works, and by making our word true, by
fulfilling it. Here we find the same arrangement as in many other
instances; the “word” has its correspondence in “truth;” and “tongue in
“work.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p35"></span>It is justly observed by *Macknight*, that
“the Apostle cannot be supposed to forbid our using affectionate
speeches to our brethren in distress But he forbiddeth us to content
ourselves with these.” — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc45015.md)
