[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas114)  [Next](jas116)   
 [\[Note\]](jas115n)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 115. Jack and the Devil.

Richard Pottinger, Claremont, St. Anne.

Devil had his company in his house, had a woman also locked up while
Jack, his servant, was heating the oven. Somebody was expected from
home. Jack was very fond of that girl, promised her that if anybody will
come from home, he will keep heating the oven. The two of them arrange
that she will keep singing--

"Wah wah oo, wah wah oo, wah wah oo,  
Nobody coming from Prince of Wales?"

Jack now (answers),

"No, no, madame; no, no, madame; no, no, madame;  
Nobody coming from Prince of Wales."

The master came to the window; "Jack, is the oven hot?"--"No, Master,
not yet hot." Jack put in two bundles of wood more. About an hour after,
the girl began the same song. Jack gave the same reply. Master came
again; "Jack, is the oven hot?"--"No, Master, not yet hot." The girl's
father came. The girl started singing--

"Wah wah oo, wah wah oo, wah wah oo,  
Nobody coming from Prince of Wales?"

Jack says,

"Yes, yes, madame! yes, yes, madame! yes, yes, madame!  
Somebody coming from Prince of Wales!"

The master came to the window; "Jack, is the oven hot?"--"Yes, Master,
red-hot!" Corning down the staircase the father drew a revolver and shot
him. Jack has to put him in, the oven, and Jack, the girl, and all the
company make a feast of him. The father took Jack and the girl back to
his house and married them both for life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 116. Jack's Riddle.](jas116)
