[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jas118)  [Next](jas120)   
 [\[Note\]](jas119n)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 119. Jack and the Grateful Dead.

Richard Morgan, Santa Cruz Mountains.

A boy an' a girl made match to marry, an' doze people who dey call de
fairy t'ief away de girl from Jack. But dey give one anodder different
name; dis girl name 'Catch 'em' an' dis boy name 'If-you-can'.

An' Jack was travelling. When he get part of de way, he see whole heap
of people beatin' a dead man. He say, "O my! what de reason dey do dis?"
Dey said, "De man owe me a lot of money!" Jack pay all de money an' bury
de man. He went a little furder an' see anodder an' he do de same. He
went a little way off again, he see anodder, he do de same.

So he get broke now. He hear dat de fairy want a servant. De fairy said,
"Yes, I want a servant!" an' gi' him every key open all de door excep'
one room. Jack said, "All right, sir!" De fairy is a people dey go out
every day. Jack open every door, an' after him open de las' door he fin'
de girl in dat room. An' 'he say, "Jack, what you open dis door for? De
fairy bin goin' kill you, for dey dey got me here an' fatten to kill."
Jack said, "I am jus' as smart as dem!" an' tek down de girl an' comb
her hair, ketch her louse, gi' her somet'ing to eat an' hang her up same
way. When de fairy come an' say, "Jack, you goin' into dis room?" Jack
said, "No, sir." De fairy tek de key, he walk in de door an' fin de girl
same way as he leave her.

Every day Jack do de same t'ing, till de las' day he took down de girl
an' dey walk. He goin' in a vessel. De girl was so pretty, one of de men
dat in de vessel grudge Jack an' fling Jack overboard. Anodder little
boy, gi' de name of Jack, he t'row one piece of board, said, "Poor man!
paddle on dis." An' de girl is de king daughter who was going to marry
to Jack de nex' day. {p. 153} An' Jack paddle till him get one part of
de sea upon some stone an' sit down hol'ing his head. Dat was night.
Pelican fly an' pick him in his head, gi' him a piece of bread, tek him
up an' sail wid him drop him into anodder place. Anodder pelican tek him
an' sail wid him drop him into anodder place again. De las' pelican gi'
him somet'ing to eat, fly wid him right into town. So dat was de t'ree
dead men he buried; dat t'ree dead save his life.

Nex' morning in de whole town nobody to be found in de street. An' when
Jack couldn't get a house to rent, all de house was rented, one woman
said 'he don' get nowhere only a loft to de roadside. Jack said, "Dat's
de place I want!" an' was dere until de couple going to church. Den,
after she come at de said place, Jack look out an' saw her, an' Jack
said, "Catch him!" De girl said, "If-you-can!" an' she call to de
coachman to turn back home to de yard. An' after she went home, she sent
a constable t'rough de whole town, an' everyone he bring she said no. De
las' one de ol' lady said, "Only one man lef' here an' he drunk, for he
drink a great bottle of rum!" but Jack do dat in gladness as he saw de
girl. An' de girl said, "Bring him come!" An' after him come, he catch
him an' kiss him an' goin' in de house bathe an' shine himself an' tell
all what distress happen to him.

Dey catch de man what do dis t'ing, hang him by de p'int of his tongue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 120. The Boy and his Master.](jas120)
