<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb14)  [Next](jb16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI.

<span class="small">*The Sermon on the Mount*.</span>

AND seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was
set, his disciples came unto him:

2 And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,

3 Blessed *are* the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

4 Blessed *are* they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

5 Blessed *are* the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

6 Blessed *are* they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
they shall be filled.

7 Blessed *are* the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

8 Blessed *are* the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

9 Blessed *are* the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children
of God.

10 Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

11 Blessed are ye, when *men* shall revile you, and persecute *you*, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.

12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven:
for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

13 But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
consolation.

14 Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that
laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.

15 Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their
fathers to the false prophets.

16 ¶ Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savour,
wherewith shall it be salted?

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot of men.

17 Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot
be hid.

18 Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.

19 Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

20 ¶ Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

21 For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.

22 Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach *them*, the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven.

23 For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed *the
righteousness* of the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

24 ¶ Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not
kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:

25 But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without
a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to
his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever
shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

26 Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest
that thy brother hath ought against thee;

27 Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

28 Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with
him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

29 Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till
thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.

30 ¶ Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not
commit adultery:

31 But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after
her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.

32 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast *it* from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not *that* thy whole body should be cast into hell.

33 And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast *it* from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not *that* thy whole body should be cast into hell.

34 ¶ It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give
her a writing of divorcement:

35 But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

36 ¶ Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time,
Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine
oaths:

37 But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is
God's throne:

38 Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for
it is the city of the great King.

39 Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one
hair white or black.

40 But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is
more than these cometh of evil.

41 ¶ Ye have heard that it hath been said, An Oil eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth:

42 But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, I. turn to him the other also.

43 And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have *thy* cloak also.

44 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

45 Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee
turn not thou away.

46 ¶ Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour, and hate thine enemy.

47 But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you, and persecute you;

48 That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on
the just and on the unjust.

49 For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same?

50 And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more *than others?*
do not even the publicans so?

51 And if ye lend to *them* of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have
ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.

52 But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of
the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

53 Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

54 Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.

55 Therefore when thou doest *thine* alms, do not sound a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that
they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their
reward.

56 But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
band doeth:

57 That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in
secret himself shall reward thee openly.

58 ¶ And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites *are:*
for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of
the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They
have their reward.

59 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou
hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy
Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

60 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen *do:* for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

61 Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what
things ye have need of, before ye ask him.

62 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name.

63 Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as *it is* in heaven.

64 Give us this day our daily bread.

65 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

66 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine
is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.

67 For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you:

68 But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.

69 ¶ Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto
men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

70 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face;

71 That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is
in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly.

72 ¶ Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:

73 But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor
rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.

74 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

75 The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single,
thy whole body shall be full of light.

76 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness.
If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great *is* that
darkness!

77 No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other.
Ye cannot serve God and mammon,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

78 Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall
put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?

79 Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not
much better than they?

80 Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?

81 And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the
field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:

82 And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of these.

83 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is,
and tomorrow is cast into the oven, *shall he* not much more *clothe*
you, O ye of little faith?

84 Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall
we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

85 (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly
Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.

86 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.

87 Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.

88 Judge not, that ye be not judged.

89 For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

90 Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For
with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you
again.

91 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

92 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye; and, behold, a beam *is* in thine own eye?

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

93 Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and
then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's
eye.

94 ¶ Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn
again and rend you.

95 ¶ Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and
it shall be opened unto you:

96 For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and
to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

97 Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give
him a stone?

98 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

99 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask him?

100 Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

101 ¶ Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide *is* the gate, and broad
*is* the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat:

102 Because strait *is* the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth
unto life, and few there be that find it.

103 ¶ Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

104 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles?

105 Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt
tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

106 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither *can* a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

107 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast
into the fire.

108 Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

109 A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good
things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil
things.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

110 But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.

111 For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

112 ¶ Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them,
I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:

113 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.

114 And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the
sand:

115 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and
beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.

116 ¶ And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the
people were astonished at his doctrine:

117 For he taught them as *one* having authority, and not as the
scribes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Exhorts](jb16)

</div>
