<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb29)  [Next](jb31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXVI.

<span class="small">*Precepts*.</span>

AFTER these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for  he would not walk in
Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him.

2 Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes,
which came from Jerusalem.

3 And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that
is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault.

4 For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash *their* hands
oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.

5 And *when they come* from the market, except they wash, they eat not.
And many other things

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

there be, which they have received to hold, *as* the washing of cups and
pots, brazen vessels, and of tables.

6 Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples
according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen
hands?

7 ¶ And when he had called all the people *unto him*, he said unto them,
Hearken unto me every one *of you*, and understand:

8 There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile
him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile
the man.

9 If any man have ears to hear let him hear.

10 And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples
asked him concerning the parable.

11 And he saith unto them, Are ye so without understanding also? Do ye
not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man,
*it* cannot defile him;

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

12 Because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth
out into the draught, purging all meats?

13 And he said, That which cometh out of the man, that defileth the man.

14 For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders,

15 Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness:

10 All these evil things come from within, and defile the man.

17 ¶ And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and
Sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know it: but he
could not be hid.

18 At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?

19 And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of
them,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

20 And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become
as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

21 Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the
same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

22 ¶ Woe unto the. world because of offences! for it must needs be that
offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!

23 Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
*them* from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into
everlasting fire.

24 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast *it* from thee:
it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than
having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

25 How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
astray, Both he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the
mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?

26 And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth
more of that *sheep*, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

27 Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that
one of these little ones should perish.

28 Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother.

29 But if he will not hear *thee*, *then* take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established.

30 And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell *it* unto the church: but
if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man
and a publican.

31 ¶ Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

32 Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but,
Until seventy times seven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. Parable of the Wicked Servant](jb31)

</div>
