<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb65)  [Next](jb67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXII.

<span class="small">*Precepts to His Disciples, Washes their Feet.
Trouble of Mind and Prayer*.</span>

NOW the first *day* of the *feast of* unleavened bread the disciples
came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee
to eat the passover?

2 And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The
Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house
with my disciples.

3 And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready
the passover.

4 Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.

5 And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the greatest.

6 And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercised lordship
over them; and they that

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

exercise authority upon them are called benefactors.

7 But ye *shall* not *be* so: but he that is greatest among you, let him
be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that Both serve.

8 For whether *is* greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth?
*is* not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he that serveth.

9 And supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of
Judas Iscariot, Simon's *son*, to betray him;

10 He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel,
and girded himself.

11 After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the
disciples’ feet, and to wipe *them* with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

12 Then cometh he to Simon Peter; and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost
thou wash my feet?

13 Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but
thou shalt know hereafter.

14 Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered
him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

15 Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also *my*
hands and *my* head.

16 Jesus saith to Him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash *his*
feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all.

17 For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all
clean.

18 So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and
was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?

19 Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for *so* I am.

20 If I then, *your* Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also
ought to wash one another's feet.

21 For I have given you an example, that ye should do; as I have done to
you.

22 Verily, verily, I shy unto you, The servant is not greater than his
lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.

23 If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

24 When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified,
and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray
me.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

25 Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake.

26 Now there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples whom Jesus
loved.

27 Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spake.

28 He then lying on Jesus’ breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it?

29 Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have
dipped *it*. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas
Iscariot, *the son* of Simon.

30 ¶ Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him.

31 A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another.

32 By this shall all *men* know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

33 Then said Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me
this night: for it is written,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered
abroad.

34 Peter answered and said unto him, Though all *men* shall be offended
because of thee, *yet* will I never be offended.

35 And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into
prison, and to death.

36 And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day,
before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.

37 Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not
deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.

38 ¶ Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and
said unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.

39 And he took with him Peter and the two. sons of Zebedee, and began to
be sorrowful and very heavy.

40 Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

41 And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou
*wilt*.

42 And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith
unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?

43 Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed
*is* willing, but the flesh *is* weak.

44 He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father,
if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be
done.

45 And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.

46 And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time,
saying the same words.

47 Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now,
and take *your* rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXIII. Judas Conducts the Officers to Jesus](jb67)

</div>
