<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb67)  [Next](jb69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### LXIV.

<span class="small">*He is Arrested and Carried Before Caiaphas, the
High Priest and is Condemned*.</span>

JESUS therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went
forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?

2 They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I am
*he*. And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.

3 As soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward,
and fell to the ground.

4 Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of
Nazareth.

5 Jesus answered, I have told you that I am *he;* if therefore ye seek
me, let these go their way:

6 And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came
they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

7 And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out *his*
hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and
smote off his ear.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

8 Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for
all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

9 In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with
you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

10 But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

11 And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast
about *his* naked *body;* and the young men laid hold on him:

12 And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

13 ¶ And they that had laid hold on Jesus led *him* away to Caiaphas the
high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.

14 And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and *so did* another disciple: that
disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the
palace of the high priest.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

15 But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other
disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that
kept the door, and brought in Peter.

16 Then saith the damsel that kept the door, unto Peter, Art not thou
also *one* of this man's disciples? He saith, I am not.

17 And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of
coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with
them, and warmed himself.

18 ¶ And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto
him, Art not thou also *one* of his disciples? He denied *it*, and said,
I am not.

19 One of the servants of the high priest, being *his* kinsman whose ear
Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?

20 Peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.

21 And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept
bitterly.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

22 ¶ The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his
doctrine.

23 Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the
synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in
secret have I said nothing.

24 Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto
them: behold, they know what I said.

25 And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by
struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high
priest so?

26 Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil;
but if well, why smitest thou me?

27 And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against
Jesus to put him to death; and found none.

28 For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not
together.

29 And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying,

30 We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands,
and within three days I will build another made without hands.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

31 But neither so did their witness agree together.

32 And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? what *is it which* these witness against thee?

33 But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest
asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed?

34 Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you,
ye will not believe:

35 And if I also ask *you*, ye will not answer *me*, nor let me go.

36 Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto
them, Ye say that I am.

37 Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any
further witnesses?

38 Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned
him to be guilty of death.

39 And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet
him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike him with
the palms of their hands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXV. Is then Carried to Pilate](jb69)

</div>
