<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb71)  [Next](jb73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### LXVIII.

<span class="small">*His Crucifixion, Death, and Burial*.</span>

THEN the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band of *soldiers*.

2 And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put *it* upon his
head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him,
and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!

3 And they spit upon him, and took the reed and smote him on the head.

4 And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him,
and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify *him*.

5 ¶j Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and elders,

6 Saying, I have sinned in that. I have betrayed the innocent blood. And
they said, What *is that* to us? see thou *to that*.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

7 And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and
went and hanged himself.

8 And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of
blood.

9 And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, to
bury strangers in.

10 Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day.

11 ¶ And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a
Cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on him they laid the cross,
that he might bear *it* after Jesus.

12 And there followed him a great company of people, and of women, which
also bewailed and lamented him.

13 But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.

14 For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say,
Blessed *are* the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps
which never gave suck.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

15 Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the
hills, Cover us.

16 For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in
the dry?

17 ¶ And there were also two other, malefactors, led with him to be put
to death.

18 And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called *the place*
of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew, Golgotha:

19 Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one,
and Jesus in the midst.

20 ¶ And Pilate wrote a title, and put *it* on the cross. And the
writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.

21 This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, *and*
Greek, *and* Latin.

22 Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The
King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.

23 Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

24 ¶ Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also *his*
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

25 They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast
lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be fulfilled,
which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they
did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.

26 ¶ And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,

27 And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest *it* in
three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
cross.

28 Likewise also the chief priests mocking *him*, with the scribes and
elders, said,

29 He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel,
let him now come down from the cross, add we will believe him.

30 He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for
he said, I am the Son of God.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

31 ¶ And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying,
If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

32 But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation?

33 And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but
this man hath done nothing amiss.

34 Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots.

35 ¶ Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's
sister, Mary the *wife* of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.

36 When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by,
whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son!

37 Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour
that disciple took her unto his own *home*.

38 And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli,
Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

39 Some of them that stood there, when they heard *that*, said, This
*man* calleth for Elias.

40 And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled *it*
with vinegar, and put *it* on a reed, and gave him to drink.

41 The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save
him.

42 ¶ Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the
ghost.

43 And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus
from Galilee, ministering unto him:

44 Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and
Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXIX. His Burial](jb73)

</div>
