[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlw04)  [Next](dlw06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406804029/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Love and Wisdom*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1763\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Divine Love and Wisdom

<span class="margnote"><span id="201.">201.</span></span>

The perfection of life, forces, and forms that increase or decrease
according to degrees of breadth, that is, continuous degrees, will not
be discussed here, because there is a knowledge of these degrees in the
world; but only the perfections of life, forces, and forms that ascend
or descend according to degrees of height, that is, discrete degrees;
because these degrees are not known in the world. Of the mode in which
perfections ascend and descend according to these degrees little can be
learned from things visible in the natural world, but this can be seen
clearly from things visible in the spiritual world. From things visible
in the natural world it is merely found that the more interiorly they
are looked into the more do wonders present themselves; as, for
instance, in the eyes, ears, tongue; in muscles, heart, lungs, liver,
pancreas, kidneys, and other viscera; also, in seeds, fruits and
flowers; and in metals, minerals and stones. That wonders increase in
all these the more interiorly they are looked into is well known; yet it
has become little known thereby that the objects are interiorly more
perfect according to degrees of height or discrete degrees. This has
been concealed by ignorance of these degrees. But since these degrees
stand out conspicuously in the spiritual world (for the whole of that
world from highest to lowest is distinctly discreted into these
degrees), from that world knowledge of these degrees can be drawn; and
afterwards conclusions may be drawn therefrom respecting the perfection
of forces and forms that are in similar degrees in the natural world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="202.">202.</span></span>

In the spiritual world there are three heavens, arranged according to
degrees of height. In the highest heavens are angels superior in every
perfection to the angels in the middle heaven; and in the middle heaven
are angels superior in every perfection to the angels in the lowest
heaven. The degrees of perfections are such, that angels of the lowest
heaven cannot attain to the first threshold of the perfections of the
angels of the middle heaven, nor these to the first threshold of the
perfections of the angels of the highest heaven. This seems incredible,
yet it is a truth. The reason is that they are consociated according to
discrete, not according to continuous degrees. I have learned from
observation that the difference between the affections and thoughts, and
consequently the speech, of the angels of the higher and the lower
heavens, is such that they have nothing in common; and that
communication takes place only through correspondences, which have
existence by immediate influx of the Lord into all the heavens, and by
mediate influx through the highest heaven into the lowest. Such being
the nature of these differences, they cannot be expressed in natural
language, therefore not described; for the thoughts of angels, being
spiritual, do not fall into natural ideas. They can be expressed and
described only by angels themselves, in their own languages, words, and
writings, and not in those that are human. This is why it is said that
in the heavens unspeakable things are heard and seen. These differences
may be in some measure comprehended when it is known that the thoughts
of angels of the highest or third heaven are thoughts of ends; the
thoughts of angels of the middle or second heaven thoughts of causes,
and the thoughts of angels of the lowest or first heaven thoughts of
effects. It must be noted, that it is one thing to think from ends, and
another to think about ends; that it is one thing to think from causes,
and another to think about causes; and that it is one thing to think
from effects, and another to think about effects. Angels of the lower
heavens think about causes and about ends, but angels of the higher
heavens from causes and from ends; and to think from these is a mark of
higher wisdom, but to think about these is the mark of lower wisdom. To
think from ends is of wisdom, to think from causes is of intelligence,
and to think from effects is of knowledge. From all this it is clear
that all perfection ascends and descends along with degrees and
according to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="203.">203.</span></span>

Since the interior things of man, which are of his will and
understanding, are like the heavens in respect to degrees (for man, as
to the interiors of his mind, is a heaven in least form), their
perfections also are like those of the heavens. But these perfections
are not apparent to any one so long as he lives in the world, because he
is then in the lowest degree; and from the lowest degree the higher
degrees cannot be known; but they are known after death, because man
then enters into that degree which corresponds to his love and wisdom,
for he then becomes an angel, and thinks and speaks things ineffable to
his natural man; for there is then an elevation of all things of his
mind, not in a single, but in a threefold ratio. Degrees of height are
in threefold ratio, but degrees of breadth are in single ratio. But into
degrees of height none ascend and are elevated except those who in the
world have been in truths, and have applied them to life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="204.">204.</span></span>

It seems as if things prior must be less perfect than things subsequent,
that is, things simple than things composite; but things prior out of
which things subsequent are formed, that is, things simple out of which
things composite are formed, are the more perfect. The reason is that
the prior or the simpler are more naked and less covered over with
substances and matters devoid of life, and are, as it were, more Divine,
consequently nearer to the spiritual sun where the Lord is; for
perfection itself is in the Lord, and from Him in that sun which is the
first proceeding of His Divine Love and Divine Wisdom, and from that in
those things which come immediately after; and thus in order down to
things lowest, which are less perfect as they are farther removed.
Without such preeminent perfection in things prior and simple, neither
man nor any kind of animal could have come into existence from seed, and
afterwards continue to exist; nor could the seeds of trees and shrubs
vegetate and bear fruit. For the more prior anything prior is, or the
more simple anything simple is, the more exempt is it from injury,
because it is more perfect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="205.">205.</span></span>

IN SUCCESSIVE ORDER THE FIRST DEGREE MAKES THE HIGHEST, AND THE THIRD
THE LOWEST; BUT IN SIMULTANEOUS ORDER THE FIRST DEGREE MAKES THE
INNERMOST, AND THE THIRD THE OUTERMOST. There is successive order and
simultaneous order. The successive order of these degrees is from
highest to lowest, or from top to bottom. The angelic heavens are in
this order; the third heaven there is the highest, the second is the
middle, and the first is the lowest; such is their relative situation.
In like successive order are the states of love and wisdom with the
angels there, also states of heat and light, and of the spiritual
atmospheres. In like order are all the perfections of the forms and
forces there. When degrees of height, that is, discrete degrees, are in
successive order, they may be compared to a column divided into three
stories, through which ascent and descent are made. In the upper rooms
are things most perfect and most beautiful; in the middle rooms, things
less perfect and beautiful; in the lowest, things still less perfect and
beautiful. But simultaneous order, which consists of like degrees, has
another appearance. In it, the highest things of successive order, which
are (as was said above) the most perfect and most beautiful, are in the
inmost, the lower things are in the middle, and the lowest in the
circumference. They are as if in a solid body composed of these three
degrees: in the middle or center are the finest parts, round about this
are parts less fine, and in the extremes which constitute the
circumference are the parts composed of these and which are therefore
grosser. It is like the column mentioned just above subsiding into a
plane, the highest part of which forms the innermost of the plane, the
middle forms the middle, and the lowest the outermost.

<span class="margnote"><span id="206.">206.</span></span>

As the highest of successive order becomes the innermost of simultaneous
order, and the lowest becomes the outermost, so in the Word, "higher"
signifies inner, and "lower" signifies outer. "Upwards" and "downwards,"
and "high" and "deep" have a like meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="207.">207.</span></span>

In every outmost there are discrete degrees in simultaneous order. The
motor fibers in every muscle, the fibers in every nerve, also the fibers
and the little vessels in all viscera and organs, are in such an order.
Innermost in these are the most simple things, which are the most
perfect; the outermost is a composite of these. There is a like order of
these degrees in every seed and in every fruit, also in every metal and
stone; their parts, of which the whole is composed, are of such a
nature. The innermost, the middle, and the outermost elements of the
parts exist in these degrees, for they are successive compositions, that
is, bundlings and massings together from simples that are their first
substances or matters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="208.">208.</span></span>

In a word, there are such degrees in every outmost, thus in every
effect. For every outmost consists of things prior and these of their
firsts. And every effect consists of a cause, and this of an end; and
end is the all of cause, and cause is the all of effect (as was shown
above); and end makes the inmost, cause the middle, and effect the
outmost. The same is true of degrees of love and wisdom, and of heat and
light, also of the organic forms of affections and thoughts in man (as
will be seen in what follows). The series of these degrees in successive
order and in simultaneous order has been treated of also in The Doctrine
of the New Jerusalem Concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 38, and
elsewhere), where it is shown that there are like degrees in each and
all things of the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="209.">209.</span></span>

THE OUTMOST DEGREE IS THE COMPLEX, CONTAINANT AND BASE OF THE PRIOR
DEGREES. The doctrine of degrees which is taught in this Part, has
hitherto been illustrated by various things which exist in both worlds;
as by the degrees of the heavens where angels dwell, by the degrees of
heat and light with them, and by the degrees of atmospheres, and by
various things in the human body, and also in the animal and mineral
kingdoms. But this doctrine has a wider range; it extends not only to
natural, but also to civil, moral, and spiritual things, and to each and
all their details. There are two reasons why the doctrine of degrees
extends also to such things. First, in every thing of which anything can
be predicated there is the trine which is called end, cause, and effect,
and these three are related to one another according to degrees of
height. And secondly things civil, moral, and spiritual are not
something abstract from substance, but are substances. For as love and
wisdom are not abstract things, but substance (as was shown above, n.
40-43), so in like manner are all things that are called civil, moral,
and spiritual. These may be thought of abstractly from substances, yet
in themselves they are not abstract; as for example, affection and
thought, charity and faith, will and understanding; for it is the same
with these as with love and wisdom, in that they are not possible
outside of subjects which are substances, but are states of subjects,
that is, substances. That they are changes of these, presenting
variations, will be seen in what follows. By substance is also meant
form, for substance is not possible apart from form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="210.">210.</span></span>

From its being possible to think of will and understanding, of affection
and thought, and of charity and faith, abstractly from the substances
which are their subjects, and from their having been so thought of, it
has come to pass, that a correct idea of these things, as being states
of substances or forms, has perished. It is altogether as with
sensations and actions, which are not things abstract from the organs of
sensation and motion. Abstracted, that is, separate, from these they are
mere figments of reason; for they are like sight apart from an eye,
hearing apart from an ear, taste apart from a tongue, and so forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="211.">211.</span></span>

Since all things civil, moral, and spiritual advance through degrees,
just as natural things do, not only through continuous but also through
discrete degrees; and since the progressions of discrete degrees are
like progressions of ends to causes, and of causes to effects, I have
chosen to illustrate and confirm the present point, that the outmost
degree is the complex, containant, and base of prior degrees, by the
things above mentioned, that is, by what pertains to love and wisdom, to
will and understanding, to affection and thought, and to charity and
faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="212.">212.</span></span>

That the outmost degree is the complex, containant, and base of prior
degrees, is clearly seen from progression of ends and causes to effects.
That the effect is the complex, containant, and base of causes and ends
can be comprehended by enlightened reason; but it is not so clear that
the end with all things thereof, and the cause with all things thereof,
are actually in the effect, and that the effect is their full complex.
That such is the case can be seen from what has been said above in this
Part, particularly from this, that one thing is from another in a
threefold series, and that the effect is nothing else than the end in
its outmost. And since the outmost is the complex, it follows that it is
the containant and also the base.

<span class="margnote"><span id="213.">213.</span></span>

As regards love and wisdom:-Love is the end, wisdom the instrumental
cause, and use is the effect; and use is the complex, containant, and
base of wisdom and love; and use is such a complex and such a
containant, that all things of love and all things of wisdom are
actually in it; it is where they are all simultaneously present. But it
should be borne in mind that all things of love and wisdom, which are
homogeneous and concordant, are present in use, according to what is
said and shown above (in chapter, n. 189-194).

<span class="margnote"><span id="214.">214.</span></span>

Affection, thought, and action are also in a series of like degrees,
because all affection has relation to love, thought to wisdom, and
action to use. Charity, faith, and good works are in a series of like
degrees, for charity is of affection, faith of thought, and good works
of action. Will, understanding, and doing are also in a series of like
degrees; for will is of love and so of affection, understanding is of
wisdom and so of faith, and doing is of use and so of work; as, then,
all things of wisdom and love are present in use, so all things of
thought and affection are present in action, all things of faith and
charity in good works, and so forth; but all are homogeneous, that is,
concordant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="215.">215.</span></span>

That the outmost in each series, that is to say, use, action, work, and
doing, is the complex and containant of all things prior, has not yet
been known. There seems to be nothing more in use, in action, in work,
and in doing than such as there is in movement; yet all things prior are
actually present in these, and so fully that nothing is lacking. They
are contained therein like wine in its cask, or like furniture in a
house. They are not apparent, because they are regarded only externally;
and regarded externally they are simply activities and motions. It is as
when the arms and hands are moved, and man is not conscious that a
thousand motor fibers concur in every motion of them, and that to the
thousand motor fibers correspond thousands of things of thought and
affection, by which the motor fibers are excited. As these act deep
within, they are not apparent to any bodily sense. This much is known,
that nothing is done in or through the body except from the will through
the thought; and because both of these act, it must needs be that each
and all things of the will and thought are present in the action. They
cannot be separated; consequently from a man's deeds or works others
judge of the thought of his will, which is called his intention. It has
been made known to me that angels, from a man's deed or work alone,
perceive and see every thing of the will and thought of the doer; angels
of the third heaven perceiving and seeing from his will the end for
which he acts, and angels of the second heaven the cause through which
the end operates. It is from this that works and deeds are so often
commanded in the Word, and that it is said that a man is known by his
works.

<span class="margnote"><span id="216.">216.</span></span>

It is according to angelic wisdom that unless the will and
understanding, that is, affection and thought, as well as charity and
faith, clothe and wrap themselves in works or deeds, whenever possible,
they are only like something airy which passes away, or like phantoms in
air which perish; and that they first become permanent in man and a part
of his life, when he practices and does them. The reason is that the
outmost is the complex, containant, and base of things prior. Such an
airy nothing and such a phantom is faith separated from good works; such
also are faith and charity without their exercise, with this difference
only, that those who hold to faith and charity know what is good and can
will to do it, but not so those who are in faith separated from charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="217.">217.</span></span>

THE DEGREES OF HEIGHT ARE IN FULLNESS AND IN POWER IN THEIR OUTMOST
DEGREE. In the preceding chapter it is shown that the outmost degree is
the complex and containant of prior degrees. From this it follows that
prior degrees are in their fullness in their outmost degree, for they
are in their effect, and every effect is the fullness of causes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="218.">218.</span></span>

That these ascending and descending degrees, also called prior and
subsequent, likewise degrees of height or discrete degrees, are in their
power in their outmost degree, may be confirmed by all those things that
have been adduced in the preceding chapters as confirmations from
objects of sense and perception. Here, however, I choose to confirm them
only by the conatus, forces and motions in dead and in living subjects.
It is known that conatus does nothing of itself, but acts through forces
corresponding to it, thereby producing motion; consequently that conatus
is the all in forces, and through forces is the all in motion; and since
motion is the outmost degree of conatus, through motion conatus exerts
its power. Conatus, force, and motion are no otherwise conjoined than
according to degrees of height, conjunction of which is not by
continuity, for they are discrete, but by correspondences. For conatus
is not force, nor is force motion, but force is produced by conatus,
because force is conatus made active, and through force motion is
produced; consequently there is no power in conatus alone, nor in force
alone, but in motion, which is their product. That this is so may still
seem doubtful, because not illustrated by applications to sensible and
perceptible things in nature; nevertheless, such is the progression of
conatus, force, and motion into power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="219.">219.</span></span>

But let application of this be made to living conatus, and to living
force, and to living motion. Living conatus in man, who is a living
subject, is his will united to his understanding; living forces in man
are the interior constituents of his body, in all of which there are
motor fibers interlacing in various ways; and living motion in man is
action, which is produced through these forces by the will united to the
understanding. For the interior things pertaining to the will and
understanding make the first degree; the interior things pertaining to
the body make the second degree; and the whole body, which is the
complex of these, makes the third degree. That the interior things
pertaining to the mind have no power except through forces in the body,
also that forces have no power except through the action of the body
itself, is well known. These three do not act by what is continuous, but
by what is discrete; and to act by what is discrete is to act by
correspondences. The interiors of the mind correspond to the interiors
of the body, and the interiors of the body correspond to the exteriors,
through which actions come forth; consequently the two prior degrees
have power through the exteriors of the body. It may seem as if conatus
and forces in man have some power even when there is no action, as in
sleep and in states of rest, but still at such times the determinations
of conatus and forces are directed into the general motor organs of the
body, which are the heart and the lungs; but when their action ceases
the forces also cease, and, with the forces, the conatus.

<span class="margnote"><span id="220.">220.</span></span>

Since the powers of the whole, that is, of the body, are determined
chiefly into the arms and hands, which are outmosts, "arms" and "hands,"
in the Word, signify power, and the "right hand" signifies superior
power. And such being the evolution and putting forth of degrees into
power, the angels that are with man and in correspondence with all
things belonging to him, know merely from such action as is effected
through the hands, what a man is in respect to his understanding and
will, also his charity and faith, thus in respect to the internal life
pertaining to his mind and the external life derived therefrom in the
body. I have often wondered that the angels have such knowledge from the
mere action of the body through the hands; but that it is so has been
shown to me repeatedly by living experience, and it has been said that
it is from this that inductions into the ministry are performed by the
laying on of the hands, and that "touching with the hand" signifies
communicating, with other like things. From all this the conclusion is
formed, that the all of charity and faith is in works, and that charity
and faith without works are like rainbows about the sun, which vanish
away and are dispersed by a cloud. On this account "works" and "doing
works" are so often mentioned in the Word, and it is said that a man's
salvation depends upon these; moreover, he that doeth is called a wise
man, and he that doeth not is called a foolish man. But it should be
remembered that by "works" here are meant uses actually done; for the
all of charity and faith is in uses and according to uses. There is this
correspondence of works with uses, because the correspondence is
spiritual, but it is carried out through substances and matters, which
are subjects.

<span class="margnote"><span id="221.">221.</span></span>

Two arcana, which are brought within reach of the understanding by what
precedes, may here be revealed. The First Arcanum is that the Word is in
its fullness and in its power in the sense of the letter. For there are
three senses in the Word, according to the three degrees; the celestial
sense, the spiritual sense, and the natural sense. Since these senses
are in the Word according to the three degrees of height, and their
conjunction is effected by correspondences, the outmost sense, which is
the natural and is called the sense of the letter, is not only the
complex, containant and base of the corresponding interior senses, but
moreover in the outmost sense the Word is in its fullness and in its
power. This is abundantly shown and proved in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem Concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 27-35, 36-49, 50-61,
62-69). The Second Arcanum is that the Lord came into the world, and
took upon Him the Human, in order to put Himself into the power of
subjugating the hells, and of reducing all things to order both in the
heavens and on the earth. This Human He put on over His former Human.
This Human which He put on in the world was like the human of a man in
the world. Yet both Humans are Divine, and therefore infinitely
transcend the finite humans of angels and men. And because He fully
glorified the natural Human even to its outmosts, He rose again with the
whole body, differently from any man. Through the assumption of this
Human the Lord put on Divine Omnipotence not only for subjugating the
hells, and reducing the heavens to order, but also holding the hells in
subjection to eternity, and saving mankind. This power is meant by His
"sitting at the right hand of the power and might of God." Because the
Lord, by the assumption of a natural Human, made Himself Divine Truth in
outmosts, He is called "the Word," and it is said that "the Word was
made flesh;" moreover, Divine Truth in outmosts is the Word in the sense
of the letter. This the Lord made Himself by fulfilling all things of
the Word concerning Himself in Moses and the Prophets. For while every
man is his own good and his own truth, and man is man on no other
ground, the Lord, by the assumption of a natural Human, is Divine Good
itself and Divine Truth itself, or what is the same, He is Divine Love
itself and Divine Wisdom itself, both in Firsts and in Lasts.
Consequently the Lord, since His advent into the world, appears as a sun
in the angelic heavens, in stronger radiance and in greater splendor
than before His advent. This is an arcanum which is brought within the
range of the understanding by the doctrine of degrees. The Lord's
omnipotence before His advent into the world will be treated of in what
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="222.">222.</span></span>

THERE ARE DEGREES OF BOTH KINDS IN THE GREATEST AND IN THE LEAST OF ALL
CREATED THINGS. That the greatest and the least of all things consist of
discrete and continuous degrees, that is, of degrees of height and of
breadth, cannot be illustrated by examples from visible objects, because
the least things are not visible to the eyes, and the greatest things
which are visible seem undistinguished into degrees; consequently this
matter does not allow of demonstration otherwise than by universals. And
since angels are in wisdom from universals, and from that in knowledge
of particulars, it is allowed to bring forward their statements
concerning these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="223.">223.</span></span>

The statements of angels on this subject are as follows: There can be
nothing so minute as not to have in it degrees of both kinds; for
instance, there can be nothing so minute in any animal, or in any plant,
or in any mineral, or in the ether or air, as not to have in it degrees
of both kinds, and since ether and air are receptacles of heat and
light, and spiritual heat and spiritual light are the receptacles of
love and wisdom, there can be nothing of heat and light or of love and
wisdom so minute as not to have in it degrees of both kinds. Angels also
declare that the minutest thing of an affection and the minutest thing
of a thought, nay, the minutest thing of an idea of thought, consists of
degrees of both kinds, and that a minute thing not consisting of these
degrees would be nothing; for it would have no form, thus no quality,
nor any state which could be changed and varied, and by this means have
existence. Angels confirm this by the truth, that infinite things in God
the Creator, who is the Lord from eternity, are one distinctly; and that
there are infinite things in His infinites; and that in things
infinitely infinite there are degrees of both kinds, which also in Him
are one distinctly; and because these things are in Him, and all things
were created by Him, and things created repeat in an image the things
which are in Him, it follows that there cannot be the least finite in
which there are not such degrees. These degrees are equally in things
least and greatest, because the Divine is the same in things greatest
and in things least. That in God-Man infinite things are one distinctly,
see above (n. 17-22); and that the Divine is the same in things greatest
and in things least (n. 77-82); which positions are further illustrated
(n. 155, 169, 171).

<span class="margnote"><span id="224.">224.</span></span>

There cannot be the least thing of love and wisdom, or the least thing
of affection and thought, or even the least thing of an idea of thought,
in which there are not degrees of both kinds, for the reason that love
and wisdom are substance and form (as shown above, n. 50-53), and the
same is true of affection and thought; and because there can be no form
in which these degrees are not (as was said above), it follows that in
these there are like degrees; for to separate love and wisdom, or
affection and thought, from substance in form, is to annihilate them,
since they are not possible outside of their subjects; for they are
states of their subjects perceived by man varyingly, which states
present them to view.

<span class="margnote"><span id="225.">225.</span></span>

The greatest things in which there are degrees of both kinds, are the
universe in its whole complex, the natural world in its complex, and the
spiritual world in its complex; every empire and every kingdom in its
complex; also, all civil, moral and spiritual concerns of these in their
complex; the whole animal kingdom, the whole vegetable kingdom, and the
whole mineral kingdom, each in its complex; all atmospheres of both
worlds taken together, also their heats and lights. Likewise things less
general, as man in his complex; every animal in its complex, every tree
and every shrub in its complex; as also every stone and every metal in
its complex. The forms of these are alike in this, that they consist of
degrees of both kinds; the reason is that the Divine, by which they were
created, is the same in things greatest and least (as was shown above,
n.77-82). The particulars and the veriest particulars of all these are
like generals and the largest generals in this, that they are forms of
both kinds of degrees.

<span class="margnote"><span id="226.">226.</span></span>

On account of things greatest and least being forms of both kinds of
degrees, there is connection between them from first to last; for
likeness conjoins them. Still, there can be no least thing which is the
same as any other; consequently all particulars are distinct from each
other, likewise all veriest particulars. In any form or in different
forms there can be no least thing the same as any other, for the reason
that in greatest forms there are like degrees, and the greatest are made
up of leasts. From there being such degrees in things greatest, and
perpetual differences in accordance with these degrees, from top to
bottom and from center to circumference, it follows that their lesser or
least constituents, in which there are like degrees, can no one of them
be the same as any other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="227.">227.</span></span>

It is likewise a matter of angelic wisdom that from this similitude
between generals and particulars, that is, between things greatest and
least in respect to these degrees, comes the perfection of the created
universe; for thereby one thing regards another as its like, with which
it can be conjoined for every use, and can present every end in effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="228.">228.</span></span>

But these things may seem paradoxical, because they are not explained by
application to visible things; yet things abstract, being universals,
are often better comprehended than things applied, for these are of
perpetual variety, and variety obscures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="229.">229.</span></span>

Some contend that there can be a substance so simple as not to be a form
from lesser forms, and out of that substance, through a process of
massing, substantiated or composite things arise, and finally substances
called material. But there can be no such absolutely simple substances.
For what is substance without form? It is that of which nothing can be
predicated; and out of mere being of which nothing can be predicated, no
process of massing can make anything. That there are things innumerable
in the first created substance of all things, which are things most
minute and simple, will be seen in what follows, where forms are treated
of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="230.">230.</span></span>

IN THE LORD THE THREE DEGREES OF HEIGHT ARE INFINITE AND UNCREATE, BUT
IN MAN THE THREE DEGREES ARE FINITE AND CREATED. In the Lord the three
degrees of height are infinite and uncreate, because the Lord is Love
itself and Wisdom itself (as has been already shown); and because the
Lord is Love itself and Wisdom itself, He is also Use itself. For love
has use for its end, and brings forth use by means of wisdom; for
without use love and wisdom have no boundary or end, that is, no home of
their own, consequently they cannot be said to have being and have form
unless there be use in which they may be. These three constitute the
three degrees of height in subjects of life. These three are like first
end, middle end which is called cause, and last end which is called
effect. That end, cause and effect constitute the three degrees of
height has been shown above and abundantly proved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="231.">231.</span></span>

That in man there are these three degrees can be seen from the elevation
of his mind even to the degrees of love and wisdom in which angels of
the second and third heavens are; for all angels were born men; and man,
as regards the interiors pertaining to his mind, is a heaven in least
form; therefore there are in man, by creation, as many degrees of height
as there are heavens. Moreover, man is an image and likeness of God;
consequently these three degrees have been inscribed on man, because
they are in God-Man, that is, in the Lord. That in the Lord these
degrees are infinite and uncreate, and in man finite and created, can be
seen from what was shown in Part First; namely, from this, that the Lord
is Love and Wisdom in Himself; and that man is a recipient of love and
wisdom from the Lord; also, that of the Lord nothing but what is
infinite can be predicated, and of man nothing but what is finite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="232.">232.</span></span>

These three degrees with the angels are called Celestial, Spiritual, and
Natural; and for them the celestial degree is the degree of love, the
spiritual the degree of wisdom, and the natural the degree of uses.
These degrees are so called because the heavens are divided into two
kingdoms, one called the celestial, the other the spiritual, to which is
added a third kingdom wherein are men in the world, and this is the
natural kingdom. Moreover, the angels of whom the celestial kingdom
consists are in love; the angels, of whom the spiritual kingdom consists
are in wisdom; while men in the world are in uses; therefore these
kingdoms are conjoined. How it is to be understood that men are in uses
will be shown in the next Part.

<span class="margnote"><span id="233.">233.</span></span>

It has been told me from heaven, that in the Lord from eternity, who is
Jehovah, before His assumption of a Human in the world, the two prior
degrees existed actually, and the third degree potentially, as they do
also with angels; but that after the assumption of a Human in the world,
He put on over these the third degree, called the natural, thereby
becoming Man, like a man in the world; but with the difference, that in
the Lord this degree, like the prior degrees, is infinite and uncreate,
while in angel and in man they are all finite and created. For the
Divine which, apart from space, had filled all spaces (n. 69-72),
penetrated even to the outmosts of nature; yet before the assumption of
the Human, the Divine influx into the natural degree was mediate through
the angelic heavens, but after the assumption it was immediate from
Himself. This is the reason why all churches in the world before His
Advent were representative of spiritual and celestial things, but after
His Advent became spiritual-natural and celestial-natural, and
representative worship was abolished. This also was the reason why the
sun of the angelic heaven, which, as was said above, is the first
proceeding of His Divine Love and Divine Wisdom, after the assumption of
the Human shone out with greater effulgence and splendor than before the
assumption. And this is what is meant by these words in Isaiah: In that
day the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the
light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days (30:26).
This is said of the state of heaven and of the church after the Lord's
coming into the world. Again, in the Apocalypse: The countenance of the
Son of man was as the sun shineth in his strength (1:16); and elsewhere
(as in Isaiah 60:20; 2 Sam. 23:3, 4; Matt. 17:1, 2). The mediate
enlightenment of men through the angelic heaven, which existed before
the coming of the Lord, may be compared to the light of the moon, which
is the mediate light of the sun; and because after His coming this was
made immediate, it is said in Isaiah, That the light of the moon shall
be as the light of the sun (30:26); and in David: In His days shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace until there is no longer any
moon (72:7). This also is said of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="234.">234.</span></span>

The reason why the Lord from eternity, that is, Jehovah, put on this
third degree by the assumption of a Human in the world, was that He
could enter into this degree only by means of a nature like human
nature, thus only by means of conception from His Divine and by birth
from a virgin; for in this way He could put off a nature which, although
a receptacle of the Divine, is in itself dead, and could put on the
Divine. This is meant by the Lord's two states in the world, which are
called the state of exinanition and the state of glorification, which
are treated of in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem Concerning the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="235.">235.</span></span>

Of the threefold ascent of the degrees of height this much has been said
in general; but these degrees cannot here be discussed in detail,
because (as was said in the preceding chapter) there must be these three
degrees in things greatest and things least; this only need be said,
that there are such degrees in each and all things of love, and
therefrom in each and all things of wisdom, and from both of these in
each and all things of use. In the Lord all these degrees are infinite;
in angel and man they are finite. But how there are these three degrees
in love, in wisdom, and in uses cannot be described and unfolded except
in series.

<span class="margnote"><span id="236.">236.</span></span>

THESE THREE DEGREES OF HEIGHT ARE IN EVERY MAN FROM BIRTH, AND CAN BE
OPENED SUCCESSIVELY; AND, AS THEY ARE OPENED, MAN IS IN THE LORD AND THE
LORD IN MAN. That there are three degrees of height in every man, has
not until now become known for the reason that these degrees have not
been recognized, and so long as they remained unnoticed, none but
continuous degrees could be known; and when none but continuous degrees
are known, it may be supposed that love and wisdom increase in man only
by continuity. But it should be known, that in every man from his birth
there are three degrees of height, or discrete degrees, one above or
within another; and that each degree of height, or discrete degree, has
also degrees of breadth, or continuous degrees, according to which it
increases by continuity. For there are degrees of both kinds in things
greatest and least of all things (as was shown above, n. 222-229); for
no degree of one kind is possible without degrees of the other kind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="237.">237.</span></span>

These three degrees of height are called natural, spiritual, and
celestial (as was said above, n. 232). When man is born he comes first
into the natural degree, and this grows in him, by continuity, according
to his knowledges and the understanding acquired by means of knowledges
even to the highest point of understanding, which is called the
rational. Yet not by this means is the second degree opened, which is
called the spiritual. That degree is opened by means of a love of uses
in accordance with the things of the understanding, although by a
spiritual love of uses, which is love towards the neighbor. This degree
may grow in like manner by continuous degrees to its height, and it
grows by means of knowledges of truth and good, that is, by spiritual
truths. Yet even by such truths the third degree which is called the
celestial is not opened; for this degree is opened by means of the
celestial love of use, which is love to the Lord; and love to the Lord
is nothing else than committing to life the precepts of the Word, the
sum of which is to flee from evils because they are hellish and
devilish, and to do good because it is heavenly and Divine. In this
manner these three degrees are successively opened in man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="238.">238.</span></span>

So long as man lives in the world he knows nothing of the opening of
these degrees within him, because he is then in the natural degree,
which is the outmost, and from this he then thinks, wills, speaks, and
acts; and the spiritual degree, which is interior, communicates with the
natural degree, not by continuity but by correspondences, and
communication by correspondences is not sensibly felt. But when man puts
off the natural degree, which he does at death, he comes into that
degree which has been opened within him in the world; he in whom the
spiritual degree has been opened coming into that degree, and he within
whom the celestial degree has been opened coming into that degree. He
who comes into the spiritual degree after death no longer thinks, wills,
speaks, and acts naturally, but spiritually; and he who comes into the
celestial degree thinks, wills, speaks, and acts according to that
degree. And as there can be communication between the three degrees only
by correspondences, the differences of love, wisdom, and use, as regards
these degrees are such as to have no common ground by means of anything
continuous. From all this it is plain that man has three degrees of
height that may be successively opened in him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="239.">239.</span></span>

Since there are in man three degrees of love and wisdom, and therefore
of use, it follows that there must be in him three degrees, of will, of
understanding, and of result therefrom, thus of determination to use;
for will is the receptacle of love, understanding the receptacle of
wisdom, and result is use from these. From this it is evident that there
are in every man a natural, a spiritual, and a celestial will and
understanding, potentially by birth and actually when they are opened.
In a word the mind of man, which consists of will and understanding, is
from creation and therefore from birth, of three degrees, so that man
has a natural mind, a spiritual mind, and a celestial mind, and can
thereby be elevated into and possess angelic wisdom while he lives in
the world; but it is only after death, and then only if he becomes an
angel, that he enters into that wisdom, and his speech then becomes
ineffable and incomprehensible to the natural man. I knew a man of
moderate learning in the world, whom I saw after death and spoke with in
heaven, and I clearly perceived that he spoke like an angel, and that
the things he said would be inconceivable to the natural man; and for
the reason that in the world he had applied the precepts of the Word to
life and had worshiped the Lord, and was therefore raised up by the Lord
into the third degree of love and wisdom. It is important that this
elevation of the human mind should be known about, for upon it depends
the understanding of what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="240.">240.</span></span>

There are in man from the Lord two capacities whereby he is
distinguished from beasts. One of these is the ability to understand
what is true and what is good; this is called rationality, and is a
capacity of his understanding. The other is an ability to do what is
true and good; this is called freedom, and is a capacity of his will.
For man by virtue of his rationality is able to think whatever he
pleases, either with or against God, either with or against the
neighbor; he is also able to will and to do what he thinks; but when he
sees evil and fears punishment, he is able, by virtue of his freedom, to
abstain from doing it. By virtue of these two capacities man is man, and
is distinguished from beasts. Man has these two capacities from the
Lord, and they are from Him every moment; nor are they taken away, for
if they were, man's human would perish. In these two capacities the Lord
is with every man, good and evil alike; they are the Lord's abode in the
human race; from this it is that all men live for ever, both the good
and evil. But the Lord's abode in man is nearer as by the agency of
these capacities man opens the higher degrees, for by the opening of
these man comes into higher degree of love and wisdom, thus nearer to
the Lord. From this it can be seen that as these degrees are opened, man
is in the Lord and the Lord in him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="241.">241.</span></span>

It is said above, that the three degrees of height are like end, cause,
and effect, and that love, wisdom, and use follow in succession
according to these degrees; therefore a few things shall be said here
about love as being end, wisdom as being cause, and use as being effect.
Whoever consults his reason, if it is enlightened, can see that the end
of all things of man is his love; for what he loves that he thinks,
decides upon, and does, consequently that he has for his end. Man can
also see from his reason that wisdom is cause; since he, that is, his
love, which is his end, searches in his understanding for its means
through which to attain its end, thus consulting its wisdom, and these
means constitute the instrumental cause. That use is effect is evident
without explanation. But one man's love is not the same as another's,
neither is one man's wisdom the same as another's; so it is with use.
And since these three are homogeneous (as was shown above, n. 189-194),
it follows that such as is the love in man, such is the wisdom and such
is the use. Wisdom is here spoken of, but by it what pertains to man's
understanding is meant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="242.">242.</span></span>

SPIRITUAL LIGHT FLOWS IN WITH MAN THROUGH DEGREES, BUT NOT SPIRITUAL
HEAT, EXCEPT SO FAR AS MAN FLEES FROM EVILS AS SINS AND LOOKS TO THE
LORD. It is evident from what has been shown above that from the sun of
heaven, which is the first proceeding of Divine Love and Divine Wisdom
(treated of in Part Second), light and heat proceed - light from its
wisdom, and heat from its love; also that light is the receptacle of
wisdom, and heat of love; also that so far as man comes into wisdom he
comes into that Divine light, and so far as he comes into love he comes
into that Divine heat. From what has been shown above it is also evident
that there are three degrees of light and three degrees of heat, that
is, three degrees of wisdom and three degrees of love, and that these
degrees have been formed in man in order that he may be a receptacle of
the Divine Love and the Divine Wisdom, thus of the Lord. It is now to be
shown that spiritual light flows in through these three degrees in man,
but not spiritual heat, except so far as man shuns evils as sins and
looks to the Lord - or, what is the same, that man is able to receive
wisdom even to the third degree, but not love, unless he flees from
evils as sins and looks to the Lord; or what is still the same, that
man's understanding can be raised into wisdom, but not his will, except
so far as he flees from evils as sins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="243.">243.</span></span>

That the understanding can be raised into the light of heaven, that is,
into angelic wisdom, while the will cannot be raised into the heat of
heaven, that is, into angelic love, unless man flees from evils as sins
and looks to the Lord, has been made plainly evident to me from
experience in the spiritual world. I have frequently seen and perceived
that simple spirits, who knew merely that God is and that the Lord was
born a man, and who knew scarcely anything else, clearly apprehended the
arcana of angelic wisdom almost as the angels do; and not these simple
ones alone, but many also of the infernal crew. These, while they
listened, understood, but not when they thought within themselves; for
while they listened, light entered from above, and when they thought
within themselves, no light could enter except that which corresponded
to their heat or love; consequently when they had listened to and
perceived these arcana, as soon as they turned their ears away they
remembered nothing, those belonging to the infernal crew even rejecting
these things with disgust and utterly denying them, because the fire of
their love and its light, being delusive, induced darkness, by which the
heavenly light entering from above was extinguished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="244.">244.</span></span>

The same thing happens in the world. A man not altogether stupid, and
who has not confirmed himself in falsities from the pride of
self-intelligence, hearing others speak on some exalted matter, or
reading something of the kind, if he is in any affection of knowing,
understands these things and also retains them, and may afterwards
confirm them. A bad man as well as a good man may do this. Even a bad
man, though in heart he denies the Divine things pertaining to the
church, can still understand them, and also speak of and preach them,
and in writing learnedly prove them; but when left to his own thought,
from his own infernal love he thinks against them and denies them. From
which it is obvious that the understanding can be in spiritual light
even when the will is not in spiritual heat; and from this it also
follows that the understanding does not lead the will, or that wisdom
does not beget love, but only teaches and shows the way, - teaching how
a man ought to live, and showing the way in which he ought to go. It
further follows that the will leads the understanding, and causes it to
act as one with itself; also that whatever in the understanding agrees
with the love which is in the will, the love calls wisdom. In what
follows it will be seen that the will does nothing by itself apart from
the understanding, but does all that it does in conjunction with the
understanding; moreover, that it is the will that by influx takes the
understanding into partnership with itself, and not the reverse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="245.">245.</span></span>

The nature of the influx of light into the three degrees of life in man
which belong to his mind, shall now be shown. The forms which are
receptacles of heat and light, that is, of love and wisdom in man, and
which (as was said) are in threefold order or of three degrees, are
transparent from birth, transmitting spiritual light as crystal glass
transmits natural light; consequently in respect to wisdom man can be
raised even into the third degree. Nevertheless these forms are not
opened except when spiritual heat conjoins itself to spiritual light,
that is, love to wisdom; by such conjunction these transparent forms are
opened according to degrees. It is the same with light and heat from the
sun of the world in their action on plants on the earth. The light of
winter, which is as bright as that of summer, opens nothing in seed or
in tree, but when vernal heat conjoins itself to that light then the
heat opens them. There is this similarity because spiritual light
corresponds to natural light, and spiritual heat to natural heat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="246.">246.</span></span>

This spiritual heat is obtained only by fleeing from evils as sins, and
at the same time looking to the Lord; for so long as man is in evils he
is also in the love of them, for he lusts after them; and the love of
evil and the lust, abide in a love contrary to spiritual love and
affection; and such love or lust can be removed only by fleeing from
evils as sins; and because man cannot flee from evils from himself, but
only from the Lord. He must look to the Lord. So when he flees from
evils from the Lord, the love of evil and its heat are removed, and the
love of good and its heat are introduced in their stead, whereby a
higher degree is opened; for the Lord flowing in from above opens that
degree, and then conjoins love, that is, spiritual heat, to wisdom or
spiritual light, from which conjunction man begins to flourish
spiritually, like a tree in spring-time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="247.">247.</span></span>

By the influx of spiritual light into all three degrees of the mind man
is distinguished from beasts; and, as contrasted with beasts, he can
think analytically, and see both natural and spiritual truth; and when
he sees them he can acknowledge them, and thus be reformed and
regenerated. This capacity to receive spiritual light is what is meant
by rationality (referred to above), which every man has from the Lord,
and which is not taken away from him, for if it were taken away he could
not be reformed. From this capacity, called rationality, man, unlike the
beasts, is able not only to think but also to speak from thought; and
afterwards from his other capacity, called freedom (also referred to
above), he is able to do those things that he thinks from his
understanding. As these two capacities, rationality and freedom, which
are proper to man, have been treated of above (n. 240), no more will be
said about them here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="248.">248.</span></span>

UNLESS THE HIGHER DEGREE WHICH IS THE SPIRITUAL IS OPENED IN MAN, HE
BECOMES NATURAL AND SENSUAL. It was shown above that there are three
degrees of the human mind, called natural, spiritual, and celestial, and
that these degrees may be opened successively in man; also, that the
natural degree is first opened; afterwards, if man flees from evil as
sins and looks to the Lord, the spiritual degree is opened; and lastly,
the celestial. Since these degrees are opened successively according to
man's life, it follows that the two higher degrees may remain unopened,
and man then continues in the natural degree, which is the outmost.
Moreover, it is known in the world that there is a natural and a
spiritual man, or an external and an internal man; but it is not known
that a natural man becomes spiritual by the opening of some higher
degree in him, and that such opening is effected by a spiritual life,
which is a life conformed to the Divine precepts; and that without a
life conformed to these man remains natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="249.">249.</span></span>

There are three kinds of natural men; the first consists of those who
know nothing of the Divine precepts; the second, of those who know that
there are such precepts, but give no thought to a life according to
them; and the third, of those who despise and deny these precepts. In
respect to the first class, which consists of those who know nothing of
the Divine precepts, since they cannot be taught by themselves they must
needs remain natural. Every man is taught respecting the Divine
precepts, not by immediate revelations, but by others who know them from
religion, on which subject see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem
Concerning the Sacred Scriptures (n. 114-118). Those of the second
class, who know that there are Divine precepts but give no thought to a
life according to them, also remain natural, and care about no other
concerns than those of the world and the body. These after death become
mere menials and servants, according to the uses which they are able to
perform for those who are spiritual; for the natural man is a menial and
servant, and the spiritual man is a master and lord. Those of the third
class, who despise and deny the Divine precepts, not only remain
natural, but also become sensual in the measure of their contempt and
denial. Sensual men are the lowest natural men, who are incapable of
thinking above the appearances and fallacies of the bodily senses. After
death they are in hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="250.">250.</span></span>

As it is unknown in the world what the spiritual man is, and what the
natural, and as by many he who is merely natural is called spiritual,
and conversely, these subjects shall be separately discussed, as
follows: (1) What the natural man is, and what the spiritual man. (2)
The character of the natural man in whom the spiritual degree is opened.
(3) The character of the natural man in whom the spiritual degree is not
opened and yet not closed. (4) The character of the natural man in whom
the spiritual degree is entirely closed. (5) Lastly, The nature of the
difference between the life of a man merely natural and the life of a
beast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 251-300](dlw06)
