[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlw07)  [Next](dlw09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406804029/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Love and Wisdom*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1763\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Divine Love and Wisdom

<span class="margnote"><span id="351.">351.</span></span>

Those who believe in a Divine operation in all the details of nature,
are able by very many things they see in nature to confirm themselves in
favor of the Divine, as fully as others confirm themselves in favor of
nature, yea, more fully. For those who confirm themselves in favor of
the Divine give attention to the wonders which are displayed in the
production both of plants and animals. In the production of plants, how
out of a little seed cast into the ground there goes forth a root, and
by means of the root a stem, and branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits
in succession, even to new seeds; just as if the seed knew the order of
succession, or the process by which it is to renew itself. Can any
reasonable person think that the sun, which is mere fire, has this
knowledge, or that it is able to empower its heat and light to effect
these results, or is able to fashion these wonderful things in plants,
and to contemplate use? Any man of elevated reason who sees and weighs
these things, cannot think otherwise than that they come from Him who
has infinite reason, that is, from God. Those who acknowledge the Divine
also see and think this, but those who do not acknowledge the Divine do
not see or think this because they do not wish to; thus they sink their
rational into the sensual, which draws all its ideas from the lumen
which is proper to the bodily senses and which confirms their illusions,
saying, Do you not see the sun effecting these things by its heat and
light? What is a thing that you do not see? Is it anything? Those who
confirm themselves in favor of the Divine give attention to the wonders
which are displayed in the production of animals; to mention here only,
in reference to eggs, how the chick in its seed or beginning lies hidden
therein, with everything requisite till it is hatched, also with
everything pertaining to its subsequent development, until it becomes a
bird or winged thing of the same form as its parent. And if one observes
the living form, it is such as to fill any one with astonishment who
thinks deeply, seeing that in the minutest as in the largest living
creatures, even in the invisible, as in the visible, there are the
organs of sense, namely, sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch; and
organs of motion which are muscles, for they fly and walk; also viscera
surrounding the heart and lungs, which are set in action by brains. That
even the commonest insects enjoy such organisms is shown in their
anatomy as described by some writers, and especially by Swammerdam, in
his Biblia Naturae. Those who ascribe everything to nature, see all
these things, but they merely perceive that they exist, and say that
nature produces them. They say this because they have turned their minds
away from thinking about the Divine; and those who have done this are
unable, when they see the wonderful things in nature, to think
rationally, still less spiritually; but they think sensually and
materially; and then they think in nature from nature, and not above
nature, just as those do who are in hell. They differ from beasts only
in having the power to think rationally, that is, in being able to
understand, and therefore to think otherwise, if they choose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="352.">352.</span></span>

Those who have averted themselves from thinking about the Divine when
observing the wonderful things in nature, and who thereby become
sensual, do not reflect that the sight of the eye is so gross as to see
many little insects as an obscure speck, when yet each one of these is
organized to feel and to move, and is accordingly furnished with fibers
and vessels, also with a minute heart, pulmonary tubes, viscera, and
brains; also that these organs are woven out of the purest substances in
nature, their tissues corresponding to that somewhat of life by which
their minutest parts are separately moved. When the sight of the eye is
so gross that many such creatures, with innumerable particulars in each,
appear to it as an obscure speck, and yet those who are sensual think
and judge by that sight, it is clear how dulled their minds are, and
therefore what thick darkness they are in concerning spiritual things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="353.">353.</span></span>

Any one who chooses may confirm himself in favor of the Divine from
things seen in nature, and whoever thinks about God in reference to life
does so confirm himself; as when he observes the birds of the air, how
each species knows its food and where to find it, recognizes its kind by
sound and sight, and which among other kinds are its friends and which
its enemies; how also they mate, have knowledge of the sexual relation,
skillfully build nests, lay eggs therein, sit upon these, know the
period of incubation, and this having elapsed, bring forth their young,
love them most tenderly, cherish them under their wings, bring them food
and feed them, until they can do for themselves, perform the same
offices, and bring forth a family to perpetuate their kind. Any one who
is willing to reflect on the Divine influx through the spiritual world
into the natural can see such influx in these things, and if he will,
can say from his heart, Such knowledges cannot flow into these creatures
out of the sun through its rays of light, for the sun, from which nature
derives its origin and essence, is mere fire, consequently its rays of
light are wholly dead; and thus he may conclude that such things are
from the influx of Divine Wisdom into the outmosts of nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="354.">354.</span></span>

Any one may confirm himself in favor of the Divine from things visible
in nature, when he sees larvae, from the delight of some impulse,
desiring and longing to change their terrestrial state to a certain
likeness of the heavenly state, and for this purpose creeping into
corners, and putting themselves as it were into a womb in order to be
born again, and there becoming chrysalises, aurelias, caterpillars,
nymphs, and at length butterflies; and having undergone this
metamorphosis, and each after its kind been decked with beautiful wings,
they ascend into the air as into their heaven, and there disport
themselves joyfully, form marriage unions, lay eggs, and provide for
themselves a posterity, nourished meanwhile with pleasant and sweet food
from flowers. Who that confirms himself in favor of the Divine from the
visible things in nature can help seeing a kind of image of man's
earthly state in these as larvae, and in them as butterflies an image of
the heavenly state? Those who confirm themselves in favor of nature see
the same things, but because in heart they have rejected the heavenly
state of man they call them merely natural instincts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="355.">355.</span></span>

Any one may confirm himself in favor of the Divine from things seen in
nature by giving attention to what is known about bees: that they know
how to collect wax and suck honey from herbs and flowers, and to build
cells like little houses, and set them in the form of a city, with
streets through which to come in and go out; that they scent at long
distances the flowers and herbs from which they collect wax for their
houses and honey for food, and laden with these fly back in a direct
line to their hive; thus providing themselves with food and habitation
for the coming winter, as if they had foresight and knowledge of it.
They also set over them a mistress as queen, out of whom a posterity may
be propagated; and for her they build a sort of a palace over themselves
with guards around it; and when her time of bringing forth is at hand,
she goes attended by her guards from cell to cell, and lays her eggs,
which the crowd of followers smear over to protect them from the air,
from which a new progeny springs forth for them. When this progeny
becomes mature enough to do the same, it is driven from the hive. The
expelled swarm first collects, and then in a close body, to preserve its
integrity, flies away in quest of a home for itself. Moreover, in the
autumn the useless drones are led out and are deprived of their wings to
prevent their returning and consuming the food for which they have not
labored; not to mention other particulars. From all this it can be seen
that bees, because of their use to the human race, have from influx from
the spiritual world, a form of government similar to that among men on
earth, and even like that of angels in heaven. Can any man of unimpaired
reason fail to see that these doings of the bees are not from the
natural world? What has that sun, from which nature springs, in common
with a government that vies with and resembles the government of heaven?
From these things and others very similar to them in the brute creation,
the confessor and worshiper of nature confirms himself in favor of
nature, while the confessor and worshiper of God confirms himself from
the same things in favor of the Divine; for the spiritual man sees in
them spiritual things and the natural man natural things, thus each
according to his character. As for myself, such things have been proofs
to me of an influx of the spiritual into the natural, that is, of the
spiritual world into the natural world, thus of an influx from the
Lord's Divine Wisdom. Consider, moreover, whether you can think
analytically concerning any form of government, or any civil law, or
moral virtue, or spiritual truth, unless the Divine out of His wisdom
flows in through the spiritual world ? For myself, I could not and
cannot. For having now observed that influx perceptibly and sensibly for
about nineteen years continually, I speak as an eye-witness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="356.">356.</span></span>

Can anything natural regard use as an end and dispose uses into series
and forms? No one can do this unless he be wise; and no one but God,
whose wisdom is infinite, can so give order and form to the universe.
Who else or what else is able to foresee and provide all things needful
for the food and clothing of man, - food from the fruits of earth and
from animals, and clothing from the same? How marvelous that so
insignificant a creature as the silk-worm should clothe in silk and
splendidly adorn both women and men, from queens and kings to
maidservants and menservants, and that insignificant insects like the
bees should supply wax for the candles by which temples and palaces are
made brilliant. These and many other things are manifest proofs that the
Lord from Himself by means of the spiritual world, brings about
everything that comes into existence in nature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="357.">357.</span></span>

To this must be added that those who have confirmed themselves in favor
of nature, from the visible things of the world, until they have become
atheists, have been seen by me in the spiritual world; and in the
spiritual light their understanding appeared open below, but closed
above, because in thought they had looked downward toward the earth, and
not upward toward heaven. Above their sensual, which is the bottom of
the understanding, appeared something like a veil; which in some flashed
with hellish fire, in some was black like soot, and in some livid like a
corpse. Therefore let every one beware of confirmations in favor of
nature; let him confirm himself in favor of the Divine; there is no lack
of materiaL

<span class="margnote"><span id="358.">358.</span></span>

PART FIFTH. TWO RECEPTACLES AND ABODES FOR HIMSELF, CALLED WILL AND
UNDERSTANDING, HAVE BEEN CREATED AND FORMED BY THE LORD IN MAN; THE WILL
FOR HIS DIVINE LOVE, AND THE UNDERSTANDING FOR HIS DIVINE WISDOM. The
Divine Love and Divine Wisdom of God the Creator, who is the Lord from
eternity, and also the creation of the universe, have been treated of;
something shall now be said of the creation of man. We read (in Gen.
1:26) that man was created "in the image of God, after His likeness." By
"image of God" is there meant the Divine Wisdom, and by "likeness" of
God the Divine Love; since wisdom is nothing but an image of love, for
in wisdom love presents itself to be seen and recognized, and because it
is seen and recognized in wisdom, wisdom is an image of it. Moreover
love is the esse of life, and wisdom is the existere of life therefrom.
In angels the likeness and image of God clearly appear, since love from
within shines forth in their faces, and wisdom in their beauty, and
their beauty is a form of their love. I have seen and know.

<span class="margnote"><span id="359.">359.</span></span>

Man cannot be an image of God, after His likeness, unless God is in him
and is his life from the inmost. That God is in man and, from the
inmost, is his life, follows from what has been shown above (n. 4-6),
that God alone is life, and that men and angels are recipients of life
from Him. Moreover, that God is in man and that He makes His abode with
him, is known from the Word; for which reason it is customary for
preachers to declare that men ought to prepare themselves to receive
God, that He may enter into them, and be in their hearts, that they may
be His dwelling-place. The devout man says the same in his prayers, and
some speak more openly respecting the Holy Spirit, which they believe to
be in them when they are in holy zeal, and from that zeal they think,
speak, and preach. That the Holy Spirit is the Lord, and not a God who
is a person by Himself, has been shown in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem Concerning the Lord (n. 51-53). For the Lord declares: In that
day ye shall know that ye are in Me, and I in you (John 14:20; so also
in chap. 15:4, 5; and chap. 17:23).

<span class="margnote"><span id="360.">360.</span></span>

Now because the Lord is Divine Love and Divine Wisdom, and these two
essentially are Himself, it is necessary, in order that He may abide in
man and give life to man, that He should create and form in man
receptacles and abodes for Himself; the one for love and the other for
wisdom. These receptacles and abodes in man are called will and
understanding; the receptacle and abode of love is called the will, and
the receptacle and abode of wisdom is called the understanding. That
these two are the Lord's in man, and that from these two man has all his
life, will be seen in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="361.">361.</span></span>

That every man has these two, will and understanding, and that they are
distinct from each other, as love and wisdom are distinct, is known and
is not known in the world. It is known from common perception, but it is
not known from thought and still less from thought when written out; for
who does not know from common perception that the will and the
understanding are two distinct things in man? For every one perceives
this when he hears it stated, and may himself say to another, This man
means well, but does not understand clearly; while that one's
understanding is good, but his will is not; I like the man whose
understanding and will are both good; but I do not like him whose
understanding is good and his will bad. Yet when he thinks about the
will and the understanding he does not make them two and distinguish
them, but confounds them, since his thought then acts in common with the
bodily sight. When writing he apprehends still less that will and
understanding are two distinct things, because his thought then acts in
common with the sensual, that is, with what is the man's own. From this
it is that some can think and speak well, but cannot write well. This is
common with women. It is the same with many other things. Is it not
known by everyone from common perception that a man whose life is good
is saved, but that a man whose life is bad is condemned? Also that one
whose life is good will enter the society of angels, and will there see,
hear, and speak like a man? Also that one who from justice does what is
just and from what is right does right, has a conscience? But if one
lapses from common perception, and submits these things to thought, he
does not know what conscience is; or that the soul can see, hear, and
speak like a man; or that the good of life is anything except giving to
the poor. And if from thought you write about these things, you confirm
them by appearances and fallacies, and by words of sound but of no
substance. For this reason many of the learned who have thought much,
and especially who have written much, have weakened and obscured, yea,
have destroyed their common perception; while the simple see more
clearly what is good and true than those who think themselves their
superiors in wisdom. This common perception comes by influx from heaven,
and descends into thought even to sight; but thought separated from
common perception falls into imagination from the sight and from what is
man's own. You may observe that this is so. Tell some truth to any one
that is in common perception, and he will see it; tell him that from God
and in God we are and live and are moved, and he will see it; tell him
that God dwells with man in love and in wisdom, and he will see it; tell
him further that the will is the receptacle of love, and the
understanding of wisdom, and explain it a little, and he will see it;
tell him that God is Love itself and Wisdom itself, and he will see it;
ask him what conscience is, and he will tell you. But say the same
things to one of the learned, who has not thought from common
perception, but from principles or from ideas obtained from the world
through sight, and he will not see. Then consider which is the wiser.

<span class="margnote"><span id="362.">362.</span></span>

WILL AND UNDERSTANDING, WHICH ARE THE RECEPTACLES OF LOVE AND WISDOM,
ARE IN THE BRAINS, IN THE WHOLE AND IN EVERY PART OF THEM, AND THEREFROM
IN THE BODY, IN THE WHOLE AND IN EVERY PART OF IT. This shall be shown
in the following order: (1) Love and wisdom, and will and understanding
therefrom, make the very life of man. (2) The life of man in its first
principles is in the brains, and in its derivatives in the body. (3)
Such as life is in its first principles, such it is in the whole and in
every part. (4) By means of first principles life is in the whole from
every part, and in every part from the whole. (5) Such as the love is,
such is the wisdom, consequently such is the man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="363.">363.</span></span>

\(1\) Love and wisdom, and will and understanding therefrom, make the
very life of man. Scarcely any one knows what life is. When one thinks
about life, it seems as if it were a fleeting something, of which no
distinct idea is possible. It so seems because it is not known that God
alone is life, and that His life is Divine Love and Divine Wisdom. From
this it is evident that in man life is nothing else than love and
wisdom, and that there is life in man in the degree in which he receives
these. It is known that heat and light go forth from the sun, and that
all things in the universe are recipients and grow warm and bright in
the degree in which they receive. So do heat and light go forth from the
sun where the Lord is; the heat going forth therefrom is love, and the
light wisdom (as shown in Part Second). Life, therefore, is from these
two which go forth from the Lord as a sun. That love and wisdom from the
Lord is life can be seen also from this, that man grows torpid as love
recedes from him, and stupid as wisdom recedes from him, and that were
they to recede altogether he would become extinct. There are many things
pertaining to love which have received other names because they are
derivatives, such as affections, desires, appetites, and their pleasures
and enjoyments; and there are many things pertaining to wisdom, such as
perception, reflection, recollection, thought, intention to an end; and
there are many pertaining to both love and wisdom, such as consent,
conclusion, and determination to action; besides others. All of these,
in fact, pertain to both, but they are designated from the more
prominent and nearer of the two. From these two are derived ultimately
sensations, those of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch, with their
enjoyments and pleasures. It is according to appearance that the eye
sees; but it is the understanding that sees through the eye;
consequently seeing is predicated also of the understanding. The
appearance is that the ear hears; but it is the understanding that hears
through the ear; consequently hearing is predicated also of attention
and giving heed, which pertain to the understanding. The appearance is
that the nose smells, and the tongue tastes but it is the understanding
that smells and also tastes by virtue of its perception; therefore
smelling and tasting are predicated also of perception. So in other
cases. The sources of all these are love and wisdom; from which it can
be seen that these two make the life of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="364.">364.</span></span>

Everyone sees that the understanding is the receptacle of wisdom, but
few see that the will is the receptacle of love. This is because the
will does not act at all by itself, but only through the understanding;
also because the love of the will, in passing over into the wisdom of
the understanding, is first changed into affection, and thus passes
over; and affection is not perceived except by something pleasant in
thinking, speaking, and acting, which is not noticed. Still it is
evident that love is from the will, for the reason that everyone wills
what he loves, and does not will what he does not love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="365.">365.</span></span>

\(2\) The life of man in its first principles is in the brains, and in
its derivatives in the body. In first principles means in its firsts,
and in derivatives means in what is brought forth and formed from its
firsts. By life in first principles is meant will and understanding.
These two are what are in their first principles in the brains, and in
their derivatives in the body. It is evident that the first principles
or firsts of life are in the brains: (1) From the feeling itself; since
man perceives, when he exerts his mind and thinks, that he thinks in the
brain. He draws in as it were the sight of the eye, contracts the
forehead, and perceives the mental process to be within, especially
inside the forehead and somewhat above it. (2) From man's formation in
the womb; in that the brain or head is first developed, and continues
for some time larger than the body. (3) In that the head is above and
the body below; and it is according to order for the higher to act upon
the lower, and not the reverse. (4) In that, when the brain is injured
in the womb or by a wound or by disease, or by excessive application,
thought is weakened and sometimes the mind becomes deranged. (5) In that
all the external senses of the body sight, hearing, smell, and taste,
with touch (the universal sense) as also speech, are in the front part
of the head, which is called the face, and communicate immediately
through fibers with the brains, and derive therefrom their sensitive and
active life. (6) It is from this that affections, which are of love,
appear imaged forth in the face, and that thoughts, which are of wisdom,
are revealed in a kind of sparkle of the eyes. (7) Anatomy teaches that
all fibers descend from the brains through the neck into the body, and
that none ascend from the body through the neck into the brains. And
where the fibers are in their first principles or firsts, there life is
in its first principles or firsts. Will any one venture to deny that
life has its origin where the fibers have their origin? (8) Ask any one
of common perception where his thought resides or where he thinks, and
he will say, In the head. Then appeal to some one who has assigned the
seat of the soul to some gland or to the heart or somewhere else, and
ask him where affection and thought therefrom are in their firsts,
whether they are not in the brain? and he will answer, No, or that he
does not know. The cause of this ignorance may be seen above (n. 361).

<span class="margnote"><span id="366.">366.</span></span>

\(3\) Such as life is in its first principles, such it is in the whole
and in every part. That this may be perceived, it shall now be told
where in the brains these first principles are, and how they become
derivative. Anatomy shows where in the brains these first principles
are; it teaches that there are two brains; that these are continued from
the head into the spinal column; that they consist of two substances,
called cortical substance and medullary substance; that cortical
substance consists of innumerable gland-like forms, and medullary
substance of innumerable fiber-like forms. Now as these little glands
are heads of fibrils, they are also their first principles. For from
these, fibers begin and thereupon go forth, gradually bundling
themselves into nerves. These bundles or nerves, when formed, descend to
the organs of sense in the face, and to the organs of motion in the
body, and form them. Consult any one skilled in the science of anatomy,
and you will be convinced. This cortical or glandular substance
constitutes the surface of the cerebrum, and also the surface of the
corpora striata, from which proceeds the medulla oblongata; it also
constitutes the middle of the cerebellum, and the middle of the spinal
marrow. But medullary or fibrillary substance everywhere begins in and
proceeds from the cortical; out of it nerves arise, and from them all
things of the body. That this is true is proved by dissection. They who
know these things, either from the study of anatomical science or from
the testimony of those who are skilled in the science, can see that the
first principles of life are in the same place as the beginnings of the
fibers, and that fibers cannot go forth from themselves, but must go
forth from first principles. These first principles, that is,
beginnings, which appear as little glands, are almost countless; their
multitude may be compared to the multitude of stars in the universe; and
the multitude of fibrils coming out of them may be compared to the
multitude of rays going forth from the stars and bearing their heat and
light to the earth. The multitude of these little glands may also be
compared to the multitude of angelic societies in the heavens, which
also are countless, and, I have been told, are in like order as the
glands. Also the multitude of fibrils going out from these little glands
may be compared to the spiritual truths and goods which in like manner
flow down from the angelic societies like rays. From this it is that man
is like a universe, and like a heaven in least form (as has been
frequently said and shown above). From all which it can now be seen that
such as life is in first principles, such it is in derivatives; or such
as it is in its firsts in the brains, such it is in the things arising
therefrom in the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="367.">367.</span></span>

\(4\) By means of first principles life is in the whole from every part,
and in every part from the whole. This is because the whole, which is
the brain and the body together, is originally made up of nothing but
fibers proceeding from their first principles in the brains. It has no
other origin, as is evident from what has been shown just above (n.
366); consequently, the whole is from every part; and by means of these
first principles life is in every part from the whole, because the whole
dispenses to each part its task and needs, thereby making it to be a
part in the whole. In a word, the whole has existence from the parts,
and the parts have permanent existence from the whole. That there is
such reciprocal communion, and conjunction thereby, is clear from many
things in the body. For the same order prevails there as in a state,
commonwealth, or kingdom; the community has its existence from the
individuals which are its parts, and the parts or individuals have
permanent existence from the community. It is the same with every thing
that has form, most of all in man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="368.">368.</span></span>

\(5\) Such as the love is, such is the wisdom, consequently such is the
man. For such as the love and wisdom are, such are the will and
understanding, since the will is the receptacle of love, and the
understanding of wisdom, as has been shown above; and these two make the
man and his character. Love is manifold, so manifold that its varieties
are limitless; as can be seen from the human race on the earths and in
the heavens. There is no man or angel so like another that there is no
difference. Love is what distinguishes; for every man is his own love.
It is supposed that wisdom distinguishes; but wisdom is from love; it is
the form of love; love is the esse of life, and wisdom is the existere
of life from that esse. In the world it is believed that the
understanding makes the man; but this is believed because the
understanding can be elevated, as was shown above, into the light of
heaven, giving man the appearance of being wise; yet so much of the
understanding as transcends, that is to say, so much as is not of the
love, although it appears to be man's and therefore to determine man's
character, is only an appearance. For so much of the understanding as
transcends is, indeed, from the love of knowing and being wise, but not
at the same time from the love of applying to life what man knows and is
wise in. Consequently, in the world it either in time passes away or
lingers outside of the things of memory in its mere borders as something
ready to drop off; and therefore after death it is separated, no more of
it remaining than is in accord with the spirit's own love. Inasmuch as
love makes the life of man, and thus the man himself, all societies of
heaven, and all angels in societies, are arranged according to
affections belonging to love, and no society nor any angel in a society
according to anything of the understanding separate from love. So
likewise in the hells and their societies, but in accordance with loves
opposite to the heavenly loves. From all this it can be seen that such
as the love is such is the wisdom, and consequently such is the man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="369.">369.</span></span>

It is acknowledged, indeed, that man is such as his reigning love is,
but only in respect to his mind and disposition, not in respect to his
body, thus not wholly. But it has been made known to me by much
experience in the spiritual world, that man from head to foot, that is,
from things primary in the head to the outmosts in the body, is such as
his love is. For all in the spiritual world are forms of their own love;
the angels forms of heavenly love, the devils of hellish love; the
devils deformed in face and body, but the angels beautiful in face and
body. Moreover, when their love is assailed their faces are changed, and
if much assailed they wholly disappear. This is peculiar to that world,
and so happens because their bodies make one with their minds. The
reason is evident from what has been said above, that all things of the
body are derivatives, that is, are things woven together by means of
fibers out of first principles, which are receptacles of love and
wisdom. Howsoever these first principles may be, their derivatives
cannot be different; therefore wherever first principles go their
derivatives follow, and cannot be separated. For this reason he who
raises his mind to the Lord is wholly raised up to Him, and he who casts
his mind down to hell is wholly cast down thither; consequently the
whole man, in conformity to his life's love, comes either into heaven or
into hell. That man's mind is a man because God is a Man, and that the
body is the mind's external, which feels and acts, and that they are
thus one and not two, is a matter of angelic wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="370.">370.</span></span>

It is to be observed that the very forms of man's members, organs, and
viscera, as regards the structure itself, are from fibers that arise out
of their first principles in the brains; but these become fixed by means
of such substances and matters as are in earths, and from earths in air
and in ether. This is effected by means of the blood. Consequently, in
order that all parts of the body may be maintained in their formation
and rendered permanent in their functions, man requires to be nourished
by material food, and to be continually renewed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="371.">371.</span></span>

THERE IS A CORRESPONDENCE OF THE WILL WITH THE HEART, AND OF THE
UNDERSTANDING WITH THE LUNGS. This shall be shown in the following
series: (1) All things of the mind have relation to the will and
understanding, and all things of the body to the heart and lungs. (2)
There is a correspondence of the will and understanding with the heart
and lungs, consequently a correspondence of all things of the mind with
all things of the body. (3) The will corresponds to the heart. (4) The
understanding corresponds to the lungs. (5) By means of this
correspondence many arcana relating to the will and understanding, thus
also to love and wisdom, may be disclosed. (6) Man's mind is his spirit,
and the spirit is the man, while the body is the external by means of
which the mind or spirit feels and acts in its world. (7) The
conjunction of man's spirit with his body is by means of the
correspondence of his will and understanding with his heart and lungs,
and their separation is from non-correspondence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="372.">372.</span></span>

\(1\) All things of the mind have relation to the will and
understanding, and all things of the body to the heart and lungs. By the
mind nothing else is meant than the will and understanding, which in
their complex are all things that affect man and all that he thinks,
thus all things of man's affection and thought. The things that affect
man are of his will, and the things that he thinks are of his
understanding. That all things of man's thought are of his understanding
is known, since he thinks from the understanding; but it is not so well
known that all things of man's affection are of his will, this is not so
well known because when man is thinking he pays no attention to the
affection, but only to what he is thinking; just as when he hears a
person speaking, he pays no attention to the tone of the voice but only
to the language. Yet affection is related to thought as the tone of the
voice is to the language; consequently the affection of the one speaking
is known by the tone, and his thought by the language. Affection is of
the will, because all affection is of love, and the will is the
receptacle of love, as was shown above. He that is not aware that
affection is of the will confounds affection with understanding, for he
declares it to be one with thought, yet they are not one but act as one.
That they are confounded is evident from the common expression, I think
I will do this, meaning, I will to do it. But that they are two is also
evident from a common expression, I wish to think about this matter; and
when one thinks about it, the affection of the will is present in the
thought of the understanding, like the tone in speech, as was said
before. That all parts of the body have relation to the heart and lungs
is known, but that there is a correspondence of the heart and lungs with
the will and understanding is not known. This subject will therefore be
treated in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="373.">373.</span></span>

Because the will and understanding are the receptacles of love and
wisdom, these two are organic forms, or forms organized out of the
purest substances; for such they must be to be receptacles. It is no
objection that their organization is imperceptible to the eye; it lies
beyond the reach of vision, even when this is increased by the
microscope. The smallest insects are also too small to be seen, yet they
have organs of sense and motion, for they feel, walk, and fly. That they
have brains, hearts, pulmonary pipes, and viscera, acute observers have
discovered from their anatomy by means of the microscope. Since minute
insects themselves are not visible, and still less so their component
viscera, and since it is not denied that they are organized even to each
single particle in them, how can it be said that the two receptacles of
love and wisdom, called will and understanding, are not organic forms?
How can love and wisdom, which are life from the Lord, act upon what is
not a subject, or upon what has no substantial existence? Without
organic forms, how can thought inhere; and from thought inherent in
nothing can one speak? Is not the brain, where thought comes forth,
complete and organized in every part? The organic forms themselves are
there visible even to the naked eye; and the receptacles of the will and
understanding, in their first principles, are plainly to be seen in the
cortical substance, where they are perceptible as minute glands (On
which see above, n. 366). Do not, I pray, think of these things from an
idea of vacuum. Vacuum is nothing, and in nothing nothing takes place,
and from nothing nothing comes forth. (On the idea of vacuum, see above,
n. 82.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="374.">374.</span></span>

\(2\) There is a correspondence of the will and understanding with the
heart and lungs, consequently a correspondence of all things of the mind
with all things of the body. This is new: it has hitherto been unknown
because it has not been known what the spiritual is, and how it differs
from the natural; therefore it has not been known what correspondence
is; for there is a correspondence between things spiritual and things
natural, and by means of correspondence they are conjoined. It is said
that heretofore there has been no knowledge of what the spiritual is, or
of what its correspondence with the natural is and therefore what
correspondence is; yet these might have been known. Who does not know
that affection and thought are spiritual, therefore that all things of
affection and thought are spiritual? Who does not know that action and
speech are natural, therefore that all things of action and speech are
natural: who does not know that affection and thought, which are
spiritual, cause man to act and to speak? From this who cannot see what
correspondence is between things spiritual and things natural? Does not
thought make the tongue speak, and affection together with thought make
the body act? There are two distinct things: I can think without
speaking, and I can will without acting; and the body, it is known,
neither thinks nor wills, but thought falls into speech, and will
descends into action. Does not affection also beam forth from the face,
and there exhibit a type of itself? This everyone knows. Is not
affection, regarded in itself, spiritual, and the change of countenance,
called the expression, natural? From this who might not conclude that
there is correspondence; and further, a correspondence of all things of
the mind with all things of the body; and since all things of the mind
have relation to affection and thought, or what is the same, to the will
and understanding, and all things of the body to the heart and lungs, -
that there is a correspondence of the will with the heart and of the
understanding with the lungs? Such things have remained unknown, though
they might have been known, because man has become so external as to be
unwilling to acknowledge anything except the natural. This has become
the joy of his love, and from that the joy of his understanding;
consequently it has become distasteful to him to raise his thought above
the natural to anything spiritual separate from the natural; therefore,
from his natural love and its delights, he can think of the spiritual
only as a purer natural, and of correspondence only as a something
flowing in by continuity; yea, the merely natural man cannot think of
anything separate from the natural; any such thing to him is nothing.
Again, these things have not heretofore been seen and known, because
everything of religion, that is, everything called spiritual, has been
banished from the sight of man by the dogma of the whole Christian
world, that matters theological, that is, spiritual, which councils and
certain leaders have decreed, are to be believed blindly because (as
they say) they transcend the understanding. Some, therefore, have
imagined the spiritual to be like a bird flying above the air in an
ether to which the sight of the eye does not reach; when yet it is like
a bird of paradise, which flies near the eye, even touching the pupil
with its beautiful wings and longing to be seen. By the sight of the eye
intellectual vision is meant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="375.">375.</span></span>

The correspondence of the will and understanding with the heart and
lungs cannot be abstractly proved, that is, by mere reasonings, but it
may be proved by effects. It is much the same as it is with the causes
of things which can be seen rationally, yet not clearly except by means
of effects; for causes are in effects, and by means of effects make
themselves visible; and until causes are thus made visible, the mind is
not assured respecting them. In what follows, the effects of this
correspondence will be described. But lest any one should fall into
ideas of this correspondence imbibed from hypotheses about the soul, let
him first read over carefully the propositions in the preceding chapter,
as follows: Love and wisdom, and the will and understanding therefrom,
make the very life of man (n. 363, 365). The life of man is in first
principles in the brains, and in derivatives in the body (n. 365). Such
as life is in first principles, such it is in the whole and in every
part (n. 366). By means of these first principles life is in the whole
from every part, and in every part from the whole (n. 367). Such as the
love is, such is the wisdom, consequently such is the man (n. 368).

<span class="margnote"><span id="376.">376.</span></span>

It is permitted to introduce here, in the way of evidence, a
representation of the correspondence of the will and understanding with
the heart and lungs which was seen in heaven among the angels. By a
wonderful flowing into spiral movements, such as no words can express,
the angels formed the likeness of a heart and the likeness of lungs,
with all the interior structures therein; and in this they were falling
in with the flow of heaven, for heaven from the inflowing of love and
wisdom from the Lord strives to come into such forms. They thus
represented the conjunction of the heart and lungs, and at the same time
the correspondence of these with the love of the will and with the
wisdom of the understanding. This correspondence and union they called
the heavenly marriage; saying that in the whole body, and in its several
members, organs, and viscera, it is the same as in the things belonging
to the heart and lungs; also that where the heart and lungs do not act,
each in its turn, there can be no motion of life from any voluntary
principle, and no sensation of life from any intellectual principle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="377.">377.</span></span>

Inasmuch as the correspondence of the heart and lungs With the will and
understanding is treated of in what now follows, and upon this
correspondence is based that of all parts of the body, namely, the
members, the organs of the senses, and the viscera throughout the body,
and inasmuch as the correspondence of natural things with spiritual has
been heretofore unknown, and yet is amply shown in two works, one of
which treats of Heaven and Hell and the other, the Arcana Coelestia, of
the spiritual sense of the Word in Genesis and Exodus, I will here point
out what has been written and shown in those two works respecting
correspondence. In the work on Heaven and Hell: The correspondence of
all things of heaven with all things of man (n. 87-102). The
correspondence of all things of heaven with all things on earth (n.
103-115). In the Arcana Coelestia, the work on the spiritual sense of
the Word in Genesis and Exodus: The correspondence of the face and its
expressions with the affections of the mind (n. 1568, 2988, 2989, 3631,
4796, 4797, 4800, 5165, 5168, 5695, 9306). The correspondence of the
body, its gestures and actions, with things intellectual and things
voluntary (n. 2988, 3632, 4215). The correspondence of the senses in
general (n. 4318-4330). The correspondence of the eyes and of their
sight (n. 4403-4420). The correspondence of the nostrils and of smell
(n. 4624-4634). The correspondence of the ear, and of hearing (n.
4652-4660). The correspondence of the tongue and of taste (n.
4791-4805). The correspondence of the hands, arms, shoulders and feet
(n. 4931-4953). The correspondence of the loins and organs of generation
(n. 5050-5062). Thy correspondence of the internal viscera of the body,
especially of the stomach, thymus gland, the receptacle and ducts of the
chyle and lacteals, and of the mesentery (n. 5171-5180, 5181, 5189). The
correspondence of the spleen (n. 9698). The correspondence of the
peritonaeum, kidneys and bladder (n. 5377-5385). The correspondence of
the liver, and of the hepatic, cystic and pancreatic ducts (n.
5183-5185). The correspondence of the intestines (n. 5392-5395, 5379).
The correspondence of the bones (n. 5560-5564). The correspondence of
the skin (n. 5552-5559). The correspondence of heaven with man (n. 911,
1900, 1982, 2996-2998, 3624-3649, 3741-3745, 3884, 4051, 4279, 4403,
4423, 4524, 4525, 6013, 6057, 9279, 9632). All things that exist in the
natural world and in its three kingdoms correspond to all things which
appear in the spiritual world (n. 1632, 1831, 1881, 2758, 2990-3003,
3213-3227, 3483, 3624-3649, 4044, 4053, 4116, 4366, 4939, 5116, 5377,
5428, 5477, 8211 9280). All things that appear in the heavens are
correspondences (n. 1521, 1532, 1619-1625, 1807, 1808, 1971, 1974, 1977,
1980, 1981, 2299, 2601, 3213-3226, 3349, 3350, 3475-3585, 3748, 9481,
9570, 9576, 9577). The correspondence of the sense of the letter of the
Word and of its spiritual sense is treated of in the Arcana Coelestia
throughout; and on this subject see also the Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 5-26, 27-65).

<span class="margnote"><span id="378.">378.</span></span>

\(3\) The will corresponds to the heart. This can not be seen so clearly
taken by itself as when the will is considered in its effects (as was
said above). Taken by itself it can be seen by this, that all
affections, which are of love, induce changes in the heart's pulsations,
as is evident from the pulse of the arteries, which act synchronously
with the heart. The heart's changes and pulsations in accordance with
the love's affections are innumerable. Those felt by the finger are only
that the beats are slow or quick, high or low, weak or strong, regular
or irregular, and so on; thus that there is a difference in joy and in
sorrow, in tranquillity of mind and in wrath, in fearlessness and in
fear, in hot diseases and in cold, and so on. Because the two motions of
the heart, systolic and diastolic, change and vary in this manner
according to the affections of each one's love, many of the ancient and
after them some modern writers have assigned the affections to the
heart, and have made the heart their dwelling-place. From this have come
into common language such expressions as a stout heart, a timid heart, a
joyful heart, a sad heart, a soft heart, a hard heart, a great heart, a
weak heart, a whole heart, a broken heart, a heart of flesh, a heart of
stone; likewise being gross, or soft, or tender in heart; giving the
heart to a thing, giving a single heart, giving a new heart, laying up
in the heart, receiving in the heart, not reaching the heart, hardening
one's heart, a friend at heart; also the terms concord, discord, folly
\[vecordia\], and other similar terms expressive of love and its
affections. There are like expressions in the Word, because the Word was
written by correspondences. Whether you say love or will it is the same,
because the will is the receptacle of love, as was explained above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="379.">379.</span></span>

It is known that there is vital heat in man and in every living
creature; but its origin is not known. Every one speaks of it from
conjecture, consequently such as have known nothing of the
correspondence of natural things with spiritual have ascribed its
origin, some to the sun's heat, some to the activity of the parts, some
to life itself; but as they have not known what life is, they have been
content with the mere phrase. But any one who knows that there is a
correspondence of love and its affections with the heart and its
derivations may know that the origin of vital heat is love. For love
goes forth as heat from the spiritual sun where the Lord is, and
moreover is felt as heat by the angels. This spiritual heat which in its
essence is love, is what inflows by correspondence into the heart and
its blood, and imparts heat to it, and at the same time vivifies it.
That a man grows hot, and, as it were, is fired, according to his love
and the degree of it, and grows torpid and cold according to its
decrease, is known, for it is felt and seen; it is felt by the heat
throughout the body, and seen by the flushing of the face; and on the
other hand, extinction of love is felt by coldness in the body, and is
seen by paleness in the face. Because love is the life of man, the heart
is the first and the last of his life; and because love is the life of
man, and the soul maintains its life in the body by means of the blood,
in the Word blood is called the soul (Gen. 9:4; Levit. 17:14). The
various meanings of soul will be explained in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="380.">380.</span></span>

The redness, also, of the blood is from the correspondence of the heart
and the blood with love and its affection; for in the spiritual world
there are all kinds of colors, of which red and white are the
fundamental, the rest deriving their varieties from these and from their
opposites, which are a dusky fire color and black. Red there corresponds
to love, and white to wisdom. Red corresponds to love because it
originates in the fire of the spiritual sun, and white corresponds to
wisdom because it originates in the light of that sun. And because there
is a correspondence of love with the heart, the blood must needs be red,
and reveal its origin. For this reason in the heavens where love to the
Lord reigns the light is flame-colored, and the angels there are clothed
in purple garments; and in the heavens where wisdom reigns the light is
white, and the angels there are clothed in white linen garments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="381.">381.</span></span>

The heavens are divided into two kingdoms, one called celestial, the
other spiritual; in the celestial kingdom love to the Lord reigns, and
in the spiritual kingdom wisdom from that love. The kingdom where love
reigns is called heaven's cardiac kingdom, the one where wisdom reigns
is called its pulmonic kingdom. Be it known, that the whole angelic
heaven in its aggregate represents a single man, and before the Lord
appears as a single man; consequently its heart makes one kingdom and
its lungs another. For there is a general cardiac and pulmonic movement
throughout heaven, and a particular movement therefrom in each angel.
The general cardiac and pulmonic movement is from the Lord alone,
because love and wisdom are from Him alone. For these two movements are
in the sun where the Lord is and which is from the Lord, and from that
in the angelic heavens and in the universe. Banish spaces and think of
omnipresence, and you will be convinced that it is so. That the heavens
are divided into two kingdoms, celestial and spiritual, see the work on
Heaven and Hell (n. 20-28); and that the whole angelic heaven in the
aggregate represents a single man (n. 59-67).

<span class="margnote"><span id="382.">382.</span></span>

\(4\) The understanding corresponds to the lungs. This follows from what
has been said of the correspondence of the will with the heart; for
there are two things, will and understanding, which reign in the
spiritual man, that is, in the mind, and there are two things, heart and
lungs, which reign in the natural man, that is, in the body; and there
is correspondence (as was said above) of all things of the mind with all
thinks of the body; from which it follows that as the will corresponds
to the heart, so the understanding corresponds to the lungs. Moreover,
that the understanding corresponds to the lungs any one may observe in
himself, both from his thought and from his speech. (1) From thought: No
one is able to think except with the concurrence and concordance of the
pulmonary respiration; consequently, when he thinks tacitly he breathes
tacitly, if he thinks deeply he breathes deeply; he draws in the breath
and lets it out, contracts and expands the lungs, slowly or quickly,
eagerly, gently, or intently, all in conformity to his thought, thus to
the influx of affection from love; yea, if he hold the breath entirely
he is unable to think, except in his spirit by its respiration, which is
not manifestly perceived. (2) From speech: Since not the least vocal
sound flows forth from the mouth without the concurrent aid of the
lungs, - for the sound, which is articulated into words, all comes forth
from the lungs through the trachea and epiglottis, - therefore,
according to the inflation of these bellows and the opening of the
passage the voice is raised even to a shout, and according to their
contraction it is lowered; and if the passage is entirely closed speech
ceases and thought with it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="383.">383.</span></span>

Since the understanding corresponds to the lungs and thought therefrom
to the respiration of the lungs, in the Word, "soul" and "spirit"
signify the understanding; for example: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart and with all thy soul (Matt. 22:37). God will give a
new heart and a new spirit (Ezek. 36:26; Psalm 51:10). That "heart"
signifies the love of the will was shown above; therefore "soul" and
"spirit" signify the wisdom of the understanding. That the spirit of
God, also called the Holy Spirit, means Divine Wisdom, and therefore
Divine Truth which is the light of men, may be seen in The Doctrine of
the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord (n. 50, 51), therefore, The Lord
breathed on His disciples, and said, Receive ye the Holy Spirit John
20:22); for the same reason it is said that: Jehovah God breathed into
the nostrils of Adam the breath of lives, and he was made into a living
soul (Gen. 2:7); also He said to the prophet: Prophesy upon the breath,
and say unto the wind, Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe
upon these slain, that they may live (Ezek. 37:9); likewise in other
places; therefore the Lord is called "the breath of the nostrils," and
"the breath of life." Because respiration passes through the nostrils,
perception is signified by them; and an intelligent man is said to be
keen-scented, and an unintelligent man to be dull-scented. For the same
reason, spirit and wind in the Hebrew, and in some other languages, are
the same word; for the word spirit is derived from a word that means
breathing; and therefore when a man dies he is said to give up the ghost
\[anima\]. It is for the same reason that men believe the spirit to be
wind, or an airy something like breath breathed out from the lungs, and
the soul to be of like nature. From all this it can be seen that to
"love God with all the heart and all the soul" means to love Him with
all the love and with all the understanding, and to "give a new heart
and a new spirit" means to give a new will and a new understanding.
Because "spirit" signifies understanding, it is said of Bezaleel: That
he was filled with the spirit of wisdom, of intelligence, and of
knowledge (Exod. 31:3); and of Joshua: That he was filled with the
spirit of wisdom (Deut. 34:9); and Nebuchadnezzar says of Daniel: That
an excellent spirit of knowledge, of intelligence, and of wisdom, was in
him (Dan. 5:11, 12, 14); and it is said in Isaiah: They that err in
spirit shall learn intelligence (29:24); likewise in many other places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="384.">384.</span></span>

Since all things of the mind have relation to the will and
understanding, and all things of the body to the heart and lungs, there
are in the head two brains, distinct from each other as will and
understanding are distinct. The cerebellum is especially the organ of
the will, and the cerebrum of the understanding. Likewise the heart and
lungs in the body are distinct from the remaining parts there. They are
separated by the diaphragm, and are enveloped by their own covering,
called the pleura, and form that part of the body called the chest. In
the other parts of the body, called members, organs, and viscera, there
is a joining together of the two, and thus there are pairs; for
instance, the arms, hands, loins, feet, eyes, and nostrils; and within
the body the kidneys, ureters, and testicles; and the viscera which are
not in pairs are divided into right and left. Moreover, the brain itself
is divided into two hemispheres, the heart into two ventricles, and the
lungs into two lobes; the right of all these having relation to the good
of truth, and the left to the truth of good, or, what is the same, the
right having relation to the good of love from which is the truth of
wisdom, and the left having relation to the truth of wisdom which is
from the good of love. And because the conjunction of good and truth is
reciprocal, and by means of that conjunction the two become as it were
one, therefore the pairs in man act together and conjointly in
functions, motions, and senses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="385.">385.</span></span>

\(5\) By means of this correspondence many arcana relating to the will
and understanding, thus also to love and wisdom, may be disclosed. In
the world it is scarcely known what the will is or what love is, for the
reason that man is not able, by himself, to love, and from love to will,
although he is able as it were by himself to exercise intelligence and
thought; just as he is not able of himself to cause the heart to beat,
although he is able of himself to cause the lungs to respire. Now
because it is scarcely known in the world what the will is or what love
is, but it is known what the heart and the lungs are, - for these are
objects of sight and can be examined, and have been examined and
described by anatomists, while the will and the understanding are not
objects of sight, and cannot be so examined - therefore when it is known
that these correspond, and by correspondence act as one, many arcana
relating to the will and understanding may be disclosed that could not
otherwise be disclosed; those for instance relating to the conjunction
of the will with the understanding, and the reciprocal conjunction of
the understanding with the will; those relating to the conjunction of
love with wisdom, and the reciprocal conjunction of wisdom with love;
also those relating to the derivation of love into affections, and to
the consociation of affections, to their influx into perceptions and
thoughts, and finally their influx according to correspondence into the
bodily acts and senses. These and many other arcana may be both
disclosed and illustrated by the conjunction of the heart and lungs, and
by the influx of the blood from the heart into the lungs, and
reciprocally from the lungs into the heart, and therefrom through the
arteries into all the members, organs and viscera of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="386.">386.</span></span>

\(6\) Man's mind is his spirit, and the spirit is the man, while the
body is an external by means of which the mind or spirit feels and acts
in its world. That man's mind is his spirit, and that the spirit is the
man, can hardly enter the faith of those who have supposed the spirit to
be wind, and the soul to be an airy something like breath breathed out
from the lungs. For they say, How can the spirit, when it is spirit, be
the man, and how can the soul, when it is soul, be the man? They think
in the same way of God because He is called a Spirit. This idea of the
spirit and the soul has come from the fact that spirit and wind in some
languages are the same word; also, that when a man dies, he is said to
give up the ghost or spirit; also, that life returns, after suffocation
or swooning, when the spirit or breath of the lungs comes back. Because
in these cases nothing but the breath or air is perceived, it is
concluded from the eye and bodily sense that the spirit and soul of man
after death is not the man. From this corporeal conclusion about the
spirit and soul, various hypotheses have arisen, and these have given
birth to a belief that man after death does not become a man until the
day of the last judgment, and that meanwhile his spirit remains
somewhere or other awaiting reunion with the body, according to what has
been shown in the Continuation concerning the Last Judgment (n. 32-38).
Because man's mind is his spirit, the angels, who also are spirits, are
called minds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="387.">387.</span></span>

Man's mind is his spirit, and the spirit is the man, because by the mind
all things of man's will and understanding are meant, which things are
in first principles in the brains and in derivatives in the body;
therefore in respect to their forms they are all things of man. This
being so, the mind (that is, the will and understanding) impels the body
and all its belongings at will. Does not the body do whatever the mind
thinks and wills? Does not the mind incite the ear to hear, and direct
the eye to see, move the tongue and the lips to speak, impel the hands
and fingers to do whatever it pleases, and the feet to walk whither it
will? Is the body, then, anything but obedience to its mind; and can the
body be such unless the mind is in its derivatives in the body? Is it
consistent with reason to think that the body acts from obedience simply
because the mind so wills? in which case they should be two, the one
above and the other below, one commanding, the other obeying. As this is
in no way consistent with reason, it follows that man's life is in its
first principles in the brains, and in its derivatives in the body
(according to what has been said above, n. 365); also that such as life
is in first principles, such it is in the whole and in every part (n.
366); and by means of these first principles life is in the whole from
every part, and in every part from the whole (n. 367). That all things
of the mind have relation to the will and understanding, and that the
will and understanding are the receptacles of love and wisdom from the
Lord, and that these two make the life of man, has been shown in the
preceding pages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="388.">388.</span></span>

From what has now been said it can also be seen that man's mind is the
man himself. For the primary texture of the human form, that is, the
human form itself with each and every thing thereof, is from first
principles continued from the brain through the nerves, in the manner
described above. It is this form into which man comes after death, who
is then called a spirit or an angel, and who is in all completeness a
man, but a spiritual man. The material form that is added and
superinduced in the world, is not a human form by itself, but only by
virtue of the spiritual form, to which it is added and superinduced that
man may be enabled to perform uses in the natural world, and also to
draw to himself out of the purer substances of the world a fixed
containant of spiritual things, and thus continue and perpetuate life.
It is a truth of angelic wisdom that man's mind, not alone in general,
but in every particular, is in a perpetual conatus toward the human
form, for the reason that God is a Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="389.">389.</span></span>

That man may be man there must be no part lacking, either in head or in
body, that has existence in the complete man; since there is nothing
therein that does not enter into the human form and constitute it; for
it is the form of love and wisdom, and this, in itself considered, is
Divine. In it are all terminations of love and wisdom, which in God-Man
are infinite, but in His image, that is, in man, angel, or spirit, are
finite. If any part that has existence in man were lacking, there would
be lacking something of termination from the love and wisdom
corresponding to it, whereby the Lord might be from firsts in outmosts
with man, and might from His Divine Love through His Divine Wisdom
provide uses in the created world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="390.">390.</span></span>

\(7\) The conjunction of man's spirit with his body is by means of the
correspondence of his will and understanding with his heart and lungs,
and their separation is from non- correspondence. As it has heretofore
been unknown that man's mind, by which is meant the will and
understanding, is his spirit, and that the spirit is a man; and as it
has been unknown that man's spirit, as well as his body, has a pulse and
respiration, it could not be known that the pulse and respiration of the
spirit in man flow into the pulse and respiration of his body and
produce them. Since, then, man's spirit, as well as his body, enjoys a
pulse and respiration, it follows that there is a like correspondence of
the pulse and respiration of man's spirit with the pulse and respiration
of his body, - for, as was said, his mind is his spirit, - consequently,
when the two pairs of motions cease to correspond, separation takes
place, which is death. Separation or death ensues when from any kind of
disease or accident the body comes into such a state as to be unable to
act in unison with its spirit, for thus correspondence perishes, and
with it conjunction; not, however, when respiration alone ceases, but
when the heart's pulsation ceases. For so long as the heart is moved,
love with its vital heat remains and preserves life, as is evident in
cases of swoon and suffocation, and in the condition of fetal life in
the womb. In a word, man's bodily life depends on the correspondence of
its pulse and respiration with the pulse and respiration of his spirit;
and when that correspondence ceases, the bodily life ceases, and his
spirit departs and continues its life in the spiritual world, which is
so similar to his life in the natural world that he does not know that
he has died. Men generally enter the spiritual world two days after the
death of the body. For I have spoken with some after two days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="391.">391.</span></span>

That a spirit, as well as a man on earth in the body enjoys a pulse and
a respiration, can only be proved by spirits and angels themselves, when
privilege is granted to speak with them. This privilege has been granted
to me. When questioned about the matter they declared that they are just
as much men as those in the world are, and possess a body as well as
they, but a spiritual body, and feel the beat of the heart in the chest,
and the beat of the arteries in the wrist, just as men do in the natural
world. I have questioned many about the matter, and they all gave like
answer. That man's spirit respires within his body has been granted me
to learn by personal experience. On one occasion angels were allowed to
control my respiration, and to diminish it at pleasure, and at length to
withdraw it, until only the respiration of my spirit remained, which I
then perceived by sense. A like experience was granted me when permitted
to learn the state of the dying (as may be seen in the work on Heaven
and Hell, n. 449). I have sometimes been brought into the respiration of
my spirit only, which I have then sensibly perceived to be in accord
with the common respiration of heaven. Also many times I have been in a
state like that of angels, and also raised up into heaven to them, and
being then out of the body in spirit, I talked with angels with a
respiration in like manner as in the world. From this and other personal
evidence it has been made clear to me that man's spirit respires, not
only in the body but also after it has left the body; that the
respiration of the spirit is so silent as not to be perceptible to man;
and that it inflows into the manifest respiration of the body almost as
cause flows into effect, or thought into the lungs and through the lungs
into speech. From all this it is also evident that conjunction of spirit
and body in man is by means of the correspondence of the cardiac and
pulmonic movement in both.

<span class="margnote"><span id="392.">392.</span></span>

These two movements, the cardiac and the pulmonic, derive their origin
and persistence from this, that the whole angelic heaven, in general and
in particular, is in these two movements of life; and the whole angelic
heaven is in these movements because the Lord pours them in from the
sun, where He is, and which is from Him; for these two movements are
maintained by that sun from the Lord. It is evident that such is their
origin since all things of heaven and all things of the world depend on
the Lord through that sun in a connection, by virtue of form, like a
chain-work from the first to outmosts, also since the life of love and
wisdom is from the Lord, and all the forces of the universe are from
life. That the variation of these movements is according to the
reception of love and wisdom, also follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="393.">393.</span></span>

More will be said in what follows of the correspondence of these
movements, as what the nature of that correspondence is in those who
respire with heaven, and what it is in those who respire with hell; also
what it is in those who speak with heaven, but think with hell, thus
what it is with hypocrites, flatterers, deceivers, and others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="394.">394.</span></span>

FROM THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THE HEART WITH THE WILL AND OF THE LUNGS WITH
THE UNDERSTANDING, EVERYTHING MAY BE KNOWN THAT CAN BE KNOWN ABOUT THE
WILL AND UNDERSTANDING, OR ABOUT LOVE AND WISDOM, THEREFORE ABOUT THE
SOUL OF MAN. Many in the learned world have wearied themselves with
inquiries respecting the soul; but as they knew nothing of the spiritual
world, or of man's state after death, they could only frame theories,
not about the nature of the soul, but about its operation on the body.
Of the nature of the soul they could have no idea except as something
most pure in the ether, and of its containing form they could have no
idea except as being ethereal. But knowing that the soul is spiritual,
they dared not say much about the matter openly, for fear of ascribing
to the soul something natural. With this conception of the soul, and yet
knowing that the soul operates on the body, and produces all things in
it that relate to its sensation and motion, they have wearied
themselves, as was said, with inquiries respecting the operation of the
soul on the body. This has been held by some to be effected by influx,
and by some to be effected by harmony. But as this investigation has
disclosed nothing in which the mind anxious to see the real truth can
acquiesce, it has been granted me to speak with angels, and to be
enlightened on the subject by their wisdom; the fruits of which are as
follows: Man's soul, which lives after death, is his spirit, and is in
complete form a man; the soul of this form is the will and
understanding, and the soul of these is love and wisdom from the Lord;
these two are what constitute man's life, which is from the Lord above;
yet for the sake of man's reception of Him, He causes life to appear as
if it were man's; but that man may not claim life for himself as his,
and thus withdraw himself from this reception of the Lord, the Lord has
also taught that everything of love, which is called good, and
everything of wisdom, which is called truth, is from Him, and nothing of
these from man; and as these two are life, that everything of life which
is life is from Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="395.">395.</span></span>

Since the soul in its very esse is love and wisdom, and these two in man
are from the Lord, there are created in man two receptacles, which are
also the abodes of the Lord in man; one for love, the other for wisdom,
the one for love called the will, the other for wisdom called the
understanding. Now since Love and Wisdom in the Lord are one distinctly
(as may be seen above, n. 17-22), and Divine Love is of His Divine
Wisdom, and Divine Wisdom is of His Divine Love (n. 34-39), and since
these so go forth from God-Man, that is, from the Lord, therefore these
two receptacles and abodes of the Lord in man, the will and
understanding, are so created by the Lord as to be distinctly two, and
yet make one in every operation and every sensation; for in these the
will and understanding cannot be separated. Nevertheless, to enable man
to become a receptacle and an abode of the Lord, it is provided, as
necessary to this end, that man's understanding can be raised above his
proper love into some light of wisdom in the love of which the man is
not, and that he can thereby see and be taught how he must live if he
would come also into that higher love, and thus enjoy eternal happiness.
But by the misuse of this power to elevate the understanding above his
proper love, man has subverted in himself that which might have been the
receptacle and abode of the Lord (that is, of love and wisdom from the
Lord), by making the will an abode for the love of self and the world,
and the understanding an abode for whatever confirms those loves. From
this it has come that these two abodes, the will and understanding, have
become abodes of infernal love, and by confirmations in favor of these
loves, abodes of infernal thought, which in hell is esteemed as wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="396.">396.</span></span>

The reason why the love of self and love of the world are infernal
loves, and yet man has been able to come into them and thus subvert the
will and understanding within him, is as follows: the love of self and
the love of the world by creation are heavenly loves; for they are loves
of the natural man serviceable to spiritual loves, as a foundation is to
a house. For man, from the love of self and the world, seeks the welfare
of his body, desires food, clothing, and habitation, is solicitous for
the welfare of his family, and to secure employment for the sake of use,
and even, in the interest of obedience, to be honored according to the
dignity of the affairs which he administers, and to find delight and
refreshment in worldly enjoyment; yet all this for the sake of the end,
which must be use For through these things man is in a state to serve
the Lord and to serve the neighbor. When, however, there is no love of
serving the Lord and serving the neighbor, but only a love of serving
himself by means of the world, then from being heavenly that love
becomes hellish, for it causes a man to sink his mind and disposition in
what is his own, and that in itself is wholly evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="397.">397.</span></span>

Now that man may not by the understanding be in heaven while by the will
he is in hell, as is possible, and may thereby have a divided mind,
after death everything of the understanding which transcends its own
love is removed; whereby it comes that in everyone the will and
understanding finally make one. With those in heaven the will loves good
and the understanding thinks truth; but with those in hell the will
loves evil and the understanding thinks falsity. The same is true of man
in this world when he is thinking from his spirit, as he does when
alone; yet many, so long as they are in the body, when they are not
alone think otherwise. They then think otherwise because they raise
their understanding above the proper love of their will, that is, of
their spirit. These things have been said, to make known that the will
and understanding are two distinct things, although created to act as
one, and that they are made to act as one after death, if not before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="398.">398.</span></span>

Now since love and wisdom, and therefore will and understanding, are
what are called the soul, and how the soul acts upon the body, and
effects all its operations, is to be shown in what follows, and since
this may be known from the correspondence of the heart with the will,
and of the lungs with the understanding, by means of that correspondence
what follows has been disclosed: (1) Love or the will is man's very
life. (2) Love or the will strives unceasingly towards the human form
and all things of that form. (3) Love or the will is unable to effect
anything by its human form without a marriage with wisdom or the
understanding. (4) Love or the will prepares a house or bridal chamber
for its future wife, which is wisdom or the understanding. (5) Love or
the will also prepares all things in its human form, that it may act
conjointly with wisdom or the understanding. (6) After the nuptials, the
first conjunction is through affection for knowing, from which springs
affection for truth. (7) The second conjunction is through affection for
understanding, from which springs perception of truth. (8) The third
conjunction is through affection for seeing truth, from which springs
thought. (9) Through these three conjunctions love or the will is in its
sensitive life and in its active life. (10) Love or the will introduces
wisdom or the understanding into all things of its house. (11) Love or
the will does nothing except in conjunction with wisdom or the
understanding. (12) Love or the will conjoins itself to wisdom or the
understanding, and causes wisdom or the understanding to be reciprocally
conjoined to it. (13) Wisdom or the understanding, from the potency
given to it by love or the will, can be elevated, and can receive such
things as are of light out of heaven, and perceive them. (14) Love or
the will can in like manner be elevated and can perceive such things as
are of heat out of heaven, provided it loves its consort in that degree.
(15) Otherwise love or the will draws down wisdom or the understanding
from its elevation, that it may act as one with itself. (16) Love or the
will is purified by wisdom in the understanding, if they are elevated
together. (17) Love or the will is defiled in the understanding and by
it, if they are not elevated together. (18) Love, when purified by
wisdom in the understanding, becomes spiritual and celestial. (19) Love,
when defiled in the understanding and by it, becomes natural and
sensual. (20) The capacity to understand called rationality, and the
capacity to act called freedom, still remain. (21) Spiritual and
celestial love is love towards the neighbor and love to the Lord; and
natural and sensual love is love of the world and love of self. (22) It
is the same with charity and faith and their conjunction as with the
will and understanding and their conjunction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="399.">399.</span></span>

\(1\) Love or the will is man's very life. This follows from the
correspondence of the heart with the will (considered above, n.
378-381). For as the heart acts in the body, so does the will act in the
mind; and as all things of the body depend for existence and motion upon
the heart, so do all things of the mind depend for existence and life
upon the will. It is said, upon the will, but this means upon the love,
because the will is the receptacle of love, and love is life itself (see
above, n. 1-3), and love, which is life itself, is from the Lord alone.
By the heart and its extension into the body through the arteries and
veins it can be seen that love or the will is the life of man, for the
reason that things that correspond to each other act in a like manner,
except that one is natural and the other spiritual. How the heart acts
in the body is evident from anatomy, which shows that wherever the heart
acts by means of the vessels put forth from it, everything is alive or
subservient to life; but where the heart by means of its vessels does
not act, everything is lifeless. Moreover, the heart is the first and
last thing to act in the body. That it is the first is evident from the
fetus, and that it is the last is evident from the dying, and that it
may act without the cooperation of the lungs is evident from cases of
suffocation and swooning; from which it can be seen that the life of the
mind depends solely upon the will, in the same way as the substitute
life of the body depends on the heart alone; and that the will lives
when thought ceases, in the same way as the heart lives when breathing
ceases. This also is evident from the fetus, from the dying, and from
cases of suffocation and swooning. From which it follows that love or
the will is man's very life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="400.">400.</span></span>

\(2\) Love or the will strives unceasingly towards the human form and
all things of that form. This is evident from the correspondence of
heart and will. For it is known that all things of the body are formed
in the womb, and that they are formed by means of fibers from the brains
and blood vessels from the heart, and that out of these two the tissues
of all organs and viscera are made; from which it is evident that all
things of man have their existence from the life of the will, which is
love, from their first principles, out of the brains, through the
fibers; and all things of his body out of the heart through the arteries
and veins. From this it is clearly evident that life (which is love and
the will therefrom), strives unceasingly towards the human form. And as
the human form is made up of all the things there are in man, it follows
that love or the will is in a continual conatus and effort to form all
these. There is such a conatus and effort towards the human form,
because God is a Man, and Divine Love and Divine Wisdom is His life, and
from His life is everything of life. Any one can see that unless Life
which is very Man acted into that which in itself is not life, the
formation of anything such as exists in man would be impossible, in whom
are thousands of thousands of things that make a one, and that
unanimously aspire to an image of the Life from which they spring, that
man may become a receptacle and abode of that Life. From all this it can
be seen that love, and out of the love the will, and out of the will the
heart, strive unceasingly towards the human form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 401-450](dlw09)
