[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06031)  [Next](cc06033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2:9-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p3"></span>**9.** And the Lord said unto me, Distress
not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle: for I will not
give thee of their land for a possession; because I have given Ar unto
the children of Lot for a possession.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p4"></span>**9.** Et dixit mihi Jehova, Ne oppugnes
Moab, neque lacessas eum bello, quia non dabo tibi e terra ejus
possessionem; filiis enim Lot dedi Ar in haereditatem.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p5"></span>**10.** The Emims dwelt therein in times
past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims;

<span id="ii.xxxi-p6"></span>**10.** Emim antea habitabant in ea,
populus magnus et multus, et excelsus, sicut Anacim.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p7"></span>**11.** Which also were accounted giants,
as the Anakims; but the Moabites call them Emims.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p8"></span>**11.** Gigantes reputabantur etiam ipsi
sicut Anacim; et Moabitae vocarunt eos Emim.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p9"></span>**12.** The Horims also dwelt in Seir
beforetime; but the children of Esau succeeded them, when they had
destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead, as Israel did
unto the land of his possession, which the Lord gave unto them.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p10"></span>**12.** In Seir autem habitaverunt Horim
antea, quos filii Esau expulerunt, et perdiderunt a facie sua,
habitaveruntque loco ipsorum, quemadmodum Israel in terrapossessionis
sum quam dedit illis Jehova.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p11"></span>**13.** Now rise up, said I, and get you
over the brook Zered: and we went over the brook Zered.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p12"></span>**13.** Nunc surgite et transite torrentem
Zered: et transivimus torrentem Zered.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p13"></span>**14.** And the space in which we cane
from Kadesh-barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, was thirty
and eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted
out from among the host, as the Lord sware unto them.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p14"></span>**14.** Dies autem quibus ambulavimus de
Cades-barnea, donec transiremus tortentem Zered, fuerunt triginta-octo
anni, donec consumeretur tota generario virorum bellatorum de medio
castrorum, quemadmodum juraverat Jehova illis.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p15"></span>**15.** For indeed the hand of the Lord
was against them, to destroy them from among the host, until they were
consumed.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p16"></span>**15.** Praeterea manus Jehovae fuit in
eos, ut perderet eos e medio castrorum, donec consumeret eos.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p17"></span>**16.** So it came to pass, when all the
men of war were consumed and dead from among the people,

<span id="ii.xxxi-p18"></span>**16.** Et fuit, postquam consumpti
fuerunt omnes viri bellatores, ut morerentur e medio populi.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p19"></span>**17.** That the Lord spake unto me,
saying,

<span id="ii.xxxi-p20"></span>**17.** Tunc loquutus est Jehova ad me,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xxxi-p21"></span>**18.** Thou art to pass over through Ar,
the coast of Moab, this day:

<span id="ii.xxxi-p22"></span>**18.** Tu transiturus es hodie
terminumMoab, nempe Ar.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p23"></span>**19.** And when thou comest nigh over
against the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them:
for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon any
possession, because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a
possession.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p24"></span>**19.** Et accedes ad viciniam filiorum
Ammon, ne obsideas eos, neque in’ites eos, quia non daturus sum tibi de
terra filiorum Ammon possessionem aliquam: nam filiis Lot dedi illam in
possessionem.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p25"></span>**20.** (That also was accounted a land of
giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Ammonites call them
Zamzummims;

<span id="ii.xxxi-p26"></span>**20.** Terra gigantum reputata fuit etiam
ipsa: gigantes habitaverunt in ea olim, quos Ammonitae vocabant
Zamzumim.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p27"></span>**21.** A people great, and many, and
tall, as the Anakims; but the Lord destroyed them before them, and they
succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead:

<span id="ii.xxxi-p28"></span>**21.** Populus magnus et multus et
excelsus sicut Anacim: et perdidit eos Jehova a facie eorum,
possede-runtque eos, et habitaverunt loco ipsorum.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p29"></span>**22.** As he did to the children of Esau
which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them; and
they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead, even unto this day:

<span id="ii.xxxi-p30"></span>**22.** Quemadmodum fecit filiis Esau,
habitantibus in Seir, propter quos disperdidit Horaeos a facie corum, et
possederunt eos, habitave runtque loco ipsormn usque in hanc diem.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p31"></span>**23.** And the Avims which dwelt in
Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of
Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)

<span id="ii.xxxi-p32"></span>**23.** Et Avaeos qui habitabant in
Haserim usque Azzah, Caphthorim qui egressi sunt de Caphthor, per
diderunt eos, et habitaverunt loco ipsorum.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p33"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxi-p34"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p35"></span>**9.** *And the Lord said unto me,
Distress not the Moabites.* He had previously forbidden them to enter
the land of Edom, unless consent were obtained. A similar prohibition is
now added with respect to the Moabites, because God had allotted to them
the territory which they inhabited. As I have said, this was painful and
burdensome, that they should cherish kindness and fraternal good-will
towards those who treated them with hostility; but God desired in this
respect also to prove the obedience of His people. He did not, then,
take into consideration what this nation had dcserved; but, inasmuch as
they were the descendants of Lot, and consequently of the race of
Abraham, He desired to treat them with special favor. For the division
of the whole world appertains to Him, so as to distribute to its various
peoples whatever part He chooses, and to fix the bounds wherein they
should confine themselves. If any object that the people of Canaan had
also their limits assigned to them, and ought not, therefore, to have
been expelled from the lands in which their forefathers had for many
ages inhabited, the reply is easy, viz., that God is always free to take
away what He has given, and to readjust the boundaries imposed by His
will, when the sins of men deserve that this should be done. When,
therefore, He declares that He had given their land to the Moabites, it
is not according to the ordinary force of the expression, but by a fixed
decree that their habitation should remain sure and undisturbed.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p36"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p37"></span>**10.** *The Emims dwelt therein in times
past.* This is a confirmation of the foregoing declaration, which is,
however, inserted by way of parenthesis by Moses himself; for the ninth
verse, which I have just expounded, is followed regularly by the
thirteenth, “Now rise up,” etc. For, after God had turned away the
people from the borders of Moab, He shews them in what direction they
must pass over; but Moses, interrupting the address of God, explains how
the Moabites had obtained that territow, though they were strangers, and
had no land of their own on which they might set their foot;. For Lot
was no less an alien than Abraham; Moses, therefore, states how by
special privilege the posterity of Lot became masters of that land which
giants had previously possessed. For it was not by human means that,
having driven out the giants, who were formidable to all men, they had
obtained the peaceful occupation, and even the dominion of that land,
which might have seemed to be invincible, from the valor and strength of
its inhabitants. He says, therefore, that the giants dwelt there, as
also in Mount Seir; and that both were overcome and destroyed, not so
much by the hand and arms of men as by the power of God, so that their
land might be cleared for possession as well for the children of Esau as
for those of Lot. Now, since God elsewhere declares that He had given
Mount Seir to Esau as an inheritance, according as He had promised to
his father Isaac, it follows that the Moabites had obtained their land
also by the same Divine authority. The comparison which is made between
Edom and the Israelites does not hold good in all respects; for,
although Esau was sustained by this consolation, that his inheritance
should be of “the fatness of the earth,” (<span
id="ii.xxxi-p37.1"></span>[Ge
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xxxi-p37.1"></span>,) it might still be the case that with regard
to himself and his posterity, their possession should not be legitimate;
whereas God so promised the land of Canaan to the race of Abraham, that
the Israelites received the dominion over it, as if from His own hand,
as it is said in <span id="ii.xxxi-p37.2"></span>[Ps
136:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xxxi-p37.2"></span>. In this respect, too, there was a
difference, because the land of Canaan was chosen as that in which God
should gather His Church, in which He should be purely worshipped, and
which should be an earnest, to the faithful of the heavenly and eternal
rest. But, as elsewhere, the distinction between the sons of Esau and
Jacob is marked, so now Moses  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125)
magnifies God’s special blessing towards them both.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p39"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p40"></span>**13.** *Now rise up.* He now proceeds
with what he had begun in verse 9, viz, that God had commanded them to
pass by the land of Seir, and to advance to the brook Zered; as much as
to say, that after they had been subdued by their misfortunes, they were
prohibited from further progress, until God should open the way before
them, and thus they should follow Him as their leader, and not make a
passage for themselves at their own discretion.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p41"></span>He afterwards specifies the period of
delay which they had been compelled by God to pass in the desert, after
they had once reached the borders of the promised land. He says, then,
that after thirty-eight years they had at length returned to the land
from whence they had been obliged to retire; and briefly reminds them
how long the course of their deliverance had been interrupted through
their own fault, since they had gone forth to enjoy the promised land.
He calls those “warlike men,” or, in the Hebrew, “men of war,” whose age
entitled them to bear arms, *i.e.,* who had exceeded their twentieth
year.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p42"></span>When mention is elsewhere made of forty
years, the two years are then included which were spent both in Mount
Sinai and in other places; and with good reason, because, during that
time also, their sins prevented them from passing to the enjoyment of
their inheritance immediately after the promulgation of the law.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p43"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p44"></span>**19.** *And when thou comest nigh over
against the children ofAmmon.* God now makes provision as to the
Ammonites, since their condition was the same as that of the Moabites,
inasmuch as they were descended from the two daughters of Lot. It might,
indeed, seem wonderful that, since the memory of their origin was
detestable, these two nations should have been so dear to God. Ammon and
Moab had been born of an incestuous connection. It was, therefore, more
reasonable that this tragical circumstance should have been buried by
their destruction, than that they should have been distinguished by
God’s favor from the common lot of other nations, as if their nobility
rendered them superior to others. But let us learn from hence, that
since God’s judgments, like a deep abyss, are beyond our apprehension,
they should be regarded with reverence. Lot’s distinguished piety is
expressly declared. The disgraceful crime, which he committed when
drunk, it pleased God so to mark with perpetual infamy, as still to
impress upon it some signs of His mercy, although this was done
especially for the sake of Abraham himself. It is unquestionable,
however, that God recommends the posterity of Lot to the Israelites on
this ground, that they may more willingly exercise kindness towards
them, and abstain from all injury, when they had to do with two nations
whom they see to be cared for by God Himself, for the sake of their
common relationship to Abraham.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p45"></span>Furthermore, by the same argument whereby
he had before proved that both Edomites and Moabites, relying on God’s
help, had occupied the lands over which they had dominion, he now
establishes that the land which the Ammonites possessed had been granted
them by God, viz., because in their conquest and overthrow of the giants
they had surpassed the limits of human bravery, and thus God had given a
proof of His special and unusual favor towards them. For neither by the
ordinary course of nature could two men increase to so great a
multitude.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p46"></span>Now, although the Hebrew call the
Cappadocians *Caphthorim,*  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) we
do not know whether the giants, whose country was taken possession of by
the Ammonites, sprung from them. But, if this be admitted, they had a
long journey, attended by many dangers, after they left their country;
and again, since they must have passed through rich and fertile regions,
it is strange that they should have penetrated to those mountains. It
might, however, be the case, that, making forays as robbers, they
nowhere found a quiet resting-place until a less cultivated region
presented itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc06032.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p37.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p38"></span> “Moyse dit ici qu’ils ont eu cela de
commun, que Dieu les a voulu loger;” Moses says here that they had this
in common, that God had chosen to give them their dwelling-places. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc06032.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p47"></span> Bochart remarks that all ancient writers
are unanimous in supposing Caphthor to be Cappadocia, and the Caphthorim
Cappadocians; but he assigns to them that part of Cappadocia only which
bordered on Colchis. *Phaleg.* Book 4, chap. 32:— See *C*. on <span
id="ii.xxxi-p47.1"></span>[Jeremiah
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxxi-p47.1"></span>,
*C. Soc. Edit.,* vol. 4, p 614.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 21:21-32; Deuteronomy 2:24-37](cc06033)
