[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06032)  [Next](cc06034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
21:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p3"></span>**21.** And Israel sent messengers unto
Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,

<span id="ii.xxxii-p4"></span>**21.** Misit Israel legatos ad Sihon
regem AEmorrhaeorum, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xxxii-p5"></span>**22.** Let me pass through thy land: we
will not turn into the fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink
of the waters of the well; but we will go along by the king’s high-way,
until we be past thy borders.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p6"></span>**22.** Transeam per terram tuam: non
declinabimus per agros, neque per vineam: non bibemus aquas puteorum,
via regia pergemus, donec transierimus terminum tuum.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p7"></span>**23.** And Sihon would not suffer Israel
to pass through his border; but Sihon gathered all his people together,
and went out against Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz,
and fought against Israel.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p8"></span>**23.** At non permisit Sihon Israeli ut
transiret per terminum suum. Itaque congregavit Sihon universum populum
suum, et egressus est obviam Israeli in desertum, venitque in Jahaz et
pugnavit cum Israele.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p9"></span>**24.** And Israel smote him with the edge
of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto
the children of Ammon: for the border of the children of Ammon was
strong.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p10"></span>**24.** Et percussit eum Israel in ore
gladii, et hareditate accepit terram ejus ab Arnon usque ad Jabbok usque
ad filios Ammon: quia munitus erat terminus filiorum Ammon.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p11"></span>**25.** And Israel took all these cities:
and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in
all the villages thereof.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p12"></span>**25.** Et accepit Israel omnes istas
urbes, et habitavit Israel in omnibus urbibus AEmorrhaei, in Hesbon, et
in omnibus oppidis ejus.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p13"></span>**26.** For Heshbon was the city of Sihon
the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of
Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p14"></span>**26.** Hesbon erat urbs Sihon regis
AEmorrhaei. Nam ipse pugnaverat contra regem Moab primum, et acceperat
omnem terram ejus a manu usque ad Arnon.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p15"></span>**27.** Wherefore they that speak in
proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be built and
prepared;

<span id="ii.xxxii-p16"></span>**27.** Idcirco dicunt parabolice
loquentes, Venite in Hesbon, aedificetur et instauretur urbs ipsi Sihon:

<span id="ii.xxxii-p17"></span>**28.** For there is a fire gone out of
Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of Moab,
and the lords of the high places of Arnon.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p18"></span>**28.** Quia ignis egressus est de
Hesbon, et flamma ex urbe Sihon consumpsit Ar Moab et dominos excelsorum
Arnon.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p19"></span>**29.** Woe to thee, Moab! thou art
undone, O people of Chemosh! he hath given his sons that escaped, and
his daughters, into captivity, unto Sihon king of the Amorites.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p20"></span>**29.** Vae tibi Moab, periisti popule
Chemos, dedit filios suos in fugam, et filias suas in captivitatem regis
AEmorrhaei Sihon.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p21"></span>**30.** We have shot at them: Heshbon is
perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste even unto Nophah,
which reacheth unto Medeba.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p22"></span>**30.** Et lucerna eorum periit ab Hesbon
usque ad Dibon, et delevimus usque ad Nopah, quae est ad medebah.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p23"></span>**31.** Thus Israel dwelt in the land of
the Amorites.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p24"></span>**31.** Habitavit itaque Israel in terra
AEmorrhaei.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p25"></span>**32.** And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer,
and they took the villages thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were
there.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p26"></span>**32.** Misit deinde Moses ad explorandum
Jaazer, et ceperunt oppida ejus, et expulit AEmorrhaeum qui erat ibi.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p27"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxii-p28"></span>A Repitition of the same History

<span id="ii.xxxii-p29"></span><span
id="ii.xxxii-p29.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xxxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p30"></span><span
id="ii.xxxii-p30.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2:24-37](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p31"></span>**24.** Rise ye up, take your journey,
and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into thine hand
Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land; begin to possess it,
and contend with him in battle.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p32"></span>**24.** Surgite, proficiscimini, et
transite torrentem Arnon. Vide, dedi in manum tuam Sihon regem Hesbon,
Aemorrhaeumn et terram ejus, incipe possidere, et dimica praelio cun eo.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p33"></span>**25.** This day will I begin to put the
dread of thee, and the fear of thee, upon the nations that are under the
whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be
in anguish because of thee

<span id="ii.xxxii-p34"></span>**25.** Hotde incipiam dare pavorem tui
et formidinem tui super faciem populorum qui sunt sub toto coelo, qui
audierant famam tuam, et pavebunt, timebuntque a facie tua.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p35"></span>**26.** And I sent messengers out of the
wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon, with words of peace,
saying,

<span id="ii.xxxii-p36"></span>**26.** Et misi nuntios e deserto
Cedemoth ad Sihon regem Hesbon verbis pacificis, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xxxii-p37"></span>**27.** Let me pass through thy land: I
will go along by the high-way, I will neither turn unto the right hand
nor to the left.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p38"></span>**27.** Transeam per terram tuam, per
viam ambulabo, non declinabo ad dexteram nec ad sinistram.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p39"></span>**28.** Thou shalt sell me meat for
money, that I may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink:
only I will pass through on my feet,

<span id="ii.xxxii-p40"></span>**28.** Cibum argento vendes mihi ut
comedam: aquam argento dabis mihi ut bibam, tantum transibo pedibus
meis:

<span id="ii.xxxii-p41"></span>**29.** (As the children of Esau which
dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in Ar, did unto me.) until I
shall pass over Jordan, into the land which the Lord our God giveth us.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p42"></span>**29.** Quemadmodum fecerunt mihi filii
Esau qui habitant in Seir, et Moabitae qui habitant in Ar: donec
transiero Jordanem ad terram quam Jehova Deus noster dat nobis.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p43"></span>**30.** But Sihon king of Heshbon would
not let us pass by him: for the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and
made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as
appeareth this day.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p44"></span>**30.** Et noluit Sihon rex Hesbon ut
transiremus per sua. Induraverat enim Jehova Deus tuus spiritum ejus: et
obfirmaverat cor ejus, ut daret eum in manu tun, ut hodie est.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p45"></span>**31.** And the Lord said unto me,
Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thee: begin to
possess, that thou mayest inherit his land.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p46"></span>**31.** Dixit autem Jehova ad me, Vide,
jam coepi dare coram te Sihon, et terram ejus, incipe possidere, ut
possideas terram ejus.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p47"></span>**32.** Then Sihon came out against us,
he and all his people, to fight at Jahaz.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p48"></span>**32.** Egressus est autem Sihon in
occursum nostrum ipse et universus popuhs ejus ad praelium in Jahaz.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p49"></span>**33.** And the Lord our God delivered
him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p50"></span>**33.** Et tradidit ilium Jehova Deus
noster coram nobis, percussimusque eum et filios ejus, et totum populum
ejus.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p51"></span>**34.** And we took all his cities at
that time, and utterly destroyed the men, and the women, and the little
ones, of every city; we left none to remain:

<span id="ii.xxxii-p52"></span>**34.** Cepimus quoque omnes urbes ejus
eo tempore, et destruximus omnes urbes, viros et mulieres, et parvulos:
non reliquimus superstitem.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p53"></span>**35.** Only the cattle we took for a
prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p54"></span>**35.** Veruntamen jumenta praedati sumus
nobis, et spolia; urbium quas cepimus.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p55"></span>**36.** From Aroer, which is by the brink
of the river of Arnon, and from the city that is by the river, even unto
Gilead, there was not one city too strong for us: the Lord our God
delivered all unto us.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p56"></span>**36.** Ab Aroer qaee est juxta ripam
torrentis Arnon, et urbe quae est in valle, usque ad Gillad, non fuit
urbs quae effugerit a nobis, omnes tradidit Jehova Deus noster coram
nobis.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p57"></span>**37.** Only unto the land of the
children of Ammon thou camest not, nor unto any place of the river
Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the
Lord our God forbade us.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p58"></span>**37.** Tantummodo ad terram filiorum
Ammon non accessisti, omnem locum torrentis Jabboc, et urbes montanas,
atque omnia de quibus praecepit Jehova Deus noster.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p59"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxii-p60"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p61"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxii-p61.1"></span>[Numbers
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p61.1"></span>.** *And Israel sent messengers.* The second
narration, which I have subjoined from Deuteronomy, is the fuller;
nevertheless, a question arises from it, for what reason this embassy
was sent to king Sihon, whose kingdom was already devoted to the
Israelites: for it seems to be altogether inconsistent to offer
conditions of peace when war is decreed. God commands His people to take
up arms: He declares that they shall be victorious, so as to occupy the
land of Sihon by right of war; what, then, can be more absurd than to
request of him that they might pass through his land in peace? If this
attempt were made by Moses without the command of God, such an excess of
kindness was not devoid of guilt, inasmuch as it was an act of much
temerity to promise what God had appointed otherwise. But, if we should
say that the messengers went with the authority, and at the command of
God, under what pretext shall the deceptiveness of the act be excused?
for it is very improper to flatter with soothing words and promises
those whom you have destined to destruction. The conclusion I come to
is, that although the event was not unknown to God, still the embassy
was sent, nevertheless, by his command and decree, in order to lay open
the obstinate ferocity of the nation. But, since the secret judgments of
God far surmount our senses, let us learn to reverence their height; and
let this sober view restrain our boldness like a rein, viz., that
although the reason for the works of God be unknown to us, still it
always exists with Him. God knew that the messengers would speak to the
deaf, and yet it is not in vain that He bids them go; for, since the
kingdom of Sihon was not properly included in the promised land, it was
not lawful for the children of Israel to make war upon it until they had
been provoked by an unjust refusal. Thus, then, I connect the history.
Before they had been assured at God’s command of the event, and the
victory, they sent the messengers, who demanded that a pacific passage
should be accorded to them; and that then the permission to have
recourse to arms was granted. If any prefer to think that, before Moses
attempted to preserve peace, he had been made acquainted with all that
would occur, I will not contend the point; but I deem it more probable
that he had expectations of the peace which he sought, because the
judgment of God had not yet been declared. If, therefore, Sihon had
allowed himself to be propitiated, Moses would never have dared to deal
with him as an enemy; but, he rather simply and honestly promised peace,
which he intended to preserve; God, however, had otherwise appointed, as
the event presently shewed. Still He was not inconsistent with Himself,
or variable, in sending the messengers to an irreclaimable and
obstinately perverse man; for thus was all excuse taken away when he had
voluntarily provoked to war a people who were ready and willing to
maintain peace and equity. But rather may we see in this history, as in
a glass, that, whilst God earnestly invites the reprobate to repentance
and the hope of salvation, He has no other object than that they may be
rendered inexcusable by the detection of their impiety. Hence is their
ignorance refuted, who gather from this that it is free for all
promiscuously to embrace God’s grace, because its promulgation
*(doctrina)* is common, and directed to all without exception; as if God
was not aware of what Sihon would answer when He would have him
attracted to equity by friendly and peaceful words; or as if, on his
free will, the purpose of God was suspended as to the war, which was
soon after carried forward by His decree.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p62"></span>But inasmuch as what is here briefly
recorded, would be obscure in itself, we must explain it by the other
narrative, where it is thus written, —

<span id="ii.xxxii-p63"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p64"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxii-p64.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p64.1"></span>.** *Rise ye up, take your journey.* I have
lately said that the order is here inverted, for what soon after
follows, “And I sent messengers out of the wilderness,” etc., <span
id="ii.xxxii-p64.2"></span>[De
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.xxxii-p64.2"></span>,
Moses, in my opinion, has inserted by way of parenthesis: it will,
therefore, be suitably rendered in the pluperfect tense, “But I had
sent,” etc. Thus there will be no ambiguity in the sense that, when the
messengers had returned without effecting their purpose, God sustained
the weariness of the people by this consolation, as though he had said,
Sihon has not, with impunity, repudiated the peace offered to him, since
it will now be permitted you to assail him in lawful war. And assuredly
this signal for the expedition to advance depends on the declaration
which is subjoined in <span id="ii.xxxii-p64.3"></span>[De
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.xxxii-p64.3"></span>,
as we may readily gather from the context; for Moses there repeats what
we here read respecting their passage in somewhat different words; and
again does God testify that He has given Sihon into the hands of the
people, and exhorts Moses to go down boldly to the battle. Moreover, the
cause is there specified why (Sihon) had been so arrogant and
contemptuous in his rejection of the embassy, viz., because God had
“hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate.” From whence again
it appears how poor is the sophistry of those who imagine that God idly
regards from heaven what men are about to do.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) They dare not, indeed, despoil Him of
foreknowledge; but what can be more absurd than that He foreknows
nothing except what men please? But Scripture, as we see, has not placed
God in a watch-tower, from which He may behold at a distance what things
are about to be; but teaches that He is the director *(moderatorem)* of
all things; and that He subjects to His will, not only the events of
things, but the designs and affections of men also. As, therefore, we
have before seen how the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, so now Moses
ascribes to God the obstinacy of king Sihon. How base a subterfuge is
the exception which some make as to His *permission,* sufficiently
appears from the end which Moses points out.  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) For why did God harden the heart of
Sihon? thalt “He might deliver him into the hand” of His people to be
slain; because He willed that he should perish, and had destined his
land for the Israelites. If God only permitted Sihon to grow hardened,
this decree was either nought, or mutable, and evanescent, since it
depended on the changeable will of man. Putting aside, then, all
childish trifling, we must conclude that God by His secret inspiration
moves, forms, governs, and draws men’s hearts, so that even by the
wicked He executes whatever He has decreed. At the same time it is to be
observed that the wicked are not impelled to hardness of heart by
extrinsic force, but that they voluntarily harden themselves; so that in
this same hardness of heart God may be seen to be a just judge, however
incomprehensible His counsel may be, and however the impiety of men may
betray itself, who are their own instigators, and the authors of their
own sin. Emphatically does Moses inculcate the same thing twice over,
viz., that the spirt of Sihon was hardened by God, and his heart made
obstinate, in order that God’s paternal favor towards His chosen people
might be more conspicuous; because from the obstinacy of the blinded
king He afforded them a just cause for war, and an opportunity for
victory.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p67"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p68"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxii-p68.1"></span>[Numbers
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p68.1"></span>** *And Israel took all these cities.* As if
speaking of something present, he uses the demonstrative pronoun, and
says, “these cities,” just as if he were pointing them out to the eyes
of his readers. The word which we have rendered “towns” *(oppida,)*
 <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) others translate
“country-houses” *(villas,)* or “hamlets” *(viculos.)* In the Hebrew,
Moses calls by the name of “daughters” all the villages and lesser
towns, whose mother-city *(metropolis)* was Heshbon. By these words,
however, Moses indicates that, by the right of war, all these places had
fallen into the hands of the Israelites, as the lot of their
inheritance; for, as I have lately said, God had not yet openly declared
that they should be masters of this part of the country. They would
consequently have over-passed their boundaries, unless these had been
added to the land of Canaan. This is the reason why God openly declares
that they possessed them by His authority. But when he says that the
cities were destroyed, and all their inhabitants exterminated, so that
neither women nor children were spared, let us understand that they
dealt not thus cruelly of their own impulse, or in heedless violence,
but that whatsoever was on the other side of Jordan was devoted to
destruction by God, that they might always have their minds fixed on the
promised land, and might never give way to listlessness, which would
have been the case if an easy occupation of it had invited them to
repose. Although, therefore, God delivered over the land to them
hereafter, and suffered them to enrich themselves with its booty and
spoils, yet He would not have it retained as a place of residence, and
therefore commanded them to destroy its cities and villages, in order
that they might seek their rest elsewhere. In fine, since they were
abundantly disposed to be slothful, it was expedient that all snares
should be removed, and that by the very desolation they might be urged
forward whither God called them.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p70"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p71"></span>**26.** *For Heshbon was the city of
Sihon.* It is not without cause that Moses relates how the country near
Heshbon had passed into the hands of the Amorites, because a long time
afterwards this was sought for as a pretext for war by the Ammonites,
when they saw that the people were brought into a low estate. In the
time of Jephthah, therefore, having collected a great army, an irruption
was made by them; and they made this their excuse, that they took up
arms to recover what was their own, from Arnon as far as Jabbok, and as
far as Jordan. Consequently, God would have it testified in the sacred
records, as Jephthah then replied to the Ammonites, that this part of
the land was taken from king Sihon, when the children of Israel were
marching peacefully through the borders of the Ammonites. Designedly,
then, did Moses, in order to sanction the right of the people, insert in
these authentic registers, as it were, what had formerly occurred,
namely, that the Amorites had had the dominion over that part of the
country, without interference from the Ammonites; nor was there any
question that the Amorites had secure and peaceful possession of it.
Hence it follows that it passed to the Israelites, so that there were no
grounds why, three hundred years afterwards, the Ammonites should
reclaim what had so long been lost and abandoned by them. And, in order
that posterity might know that there was then no obscurity about the
matter, he records an ancient canticle, from which it appears that the
Ammonites were so completely overcome, that their enemies triumphed
magnificently over them, and cut off all hope of their restoration.
Here, however, the question arises, why the king of Ammon, rather than
the king of Moab, set on foot that war; for we clearly gather from the
song, that the land was taken from the Moabites. But for men who are
bent on rapine and robbery, it is sufficient to allege any trivial
pretext, and often to glory in the rights of others. There doubtless
remained a report that the Amorites had been driven out of their
territories,  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) which they had
obtained by force of arms. The Ammonites pass over in silence what had
been forgotten in the lapse of many ages, and set up this false title,
that, although the Israelites had conquered the Amorites, still their
victory conferred upon them no right to occupy what the Amorites
unjustly and forcibly held. With this object Moses inserted the account
he here gives.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p73"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p74"></span>**27.** *Wherefore, they that speak in
proverbs.* That is, an old saying, or proverbial sentence remains, and
is well known. The song, however, appears to have been composed in the
character of those who, when prepared to engage in war, mutually
exhorted each other, “Come into Heshbon,” i.e., run to the standard of
king Sihon; hasten to his home, and his chief place of abode, in order
that we may thence go forth to battle. These expressions, “build and
prepare,” I interpret as being used for enlarge, adorn, and enrich; for
it is probable that this city was not overthrown, but they foretell that
the city would be renovated, when a larger dominion had been gained. And
this is more fully confirmed by what immediately follows, when it is
said that “a fire had gone forth from Heshbon,” which consumed Ar of
Moab, and all its neighborhood. As to the “lords of the high places of
Arnon,” some understand the priests who presided in the temples; others
extend them to all the inhabitants in general; but, in my opinion, it
will not be unsuitable to refer them to the idols themselves, since it
appears from the next verse that the conquerors were so insolently
elated, as not only to despise the men themselves, but their gods also;
for when they say, “Thou art undone, O people of Chemosh,” there is no
doubt but that they mockingly reproach them with the fact that they had
been badly defended by the gods whom they worshipped.  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) And, in point of fact, ungodly men,
when in prosperity, uplift their horns to heaven, as if they would
assail the divinity which was opposed to them. They, therefore, deride
Chemosh, because he made “his sons” or worshippers to be fugitives or
captives.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p76"></span>In the word *lantern*  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) he makes use of a common metaphor.
Some follow the Chaldee interpreter, and render it *kingdom;* but it has
a wider signification; for it includes all the component parts of a
happy and prosperous state.  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) The
meaning, therefore, is, that their glory and all their wealth was
annihilated. The cities of Dibon and Medeba are situated on the extreme
borders, near the river Arnon, so that by these he designates all the
intermediate plain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc06033.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p64.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p65"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “sans disposer de
leur volonte;” without disposing their will.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc06033.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p66"></span> “Or il appert par la fin que Moyse
specifie combien ceste tergiversation est frivole, de dire que Dieu
permet sans rien ordonner;” now, it appears by the end which Moses
specifies, how frivolous is that subterfuge, to say that God permits
without ordaining anything. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc06033.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p69"></span> “ Par ce mot, que nous avons translate
*villages,* il nous faut aussi entendre les bourgades, et metairies;“ by
this word, which we have translated *villages,* we must also understand
the hamlets and farm-houses. — *Fr.* See marg. *A.V.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc06033.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p72"></span> “Par les enfans d’Israel;” by the
children of Israel. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc06033.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p75"></span> “Par Chamos, qu’ils adoroyent comme leur
patron;” by Chemosh, whom they worshipped as their patron. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc06033.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p77"></span> <span id="ii.xxxii-p77.1"></span>ונירם
*vaniram: A. V.,* “we have shot at them.” Our translators have regarded
<span id="ii.xxxii-p77.2"></span>ניר, the central syllable of this
composite word, as the first future plural of <span
id="ii.xxxii-p77.3"></span>ירה *be shot or cast;* and *S. M.* has
noticed this explanation as more probably right than the one which he
has adopted in his text, and which supposes <span
id="ii.xxxii-p77.4"></span>ניר to be a substantive, namely, a *lantern.*
The Chaldee Paraphrast and the *V.* have regarded this substantive as a
metaphor for the ruling power. If it had been a substantive, its place,
in ordinary construction, should have been after the verb <span
id="ii.xxxii-p77.5"></span>אבד *perished,* whereas it precedes that
verb, which has Heshbon following it, in the proper position for its
nominative. — *W*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc06033.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p77.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p78"></span> “Elle comprend les biens, l’honneur, le
repos, et la reputation;” it comprehends goods, honor, repose, and
reputation. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 21:33-35](cc06034.md)
