[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06053)  [Next](cc06055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.liii"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p1"></span><span id="ii.liii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
31](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#000)<span id="ii.liii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p2"></span><span id="ii.liii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
31:14-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014)<span
id="ii.liii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p3"></span>**14.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Behold, thy days approach that thou must die: call Joshua, and present
yourselves in the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a
charge. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the
tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="ii.liii-p4"></span>**14.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Ecce,
appropinquaverunt dies tui, ut moriaris: voca Josua, et state in
tabernaculo conventionis, et praecipiam ei. Perrexit ergo Moses et
Josua, steteruntque in tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="ii.liii-p5"></span>**15.** And the Lord appeared in the
tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: and the pillar of the cloud stood
over the door of the tabernacle.

<span id="ii.liii-p6"></span>**15.** Et apparuit Jehova in tabernaculo,
in columna nubis, stetitque columna nubis super ostium tabernaculi.

<span id="ii.liii-p7"></span>**16.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up,
and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land whither
they go to be among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant
which I have made with them.

<span id="ii.liii-p8"></span>**16.** Et dixit Jehova, ad Mosen, Ecce, tu
dormiturus es cum patribus tuis: postea surget populus iste, et
fornicabitur post deos alienorum terrae ad quam pergit in medio ejus, et
derelinquet me, irritumque faciet pactum meum quod pepigi cum eo.

<span id="ii.liii-p9"></span>**17.** Then my anger shall be kindled
against them in that day, and I will them, and I will hide my face from
them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall
befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come
upon us, because our God is not among us?

<span id="ii.liii-p10"></span>**17.** Itaque irascetur vultus meus
contra eum ipse die, ac derelinquam eos, et abscondam faciem meam ab
eis: et consumetur, et inverient eum mala multa, et angustiae: dicetque
in die illa, Nonne propterea quod non est Deus meus in medio mei
invenerunt me mala haec?

<span id="ii.liii-p11"></span>**18.** And I will surely hide my face in
that day, for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they
are turned unto other gods.

<span id="ii.liii-p12"></span>**18.** Ego vero abscondendo abscondam
faciem meam in die illa, propter omne malum quod fecerit, quod
converterit se ad deos alienos.

<span id="ii.liii-p13"></span>**19.** Now therefore write ye this song
for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths,
that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.

<span id="ii.liii-p14"></span>**19.** Nunc itaque scribite vobis
canticum istud, et doce illud filios Israelis: pone illud in ore eorum,
ut sit mihi canticum istud in testem contra filios Israelis.

<span id="ii.liii-p15"></span>**20.** For when I shall have brought them
into the land which I sware unto their fathers, that floweth with milk
and honey, and they shall have eaten, and filled themselves, and waxen
fat; then will they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke
me, and break my covenant.

<span id="ii.liii-p16"></span>**20.** Introducam enim eum in terram quam
juravi patribus ejus, fluentem lacte et melle: comedet autem et
saturabitur, impinguabitque se: tunc convertet se ad deos alienos, et
colent eos, vilipendentque me, et irritum facient pactum meum.

<span id="ii.liii-p17"></span>**21.** And it shall come to pass, when
many evils and troubles are befallen them, that this song shall testify
against them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the
mouths of their seed: for I know their imagination which they go about,
even now, before I have brought them into the land which I sware.

<span id="ii.liii-p18"></span>**21.** Quum autem invenerint eum mala
plurima, et angustiae, tunc respondebit canticum istud in conspectu ejus
in testera: non enim oblivioni tradetur ab ore seminis ejus, novi enim
ingenium ejus, et quid ipse faciat hodie antequam introduxerim eum in
terram de qua juravi.

<span id="ii.liii-p19"></span>**22.** Moses therefore wrote this song
the same day, and taught it the children of Israel.

<span id="ii.liii-p20"></span>**22.** Scripsit itaque Moses canticum
istud eo die, et docuit illud filios Israelis.

<span id="ii.liii-p21"></span>**23.** And he gave Joshua the son of Nun
a charge, and said, Be strong, and of a good courage: for thou shalt
bring the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and
I will be with thee.

<span id="ii.liii-p22"></span>**23.** Dein praecepit Josuae filio Nun,
ac dixit, Fortis esto, et roborare, quia tu introduces filios Israel in
terram de qua juravi eis: et ego ero tecum.

<span id="ii.liii-p23"></span>**24.** And it came to pass when Moses had
made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were
finished,

<span id="ii.liii-p24"></span>**24.** Quum autem fecisset finem Moses
scribendi verba legis istius in libro, donec ea complerentur,

<span id="ii.liii-p25"></span>**25.** That Moses commanded the Levites,
which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, saying,

<span id="ii.liii-p26"></span>**25.** Praecepit Moses Levitis
portantibus Arcata foederis Jehovae, dicendo:

<span id="ii.liii-p27"></span>**26.** Take this book of the law, and put
it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it
may be there for a witness against thee.

<span id="ii.liii-p28"></span>**26.** Capite librum istum legis, et
ponite eum in latere arcae foederis Jehovae Dei vestri, sitque ibi
contra te in testem.

<span id="ii.liii-p29"></span>**27.** For I know thy rebellion, and thy
stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been
rebellious against the Lord; and how much more after my death?

<span id="ii.liii-p30"></span>**27.** Ego enim novi rebellionem tuam, et
cervicem tuam duram: ecce, adhuc me vivente vobiscum hodie rebelles
estis Jehovae, et quanto magis posteaquam mortuus fuero?

<span id="ii.liii-p31"></span>**28.** Gather unto me all the elders of
your tribes, and your officers. that I may speak these words in their
ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

<span id="ii.liii-p32"></span>**28.** Congregate ad me omnes seniores
tribuum vestrarum, et praefectos vestres, ut loquar in auribus eorum
verba ista, et antester contra eos coelum et terram.

<span id="ii.liii-p33"></span>**29.** For I know that after my death ye
will utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I
have commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because
ye will do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger
through the work of your hands.

<span id="ii.liii-p34"></span>**29.** Novi enim postquam mottuus lucre,
corrumpendo corrumpetis yes et recedetis de via quam praecepi vobis,
unde eveniet vobis malum in novissimis dierum, quum feceritis malum in
oculis Jehovae, irritando eum opere mannuum vestrarum.

<span id="ii.liii-p35"></span>**30.** And Moses spake in the ears of all
the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were
ended.

<span id="ii.liii-p36"></span>**30.** Itaque loquutus est Moses in
auribus totius congregationis verba cantici hujus, donec ea
complerentur.

<span id="ii.liii-p37"></span> 

<span id="ii.liii-p38"></span><span id="ii.liii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p39"></span>**14.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
Joshua is now substituted in the place of Moses by a solemn ceremony,
not only that he may be held in greater reverence by men, but also that
he may be presented before God, and thus may acknowledge that he is
dedicated to His service; for his being brought before the door of the
tabernacle was a kind of consecration; and God also declares that He
will give him a charge, which is equivalent to saying that He will
instruct him in the performance of his duties. The appearance also of
the glory of God in the cloud, was not less effectual for encouraging
himself personally, than for giving public distinction to his high
office. For he would never have been recognized as the successor of
Moses, unless this visible approbation of God had fastened the yoke upon
the people.

<span id="ii.liii-p40"></span><span id="ii.liii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p41"></span>**16.** *Behold, thou, shalt sleep with
thy fathers.* In order that Moses may labor more earnestly to retain the
people in obedience to God, he is reminded of their indomitable
perverseness. He had already sufficiently, and more than sufficiently,
experienced how depraved and stubborn was the disposition of the
Israelites, and how disobedient and contumacious they had been; God now
declares that they will be no better after his death; nay, that they
will indulge themselves in greater license in *consequence* of his
*absence* from them. For it appears as if there was an antithesis
implied between the words “lie down,” and “rise up;”  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) as if it were said, As soon as you
have gone to rest, their insubordination shall break forth, as if they
were released from all laws. Not, indeed, that this should take place
immediately, for under Joshua they manifested some humility and
submissiveness; at any rate, the outward form of pure religion was then
maintained, but soon afterwards they relapsed into their old habits. And
perhaps this admonition was useful as a preventative, so that they
should not fall away so soon.

<span id="ii.liii-p43"></span>Since now we understand the general object
which God had in view, it will be well briefly to consider the words He
employs. When it is said to Moses, “Thou shalt sleep with thy fathers,”
first of all the condition of the human race is stated, that Moses may
not think it hard to depart from the world like all others, since he was
born to this end. At the same time, the difference is indicated between
the death of men and of the brute animals. Hence the best consolation is
derived, for, if our death were total annihilation, we should not be
said to sleep with our fathers.

<span id="ii.liii-p44"></span>Why the Spirit designates idolatry by the
name of “whoring,” we have seen elsewhere, as also why he calls all
false gods “strange,” or “of the *strangers,”* viz., because, as God
chose to be served alone in Israel, so he had distinguished Himself by
this title, that He was “the God of Israel.” It is stated in aggravation
of their crime, that they would not only be led away into the
superstitions which they had learnt in Egypt, but would also pollute
themselves with the defilements of Canaan, from which God had willed
that it should be purged by their hand. These words, then, are to be
read emphatically, The people shall go a whoring after the gods of the
land whither they go, and indeed in the midst of it; for it was far more
disgraceful to embrace those false gods, of which they were the
conquerors and judges, than to invent for themselves fresh idols.

<span id="ii.liii-p45"></span>Another aggravation of their crime is,
also added, that they would desert the God by whom they had been adopted
as children, and wickedly depart from His covenant. For they could not
pretend ignorance, when they had been again and again so clearly and
solemnly warned. Meanwhile let us learn from this passage, that
whosoever turn away to superstitious worships are covenant breakers, and
thus, that all their pretenses are vain, who profess that they worship
the supreme God together with idols.

<span id="ii.liii-p46"></span><span id="ii.liii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p47"></span>**17.** *Then my anger shall be kindled
against them.* By this denunciation of punishment, God undoubtedly
desired to put a restraint upon the senselessness of the people; but
since this was done without their profiting by it, there was another
advantage in this lesson, viz., that, after having been seriously
chastised according to their deserts, they should at length repent
though it might be late. Otherwise these punishments would have been
inflicted in vain; and it would have never suggested itself to their
minds that they received the just recompense of their ingratitude and
perfidiousness. This is indeed the first step of prudence, voluntarily
to choose that which is right; but the second is to beware, when we have
listened to admonition, and to make a stand against evil. But, if our
minds are so blinded, that reproofs and threats profit us nothing, there
is still a third, i.e., that those who have been careless in prosperity
should at length begin to perceive that they are smitten by God’s hand,
and thus be driven to acknowledge their guilt. Although, therefore, the
simple admonition, as long as it was not followed by its consequences,
was despised by the Israelites; still, when they were further instructed
by its result, and by experience, it produced its fruit; and the same is
daily the case with ourselves. There is scarcely one in ten of the
godly, who, as long as God postpones His punishments, anticipates His
judgment, but those who are aroused from their torpor, seriously
consider the threats which they had hitherto passed over with
indifference, and, being brought under conviction, condemn themselves.

<span id="ii.liii-p48"></span>By the word <span
id="ii.liii-p48.1"></span>אפי, *ephi*, I here rather understand His
*face* than His *wrath*;  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) for
the expression is more appropriate; and then he sets forth the effect of
His wrath, viz., that, being deprived of His aid, they shall be
overtaken by all sorts of evils, until they are consumed and perish.
Moreover, He affirms that they should be brought into such straits as
should extort from them the confession, that the miseries which they
suffered were tokens of God’s alienation from them. But He adds, that He
would not then listen to their prayers. Hence are we taught that, as our
happiness depends on God’s paternal favor, so there is nothing worse for
us than to be forsaken by Him, as if He regarded us with no further
care; and the lesson we are to learn is, that there is nothing more
desirable for us than that He should honor us with His countenance. We
read respecting all His creatures, in <span
id="ii.liii-p49.1"></span>[Ps
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)<span
id="ii.liii-p49.1"></span>, that they *are troubled* when He *hides His
face;* but here it is more clearly perceived that nothing can be
imagined more miserable than we are, when “our iniquities have separated
between us and our God, and our sins have hid his face from us, that he
will not hear,” as Isaiah says, (<span id="ii.liii-p49.2"></span>[Isa
59:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)<span id="ii.liii-p49.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.liii-p50"></span>I have already stated, that the greatness
of their miseries is expressed, when the people shall confess that they
are thus grievously afflicted, because God is departed from them; for it
was by no light punishments that they would be brought to this state of
feeling, especially considering their great hardness of heart and blind
obstinacy. It follows then, that severe punishments are indicated, that
should compel them, though unwillingly, to reflect on God’s anger, which
they had previously taken no account of. Still, this confession is not
referred to as the fruit or sign of sincere repentance; for, if the
sinner sincerely flies to God, God will be sure to meet him, since he is
inclined to mercy. But in this place He declares that He will not be
favorable to them, but will suffer them to pine away in their
wretchedness, for God says of Himself that He will “hide His face from
them,” in the 18th verse, with a deeper meaning than just before, in
that He will take no notice of their groans and lamentations, and by the
very continuance of their punishments will show how greatly wroth with
them He is.

<span id="ii.liii-p51"></span><span id="ii.liii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p52"></span>**19.** *Now, therefore, write ye this
song.* It seems absurd that a useless remedy should be applied to an
incurable disease. Why does not God rather correct their wickedness, and
by His Spirit mold their hearts to obedience, than pour forth words in
vain into their deaf ears? Thus do proud and profane men mock at this
mode of dealing with them, as if God, throwing away His labor, were
deluding unhappy men. We must bear in mind, however, that the preaching
of the word, although it is a savior of death to them that perish, is
still a sacrifice of sweet savior to God; nor is it to be considered
thrown away and ineffectual, when it convicts the ungodly more and more,
and renders them altogether inexcusable. And God expressly declares that
this would be the use of the song as “a witness” against those, from
whose mouth it should proceed. To some, indeed, it was profitable unto
salvation; for, when subdued by chastisement, they at length learnt from
it that their iniquities were the source and cause of all their evils.
For, however God may redouble the blows of His scourges, unbelievers,
who are without instruction, reap no advantage from them. Thus, this
song was the means of assisting the elect to seek after repentance, when
they were smitten by the hand of God. Still, although the word of God
should do nothing more than condemn its hearers to death, yet it would
be enough that it was a sweet savor to Himself. It seems by no means
accordant with our reason that God should have given this command to
Isaiah;

<span id="ii.liii-p53"></span>“Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed,
but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart
of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their heart, and convert, and be healed,” (<span
id="ii.liii-p53.1"></span>[Isa. 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="ii.liii-p53.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.liii-p54"></span>but, with respect to the secret judgments
of God, whereby all our senses must be overwhelmed, let sober-mindedness
be our wisdom.

<span id="ii.liii-p55"></span><span id="ii.liii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p56"></span>**20.** *But when I shall have brought
them.* In other words, God again enlarges upon the atrociousness of
their iniquity, in that, when He had dealt liberally with the
Israelites, they would turn His benefits into occasions of perversity,
since nothing can be more base than such ingratitude, he says, then,
that He will perform to them, unworthy as they are, that which he has
sworn, so that He might thus be faithful to His promises. He commends
the fertility of the land, since this striking pledge of His indulgence
should have attracted them by its sweetness to love so beneficent a
Father in return. Hence, therefore, the perverseness of their nature is
demonstrated, inasmuch as, when full, they would kick against Him, like
horses which become intractable from high feeding. But, after having
complained of their future rebellion, He again says, that when they
shall have been brought into sore straits, and overwhelmed with
miseries, this song would be “as a witness,” as if they should proclaim
in it their own condemnation.

<span id="ii.liii-p57"></span>When He says that He knew their
disposition,  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) or what they
forged within them, (for the word employed is <span
id="ii.liii-p58.2"></span>יצר, *yetzer,* which is equivalent to figment,
or imagination, and includes all the thoughts and feelings,) it is
apparent that He was by no means unaware how in He was bestowing His
benefits upon such unworthy persons, but that He thus contended with
their unworthiness, in order that His goodness might be the more
conspicuous; and also that He desired this instruction to be set before
them, ungodly and hopeless as they were, which He knew they would
despise, so as to render them all the more inexcusable by this test. But
it may be objected, Why then did He not turn their hearts to better
things? for thus do ungodly railers allow themselves to dispute with
Him; but let us rather reflect on the words of Paul, “Nay but, O man,
who art thou that repliest against God? Hath not the potter power over
the clay, to make” of it vessels according to his own will? (<span
id="ii.liii-p58.3"></span>[Rom. 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="ii.liii-p58.3"></span>.)
And,

<span id="ii.liii-p59"></span>“Who hath first given to him, and it shall
be recompensed  
unto him again?” *(*<span id="ii.liii-p59.2"></span>[Ro
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035)<span
id="ii.liii-p59.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.liii-p60"></span>So will it come to pass, that we shall
exclaim with trembling, Oh, how deep are the judgments of God; how
incomprehensible are His ways!

<span id="ii.liii-p61"></span>That God should judge from their former
life what they would be hereafter, does not seem very logical; but these
two clauses are to be taken connectedly, that God foresees that nothing
else is to be expected from them, but that they would be carried away
into sin by their unbridled lust; and secondly, that it had already been
sufficiently manifested by their many iniquities how desperate was their
obstinacy.

<span id="ii.liii-p62"></span><span id="ii.liii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p63"></span>**23.** *And he gave Joshua the son of
Nul, a charge.* The more difficult was the task of Joshua, the more
needful was it that he should be encouraged to exert himself, and to
beware of failure. For this reason his charge is repeated, although in
his person all the others were at the same time confirmed. Moses grounds
it on the promise of God, which has been so often mentioned; and says
that Joshua had been chosen to complete the work of deliverance already
begun; for it was hardly credible that the disciple should be not only
superior to his master, but that a man of humble position should be
elevated to the dignity from which the sovereign Prophet, and God’s
chief minister, had been degraded, unless this was done by the decree
and ordinance of God. At the same time, however, he makes him more
confident of the result of his calling, by promising him that God, who
was the mover of this expedition, would be with him; for He has the
power to accomplish every work to which He has appointed any one of us.

<span id="ii.liii-p64"></span><span id="ii.liii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p65"></span>**24.** *And it came to pass, when Moses
had made an end.* By “the words of this law,” we must understand not
only those which are embraced in this book, but in the other three also;
and there is an implied antithesis between the two tables written by
God’s hand, and the exposition which was afterwards added, lest there
should be any obscurity respecting God’s will on account of the brevity
with which it was delivered. At the very beginning, indeed, God had set
forth whatever it was useful for them to know, but it was His will that
what He had briefly comprehended in the Decalogue should be more fully
unfolded, and not only so, but that it should be also committed to
writing, lest it should be forgotten. We know how inclined to vanity is
the mind of man, nay, how willfully it is led away into error by its
levity; whilst it has other faults also, such as inquisitiveness, and
audacity in invention, and the love of novelty. Thus religion would have
been corrupted in a thousand ways, had not its rule been diligently
written down for posterity. Moreover, since the books of Moses were for
a long time buried through the carelessness of the people and the
priests, what darkness of error would have overspread the minds of all,
if nothing had been written down!

<span id="ii.liii-p66"></span>Since the two Tables were enclosed in the
Ark of the Covenant, a place at the side was assigned to the
interpretation, so that they might have no doubt but that it proceeded
from the same Divine Author; and, since the Decalogue is repeated in
these books, it was not at all necessary that the Ark should be opened;
which was not lawful, because they might seek in the books of Moses the
instruction which was hidden in the Tables. This, indeed, we must
remember, that the volume was placed near the Ark in token of its
dignity, so that, when it was taken from thence by the Levites, it might
be listened to with greater reverence. When it is said, “That it may be
there for a witness against thee,” this is not addressed to the Levites
alone, but relates generally to the whole people, though the general
statement is directed to them as one member of the whole body. But
further, although the application of its doctrine is manifold, still one
point only is adverted to; for the Law was not written with the single
object of being a witness to condemn the people, but to be the rule of a
pious and holy life, and a testimony of God’s favor. But, since he had
to do with hard and proud minds, Moses declares that, whenever its
doctrine shall be set forth, it will render their perverseness
inexcusable.

<span id="ii.liii-p67"></span><span id="ii.liii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p68"></span>**27.** *For I know thy rebellion.* The
reason is given why he passed over the utility of his doctrine, and only
cited it as a witness against the Israelites in terms of severity and
reproach, viz., because he had found them by experience to be of a
“stiff neck,” (of which expression I have spoken elsewhere,) and has no
confidence that they will be more tractable hereafter. He argues from
the less to the greater; for, if, while such a leader as theirs was
alive, they were rebellious, they were likely to assume greater audacity
when he was dead. For we know of what avail is the authority of a great
and excellent person to restrain the licentiousness of a people. At the
same time, Moses does not arrogate so much to himself as to say that the
good condition of the people depended upon his presence, but, pointing
out their danger, he seeks to render them more obedient after his death.

<span id="ii.liii-p69"></span><span id="ii.liii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p70"></span>**28.** *Gather to me all the elders of
your tribes.* Special reference is here made to the Song, which we
gather from the last verse to have been alone recited. Moses, indeed,
appears to contradict himself when he commands the elders and officers
only to be called to listen, whereas he soon afterwards records that he
read it to the whole people. But these two things are easily reconciled,
when we remember the order which he was accustomed to observe in
gathering the multitude together; for it is manifest from many passages
that they were not called together promiscuously, but that the heads of
tribes, and the princes of the people, each of them led their band; so
that the assembling of the elders here mentioned, is so far from
excluding the rest of the multitude, that it rather indicates that the
whole people were gathered together by their tribes and classes. And
this we may infer from the context, for assuredly he did not “call
heaven and earth to record against” the officers only; and yet so he
seems to signify. Under the leaders, therefore, the whole multitude is
included.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc06054.htm#fr_241) <span
id="ii.liii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p42"></span> See margin, *A. V.* “Il semble qu’il ait
comparaison des choses opposees entre ces deux mots, que Moyse se
couchera, et le peuple se levera;” it seems that there is a comparison
of two opposite things in these two expressions, that “Moses shall lie
down,” and “the people shall rise up.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc06054.htm#fr_242) <span
id="ii.liii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p49"></span> *A. V.,* “Then my *anger* shall be
kindled.” C., ”Itaque irascetur vultus meus.”

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc06054.htm#fr_243) <span
id="ii.liii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p58"></span> *A. V*., “Their imagination.” “The thing
forged in their heart.” — Ainsworth. “Figmentum;” Taylor, from <span
id="ii.liii-p58.1"></span>יצר, *fingere*, *formare*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Song of Moses](cc06055)
