[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06009)  [Next](cc06011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#000)<span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span><span id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
14:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001)<span id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span>**1.** And all the congregation lifted up
their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span>**1.** Tunc sustulit universus coetus,
edideruntque vocem suam, et flevit populus nocte illa.

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span>**2.** And all the children of Israel
murmured against Moses and against Aaron; and the whole congregation
said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or,
would God we had died in this wilderness!

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span>**2.** Et murmuraverunt adversus Mosen et
adversus Aharon omnes filii Israel: ac dixerunt universa multitudo,
Utinam mortui essemus in terra AEgypti: aut in deserto hoc utinam mortui
essemus.

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span>**3.** And wherefore hath the Lord brought us
unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children
should be a prey? Were it not better for us to return into Egypt?

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span>**3.** Et quare Jehova introducit nos in hanc
terram, ut cadamus gladio, uxores nostrae et parvuli nostri sint in
praedam? Nonne satius esset nobis reverti in AEgyptum?

<span id="ii.ix-p9"></span>**4.** And they said one to another, Let us
make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.

<span id="ii.ix-p10"></span>**4.** Dixerunt itaque alter ad alterum,
Constituamus ducem, et revertamur in Aegyptum.

<span id="ii.ix-p11"></span>**5.** Then Moses and Aaron fell on their
faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of
Israel.

<span id="ii.ix-p12"></span>**5.** Tunc cecidit Moses et Aharon super
faciem suam coram universo coetu congregationis filiorum Israel.

<span id="ii.ix-p13"></span>**6.** And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh, which were of them that searched the land, rent
their clothes:

<span id="ii.ix-p14"></span>**6.** Jehosua vero filius Nun, et Caleb
filius Jephuneh, de exploratoribus terrae sciderunt vestimenta sua.

<span id="ii.ix-p15"></span>**7.** And they spoke unto all the company
of the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to
search it, is an exceeding good land.

<span id="ii.ix-p16"></span>**7.** Ac loquuti sunt ad universam
congregationem filiorum Israel, dicendo, Terra per quam transivimus ut
exploraremus eam, optima terra est.

<span id="ii.ix-p17"></span>**8.** If the Lord delight in us, then he
will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with
milk and honey.

<span id="ii.ix-p18"></span>**8.** Si complacitum fuerit Jehovae in
nobis, introducet nos in terram istam, tradetque eam nobis, terram quae
affluit lacte et melle.

<span id="ii.ix-p19"></span>**9.** Only rebel not ye against the Lord,
neither fear ye the people of the land; for they are bread for us: their
defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us; fear them not.

<span id="ii.ix-p20"></span>**9.** Tantum ne sitis rebelles Jehovae,
neque timeatis populum terrae hujus: quia velut panis noster sunt,
recessit praesidium eorum ab ipsis: Jehova autem nobiscum est, ne
timeatis eos.

<span id="ii.ix-p21"></span><span id="ii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p22"></span>**1.** *And all the congregation lifted up
their voice.* Here we see how easily, by means of a few incentives,
sedition is excited in a great multitude; for the people, unless
governed by the counsel of others, is like the sea, exposed to many
tempests; and the corruption of human nature produces this amongst
innumerable other evils, that lies and impostures prevail over truth.
There was, indeed, some pretext for the error of the people, in that
they saw ten most choice leaders of their tribes dissuading them from
entering the land, and only two advising them to proceed. But that
credulity, to which they were too much inclined, is without excuse,
because it arose from incredulity; for, if the dignity and reputation of
ten men availed so much with them, that they were thus easy of belief,
ought they not much rather to have given credit to the word of God, who
had promised them the land four hundred years before? For when they
cried out beneath the oppressive tyranny of the Egyptians, the memory of
the promise given to their fathers was not effaced, since the holy Jacob
had carefully provided for its transmission. They had recently heard and
embraced its confirmation, and in this confidence had come forth from
Egypt. We see, then, that they had already been induced by their own
supineness and depravity to recoil from entering the land, because they
had thrown aside their confidence in God, so that they might seem to
have deliberately laid hold of the opportunity. Still the evil
counselors gave an impulse to them, when they were falling of their
accord, and east them down headlong.

<span id="ii.ix-p23"></span>They begin with weeping, which at length
bursts out into rage. The cause of their weeping is the fear of death,
because they think that they are being carried away to slaughter; and
whence does this arise, except because the promised aid of God is of no
account with them? Thus it appears how greatly opposed to faith is
cowardice, when, on the occurrence of danger, we look only to ourselves.
But:. whilst the beginning of infidelity is to be withheld by fear from
obedience to God, so another worse evil presently follows, when men
obstinately resist God, and, because they are unwilling to submit
themselves to His word, enter into altercation with Him. This was the
case with the Israelites, who, being overwhelmed with grief, at length
are stirred up by its impetuosity against Moses and Aaron. And this is
wont too often to occur, that impatience bursts forth from the anguish
into which our unbelief has brought us. The desire for death, which they
conceive, arises from ingratitude and contempt of God’s blessing. They
wished that they had died either in Egypt or in the wilderness; why,
then, had they just before humbly beseeched Moses to propitiate God?

<span id="ii.ix-p24"></span>With regard to the words, the old
interpreter,  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) taking the particle
<span id="ii.ix-p25.1"></span>לו, which is optative, for the negative
(<span id="ii.ix-p25.2"></span>לא, *lo,*) improperly translates the
passage, as if their death in the desert would have been more bitter
than in Egypt; whereas they only deplore that they would be exposed to
death if they should enter the land of Canaan, as follows in the next
verse.

<span id="ii.ix-p26"></span><span id="ii.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p27"></span>**3.** *And wherefore has the Lord brought
us into this land?* The pride, and even the madness of their impiety
here more fully betrays itself, when they accuse God of deception and
cruelty, as if tie were betraying them to the Canaanitish nations, and
leading them forth to slaughter; for they conclude that they ought not
to obey His command, because He would destroy them, and not only so, but
that He would at the same time give their wives and children to be a
prey. We see how mad is unbelief, when it gives way to itself, since
these wretched people do not hesitate to prefer charges against God, and
to repay His kindnesses by calling Him their betrayer. But what was the
cause of this blasphemous audacity,  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) except that they hear they would have to
do with powerful enemies? as if they had not experienced the might of
God to be such, that nothing which they might encounter was to be feared
whilst He was on their side! At the same time, they also accuse God of
weakness, as if He were less powerful than the nations of Canaan. At
length their monstrous blindness and senselessness comes to its climax,
when they consult as to their return, and, rejecting Moses, set
themselves about choosing a leader, who may again deliver them up to
Pharaoh. Were they so quickly forgetful how wretched their condition
there had been? It was for no fault of theirs, but whilst they were
peaceful and harmless guests, that the Egyptians had so cruelly
afflicted them, since they were hated by Pharaoh on no other account but
because he could not endure their multitude; what, then, was he likely
to do, when, for their sakes, he had undergone so many calamities; what
humanity, again, was to be expected from that nation which had conspired
for their destruction already, when it had suffered no injury from them?
Surely there was no house among them which would not long to avenge its
first-born! Yet they desire to give themselves up to the will of a most
bitter enemy, who, without any cause for ill-will, had proceeded to all
sorts of extremities against them. Hence we plainly see that unbelievers
are not only blinded by the just vengeance of God, but carried away by a
spirit of infatuation, so as to inflict upon themselves the greatest
evils.

<span id="ii.ix-p29"></span><span id="ii.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p30"></span>**5.** *Then Moses and Aaron fell on their
faces.* It is doubtful whether they so humbled themselves towards the
people, as to he prostrate before them, or whether it was in prayer that
they fell with their faces on the earth; the latter, however, seems more
likely to me, as if, by thus turning themselves to God, they reproved
the stupidity of the people,. And, in fact, in such a case of obduracy,
nothing remained except to call upon God, yet in such sort that the
prayer should be made in the sight of all, in order to influence their
minds. Otherwise they might have sought some place of retirement; but by
this pitiful spectacle they endeavored to recall the people to their
right senses. This, indeed, is beyond dispute, that they sought for
nothing on their own account, but were only anxious for the welfare of
the people; since, if the people had gone back, they would have been at
liberty to sojourn in the land of Canaan, or elsewhere. Yet still they
were not merely concerned with regard to the people, but the
interruption of God’s grace troubled them most, with which the Covenant
made with Abraham would also have been buried. In a word, this was
justly felt by them to be the same as if they had seen both the glory of
God and the salvation of the human race altogether brought to naught.
Wherefore they must needs have been more than senseless who were unmoved
by this sad sight, especially when Moses, whom God had exalted by so
many privileges above all other mortals, was lying prostrate on the
earth for their sake.

<span id="ii.ix-p31"></span><span id="ii.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p32"></span>**6.** *And Joshua, the son of Nun, and
Caleb.* The magnanimity of Joshua is here specified, whereas, before,
only Caleb had been praised. But Moses says that they both rent their
clothes in token of their excessive sorrow, and even of their
abhorrence. For, as is well known, this, amongst the Orientals, was a
solemn ceremony in extreme grief, or when they would express their
abomination of some crime. Hypocrites have improperly imitated this
custom, either when they made a pretence of sorrow, or desired to
deceive the simple. But it is plain that Caleb and Joshua were moved to
rend their garments by solemn feelings, nay, by the fervor of their
indignation; whilst, at the same time, they seek to reclaim the people
from their madness. And, first, they commend the fertility of the land;
and then base their hope of obtaining it on the favor or good pleasure
of God. Some take the conditional particle <span
id="ii.ix-p32.1"></span>אם, *im,* for the causal particle, and translate
it, “For *because* God loves us, therefore He will bring us in;” but
this I do not approve of, and it is manifestly foreign to the true
meaning; for, since the Israelites had in a manner rejected so great a
benefit, they were surely unworthy through unbelief of being still
pursued by His favor. The condition is, therefore, introduced as if
doubtingly, not in order to diminish their hopes, as though it were a
mark of uncertainty, but simply that the people should be convinced of
their impiety, and repent; as if they had said, If only we afford room
for the continuance of God’s favor towards us, be ye of good courage.
And this they state more clearly soon afterwards, in reproving the
stubbornness of the people, where they say, “Only (or but) rebel not
ye;” in which words they admonish them that they shut up all the ways
whereby God might still pursue the course of His work;  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) and that there is no other obstacle to
these wretched people except their own unbelief, which does not permit
them to obey God. In this way, then, they assert that God’s power is
sufficient to perform what He had promised; and then exhort the people
to conciliate His favor, from whence they had fallen through their own
fault. The particle <span id="ii.ix-p33.1"></span>אך, *ac,* is used
emphatically, as though Joshua and Caleb had said that there was no fear
of danger, except because the people’s minds were set on bringing evil
upon themselves. Finally, in their reliance upon God’s aid, they exult
like conquerors; “They will be bread for us,” they say, *i.e.,* we shall
devour them without any trouble. And the reason is subjoined, because,
if God stands by the Israelites, their enemies will be destitute of all
defense. Justly, then, and for the best of reasons they conclude, that
although our enemies would otherwise be formidable, they are not to be
feared, if only God, apart from whom there is no strength, be favorable
unto us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc06010.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.ix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p25"></span> By the old interpreter, *C.* does not here
mean, as he generally does, the *V.*, which accords with his own view,
“in hac vasta solitudine *utinam* pereamus;” on these words Corn. a
Lapide says; “Ita haec legunt et conjungunt, Hebr., Chald., Septuaginta,
et Latina Romana. Tollenda ergo est negatio *non,* et distinctio quam
habent Biblia Plantiniana.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc06010.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p28"></span> “D’une audace tant diabolique;” of such
diabolical audacity. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc06010.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p33"></span> Addition in *Fr.*, “Quand on ne se soumet
point a luy;” when they do not submit themselves to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 1:26-33](cc06011)
