[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06043)  [Next](cc06045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
31](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#000)<span id="ii.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
31:1-54](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xliii-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xliii-p5"></span>**2.** Avenge the children of Israel of
the Midianites: afterwards shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.

<span id="ii.xliii-p6"></span>**2.** Ulciscere ultionem filiorum Israel
de Madianitis, postea aggregaberis ad populos tuos.

<span id="ii.xliii-p7"></span>**3.** And Moses spake unto the people,
saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the
Midianites, and avenge the Lord of Midian.

<span id="ii.xliii-p8"></span>**3.** Loquutus est itaque Moses ad
populum, dicendo, Accingant se ex vobis viri ad bellum, et sint contra
Madian, ut dent ultionem Jehovae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p9"></span>**4.** Of every tribe a thousand,
throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.

<span id="ii.xliii-p10"></span>**4.** Mille de singulis tribubus, de
omnibus tribubus Israel mittetis ad bellum.

<span id="ii.xliii-p11"></span>**5.** So there were delivered out of the
thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed
for war.

<span id="ii.xliii-p12"></span>**5.** Et traditi sunt ex millibus Israel
mille per singulas tribus, duodecim millia accineti ad militiam.

<span id="ii.xliii-p13"></span>**6.** And Moses sent them to the war, a
thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the
priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow
in his hand.

<span id="ii.xliii-p14"></span>**6.** Quos misit Moses, mille de
singulis tribubus ad bellum: misit, inquam, illos et Phinees filium
Eleazar sacerdotis ad bellum, et vasa sancta, et tubae clangoris erant
in manu ejus.

<span id="ii.xliii-p15"></span>**7.** And they warred against the
Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses; and they slew all the males.

<span id="ii.xliii-p16"></span>**7.** Et pugnaverunt contra Madian,
quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi, et occiderunt omnem masculum.

<span id="ii.xliii-p17"></span>**8.** And they slew the kings of Midian,
besides the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and
Zur, and Hut, and Reba, five kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of
Beor they slew with the sword.

<span id="ii.xliii-p18"></span>**8.** Reges quoque Madian occiderunt cum
occisis eorum, Evi et Recem, et Sur, et Hur, et Reba, quinque reges
Madian: et Balaam filium Beor occiderunt gladio.

<span id="ii.xliii-p19"></span>**9.** And the children of Israel took
all the women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took the
spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods.

<span id="ii.xliii-p20"></span>**9.** Abduxerunt autem captivas filii
Israel uxores Madianitarum, et parvulos eorum, atque omnia jumenta
eorum, omniaque pecora eorum, et omnem substantiam corum praedati sunt.

<span id="ii.xliii-p21"></span>**10.** And they burnt all their cities
wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly castles with fire.

<span id="ii.xliii-p22"></span>**10.** Omnes quoque urbes eorum per
habitationes eorum et omnes, aedes combusserunt igni.

<span id="ii.xliii-p23"></span>**11.** And they took all the spoil, and
all the prey, both of men and of beasts.

<span id="ii.xliii-p24"></span>**11.** Tuleruntque crania spolia, et
omnem praedam, tam de hominibus quam de jumentis.

<span id="ii.xliii-p25"></span>**12.** And they brought the captives,
and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and
unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp at the
plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near Jericho.

<span id="ii.xliii-p26"></span>**12.** Et adduxerunt ad Mosen et Eleazar
sacerdotem, et ad congregationem fillerum Israel, captivitatem, et
praedam, et spolia ad castra ipsa in campestribus Moab, quae sunt juxta
Jordanem Jericho.

<span id="ii.xliii-p27"></span>**13.** And Moses and Eleazar the priest,
and all the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them without
the camp.

<span id="ii.xliii-p28"></span>**13.** Egressi sunt ergo Moses et
Eleazar sacerdos, et omnes principes congregationis in occursum eorum
extra eastra.

<span id="ii.xliii-p29"></span>**14.** And Moses was wroth with the
officers of the host, with the captains over thousands, and captains
over hundreds, which came from the battle.

<span id="ii.xliii-p30"></span>**14.** Iratusque est Moses contra
praefectos exercitus, tribunes et centuriones qui revertebantur de
expeditione belli.

<span id="ii.xliii-p31"></span>**15.** And Moses said unto them, Have ye
saved all the women alive?

<span id="ii.xliii-p32"></span>**15.** Et dixit els Moses, Reservastisne
omnes mulieres?

<span id="ii.xliii-p33"></span>**16.** Behold, these caused the children
of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the
Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the
congregation of the Lord.

<span id="ii.xliii-p34"></span>**16.** Ecce, ipsae fuerunt filiis
Israel, consilio Balaam ad tradendum in praevaricationem contra Jehovam
in negotio Phogor, et fuit plaga in congregatione Jehovae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p35"></span>**17.** Now therefore kill every male
among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying
with him.

<span id="ii.xliii-p36"></span>**17.** Nunc ergo occidite omnes mares in
parvulis, et omnem mulierem qum cognoverit virum concubitu masculi,
occidite.

<span id="ii.xliii-p37"></span>**18.** But all the women-children, that
have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.

<span id="ii.xliii-p38"></span>**18.** Omnes autem parvulas inter
mulieres, qum non cognoverint concubitum masculi, servate vivas vobis.

<span id="ii.xliii-p39"></span>**19.** And do ye abide without the camp
seven days: whosoever hath killed any person, and whosoever hath touched
any slain, purify both yourselves and your captives on the third day,
and on the seventh day.

<span id="ii.xliii-p40"></span>**19.** Vos vero manete extra castra
septem diebus: omnis qui occiderit aliquem, quicunqne item tetigerit
occisum, purificabitis vos die tertia et die septima, vos et praeda
vestra.

<span id="ii.xliii-p41"></span>**20.** And purify all your raiment, and
all that is made of skins, and all work of goats’ hair, and all things
made of wood.

<span id="ii.xliii-p42"></span>**20.** Omne quoque vestimentum, et omnem
supellectilem pelliceam, et omne opus e pilis caprarum, et omne vas
lineum purificabitis.

<span id="ii.xliii-p43"></span>**21.** And Eleazar the priest said unto
the men of war which went to the battle, This is the ordinance of the
law which the Lord commanded Moses;

<span id="ii.xliii-p44"></span>**21.** Et dixit Eleazar sacerdos
admilites qui iverant ad bellum, hoc est statutum legis quod praeceperat
Jehova Mosi.

<span id="ii.xliii-p45"></span>**22.** Only the gold, and the silver,
the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,

<span id="ii.xliii-p46"></span>**22.** Profecto aurum, et argentum, aes,
ferrum, stannum, et plumbum, et quiequid ingreditur ignem, transire
facietis per ignem, et mundabitur;

<span id="ii.xliii-p47"></span>**23.** Every thing that may abide the
fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean;
nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of separation: and all
that abideth not the fire ye shall make go through the water.

<span id="ii.xliii-p48"></span>**23.** Veruntamen aqua expiationis
purificabitur, quicquid autem non ingreditur ignem, transire facietis
per aquam.

<span id="ii.xliii-p49"></span>**24.** And ye shall wash your clothes on
the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye shall come into
the camp.

<span id="ii.xliii-p50"></span>**24.** Lavabitis praeterea vestimenta
vestra die septima, et mundi eritis, et postea intrabitis castra.

<span id="ii.xliii-p51"></span>**25.** And the Lord spalke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xliii-p52"></span>**25.** Loquutus est deinde Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xliii-p53"></span>**26.** Take the sum of the prey that was
taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the
chief fathers of the congregation;

<span id="ii.xliii-p54"></span>**26.** Cape summam praedm captivitatis,
tam de hominibus quam de jumentis, tu et Eleazar sacerdos, et capita
patrum congregationis.

<span id="ii.xliii-p55"></span>**27.** And divide the prey into two
parts, between them that took the war upon them, who went out to battle,
and between all the congregation;

<span id="ii.xliii-p56"></span>**27.** Et partieris in duas partes
praedam, inter bellatores qui egressi sunt ad pugnam, et inter universam
congregationem.

<span id="ii.xliii-p57"></span>**28.** And levy a tribute unto the Lord
of the men of war which went out to battle: one soul of five hundred,
both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the
sheep:

<span id="ii.xliii-p58"></span>**28.** Tollesque censum Jehovae a viris
bellatoribus qui egressi sunt ad militiam, unam animam de quingentis, ex
hominibus, et ex bobus, et ex asinis, et ex pecudibus.

<span id="ii.xliii-p59"></span>**29.** Take it of their half, and give
it unto Eleazar the priest, for an heave-offering of the l,ord.

<span id="ii.xliii-p60"></span>**29.** De media parte illorum capietis:
et dabitis Eleazaro sacerdoti oblationem Jehovae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p61"></span>**30.** And of the children of Israel’s
half, thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of the
beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and
give them unto the Levites, which keep the charge of the tabernacle of
the Lord.

<span id="ii.xliii-p62"></span>**30.** Et de media parte filiorum Israel
capies unam portionem ex quinquaginta, ex hominibus, ex bobus, ex
asinis, et ex pecoribus, id est ex omni jumento: et dabis illa Levitis
custodientibus custodiam tabernaculi Jehovae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p63"></span>**31.** And Moses and Eleazar the priest
did as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="ii.xliii-p64"></span>**31.** Et fecit Moses et Eleazar
sacerdos quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="ii.xliii-p65"></span>**32.** And the booty, being the rest of
the prey which the men of war had caught, was six hundred thousand, and
seventy thousand, and five thousand sheep,

<span id="ii.xliii-p66"></span>**32.** Et fuit praeda, residuum scilicet
praedae quam praedati sunt milites, ovium sexcenta septuaginta quinque
millia,

<span id="ii.xliii-p67"></span>**33.** And threescore and twelve
thousand beeves,

<span id="ii.xliii-p68"></span>**33.** Et bovum septuaginta duo milIlia,

<span id="ii.xliii-p69"></span>**34.** And threescore and one thousand
asses,

<span id="ii.xliii-p70"></span>**34.** Et asinorum unum et sexaginta
millia,

<span id="ii.xliii-p71"></span>**35.** And thirty and two thousand
persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with him.

<span id="ii.xliii-p72"></span>**35.** Et animarum hominis e mulieribus
qum non cognoverant coitum masculi: omnium, inquam, animarum, duo et
triginta millia.

<span id="ii.xliii-p73"></span>**36.** And the half, which was the
portion of them that went out to war, was in number three hundred
thousand, and seven and thirty thousand and five hundred sheep:

<span id="ii.xliii-p74"></span>**36.** Fuit autem dimidia pars, portio
eorum, qui egressi fuerant ad militiare, numerus ovium trecenta triginta
septem millia et quingentae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p75"></span>**37.** And the Lord’s tribute of the
sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.

<span id="ii.xliii-p76"></span>**37.** Fuit vero census pro Jehova ex
ovibus sexcentae septuagintaquinque.

<span id="ii.xliii-p77"></span>**38.** And the beeves were thirty and
six thousand, of which the Lord’s tribute was threescore and twelve.

<span id="ii.xliii-p78"></span>**38.** Et bovum, sex et triginta millia:
et census eorum Jehovae, duo et septuaginta.

<span id="ii.xliii-p79"></span>**39.** And the asses, were thirty
thousand and five hundred, of which the Lord’s tribute was threescore
and one.

<span id="ii.xliii-p80"></span>**39.** Et asinorum triginta millia, et
quingenti: census autem eorum Jehovae unus et sexaginta:

<span id="ii.xliii-p81"></span>**40.** And the persons were sixteen
thousand, of which the Lord’s tribute was thirty and two persons.

<span id="ii.xliii-p82"></span>**40.** Et animarum hominum sedecim
millia: census vero eorum Jehovae, duae et triginta animae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p83"></span>**41.** And Moses gave the tribute, which
was the Lord’s heave-offering, unto Eleazar the priest; as the Lord
commanded Moses.

<span id="ii.xliii-p84"></span>**41.** Deditque Moses censum oblationis
Jehovae ipsi Eleazar sacerdoti, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="ii.xliii-p85"></span>**42.** And of the children of Israel’s
half, which Moses divided from the men that warred,

<span id="ii.xliii-p86"></span>**42.** Et de dimidia parte filiorum
Israel, quam deduxerit Moses a viris que militaverant:

<span id="ii.xliii-p87"></span>**43.** (Now the half that pertained unto
the congregation was three hundred thousand, and thirty thousand, and
seven thousand and five hundred sheep,

<span id="ii.xliii-p88"></span>**43.** Fuit autem dimidia pars
congregationis de ovibus, trecenta et triginta septem millia et
quingentae.

<span id="ii.xliii-p89"></span>**44.** And thirty and six thousand
beeves,

<span id="ii.xliii-p90"></span>**44.** Et bovum sex et triginta millia.

<span id="ii.xliii-p91"></span>**45.** And thirty thousand asses and
five hundred,

<span id="ii.xliii-p92"></span>**45.** Et asinorum triginta millia et
quingenti.

<span id="ii.xliii-p93"></span>**46.** And sixteen thousand persons,)

<span id="ii.xliii-p94"></span>**46.** Et animarum hominum sedecim
millia.

<span id="ii.xliii-p95"></span>**47.** Even of the children of Israel’s
half, Moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and
gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of
the Lord; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="ii.xliii-p96"></span>**47.** De dimidia, inquam, parte
filiorum Israel tulit Moses portionem unam e quinquaginta ex hominibus
et ex jumentis, et dedit eam Levitis custodientibus custodiam
tabernaculi, Jehovae, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="ii.xliii-p97"></span>**48.** And the officers which were over
thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds, came near unto Moses:

<span id="ii.xliii-p98"></span>**48.** Et accesserunt ad, ad Mosen
praefecti militum militiae, tribuni et centuriones.

<span id="ii.xliii-p99"></span>**49.** And they said unto Moses, Thy
servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our
charge, and there lackcth not one man of us.

<span id="ii.xliii-p100"></span>**49.** Dixeruntque ad Mosen, Servi tui
levarunt (vel, subduxerunt,) summam virorum bellatorum qui sunt in manu
nostra, et non defuit in nobis quisquam.

<span id="ii.xliii-p101"></span>**50.** We have therefore brought an
oblation for the Lord, what every man hath gotten, of jewels of gold,
chains, and bracelets, rings, ear-rings, and tablets, to make an
atonement for our souls before the Lord.

<span id="ii.xliii-p102"></span>**50.** Propterea obtulimus oblationem
Jehovae quisque quod invenit, vasa aurea, brachiale, et ornamentum
manus, annulum in aurem, et subligaculum foemineum, ad expiandum animas
nostras coram Jehova.

<span id="ii.xliii-p103"></span>**51.** And Moses and Eleazar the priest
took the gold of them, even all wrought jewels.

<span id="ii.xliii-p104"></span>**51.** Et accepit Moses et Eleazar
sacerdos aurum ab illis, omnia vasa operis.

<span id="ii.xliii-p105"></span>**52.** And all the gold of the offering
that they offered up to the Lord, of the captains of thousands, and of
the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty
shekels.

<span id="ii.xliii-p106"></span>**52.** Fuitque omne aurum oblationis
quod obtulerunt Jehovae, sedecim millia, septingenti et quinquaginta
sicli, a tribunis et centurionibus.

<span id="ii.xliii-p107"></span>**53.** (For the men of war had taken
spoil, every man for himself.)

<span id="ii.xliii-p108"></span>**53.** (Viri namque exereitus praedati
fuerant quisque sibi.)

<span id="ii.xliii-p109"></span>**54.** And Moses and Eleazar the priest
took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought
it into the tabernacle of the congregation,for a memorial for the
children of Israel before the Lord.

<span id="ii.xliii-p110"></span>**54.** Accepit inquam Moses et Eleazar
sacerdos aurum a tribunis et centurionibus, et intulit illud in
tabernaculum conventionis, in memoriam filiis Israel coram Jehova.

<span id="ii.xliii-p111"></span> 

<span id="ii.xliii-p112"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p113"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
Amongst the other prerogatives which God conferred upon His Church, this
one is celebrated, that He armed the godly “to execute vengeance upon
the heathen, — to execute upon them the judgment that is written,”
(<span id="ii.xliii-p113.1"></span>[Ps
149:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xliii-p113.1"></span>) and although the Spirit declares that this
should happen under the kingdom of Christ, still He refers to ancient
examples, one of which, well worthy of remembrance, is here recorded.
The Midianites had organized a wicked conspiracy for the destruction of
God’s people: and God, in undertaking to punish this cruel act of
theirs, gave a striking proof of His paternal favor towards the
Israelites; whilst this grace is doubled by His constituting them the
ministers of his judgment. This passage, therefore, shews us how anxious
God was for the welfare of His elect people, when He so set Himself
against their enemies, as if He would make common cause in all respects
with them. At the same time we must observe this additional favor
towards them, that although the Israelites themselves were not without
blame, He still deigned to appoint them as judges of the Midianites.
Inasmuch, however, as He everywhere prohibits His people from indulging
the lust of vengeance, we must not forget the distinction between men’s
vengeance and His own. He would have His servants, by patiently bearing
injuries, overcome evil with good; while, at the same time, He by no
means abdicates His own power, but still reserves to Himself the right
of inflicting punishment. Nay, Paul, desiring to exhort believers to
long-suffering, recalls them to the principle, that God takes upon
Himself the office of avenging.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202)
Since, then, God is at liberty to execute vengeance, not only by
Himself, but also by His ministers, as we have already seen, these two
things are not inconsistent with each other, that the passions of the
godly are laid under restraint by the Word, that they should not, when
injured, seek for vengeance, or retaliate the evils they have received,
and still that they are the just and legitimate executioners of God’s
vengeance, when the sword is put into their hands. It remains, that
whosoever is called to this office, should punish crime with honest
zeal, as the minister of God, and not as acting in his own private
cause. God here intrusted the office of vengeance upon His people, but
by no means in order that they might indulge the lust of their nature:
for their feeling ought to have been this, that they should have been
ready to pardon the Midianites,  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)
and still that they should heartily bestir themselves to inflict
punishment upon them.

<span id="ii.xliii-p116"></span>That, whilst God so severely judged the
Midianites, he spared the Moabites, was for the sake of Lot, who was the
founder of their race. But I have already frequently reminded my readers
that, when God’s judgments surpass our understanding, we should, in
sober humility, give glory to His secret, and to us incomprehensible,
wisdom: for those who, in this respect, seek to know more than is
fitting, elevate themselves too high, in order to plunge with head-long
audacity into a profound abyss, in which, at length, all their senses
must be overwhelmed. Why was He not at liberty to remit the punishment
of the Moabites, and at the same time to repay to the Midianites the
recompense which was their due? Besides, it was only for a time that he
pardoned the Moabites, until their obstinacy should render them
inexcusable, after they had not only abused his forbearance, but
tyrannically afflicted their brethren, by whom they had been treated
with kindness.

<span id="ii.xliii-p117"></span>Moreover, God desired, whilst Moses was
still alive, again to testify by this final act His love towards His
people, in order that they might more cheerfully advance to the
possession of the promised land: for this was no feeble encouragement,
when they saw that God spontaneously put Himself forward to avenge them.
At the same time it was expedient for Moses that, at the very moment of
his death, he should feel, by a fresh instance, what care God took for
the welfare of the people. For he was able joyfully to leave them in
God’s keeping, whose hand he had so recently seen put forth to fulfill
to the utmost His gracious purposes towards them. To the same effect
were the words, “Thou shalt be gathered unto thy people,” which were
undoubtedly spoken as a consolation in death. It was also a reason for
making haste; for if the dearth of the holy Prophet had been waited for,
perhaps the Israelites would not have dared to attack, with arms in
their hands, a peaceful nation, from whom there was no peril or
inconvenience impending. But so great was the authority of Moses over
them, that they were more ready to obey his bidding than that of any
other person.

<span id="ii.xliii-p118"></span>Although it is said indifferently of the
reprobate as well as believers, that they are gathered or congregated to
their fathers by death, still this expression shews that men are born
for immortality; for it would not be appropriate to say this of the
brute animals, whose death is their final destruction, inasmuch as they
are without the hope of another life.

<span id="ii.xliii-p119"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p120"></span>**3.** *And Moses spake unto the
people.* There is no doubt but that Moses delivered the commands which
he had received from God; although, therefore, it is stated  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) that only ten thousand went forth to
the war, yet the facts themselves demonstrate that the number, as well
as the mode of warfare, was prescribed by God. And assuredly it would
have been inconsiderate of Moses to attack so great a people with so
small a band; and thus he would have deservedly incurred the penalty of
his rashness, if he had attempted it of his own accord; still, when
God’s command had preceded, he happily concluded the matter, which had
been properly and rightly undertaken. Nor can it be questioned but that
God desired by this test to prove the faith of His people. For,
according to human apprehension, it was folly to endanger themselves
without cause; and the objection was obvious that it was by no means
advisable, when six hundred thousand men were at hand, to restrict to so
few the office of waging such a perilous war. Just, therefore, as God
afterwards destroyed the great army of the Midianites by only four
hundred men under the guidance of Gideon, so also under the hand of
Moses He sent forth only a single thousand from every tribe for the
destruction of that nation. The tribe of Zebulon alone could have
furnished five times as many soldiers as God took from the whole people.
Thus, then, they proved their faith, when in reliance on the aid of God
alone, they did not hesitate boldly to rush forward against their
enemies. And the event itself more fully illustrated God’s grace than as
if they had fought with all their forces, for then it would have been
believed that the Midianites were overwhelmed by the infinite multitude
of men. As, therefore, the people testified their obedience by prompt
compliance, so they experienced in the result that there is nothing
better than to submit ourselves to God, and to leave the prospect of
success so completely in His hand, as that our confidence may depend
solely upon him.

<span id="ii.xliii-p122"></span>Lest either of the tribes should boast
itself against the others, they were each of them commanded to give the
same number of soldiers. Moreover, Phinehas was sent with them, not so
much that he might engage personally with the enemy, or be their
General, as that he might rule and control their minds as God’s
messenger and interpreter. They were to be kept in the fear of God, and
to be elevated to the expectation of victory, and therefore God’s priest
was their leader, so that the war might be a holy one; and the same was
the object of the silver trumpets, with which, in obedience to the Lw,
as we have elsewhere seen,  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) the
Levites were accustomed to sound, that it might be manifest that their
battles were not fought without the will and authority of heaven.
Amongst “the holy instruments,” some commentators, in my opinion
rightly, include the Ark of the Covenant.

<span id="ii.xliii-p124"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p124.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p125"></span>**7.** *And they warred against the
Midianites.* It was a signal example of obedience, that 12,000 men did
not refuse to engage in a war which was full of danger, when it was
reasonable for them to object that it was not right for them to be
exposed to butchery, as it were, whilst the people sat idly in the camp,
who by their great numbers and with little trouble would have routed and
overcome the enemy. It was therefore no common proof of piety, that they
obeyed God’s command, and sought for no pretext to cover their
cowardice. God, too, shewed by the result that He did not rashly expose
His servants to danger; for it is in His power to rescue those whom He
takes under His protection, from a hundred deaths. From hence also we
are taught that there is no surer means of safety than to follow whither
He leads. What Moses afterwards adds, tends to render praise to their
perseverance, with one exception, they were right in killing all the
males, even to the kings, whom Moses relates to have been slain in the
general slaughter; and especially that they inflicted punishment on
Balaam, who by his cunning and his snares, had endeavored to destroy the
people of God. They were right, too, in spoiling the whole land; nor did
they act with less propriety and discretion in razing all the cities and
towns, which might have been a temptation to the timid and inactive to
take up their abode there; for, as we have seen before, all hindrances
were to be taken away, so that the people might advance freely and
without incumbrance into the land of Canaan; else, when there was an
opportunity of repose, many would have willingly foregone the promised
inheritance. Hence the cities were consumed by fire, lest they should
afford any hold for those who were willing to stay. Thus far the
selected soldiers faithfully performed their duty: in one respect they
failed, in that, under the impulse either of avarice or lust, they
preserved the women alive: on which point we shall see more presently.

<span id="ii.xliii-p126"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p127"></span>**11.** *And they took all the spoil.*
It was a sign both of their disinterestedness and modesty, that they
brought the booty, which they had taken in the ardor of battle, to Moses
and Eleazar; nor was it a mere empty and pompous ceremony, as many
boastingly parade the wealth which they desire to keep to themselves;
but their intention was, to acquiesce in the determination of Moses as
to its distribution. For, when Moses soon afterwards allots half of it
to the people, they are so far from rebelling against his decision, that
they do not even murmur. It is clear, then, that in this respect they
were no less submissive than they had been when, at the outset, they
took up arms, and boldly went forth to battle, whilst the rest were
quietly reposing out of the reach of the darts.

<span id="ii.xliii-p128"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p129"></span>**14** *And Moses was wroth with the
officers.* A successful issue usually obtains pardon for any errors in
performance, nay, in a manner covers them, so that they are not taken
into account; but, although the army brought with it many causes of
congratulation, still Moses does not forbear from severely reproving
their single fault. By this example we are taught that, whilst we give
praise to virtuous actions, we are not to approve of anything which
deserves reprehension. The anger of Moses might appear to us inhumane,
when he severely reproves his soldiers because they had not treated the
female sex with the greatest cruelty; but it is not our business to
canvass the judgments of God, before whose tribunal we must all
hereafter stand. Although, therefore, they may be repugnant to our own
feelings, still we must rest assured that, even where they may seem to
be excessive, He nevertheless tempers the most severe punishments with
the most perfect equity; yea, that although He may for a time overlook,
or at any rate not so severely punish, the same sin in the Moabites
which He sorely avenged upon the Midiantes, there is still a most just
cause for this distinction, although it may be hidden in His own breast.
It is not our part to murmur against Him, lest He should absolve Himself
by condemning our blasphemous audacity and temerity.

<span id="ii.xliii-p130"></span>The Israelites sinned, in that, when
they were only the ministers of God’s vengeance, it rested not in their
own discretion to relax any part of it. And this is worthy of
observation, that those who are armed with the sword, must not go out of
the way on either side one tittle, but faithfully execute whatever God
prescribes. By the praise which: is given to the anger of Moses, the
imagination of the Stoics is refuted, with whom indifference  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) (<span
id="ii.xliii-p131.1"></span>ἀπάθεια) is the highest of virtues. But
rather are we to labor that all our affections should proceed from a
good motive, and that they should be kept under such restraint, that
they may contain no ebullition of carnal passion, but that spiritual
zeal may preside in them. Moses, however, gives the reason why the women
were no more to be spared than the men, viz., because they had
prostituted themselves in order to lay deadly snares for the Israelites.
As regards the little ones, the same reasoa did not affect them,
inasmuch as they were guilty of no crime; yet is it not doubtful but
that God justly desired that the very name of this wicked and
irrecoverable nation should be utterly blotted out; just as He
afterwards gave over to destruction the nations of Canaan, together with
their offspring. The question, however, arises by what means the women,
who “had not known a man,” were to be distinguished from virgins. The
Jews, according to their custom, invent a fable  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) in reply, whereas it is probable that
the decision was only come to on the ground of their age.

<span id="ii.xliii-p133"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p134"></span>**19.** *And do ye abide without the
camp seven days.* We have elsewhere seen,  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) that, if any one had touched a dead
body, he was accounted unclean. Moses, by now extending the ceremony of
expiation to lawful homicide, intimates how carefully we ought to
abstain from shedding human blood. It was required of the Israelites
that they should strenuously advance through the midst of carnage; but,
inasmuch as it is in a manner contrary to the order of nature that men
should be killed by men, as if they were raging against their own
bowels, God would have some vestiges of humanity preserved even in just
punishments, so as to put a restraint upon all cruelty in the abstract.
Nor is it without cause that Scripture, even in commending heroic
bravery, uses this form of expression, that “they have polluted their
hands with blood,” who have slain any of their enemies, *i.e.,* in order
that we may abhor all acts of homicide, as being repugnant to the
preservation of the human race. Although, therefore, the Israelites had
slain the Midianites not only justly, but by God’s command, still, lest
they should accustom themselves to the indiscriminate shedding of blood,
they are commanded to purify themselves on the third and the seventh
day, before they returned to the camp, so that their pollution should
not infect the people. The reason for purifying the booty was different,
viz., because the uncleanness of their vessels indicated how detestable
was this people, whose very utensils, until they were purified either by
fire or water, defiled every one by the mere touch. Lest, however, the
soldiers should refuse to obey, or should comply unwillingly, Eleazar
reminds them that nothing more was required of them than the observance
of an old injunction. Nor is it to be doubted but that Moses designedly
resigned the office of teaching to his nephew, because the
interpretation of the law was hereafter to be sought from the mouth of
the priest

<span id="ii.xliii-p136"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p136.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p137"></span>**25.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
A most equitable distribution of the booty is here described, in which
the law of proportion was so well observed that, whilst the soldiers
were not defrauded of the reward of their labor, at the same time some
advantage accrued to the rest of the people in whose name the war was
carried on. The share of the multitude was indeed small, for the same
proportion was awarded to the 12,000 as to the remaining 600,000. But,
since the booty had been already won by the soldiers in right of their
victory, it ought not to have been a cause of complaint to the people
who had not borne arms, that they received an honorary gift, although it
might be of little value. And assuredly it would have been a shame that
those who remained in the camp should be altogether without any part of
the spoil, as if they had been convicted of cowardice, whereas it did
not depend on themselves that they had not taken part with their
brethren in the conquest of the enemy. For it was from no want of
courage that they had escaped the burden and the perils of war, but they
had modestly allowed the general glory to be appropriated by a few,
because it had so pleased God. But, whilst it was just that some of the
fruits of the victory should be communicated to all, so it. was no less
right that the fuller and more liberal reward should be received by
those who had borne the whole brunt of the war.

<span id="ii.xliii-p138"></span>It appears to some that David pursued
the same rule, when he distributed the spoil equally amongst his
followers who had gone down to the battle, and those who had stood by
the baggage. (<span id="ii.xliii-p138.1"></span>[1Sa
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xliii-p138.1"></span>.) In my opinion, however, what David then
decided was very different; for if the portion of those who remained
with the baggage had been equal with that of those who were actually
engaged, it would have been far more advantageous to remain out of the
reach of the weapons. For, when a battle is fought, only a few men out
of a large army are generally left with the baggage, and thus half the
booty would have accrued to a few idlers. The partition, therefore,
which is there mentioned, must have been an equal distribution to each
individual; and very justly did David enjoin that those who remained
stationed in the camp should have a full share of the spoil, lest  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) the condition of those should be
dissimilar who were under the operation of the same rule. But in this
case the actual warriors are justly rewarded above those who quietly
attended to their own domestic cares.

<span id="ii.xliii-p140"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p140.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p141"></span>**28.** *And levy a tribute unto the
Lord.* God now requires a tribute, or holy oblation, out of the spoil
from both parties, but in unequal portions, the people paying ten times
more than the soldiers. There was a twofold reason and object for this
tribute; for it was not fair that the Levites alone should be sent away
empty, as if their condition were worse than that of the rest, because
they were occupied in the service of God, and in taking care of the holy
things. But the part which He assigns to them, God commands to be
offered to Himself, that men may not only regard equity amongst each
other, but that religion may stand in the foremost place; for nothing
can be more unreasonable than that the rights of men should be
maintained inviolate, whilst God himself is overlooked. In order, then,
to testify their piety, the offering was enjoined, as if God claimed for
Himself the glory of the victory in taking this fiftieth and
five-hundredth portion. But, inasmuch as He has no want of anything,
having full satisfaction in Himself alone, the Levites are substituted
in His stead, that they may receive some reward for their ministry.

<span id="ii.xliii-p142"></span>Again, we perceive that God dealt more
liberally with the soldiers than with the rest of the multitude; nor is
this a matter of surprise, for, since He had laid a greater burden upon
them, it was just that they should be enriched by more fruits of the
victory, for He heaps blessings upon blessings according to His
pleasure.

<span id="ii.xliii-p143"></span>From this distribution we also gather
that it depends upon His ordinance that some should be richer than
others; for, if there were no such thing as property, there would be no
test of justice and integrity.

<span id="ii.xliii-p144"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p144.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p145"></span>**37.** *And the Lord’s tribute of the
sheep.* The greatness of the victory is shewn by the result, since such
an abundance of cattle could only have been collected from a wide and
populous country. It is probable that it was not very fertile, and
consequently only live stock, and not corn and wine, are enumerated as
amongst their wealth. Still, we may conjecture that it was famous for
pastures, since barren mountains could not have fed so many oxen, and
goats, and sheep, and camels; besides, it is most evident, from the
number of young women, that the men who were slain were more in number
than their conquerors who had been sent to the battle; for suppose they
each of them had an unmarried daughter, they would have almost three
times outnumbered the 12,000 Israelites. Hence, again, it is manifest
that the victory was effected by Divine power. It may, however, seem
strange that, although the nation was almost destroyed, nevertheless
their posterity existed some little time afterwards, as if new
Midianites had been begotten from the ashes of their sires. For it was
not a very long time that elapsed between this slaughter and the time of
Gideon, when they again dared voluntarily to attack the Israelites, and
in reliance on their multitude, to rush into the very heart of Canaan;
nay, they had already brought all the neighboring nations into
subjection. How this could have happened, since the Scriptures do not
inform us, it only remains for us to make the conjecture, that many of
them, as is often the case in a season of confusion, fled elsewhere, and
soon afterwards returned into the land, which was now unoccupied. For
the sudden irruption of the Israelites was like a storm which soon
passed away; nor was flight a difficult thing for this unsettled and
wandering nation. It might also have been the case, that many immigrants
from various quarters flowed into the land, when stripped of its
inhabitants; or even that the Israelites, having performed their work
but slackly, sounded the recall sooner than they ought, and that God
afterwards punished their remissness. At any rate, we are taught by this
example that the wicked sprout up like foul and noxious weeds, so that,
though often cut down, they soon cover the ground again.

<span id="ii.xliii-p146"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p146.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p147"></span>**48.** *And the officers which were
over the thousands.* We have here an example of signal gratitude, that
the leaders of the army, when they saw that none of their men were lost,
consecrated their spoils of gold and silver to the Lord. By the offering
of the first-fruits, they had already sufficiently testified their piety
and obedience; nor, indeed, after they had faithfully complied with
God’s command, could anything more have been expected from them; hence
does their liberality deserve so much the more praise, when they lay
themselves under the obligation of a new and extraordinary vow. At the
same time, Moses magnifies God’s special blessing in bringing them all
back safely to a man from this great battle. Surely, since their spoils
must have been driven from many villages, it was strange that some few
of them at least had not been slain in their very passage from one place
to another. Hence, therefore, it was more than ever manifest that the
war was thus successfully concluded under the guidance of God, who had
protected the 12,000 men. Hence the incredible goodness of God towards
his people is here celebrated, as well as the pious profession of the
officers, when it is expressly stated that, having mustered their
forces, they had found them all safe, so that there could be no doubt
nor question about the grace of God. In acknowledgment, therefore, of
His wondrous power in the preservation of the soldiers, they offer as
the price of their redemption whatever gold and silver they had taken
among the spoils. Moses records the sum, so that it may more clearly
appear that, in the performance of this act of homage, it was no
trifling amount of gain that they despised, for its amount is more than
10,500 *livres* of French money.  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210)

<span id="ii.xliii-p149"></span>But what becomes of the soldiers? whilst
these vows are being paid for their safety, they quietly enjoy their
plunder: for there is an implied comparison here, when Moses, after
having praised the centurions and tribunes, presently adds the
exception, that “the spoil which each man had taken was his own.” It is,
indeed, amazing that the soldiers, as if they had conquered by
themselves, and for themselves alone, should have been so
ill-conditioned and mean, as not to imitate this laudable example. And,
in truth, it often happens, that the multitude indulges its meanness
without shame, as well because it is ignorant of what true nobility is,
as because the crowd conceals the disgrace. Meanwhile, those in office
are reminded to take care, that the higher the dignity may be to which
they are called, the more eminent should their virtues be.

<span id="ii.xliii-p150"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p150.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p151"></span>**51.** *And Moses and Eleazar the
priest took the gold.* It was fitting that this should be added, lest
any should suppose that Eleazar made a profit by the liberality of
others. Moses, therefore, relates, that whatever gold was offered, was
faithfully laid up as an ornament for the sanctuary. When it is said,
“for a memorial for the children of Israel,” it may be taken either
actively or passively; viz., either that the gift may be a monument of
their gratitude, or that it might conciliate favor for the people in the
eyes of God; as if that offering of expiation brought before God, and
represented, all those who thus professed themselves to be preserved by
His grace. I prefer the latter sense myself, *i.e.,* that this memorial
was set before His eyes, in order that God might hereafter also be
favorable to His people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc06044.htm#fr_202) <span
id="ii.xliii-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p114"></span> The reference here, both in *Lat.* and
*Fr.,* is to <span id="ii.xliii-p114.1"></span>[Ro
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xliii-p114.1"></span>, though I presume it ought to be to <span
id="ii.xliii-p114.2"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xliii-p114.2"></span>, — the former citation being transferred to
what follows.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc06044.htm#fr_203) <span
id="ii.xliii-p114.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p115"></span> Added in *Fr*., “s’il les eust voulu
laisser impunis:” if He had been willing to leave them unpunished.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc06044.htm#fr_204) <span
id="ii.xliii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p121"></span> “Combien doncques qu’il n’y est rien
exprime d’avantage, sinon que, etc.;” although, therefore, nothing more
is stated than that, etc. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc06044.htm#fr_205) <span
id="ii.xliii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p123"></span> See *ante,* on <span
id="ii.xliii-p123.1"></span>[Numbers
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xliii-p123.1"></span>, vol. 2, p. 104.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc06044.htm#fr_206) <span
id="ii.xliii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p131"></span> “De n’avoir nulle passion;” to be
without any passion. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc06044.htm#fr_207) <span
id="ii.xliii-p131.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p132"></span> “(Eleazar) made them pass before the
plate, *(i.e.,* the golden plate engraved like a signet, <span
id="ii.xliii-p132.1"></span>[Ex
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036)<span
id="ii.xliii-p132.1"></span>,) and the face of her who was suited for
marriage grew yellow as a crocus.” — See R. Sal. Jarchi, *in loco.* Ed.
Breithaupt. p. 1270.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc06044.htm#fr_208) <span
id="ii.xliii-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p135"></span> See *ante,* on <span
id="ii.xliii-p135.1"></span>[Numbers
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xliii-p135.1"></span>, vol. 2, p. 42.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc06044.htm#fr_209) <span
id="ii.xliii-p138.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p139"></span> The *Fr.* gives a different turn to the
sentence, “veu que tous a la verite guerroyoyent;” seeing that in truth
all were alike engaged in the war.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc06044.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ii.xliii-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p148"></span> 16,750 shekels. *C.’s* calculations
are, as far as I have observed, rarely accurate. The equivalent for the
shekel in French money, which he professed to adopt, was somewhat more
than 14 sous, or 14-20ths of the franc or livre. See *ante,* vol. 1, p.
483, and vol. 3, p 416

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 32:1-42](cc06045)
