[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06024)  [Next](cc06026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p1"></span>A Repetition of the same History

<span id="ii.xxiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p4"></span>**2.** And the Lord spoke unto me, saying,

<span id="ii.xxiv-p5"></span>**2.** Postea loquutus est ad me Jehova,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xxiv-p6"></span>**3.** Ye have compassed this mountain long
enough: turn you northward.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p7"></span>**3.** Sufficit vobis circuisse montem
istum: convertite vos ad aquilonem.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p8"></span>**4.** And command thou the people, saying,
Ye are to pass through the coast of your brethren the children of Esau,
which dwell in Self, and they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed
unto yourselves therefore.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p9"></span>**4.** Populo autem praecipe dicendo, Vos
nunc transituri estis per terminum fratrum vestrorum filiorum Esau qui
habitabant in Seir: timebunt autem a vobis, cavete diligenter:

<span id="ii.xxiv-p10"></span>**5.** Meddle not with them; for I will
not give you of their laud, no, not so much as a foot-breadth; because I
have given mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p11"></span>**5.** Ne irritetis eos, non enim daturus
sum vobis de terra eorum usque ad calcationem plantae pedis: quia in
haereditatem ipsi Esau dedi montem Seir.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p12"></span>**6.** Ye shall buy meat of them for
money, that ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money,
that ye may drink.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p13"></span>**6.** Cibum emetis ab eis argento, et
comedetis: et etiam aquam emetis ab eis argento, et bibetis.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p14"></span>**7.** For the Lord thy God hath blessed
thee in all the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking through this
great wilderness: these forty years the Lord thy God hath been with
thee; thou hast lacked nothing.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p15"></span>**7.** Siquidem Jehova Deus tuus benedixit
tibi in onmi opere manus tuae, et novit quod ambules per desertum magnum
istud: jam quadraginta annis Jehova Deus tuus fuit tecum, neque
indiguisti aliquo.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p16"></span>**8.** And when we passed by from our
brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, through the way of
the plain from Elath, and from Ezion-gaber, we turned and passed by the
way of the wilderness of Moab.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p17"></span>**8.** Et transivimus a fratribus nostris
filiis Esau, qui habitabant in Seir, per viam solitudinis ab Elath et ab
Esion-gaber: conversi autem transivimus ad viam deserti Moab.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p18"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiv-p19"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p20"></span>**4.** *And they shall be afraid of you.*
This temptation was the more provoking, when they heard not only that
the embassy would be vain, but that although Edom should receive them
with injustice and hostility, they were still to abstain from violence
and arms. For there might be some reason in this, that when they
presented their request in a friendly manner, they would have a
legitimate cause of war, if Edom should reject their demands. But this
further condition might appear altogether intolerable that they were to
do nothing against those who refused to let them pass quietly through
their land. Hence, however, it more fully appears how the Israelites
were gradually, and by various kinds of chastisement, subdued to
obedience, whereas they would otherwise have fiercely and petulantly
exclaimed that they had been dealt with unkindly by God; since thus
their condition would be worse than the universal law of nations
allowed. In this matter, then, their wanderings, for eight and thirty
years, had much efficacy in bringing them back to the right way.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p22"></span>**<span id="ii.xxiv-p22.1"></span>[Numbers
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.xxiv-p22.1"></span>.** *Thou knowest all the travel that hath
befallen us.* This preface was well calculated to conciliate favor, when
the sons of Jacob, descended from the same blood, familiarly approached
the Edomites: for their connection ought to have rendered them
hospitable. But there are two principal points whereby Moses endeavored
to influence the mind of the king of Edom, so that he should grant them
a passage through his dominions. The first is derived from the ordinary
feelings of humanity; for nature dictates that aid should be extended to
the wretched, who are unjustly oppressed. In this view, he says, that
the afflictions which they had endured were notorious; viz., that as
sojourners in Egypt they had been tyrannically harassed and oppressed.
In saying that “the Egyptians vexed us and our fathers,” although they
were not, at that time, endowed with capacity for estimating the
injuries inflicted upon them  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)
yet it is not without reason that they complain that these injuries had
been inflicted on themselves, which affected their whole body and name,
especially since the final act of cruelty directly concerned them, when
Pharaoh commanded all the male infants to be destroyed. The second
argument is more effective: since nothing can be less in accordance with
propriety than to deny our assistance to those whoso welfare God
recommends to us by His own example. In order, then, that they may
obtain help from their brethren, they make mention of the grace of God,
which at that time might have been everywhere celebrated. When,
therefore, this message is given to their ambassadors, We cried unto the
Lord, who hath heard us, their design was to exhort the Edomites to be
imitators of God, who had been merciful in delivering His people. If any
should object that the cry of the people had not been praiseworthy, as
not having arisen from a true and sincere faith, nor from a serious
feeling of the heart, the reply is easy. that the Israelites were not
here boasting of any merit of their own, as if they had prayed duly and
perfectly, but that they were simply professing their innocence, since
they could not have had recourse to God, unless they had been unjustly
oppressed. The fact, then, that God had heard them, had the effect of
commending their cause. They prove, however, from the result, that God
was their deliverer: because their exodus had been incredible; although
this point is but lightly touched upon.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p24"></span>Their notion is a poor one, who understand
Moses by “the angel:” since by this name they unquestionably magnify the
miracles which God had wrought.  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md)
Now, although the angels encamp around the servants of God — and it is
certain that many angels had been the ministers of the people’s safety —
still they especially designate, as the angel, Him who had been often
before called Jehovah, and in whom the, majesty of God perfectly shone
forth. Paul, however, teaches that he was Christ. (<span
id="ii.xxiv-p25.2"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxiv-p25.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xxiv-p26"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p27"></span>**19.** *And the children of Israel said
unto him.* It is doubtful whether or not the ambassadors were sent a
second time, in order to remove all unjust suspicions, and to appease
the ferocity (of the Edomites.) It is probable, however, that we have
the relation of what was done in one and the same expedition. The sum
is, that the Israelites tried every means, in order that a free and
unmolested passage might be accorded them by the Edomites: whence their
repulse might appear the more harsh and intolerable. But God, by this
test, would prove the obedience of His people. As regards the Edomites,
although by rashly taking up arms they would have drawn upon themselves
just destruction, still God spared them for a time; not by freely
pardoning them, but by deferring their punishment, as He is wont to do,
until its due season.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p28"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p29"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxiv-p29.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.xxiv-p29.1"></span>**
*For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.* This reason is added, lest the
people should be grieved at spending their money, of which they had not
much, in buying meat and drink. There are, however, two clauses; first,
that they were so enriched by God’s bounty, that they were fully
supplied with the means of buying food; and, secondly, that they must
not doubt but that He would relieve their necessity, if it were
required, since He had thus far provided for them, and had not suffered
them to want anything. He, therefore, encourages them to hope, in
consideration of their past experience; because God would take care of
them, as tie had before been accustomed to do.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p30"></span>The question, however, arises, how God
could say, that He had blessed the work of their hands, when they had
had no commerce with other nations, so as to make the smallest gains
whatever. But I thus understand it, viz., that although they were
gratuitously sustained in the wilderness, and had not expended a single
penny in buying even shoelatchets, still their cattle had increased,
and, besides, they had made some profits by their daily labor; not by
receiving, indeed, daily wages, but by providing for themselves
furniture and other necessaries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc06025.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p23"></span> “Ils prennent sur eux les injures qui
avoyent este faites devant qu’ils les peussents sentir, n’estans point
encore nez, ou estans petits enfans;” they take upon themselves the
injuries which had been done before they could feel them, not being yet
born, or being but little children. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc06025.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p25"></span> *C.* found in S’.M. that Rabbi Salomon
interpreted the ambiguous word <span id="ii.xxiv-p25.1"></span>מלאך,
*messenger,* here, instead *of angel;* and said that the messenger was
Moses. — *W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 20:23-29](cc06026.md)
