[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06021)  [Next](cc06023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
20:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p3"></span>**1.** Then came the children of Israel,
even the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin, in the first month:
and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried
there.

<span id="ii.xxi-p4"></span>**1.** Pervenerunt autem filii Israel
universa congregatio, in desertum Sin, mense primo, et mansit populus in
Cades: ubi mortua est Maria, et sepulta illic fuit:

<span id="ii.xxi-p5"></span>**2.** And there was no water for the
congregation: and they gathered themselves together against Moses and
against Aaron.

<span id="ii.xxi-p6"></span>**2.** Quumque non esset aqua congregationi,
convenerunt adversus Mosen et Aharon.

<span id="ii.xxi-p7"></span>**3.** And the people chode with Moses, and
spoke, saying, Would God that we had died when our brethren died before
the Lord!

<span id="ii.xxi-p8"></span>**3.** Et jurgatus est populus cum Mose, ac
dixerunt in hunc modum, Et utinam obiissemus quando obierunt fratres
nostri coram Jehova.

<span id="ii.xxi-p9"></span>**4.** And why have ye brought up the
congregation of the Lord into this wilderness, that we and our cattle
should die there?

<span id="ii.xxi-p10"></span>**4.** Et quare venire fecistis
congregationem Jehovae in desertum istud: ut moriamur hic nos et jumenta
nostra.

<span id="ii.xxi-p11"></span>**5.** And wherefore have ye made us to
come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it is no
place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither is
there ally water to drink.

<span id="ii.xxi-p12"></span>**5.** Et quare ascendere fecistis nos ex
AEgypto, ut venire faceretis nos ad locum malum istum, non locum
sementis, ficuum, et vinearum, et malogranatorum, et in quo aqua nulla
est ad bibendum?

<span id="ii.xxi-p13"></span>**6.** And Moses and Aaron went from the
presence of the assembly unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and they fell upon their faces: and the glory of the Lord
appeared unto them.

<span id="ii.xxi-p14"></span>**6.** Abierunt ergo Moses et Aharon a
conspectu congregationis ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, et
projecerunt se super faciem suam: apparuitque gloria Jehovae super eos.

<span id="ii.xxi-p15"></span>**7.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xxi-p16"></span>**7.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xxi-p17"></span>**8.** Take the rod, and gather thou the
assembly together, thou and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the
rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou
shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the
congregation and their beasts drink.

<span id="ii.xxi-p18"></span>**8.** Accipe virgam, et congrega coetum tu
et Aharon frater tuus, et loquimini petrae in oculis eorum, et dabit
aquam suam, educesque illis aquam e petra, et potum dabis coetui ac
jumentis eorum.

<span id="ii.xxi-p19"></span>**9.** And Moses took the rod from before
the Lord, as he commanded him.

<span id="ii.xxi-p20"></span>**9.** Tulit ergo Moses virgam a conspectu
Jehovae, quemadmodum praeceperat ei:

<span id="ii.xxi-p21"></span>**10.** And Moses and Aaron gathered the
congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now,
ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?

<span id="ii.xxi-p22"></span>**10.** Et congregaverunt Moses et Aharon
congregationem ante petram, dixitque illis, Audite nunc o rebelles,
Nunquid de petra hac educemus vobis aquam?

<span id="ii.xxi-p23"></span>**11.** And Moses lifted up his hand, and
with his rod he smote the rock twice; and the water came out abundantly,
and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.

<span id="ii.xxi-p24"></span>**11.** Et elevavit Moses manum suam,
percussitque petram virga sua duabus vicibus: tunc egressae sunt aquae
multae, et bibit congregatio ac jumenta eorum.

<span id="ii.xxi-p25"></span>**12.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses and
Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the
children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into
the land which I have given them.

<span id="ii.xxi-p26"></span>**12.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen et Aharon,
Propterea quod non credidistis mihi, ut sanctificaretis me in oculis
filiorum Israel, idcirco non introducetis congregationem istam in terram
quam dedi illis.

<span id="ii.xxi-p27"></span>**13.** This is the water of Meribah;
because the children of Israel strove with the Lord, and he was
sanctified in them.

<span id="ii.xxi-p28"></span>**13.** Istae sunt aquae jurgii, pro quibus
jurgati sunt filii Israel cum Jehova, et sanctificavit se in illis.

<span id="ii.xxi-p29"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p30"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p31"></span>**1.** *Then came the children of Israel.*
In the twenty-third chapter of this book many intermediate stations are
mentioned, which are not here referred to: perhaps because, from the
time that God compelled them to draw back, *they* had made no advance
for thirty whole years, but had wandered about by circuitous paths. In
connecting the history, therefore, in this place he relates that they
passed from the desert of Paran to the desert of Sin; because they then
began to direct their journey straight towards the land of Canaan, and
to advance more closely to it, so as at length to conclude their
wanderings. When he tells us that Miriam died here, we may infer from
hence that her life was greatly prolonged. It is probable that she was a
girl of ten or twelve years of age, when Moses was born, since she was
able to provide adroitly for his safety, (<span
id="ii.xxi-p31.1"></span>[Ex 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xxi-p31.1"></span>;) for although her name is not actually given,
yet it may be reasonably supposed that she was the person who fetched
her mother to nurse the child that had been exposed. She reached the
age, then, of about 130 years,  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)
an unusual length of life, and especially for a woman.

<span id="ii.xxi-p33"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p34"></span>**2.** *And there was no water for the
congregation.* We have already seen a similar, though not the same,
history. For, when the people had hardly come out of Egypt, they began
to rebel in Rephidim on account of the scarcity of water; and now, after
thirty-eight years, or thereabouts, a new sedition arose in Kadesh,
because there, too, they wanted water. Their first murmuring, indeed,
sufficiently showed how great was their depravity and contumacy; for,
when God gave them their food from heaven every day, why did they not
supplicate Him for water, so that their sustenance might be complete?
Yet, not less with foul ingratitude than with impious refractoriness,
they assail God with reproaches, and complain that they are deceived and
betrayed. But this second rebellion is far worse; for, when they had
experienced that it was in God’s power to extract plenty of water from
the barren rock, why do they not now implore His aid? why does not that
marvelous interference in their behalf recur to their minds? Yet, in
their madness, they clamor that they have been more cruelly dealt with
than as if they had been swallowed up by the earth, or consumed by fire
from heaven, as if there were no remedy for their thirst. Assuredly this
was incredible stupidity, designedly, as it were, to shut the gate of
God’s grace, and to east themselves into despair. It is true that they
rebel against Moses and Aaron; but they direct their complaints like
darts against God Himself. They deem it a very great injustice that they
had been brought into the desert, as if they had not in their own
impious obstinacy themselves preferred the desert to the land of Canaan,
and were deserving, therefore, of pining, in want of all things, to
death itself. Perversely, then, do they throw the blame, which belongs
to themselves alone, upon the ministers of their salvation. With truth,
indeed, do they call the place evil and barren; but God would not have
wished to keep them imprisoned there, unless they had voluntarily
refused the land flowing with milk and honey, after it had been set
before their eyes, and an easy entrance to it had been accorded to them
under the guidance and authority of God. Thus the Prophet, in <span
id="ii.xxi-p34.1"></span>[Psalm
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxi-p34.1"></span>, in
recounting the history of their redemption, before he descends to the
punishments inflicted upon their sins, relates that they were brought
forth by God “with joy” and “with gladness.”  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) But, further, taking occasion from the
inconvenience they experienced from thirst, they maliciously heap
together other complaints. There was no lack of food to satisfy their
hunger, and such as was pleasant to the taste; yet they complain exactly
as if hunger oppressed them as well as thirst. God daily rained for them
food from heaven, which it was mere sport for them to gather; but the
ground of their murmuring is that they had not to fatigue themselves
with ploughing and sowing. Behold to what senselessness men are driven
by preposterous lust, and by contempt of God’s present blessings! The
climax of their madness, however, is that they lament their fate in not
having been swallowed up with Korah and his companions, or consumed by
fire from heaven. They had been overwhelmed with great fear at that
melancholy spectacle; and justly so, for God had exhibited a prodigy,
terrible throughout all ages. Now they quarrel with Him because His
lightnings did not smite them also. Nor do they only lament that they
were not destroyed by that particular kind of death, but they willfully
provoke God’s vengeance upon their heads, which ought to have terrified
them more than a hundred deaths: for it is emphatically added, that
those, with whom they desired to be associated, had “died *before the
Lord.”* They acknowledge, therefore, that the destruction, which they
imprecate upon themselves, had come to pass not by chance, but by the
manifest judgement of God, as if they were angry with God for having
spared themselves. Most truly do they call them their *brethren,* to
whom they were only too like; yet is it in brutal arrogance that they
desire to be accounted God’s Church; for, whilst they professedly
connect themselves with the adverse faction, they arrogate falsely this
title to themselves.

<span id="ii.xxi-p36"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p37"></span>**6.** *And Moses and Aaron went from the
presence.* It is probable that they fled in fear, inasmuch as the
tabernacle was a kind of refuge for them from the violence of the
people. Still, we may conjecture from other passages that they had
consideration not only for themselves, but for the wretched people,
howsoever unworthy of it they might be so also, when they throw
themselves upon their faces, I understand that they did so, not so much
(to pray) that God would protect them from the wrath of their enemies,
but also that He would calm these madmen by some appropriate remedy.
Still their agitation appears to have been such as to deprive them of
their ordinary self-restraint. Neither, indeed, does God try their faith
and patience, as He often did on other occasions; perhaps because He saw
that they were too much overwhelmed to be able to persevere inflexibly
in pious zeal, patience, and care for the public good. Consequently the
appearance to them of God’s glory was a support for their weakness, as
in a case of extremity.

<span id="ii.xxi-p38"></span>This example shows us how earnestly God
should be entreated constantly to support us with new supplies of His
grace, since otherwise the boldest of us all would fail at every moment.
The invincible resolution of Moses had so often overcome every obstacle,
that there seemed to be no fear of his being in danger of falling; yet
the conqueror in so many struggles at length stumbles in a single act.
Hence we should more carefully bear in mind the exhortation of Paul:
Because

<span id="ii.xxi-p39"></span>“it is God which worketh in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure,” we should “work out our own salvation
with fear and trembling.” (<span id="ii.xxi-p39.1"></span>[Phil.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p39.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxi-p40"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p41"></span>**8.** *Take the rod.* It is unquestionable
that the faith of Moses had now begun to waver; but we gather from his
prompt obedience that it had not altogether failed; for he wastes no
time in discussion, but comes straight to the rock in order that he may
perform God’s command. His faith, then, was only so smothered, that its
hidden rigor at once directed him to his duty. Thus is it that the
saints sometimes, whilst they totter like children, still advance toward
their mark.

<span id="ii.xxi-p42"></span>By the sight of “the rod,” God would recall
both to Moses and the people so many miracles, which were well fitted to
awaken confidence for the future; just as if He were uplifting the
standard of His power. The command to speak to the rock is not
unattended with a severe reproach, as if He had said, that in the
lifeless elements there was more reason and intelligence than in men
themselves. And assuredly it was a thing much to be ashamed of, that the
rock, as if it could hear and was endued with sense, should obey God’s
voice, whilst the people, to whom the Law had been given, remained in
deafness and stupidity.

<span id="ii.xxi-p43"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p44"></span>**10.** *And Moses and Aaron gathered the
congregation together.* There is no doubt but that Moses was perplexed
between hope and doubt, so that, although he committed the event to God,
he was still to a certain extent oppressed with anxiety; for he would
never have been so ready and prompt in obeying, and especially in such
an unusually arduous matter, if he had been without faith. Aaron and
himself had recently hidden themselves in alarm; it was, therefore, a
task of no slight difficulty straightway to call the people, from whom
they had fled, and voluntarily to encounter their madness. Thus far,
then, we see nothing but a readiness to obey, conjoined with
magnanimity, which is deserving of no common praise; but inasmuch as the
unbelief of Moses is condemned by the heavenly Judge, in whose hands is
the sovereign power, and at whose word we all stand or fall, we must
acquiesce in His sentence. We scarcely perceive anything reprehensible
in this matter, yet, since God declares that the fall of Moses
displeased Him, we must abide by His decision rather than our own. And
hence, too, let us learn that our works, on the surface of which nothing
but virtue is apparent, are often abounding in secret defects, which
escape the eyes of men, but are manifest to God alone.

<span id="ii.xxi-p45"></span>If it be asked in what respect Moses
transgressed, the origin of his transgression was unbelief; for it is
not allowable, when this species of sin is expressly referred to in the
answer of God, to imagine that it was anything else. But it is doubtful
in what point he was incredulous; unless it be, that in asking whether
he could fetch water out of the rock, he seems to reject as if it were
impossible and absurd what God had promised to do. And, in fact, he was
so entirely taken up by considerations of their contumacy, that he did
not acknowledge the grace of God. He inquires whether he shall fetch
water out of the rock? whereas he ought to have recollected that this
had already been permitted to him by God. It became him, then,
confidently to assert that God had again promised the same thing, rather
than to speak with hesitation.

<span id="ii.xxi-p46"></span>Others think that he sinned, because he was
not contented with a single blow, but smote the rock twice. And this
perhaps did arise from distrust. But the origin of the fault was that he
did not simply embrace God’s promise, and strenuously discharge the duty
assigned to him as an evidence of his faith. Although, therefore, his
smiting the rock twice might have been a token of his want of
confidence, still it was only an aggravation of the evil, and not its
origin or cause. Thus, then, we must always come back to this, that
Moses did not give God the glory, because he rather considered what the
people had deserved, than estimated the power of God according to His
word. And this, too, has previous reprimand denotes, when, in accusing
the Israelites of rebellion, he shows, indeed, that he was inflamed with
holy zeal; yet, at the same time, he does not bestir himself with
suitable confidence in order to their conviction; nay, in a manner he
confesses that the power of God fails beneath their wickedness. Thus it
is said in <span id="ii.xxi-p46.1"></span>[Ps.
106:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#033)<span id="ii.xxi-p46.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.xxi-p47"></span>“That it went in with Moses for their
sakes, because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke with his
mouth:”  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="ii.xxi-p49"></span>for the Prophet does not there excuse
Moses; but shows that in consequence of the wickedness of the people, he
was carried away by inconsiderate fervor, so as to deny that what God
had promised should take place. Hence let us learn that, when we are
angered by the sins of others, we should beware lest a temptation of an
opposite kind should take possession of our minds.

<span id="ii.xxi-p50"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p51"></span>**12.** *And the Lord spoke unto Moses and
Aaron.* God here both sets forth their crime, and pronounces its
punishment. Now, whilst unbelief is in itself a gross and detestable
evil, God aggravates its guilt by declaring its consequence, viz., that
He was defrauded of His glory, when Moses and Aaron, who ought to have
been the proclaimers of the miracle, lay as it were confounded with
shame. For, whereas their confidence, by exciting attention, would have
sanctified God’s name, so by their mistrust it came to pass that all
were led to think that there was nothing to be hoped from His
assistance.

<span id="ii.xxi-p52"></span>When Moses not only ingenuously confesses
his guilt, but also relates how he was condemned by God, and, in order
that his disgrace may be more complete, introduces Him speaking as from
His judgment-seat, this does not a little tend to establish the truth of
his doctrine. For what human being, unless he had renounced all carnal
affections, would voluntarily endure to declare himself guilty before
all the world? His angelic virtues were sufficient to exempt him from
all suspicion. Having erred in one particular only, he proclaims the
disgrace which he might have concealed, and does not hesitate to
disparage himself, in order to magnify the goodness of God. And surely
it is obvious from the passage that, whenever God had before pardoned
the people at the request of Moses, the pardon was no less gratuitous
than as if he had not interceded for them. For the intercession of Moses
ceases on this occasion, yet God does nod; fail to deal kindly with them
in their unworthiness, according to His wont.

<span id="ii.xxi-p53"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p54"></span>**13.** *This is the water of Meribah.*
 <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) This name was given: to the
place in order that the ingratitude of their fathers might be detestable
to their descendants, and hence the mercy of God more illustrious. Thus
the Prophet, referring to it, says:

<span id="ii.xxi-p56"></span>“That the generation to come might know
them, — that they might not forget the works of God, — and might not be
as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; a generation
that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with
God.”  
(<span id="ii.xxi-p56.2"></span>[Ps.
78:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p56.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxi-p57"></span>And elsewhere both the name of Meribah and
that of Massah are employed, in order that the Israelites might learn
not to imitate their fathers, (<span id="ii.xxi-p57.1"></span>[Ps
95:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p57.1"></span>;
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) )although Moses here uses the
plural number, whereas he has the singular in <span
id="ii.xxi-p58.3"></span>[Exodus
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxi-p58.3"></span>.

<span id="ii.xxi-p59"></span>The expression at the end of the verse,
that God “was sanctified” among the children of Israel, is not used in
approval, but rather in reproof, of their conduct. Israel is called
elsewhere God’s “holiness,”  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111)
(<span id="ii.xxi-p60.2"></span>[Ps
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxi-p60.2"></span>,)
because God magnificently displayed tits glory in their deliverance; but
He is here said to have sanctified Himself in a different sense,
because, by the overthrow of their iniquity and frowardness, He rescued
his holy name from contempt. In fine, it was a proof of his inestimable
mercy, that the water, which might have justly been destructive to them,
was not only given to be the sustenance of their bodies, but also was
converted into an aid for their salvation; for which reason Paul says
that this was “spiritual drink.” (<span id="ii.xxi-p60.3"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxi-p60.3"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc06022.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ii.xxi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p32"></span> “Ainsi elle a passe six vingts ans;” thus
she was more than six-score years of age. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc06022.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.xxi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p35"></span> These expressions occur, <span
id="ii.xxi-p35.1"></span>[Ps
105:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#043)<span id="ii.xxi-p35.1"></span>.
It is in <span id="ii.xxi-p35.2"></span>[Ps
106](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxi-p35.2"></span>
that the Psalmist proceeds to narrate the history of their rebellions
and punishments.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc06022.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.xxi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p48"></span> *A. V.,* “He spoke unadvisedly.”

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc06022.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.xxi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p55"></span> *Lat.,* “These are the waters of strife.”
See margin *A.V.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc06022.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.xxi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p58"></span> In *C.’s* translation of this verse he
retains the proper names Meribah and Massah, which in *A.V.* are
rendered, “in the *provocation,* and in the day of *temptation.”* See
*C. Soc. Edit.,* vol. 4, p. 40; and Mr. Anderson’s note.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc06022.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.xxi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p60"></span> *A.V.*, “Judah was his sanctuary.” *V.*
“Facta est Judaea sanctificatio ejus.” See *C. Soc. Edit.* of Psalms,
vol. 4, pp. 336, 337.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 1:37,38](cc06023)
