[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06019)  [Next](cc06021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span><span id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
16:1-50](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span>**1.** Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son
of Kohath, the son of Levi: and Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab; and
On the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, tool: men:

<span id="ii.xix-p4"></span>**1.** Tulit autem Corah filius Ishar, filii
Cehath, filii Levi, et Dathan et Abiram filii Eliab, et On filius Peleth
filii Reuben.

<span id="ii.xix-p5"></span>**2.** And they rose up before Moses, with
certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the
assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown:

<span id="ii.xix-p6"></span>**2.** Et surrexerunt coram Mose, et viri e
filiis Israel ducenti quinquaginta, principes congregationis, vocati ad
tempus statutum, viri nominis.

<span id="ii.xix-p7"></span>**3.** And they gathered themselves together
against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much
upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and
the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the
congregation of the Lord?

<span id="ii.xix-p8"></span>**3.** Congregatique sunt adversum Mosen et
Aharon, ac dixerunt eis, Sat sit vobis: nam tota congregatio, universi
ipsi sancti sunt, et in medio, eorum est Jehova: quare ergo effertis vos
supra congregationem Jehovae?

<span id="ii.xix-p9"></span>**4.** And when Moses heard it, he fell upon
his bee:

<span id="ii.xix-p10"></span>**4.** Quod quum audisset Moses, projecit
se in faciem suam.

<span id="ii.xix-p11"></span>**5.** And he spoke unto Korah, and unto
all his company, saying, Even tomorrow the Lord will show who are his,
and who is holy; and will cause him to come near unto him: even him whom
he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto him.

<span id="ii.xix-p12"></span>**5.** Et loquutus est ad Corah et ad omnem
congregationem ejus, dicendo: Mane ostendet Jehova qui sint ejus, et
quis sanctus, et ut accedat ad se: et quem elegerit, accedere faciet ad
se.

<span id="ii.xix-p13"></span>**6.** This do; Take you censers, Korah,
and all his company;

<span id="ii.xix-p14"></span>**6.** Hoc facite, capite vobis acerras,
Corah et tota congregatio ejus,

<span id="ii.xix-p15"></span>**7.** And put fire therein, and put
incense in them before the Lord tomorrow: and it shall be, that the man
whom the Lord doth choose, he shall be holy: ye take too much upon you,
ye sons of Levi.

<span id="ii.xix-p16"></span>**7.** Et ponite in illis ignem, imponite
quoque in eis incensum coram Jehova cras, et erit, vir quem elegerit
Jehova, erit ille sanctus: satis sit vobis filii Levi.

<span id="ii.xix-p17"></span>**8.** And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I
pray you, ye sons of Levi;

<span id="ii.xix-p18"></span>**8.** Et dixit Moses ad Corah: Audite,
quaeso, filii Levi.

<span id="ii.xix-p19"></span>**9.** Seemeth it but a small thing unto
you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of
Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the service of the
tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister
unto them?

<span id="ii.xix-p20"></span>**9.** An parurn hoe vobis est quod
separaverit Deus Israelis vos de congregatione Israel, ut accedere
faceret vos sibi ut ministretis in ministerio tabernaculi Jehovae, et ut
staretis coram congregatione, ut ministraretis ei.

<span id="ii.xix-p21"></span>**10.** And he hath brought thee near to
him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the
priesthood also

<span id="ii.xix-p22"></span>**10.** Et accedere fecit te, et omnes
fratres tuos, filios Levi tecum: nisi quaeratis etiam sacerdotium?

<span id="ii.xix-p23"></span>**11.** For which cause, both thou and all
thy company are gathered together against the Lord: and what is Aaron,
that ye murmur against him?

<span id="ii.xix-p24"></span>**11.** Idcirco tu et universa congregatio
tua estis qui conveniunt contra Jehovam: at vero Aharon quid est, quod
murmurastis adversus eum?

<span id="ii.xix-p25"></span>**12.** And Moses sent to call Dathan and
Abiram, the sons of Eliab; which said, We will not come up:

<span id="ii.xix-p26"></span>**12.** Misit etiam Moses ad vocandum
Dathan et Abiram filios Eliab: qui responderunt, Non ascendemus.

<span id="ii.xix-p27"></span>**13.** Is it a small thing that thou hast
brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us
in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?

<span id="ii.xix-p28"></span>**13.** An parum es quod ascendere feceris
nos e terra quae fluit lacte et melle, ut mori nos faceres in deserto,
nisi etiam dominando domineris nobis?

<span id="ii.xix-p29"></span>**14.** Moreover, thou hast not brought us
into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of
fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will
not come up.

<span id="ii.xix-p30"></span>**14.** Atqui certe ad terram quae fluit
lacte et melle non introduxistis nos, neque dedisti nobis haereditatem
agrorum et vinearum: an oculos virorum istorum effodies? Non ascendemus.

<span id="ii.xix-p31"></span>**15.** And Moses was very wroth, and said
unto the Lord, Respect not thou their offering: I have not taken one ass
from them, neither have I hurt one of them.

<span id="ii.xix-p32"></span>**15.** Iratus est ergo Moses valde, et
dixit ad Jehovam, Ne respicias ad oblationem eorum: ne asellum quidem
unum ab eis accepi, neque afflixi quenquam ex ipsis.

<span id="ii.xix-p33"></span>**16.** And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou
and all thy company before the Lord, thou, and they, and Aaron,
tomorrow:

<span id="ii.xix-p34"></span>**16.** Postea dixit Moses ad Corah, Tu et
universa congregatio tua estote coram Jehova, tu et illi et Aharon cras.

<span id="ii.xix-p35"></span>**17.** And take every man his censer, and
put incense in them, and bring ye before the Lord every man his censer,
two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and Aaron, each of you his
censer.

<span id="ii.xix-p36"></span>**17.** Et capite quisque acerram suam, et
ponite in illis suffitum, et admovete coram Jehova quisque acerram suam,
ducentas quinquaginta acerras, tu quoque et Aharon, quisque acerram
suam.

<span id="ii.xix-p37"></span>**18.** And they took every man his censer,
and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron.

<span id="ii.xix-p38"></span>**18.** Tulerunt igitur quisque acerram
suam, et posuerunt in ipsis ignem, posueruntque suffitum, et steterunt
ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, et Moses et Aharon.

<span id="ii.xix-p39"></span>**19.** And Korah gathered all the
congregation against them unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the
congregation.

<span id="ii.xix-p40"></span>**19.** Congregaverat autem contra ipsos
Corah, universam congregationem ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis: et
visa est gloria Jehovae a tota multitudine.

<span id="ii.xix-p41"></span>**20.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses and
unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="ii.xix-p42"></span>**20.** Tunc loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen
et Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xix-p43"></span>**21.** Separate yourselves from among this
congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.

<span id="ii.xix-p44"></span>**21.** Separate vos e medio turbae, ejus,
et consumam eos momento.

<span id="ii.xix-p45"></span>**22.** And they fell upon their faces, and
said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and
wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?

<span id="ii.xix-p46"></span>**22.** Tunc ceciderunt super facies suas,
ac dixerunt, Deus (vel, fortis) Deus spirituum in universa carne, num
quum vir unus peccaverit, contra totum coetum excandesces?

<span id="ii.xix-p47"></span>**23.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xix-p48"></span>**23.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xix-p49"></span>**24.** Speak unto the congregation,
saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram.

<span id="ii.xix-p50"></span>**24.** Alloquere congregationem, dicendo,
Discedite e circuitu tabernaculi Corae, Dathan, et Abiram.

<span id="ii.xix-p51"></span>**25.** And Moses rose up, and went unto
Dathan and Abiram: and the elders of Israel followed him.

<span id="ii.xix-p52"></span>**25.** Surrexit ergo Moses, et venit ad
Dathan et Abiram: et sequuti sunt eum seniores Israel.

<span id="ii.xix-p53"></span>**26.** And he spoke unto the congregation,
saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and
touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.

<span id="ii.xix-p54"></span>**26.** Tune loquutus est ad
congregationera, dicens, Recedite nunc a tabernaculis virorum istorum
impiorum, neque attingatis quicquam eorum quae ad illos pertinent, ne
forte pereatis in omnibus peccatis illorum.

<span id="ii.xix-p55"></span>**27.** So they gat up from the tabernacle
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came
out, and stood in the door of their tents, and their wives, and their
sons, and their little children.

<span id="ii.xix-p56"></span>**27.** Et recesserunt a tabernaculo Corae,
Dathan et Abiram, e circuitu. Dathan vero et Abiram egressi sunt, ac
steterunt ad ostium tabernaculorum suorum, et uxores eorum, et filii
eorum, et parvuli eorum.

<span id="ii.xix-p57"></span>**28.** And Moses said, Hereby ye shall
know that the Lord hath sent me to do all these works; (for I have not
done them of mine own mind:)

<span id="ii.xix-p58"></span>**28.** Tunc dixit Moses, In hoc scietis
quod Jehova miserit me, ut facerem omnia opera haec, et quod non de
corde meo:

<span id="ii.xix-p59"></span>**29.** If these men die the common death
of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then
the Lord hath not sent me:

<span id="ii.xix-p60"></span>**29.** Si ut moriuntur omnes homines,
morientur isti, et visitatione omnium hominum visitabitur super eos, non
misit me Jehova:

<span id="ii.xix-p61"></span>**30.** But if the Lord make a new thing,
and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that
appertain unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shall
understand that these men have provoked the Lord.

<span id="ii.xix-p62"></span>**30.** Sin autem creationem creaverit
Jehova, et aperuit terra os suum, et deglutiverit eos, atque omnia quae
ad illos pertinent, et descenderint viventes in infernum: tum
cognoscetis quod irritaverunt viri isti Jehovam.

<span id="ii.xix-p63"></span>**31.** And it came to pass, as he had made
an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that
was under them:

<span id="ii.xix-p64"></span>**31.** Fuit igitur quum consummasset loqui
omnia verba ista, rupit sese terra quae erat sub illis:

<span id="ii.xix-p65"></span>**32.** And the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained
unto Korah, and all their goods.

<span id="ii.xix-p66"></span>**32.** Aperuitque terra os suum, et
deglutivit eos, et domos eorum, atque omnes homines qui erant ipsi
Corah, et omnem substantiam:

<span id="ii.xix-p67"></span>**33.** They, and all that appertained to
them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and
they perished from among the congregation.

<span id="ii.xix-p68"></span>**33.** Descenderuntque ipsi et quotquot ad
eos pertinebant viventes, in infernum: ac operuit eos terra, et
perierunt e medio congregationis.

<span id="ii.xix-p69"></span>**34.** And all Israel that were round
about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the earth
swallow us up also.

<span id="ii.xix-p70"></span>**34.** Omnis autem Israel qui erant in
circuitu eorum, fugerunt ad clamorem eorum: dicebant enim, Ne forte
deglutiat nos terra.

<span id="ii.xix-p71"></span>**35.** And there came out a fire from the
Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

<span id="ii.xix-p72"></span>**35.** Porro ignis egressus est a Jehova,
et consumpsit ducentos illos, et quinquaginta viros offerentes suffitum.

<span id="ii.xix-p73"></span>**36.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xix-p74"></span>**36.** Tunc loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xix-p75"></span>**37.** Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron
the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scatter
thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

<span id="ii.xix-p76"></span>**37.** Dic ad Eleazar filium Aharon
sacerdotis, ut tollat acerras e medio incendii, et ignem dispergat
longius, quid sanctificatae sunt.

<span id="ii.xix-p77"></span>**38.** The censers of these sinners
against their own souls, let them make them broad plates for a covering
of the altar; for they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are
hallowed: and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.

<span id="ii.xix-p78"></span>**38.** Quod ad acerras istorum qui
scelerati fuerunt in animas suas, ut faciant ex illis extensiones
laminarum, opertorium altaris: quia obtulerunt in ipsis coram Jehova, et
sanctificatae sunt: et erunt in signum filiis Israel.

<span id="ii.xix-p79"></span>**39.** And Eleazar the priest took the
brazen censers, wherewith they that were burnt had offered, and they
were made broad plates for a covering of the altar;

<span id="ii.xix-p80"></span>**39.** Tulit itaque Eleazar sacerdos
acerras aereas quibus obtulerant combusti, et extenderunt eas
operimentum altaris.

<span id="ii.xix-p81"></span>**40.** To be a memorial unto the children
of Israel that no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near
to offer incense before the Lord, that he be not as Korah, and as his
company; as the Lord said to him by the hand of Moses.

<span id="ii.xix-p82"></span>**40.** Memoriale filiis Israel, ut non
accedat quisquam alienus qui non sit e semine Aharon, ut offerat
suffitum coram Jehova, ne sit sicut Corah et coetus ejus: quemadmodum ei
praeceperat Jehova per manum Mosis.

<span id="ii.xix-p83"></span>**41.** But on the morrow all the
congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and
against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord.

<span id="ii.xix-p84"></span>**41.** Et murmuraverunt universus coetus
filiorum Israel postridie contra Mosen et Aharon, dicendo, Vos
interfecistis populum Jehovae.

<span id="ii.xix-p85"></span>**42.** And it came to pass, when the
congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they
looked toward the tabernacle of the congregation; and. behold, the cloud
covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared.

<span id="ii.xix-p86"></span>**42.** Fuit autem quum se congregaret
universus coetus contra Mosen et Aharon, verterunt faciem ad
tabernaculum conventionis, et ecce operuit illud nubes et conspecta est
gloria Jehovae.

<span id="ii.xix-p87"></span>**43.** And Moses and Aaron came before the
tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="ii.xix-p88"></span>**43.** Venit ergo Moses et Aharon coram
tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="ii.xix-p89"></span>**44.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.xix-p90"></span>**44.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.xix-p91"></span>**45.** Get you up from among this
congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And they fell upon
their hoes.

<span id="ii.xix-p92"></span>**45.** Recedite e medio congregationis
hujus, et consumam eos momento. Tunc projecerunt se super faciem suam.

<span id="ii.xix-p93"></span>**46.** And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a
censer, and put fire therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and
go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them: for
there is wroth gone out from the Lord; the plague is begun.

<span id="ii.xix-p94"></span>**46.** Dixitque Moses ad Aharon, Cape
acerram, et pone in ea ignem ex altari, et injice suffitum et perge cito
ad congregationem, et expia eos: egressus est enim furor a facie
Jehovae, coepitque percussio.

<span id="ii.xix-p95"></span>**47.** And Aaron took as Moses commanded,
and ran into the midst of the congregation; and, behold, the plague was
begun among the people: and he put on incense, and made an atonement for
the people.

<span id="ii.xix-p96"></span>**47.** Tulit ergo Aharon quenmadmodum
dixerat Moses, et cucurrit in medium congregationis: et ecce incoeperat
percussio in populo, posuitque suffitum et expiavit populum.

<span id="ii.xix-p97"></span>**48.** And he stood between the dead and
the living; and the plague was stayed.

<span id="ii.xix-p98"></span>**48.** Et quum staret inter mortuos et
viventes, cessavit percussio.

<span id="ii.xix-p99"></span>**49.** Now they that died in the plague
were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides them that died about
the matter of Korah.

<span id="ii.xix-p100"></span>**49.** Fuernnt autem qui mortui sunt
plaga illa, quatuordecim millia et septingenti, praeter mortuos super
negotio Corah.

<span id="ii.xix-p101"></span>**50.** And Aaron returned unto Moses unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the plague was
stayed.

<span id="ii.xix-p102"></span>**50.** Postea reversus est Aharon ad
Mosen ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, quum percussio esset cohibita.

<span id="ii.xix-p103"></span> 

<span id="ii.xix-p104"></span><span id="ii.xix-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p105"></span>**1.** *Now Korah, the son of Izhar.* The
impious conspiracy is here related of a few men, but these of the
highest rank, whose object was to subvert and destroy the
divinely-appointed priesthood. They make their attack, indeed, upon
Moses, and accuse him of ruling unjustly; for thus it is that turbulent
persons are carried away without reason or discrimination; but, the only
cause why they are set against him is because they suppose him to be the
originator of the priesthood, as we easily collect from his reply. For
he does not command them to stand forth, in order that they may decide
respecting the political government or chieftainship, but that it may be
made plain whether God acknowledges them as priests; nor does he
reproach the Levites with anything but that, not content with their own
lot, they have an unreasonable ambition to obtain the honor of the
high-priesthood. It was jealousy, then, that instigated Korah and his
companions to set on foot first a quarrel, and then a tumult; respecting
the priesthood, because they were indignant that the hope of attaining
that honor was taken away from themselves and their posterity for ever.
Thus there never was any more deadly or abominable plague in the Church
of God, than ambition; inasmuch as it cannot be that those who seek for
pre-eminence should range themselves beneath God’s yoke. Hence arises
the dissolution of legitimate authority, when each one neglects the
duties of his position, and aims at his own private advancement.

<span id="ii.xix-p106"></span>Now, this conspiracy was the more
formidable, because the sedition did not arise from the dregs of the
people, but amongst the princes themselves, who were of high dignity,
and held in the greatest estimation. For although there were only four
leaders of the faction, there is but little room to doubt but that the
purpose of the two hundred and fifty was the same; for they would never
have eagerly embarked in a grave and invidious contest for the sake of
four men; but the fact was, that all unholy covetousness misled them
all, for there was none of them who did not expect some prize as a
reward of victory. They not only, then, dissemble their mental disease,
but conceal it under an honorable pretext; for they pretend that they
are instigated by zeal for the public good, and that their object is the
defense of liberty. For, inasmuch as ambition is crafty, it is never
destitute of some specious excuse: thus, whilst schismatics are
influenced by nothing but pride to disturb the peace of the Church, they
always invent plausible motives, whereby they may conciliate in some
degree the favor of the ignorant, or even of the unstable and worthless.
We must, therefore, cautiously weigh the designs of those who seek to
make innovations, and to overthrow a state of things which might be
endured; for thorough investigation will make it plain that; they aim at
something besides what they pretend. By the, fact of their so speedily
engaging such a multitude of persons in their party, we perceive how
disposed man’s nature is to the most unpromising and unreasonable
revolts in the world. Four worthless men wickedly endeavor to overthrow
Moses and Aaron; and straightway two hundred and fifty persons are ready
to follow them, not of the populace, but chiefs of the tribes, whose
reputation might dazzle the eyes of the simple. Hence we must be the
more cautious, lest any bugbears *(larvae)* should deceive us into
making rash innovations.

<span id="ii.xix-p107"></span>With respect to the wording of the
passage, some refer the verb “he took,”  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) to the other conspirators, as if it were
said that Korah stirred them up. Others explain it that he instigated
himself, and hurried himself onwards by his evil passions. I do not,
however, assent to either signification, but take it for “he set to
work” *(aggressus est.)* When it is afterwards said that “they rose up
before Moses,” some understand the words according to their simple
meaning, others in a bad sense; and undoubtedly here the expression
“before the face of,” is equivalent to *“against,”* and thus indicates
the wantonness of their aggression. There is more difficulty in the
words <span id="ii.xix-p108.3"></span>קראי מועד,  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) *kerei mogned.* All, however, almost with
one consent, translate them “great in the congregation;” but since the
word <span id="ii.xix-p109.1"></span>קריים, *keriira,* generally
signifies persons *called* or *invited,* and <span
id="ii.xix-p109.2"></span>מועד, *mogned,* not only an assembly, but also
an appointed time, or convention, it seems probable to me that these
princes and men of high name are stated to have been present, because
they were called according to appointment: as if Moses had said that
they were called at a fixed time, or by agreement. For neither do I see
any reason why, after the word <span id="ii.xix-p109.3"></span>עדה,
 <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) *gnedah,* <span
id="ii.xix-p110.2"></span>מועד*, mogned,* should be used with the same
meaning.

<span id="ii.xix-p111"></span><span id="ii.xix-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p112"></span>**3.** *Ye take too much upon you.*  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) Some explain, “Let it suffice,” as if
they desired to put an end to the tyranny of Moses; but I am rather of
opinion that they would thus make a charge of presumptuous and
sacrilegious supremacy, as if Moses and Aaron had not only usurped more
than their right, but had also robbed God of His supreme authority.
They, therefore, reproach the holy men with having impiously subjected
to themselves the inheritance of God. Thus we see that God’s faithful
servants, whatever may be their moderation, are still not exempted from
false accusations. Moses was an extraordinary example, not only of
integrity, but also of humility and gentleness; yet he is called proud
and violent, as if he unworthily oppressed the people of God. Observe
further, that God permits His servants to be loaded with such unjust
calumnies, in order to teach them that they must expect their reward
elsewhere than from the world; and that the may humble them and make
trial of their endurance. Let us learn, then, to harden ourselves, so as
to be prepared, though we do well, to be evil spoken of. These ungodly
and seditious men betray their senselessness as well as their impudence.
For by what right do they seek to degrade Moses and Aaron? Because,
forsooth, God dwells amongst the people, and all in the congregation are
holy! But holiness is neither destructive of subordination, nor does it
introduce confusion, nor release believers from the obligation to obey
the laws. It is madness in them, then, to infer that those, whom God has
sane-titled, are not subject to the yoke; yet they maliciously
stigmatize as tyranny that care of the people which God has intrusted to
His servants, as if they would purposely turn light into darkness.

<span id="ii.xix-p114"></span><span id="ii.xix-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p115"></span>**4.** *And when Moses heard it, he fell
upon his face.* There is no doubt but that he had recourse to prayer in
his perplexity, since he knew that the remedy for so great an evil was
only in the hand of God. It is in this respect that the magnanimity of
the ungodly differs from the firmness of believers; for it often happens
that unbelievers also labor in the defense of a good cause, voluntarily
expose themselves to the hatred of many, undergo severe contests, and
encounter of their own accord great perils; but with them obstinacy
stands in the place of virtue. But those who look to God, since they
know that the prosperous or unhappy events of all things are in His
power, thus rely upon His providence; and when any adversity occurs,
implore His faithfulness and assistance. When, therefore, Moses cast
himself upon the earth, this  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md)
supplication was of more: value than all those heroic virtues in which
unbelievers have ever seemed to excel.

<span id="ii.xix-p117"></span><span id="ii.xix-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p118"></span>**5.** *And he spoke unto Korah.* Moses
did not inconsiderately choose this mode of divination, but by the
dictation of the Spirit maintained the priesthood of his brother by this
token and testimony; for we know how, in matters of doubt and obscurity,
he was accustomed to inquire what God’s pleasure was. He did not,
therefore, at this time make this proposal hastily and at random, but by
the inspiration of the Spirit had recourse to the sure judgment of God.
The effect of his prayer was that God suggested an easy and expeditious
mode of conquest.

<span id="ii.xix-p119"></span>He bids them take their censers, that by
their incense-offering it might be manifested whether their oblation was
acceptable to God. By deferring it to the morrow he con-suited their own
safety, if any of them might still be not incurable; for he saw that
they were carried away headlong by blind fury, and that they could not
be recalled to their senses in a moment. He, therefore, grants them some
space of time for repentance, that they might be led to consideration
during the night; or perhaps his object was that, the tumult being
appeased, he might render them all attentive to the decision of God.

<span id="ii.xix-p120"></span><span id="ii.xix-p120.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p121"></span>**8.** *Hear, I pray you, ye sons of
Levi.* He addresses the whole body, and yet it is said that his
discourse was directed to Korah alone, and this was because he had
corrupted others of the Levites, and therefore is first summoned to
God’s tribunal, so that the whole party might be at the same time
included. He was able to expostulate with the Levites at once, because
their residence was close to the sanctuary.

<span id="ii.xix-p122"></span>He accuses them of ingratitude, because
they were not satisfied with the honor with which God had already
dignified them, but also sought the high-priesthood. In this they
betrayed their despisal of His grace; for, if they had rightly valued
the gifts of God, each of them would have quietly contented himself with
his lot; especially since, in proportion as a person has been liberally
dealt with, his ingratitude is more intolerable, if he aspires to
anything higher. We are taught, therefore, that the higher the degree
may be to which we have been elevated by God’s goodness, the greater is
the punishment which our crime deserves, if our ambition still incites
us to overleap the bounds of our calling. Nevertheless, such is the
perversity of almost all men, that as soon as a person has attained some
intermediate position, he uplifts, as it were, the standard of pride
 <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) and prescribes to himself no
limit, until he shall have reached above the clouds. In a word, few are
found who do not grow insolent in places of honor. Wherefore we ought to
be all the more attentive to this admonition of Moses, that those are
most ungrateful to God who despise their lot, which is already
honorable, and aim at something higher.

<span id="ii.xix-p124"></span><span id="ii.xix-p124.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p125"></span>**11.** *For which cause both thou, and
all thy company.* He here lays open their sin, which they had endeavored
to disguise. For they had neither scruple nor shame, as we have seen, in
pretending pious zeal. But in one word Moses scatters these mists,
telling them that they were instigated by nothing but pride and envy to
disturb the condition of the people. We must observe the expression
which he uses, that they are in “arms against God;” for, although they
might have never confessed to themselves that they had to do with Him,
but only that they were contending for the pre-eminence with men; still,
because it was their aim to overthrow the order established by God,
Moses casts aside all false pretences, and sets before them the simple
fact that they are waging war with God, when they are fighting with His
servants. If, therefore, we are afraid of contending with Him, let us
learn to remain in our right place. For, however they may prevaricate,
who disturb the Church through their ambition, in fighting against the
servants of God, they attack Himself: and therefore it is needful that
He should resist them, to avenge Himself. For war is not waged against
God, as the poets feign the giants to have done, when they heaped up
mountains, and endeavored to surmount heaven; but when He is assailed in
the person of His servants, and when what He has decreed is in any wise
undermined. The vocation of the priests was sacred, so that they who
conspired to overthrow it, were the open enemies of God, as much as if
they had directed their arms, their strength, and their assaults against
Him. We must, therefore, bear in mind the reason which is subjoined,
“And what is Aaron?” for, if Aaron had usurped anything for himself, his
temerity and audacity would not have been supported by the countenance
of God. Moses, therefore, declares that this is God’s cause, because
there was nothing human in the ordinance of the priesthood. It was,
indeed, an honorable office, so that Aaron justly deserved to be thought
something of; but Moses indicates that he had nothing of his own, nor
arrogated anything to himself; in a word, that he is nothing in himself,
and moreover, that he is not elevated for his own private advantage, and
that his dignity is no idle one; but rather a laborious burden placed
upon his shoulders for the common welfare of the Church. How utterly
ridiculous, then, is the folly of the Pope in comparing all the enemies
of his tyranny to Koran, Dathan, and Abiram; for, in order to prove that
his cause is connected with that of God, let him show us the credentials
of his calling, and at the same time thoroughly fulfil his office. But
what frivolous and vapid trifling it is, when some mimic Aaron sets
himself up — produces no divine command or vocation — domineers in
obedience to his own lusts, and is rather an actor on the stage than a
priest in the temple; that all who reject this spurious dominion should
be condemned as schismatics! Wherefore let us hold fast this principle,
that war is waged against God when His servants are molested, who are
both lawfully called and faithfully exercise their office.

<span id="ii.xix-p126"></span><span id="ii.xix-p126.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p127"></span>**12.** *And Moses sent to call Dathan and
Abiram.* He desired, in this way, if it might be, by his holy
admonitions, to withhold them from that destruction, on which they were
rushing. Therefore he ceased not to provide for their welfare, though he
had thus far experienced that they were altogether in a desperate state.
Herein he presented a likeness of the loving-kindness of God, by whose
Spirit he was directed; not only because he was unwilling to pass
sentence without hearing the cause, but also because he endeavored to
bring them to repentance, that they might not willfully destroy
themselves. Nevertheless it came to pass at this time, as also often
afterwards, that not only was the earnestness of the Prophet, with
respect to these unbelievers, throw away, but that it hardened them more
and more. For we know what was said by Isaiah;

<span id="ii.xix-p128"></span>“Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with hearts, and convert,
and be healed.” (<span id="ii.xix-p128.1"></span>[Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p128.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xix-p129"></span>Thus does it please God to discover the
*wickedness* of the reprobate, in order that they may be rendered the
more inexcusable.

<span id="ii.xix-p130"></span><span id="ii.xix-p130.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p131"></span>**13.** *Is it a small thing that thou
hast brought us.* It is not enough for these wicked men, when they are
invited to discussion, contumaciously to repudiate the superiority of
Moses, unless they also assail him with counter-accusations. The crime
they allege against him must be observed. They reproach him for having
led them up out of the land of Egypt: though they cunningly suppress its
name, whilst they magniloquently extol its fruitfulness, in order to
throw into the shade all that God had promised with respect to the land
of Canaan. Nay, they seem to transfer slyly to Egypt the very phrase
which Moses had often used, so that thus God’s blessing may be, as it
were buried. But what gross ingratitude it showed, to allege as a crime
against Moses, God’s minister, that deliverance, which was so
extraordinary an act of His kindness! In the next place, they reproach
him with having brought them into the desert, to die: and this they
enlarge upon in the next verse, and maliciously inquire, Where is the
truth of the promises? At length they conclude that Moses is impudent in
his deceptions, inasmuch as it plainly appears that the people had been
imposed upon by him: as if it were his fault that they had deprived
themselves of the possession of the promised land. Moses had exhorted
them, by God’s command, to enter upon the inheritance promised to them:
what dishonesty and petulance, therefore, was it, when they had shut the
door against themselves, to complain of Moses, upon whom it had not
depended that they were not in the enjoyment of fields and vineyards! In
the third place, they taunt Moses with seeking to domineer over a free
people. He did indeed preside over them; but how far short of dominion
was that moderate control, which was as onerous to Moses, as it was
advantageous to the whole people! But this is the condition of God’s
servants, that their course is through reproaches,  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) though they are conducting themselves
aright.

<span id="ii.xix-p133"></span><span id="ii.xix-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p134"></span>**15.** *And Moses was very wroth.*
Although it might be, that there was something of human passion here,
still zeal for God was supreme in his mind, nor did intemperate
feelings, if he was at all tempted by them, prevail. Assuredly, it
appears probable, from the context, that he was inflamed with holy
ardor; since he executes the vengeance of God, as His lawful minister,
so that it is plain he neither spoke nor did anything but at the
dictation of the Spirit. Nay, we shall soon see that, although he was
anxious with regard to the public safety, he required that but a few
offenders should be punished, and not that the multitude should perish.
Nor does his anger burst forth into revilings: as those, who are carried
away by excess, usually assail the enemies by whom they are injured,
with their tongue as well as their hands: but he betakes himself to God;
nor does he ask more than flint they may be brought to shame in their
pride. This is, indeed, expounded generally, by many, as if Moses
desired that God should have no mercy upon them; but inasmuch as the
decision of the quarrel depended on the approbation or rejection by God
of rite offering they were about to make, he does not seem to me to pray
for more than that God, by refusing their polluted gift, should thus
chastise their ambition. At the same time also he shows that his prayer
springs from the confidence of a good conscience, when he dares to
testify before God that he had injured no man. Now this was the extreme
of integrity and disinterestedness, that, when the people owed
everything to him, he had not taken even the value of a single ass as
the reward of all his labors.

<span id="ii.xix-p135"></span><span id="ii.xix-p135.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p136"></span>**16.** *And Moses said unto Korah.* The
idea of Moses is not to make an experiment as if in a doubtful matter;
but, being assured by the Spirit of prophecy what the event would be, he
summons Korah before the tribunal of God, that he may receive the
sentence of condemnation which he deserves. Nor does he inveigle him so
as to destroy him unawares, but rather still endeavors to cure his
madness, if it were possible to do so. For the sacred incense-offering
was calculated to inspire him with alarm, lest, by rashly attempting
more than was lawful, he should effect his own destruction, especially
after so memorable an example had been made in the case of Nadab and
Abihu. Moses, however, in reliance on God’s command, does not hesitate
to engage in an open contest, in order that the judgment of God might be
the more conspicuous.

<span id="ii.xix-p137"></span><span id="ii.xix-p137.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p138"></span>**18.** *And they took every man his
censer.* It is manifest how greatly they were blinded by pride, since,
although admonished both by the confidence of Moses and also by the
previous examples, they still obstinately go forward. Surely if any
spark of the fear of God had remained in them, their censers would
straightway have fallen from their hands; but Korah seems to have
sought, as it were, deliberately how he might cast aside all fear, and
totally bereave himself of his senses. For in the next verse, Moses
narrates how ostentatiously he hardened himself in his rebellion, before
he should offer the incense; for he gathered the people together to his
party, in order that the magnificence of his array might overwhelm the
grace of God, which opposed\[ him. Herein also his senselessness is
clearly seen, when he seeks to fortify himself against God by the favor
of the, mob, as if he had desired to extinguish the light of the sun by
interposing a little smoke. Now, let us learn so to condemn his folly,
as that nothing similar may happen in ourselves; for all ambitious
persons are affected by the same disease. They collect their forces by
endeavoring to ingratiate themselves with men; and, if the world
approves of’ them, they are inebriated with such fatal confidence, as to
spit at the very clouds. But we shall soon see how God, by a single
breath, dissipates all their ungodly conspiracies.

<span id="ii.xix-p139"></span>On the other side, the levity of the
people is set before our eyes. For some time they had been all
accustomed to the duly-appointed priesthood, which they knew to be
instituted by God; yet only a single night is required to make them
revolt to Korah. And, in fact, as we are by nature slow to act aright,
so also we are carried away to evil in a moment, as soon as some villain
lifts up his finger.

<span id="ii.xix-p140"></span><span id="ii.xix-p140.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p141"></span>**21.** *Separate yourselves from among
this congregation.* Again does God declare that He will bear the
people’s great impiety no longer, but will destroy them all to a man.
Just, therefore, as he had commanded Lot to depart from Sodom, nay, had
drawn him out by the hand of the angel, when He desired to destroy that
city, so He now commands Moses and Aaron to give Him room to exercise
His wrath. In this He declares His extraordinary favor towards them; as
if He were not free to execute vengeance, until they had gone out of the
way, lest the destruction should reach themselves. In speaking thus,
however, He does not absolutely affirm what He had determined in His
secret counsel, but only pronounces what the authors of this wickedness
had deserved. It is, therefore, just as if He were ascending His
judgment-seat. Thus Moses by his intercession by no means changed His
eternal decree; but, by appeasing Him, delivered the people from the
punishment they had merited. In the same sense God is said to be
influenced by our prayers; not that after the manner of men He assumes
new feelings, but, in order to show the more than paternal love with
which he honors us, He, as it were, indulges us, when He listens to our
desires. Hence we gather that even by this express denunciation Moses
was not prohibited from praying; because his faith in the adoption of
the people was not destroyed. For we have already said that this
principle, that the covenant which God had made with Abraham could not
be made void, was so thoroughly an-graven upon his mind, that it
surmounted whatever obstacles might present themselves. Resting,
therefore, on the gratuitous promise, which depended not on men, his
prayer was the offspring of faith. For the saints do not always reason
accurately and subtlety as to the form of their prayers; but, after they
have once embraced that which suffices to awaken in them confidence in
prayer, viz., God’s word, their whole attention is so directed to it,
that they pass over the things which seem apparently to contradict it.
Nor can we doubt but that it was God’s design, when He delivered his
terrible sentence as to the destruction of the people, to quicken the
earnestness of Moses in prayer, since necessity more and more inflames
the zeal of the pious. In short, Moses was always consistent in his care
for the well-being of the people.

<span id="ii.xix-p142"></span><span id="ii.xix-p142.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p143"></span>**22.** *O God, the God of the, spirits of
all flesh.* The old interpreter renders the first <span
id="ii.xix-p143.1"></span>אל*, el,* as an adjective, in which some
others have followed him;  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) but, in
my opinion, the name of God is rather repeated by way of adding force to
the sentence. It does not, however, so clearly appear to me why all
render the word *flesh,* in the genitive case. But, since I do not think
that the <span id="ii.xix-p144.4"></span>ל*, lamed,* is superfluous
here, but that it is used for <span id="ii.xix-p144.5"></span>ב*, beth,*
as often elsewhere, I have accurately expressed the sense by my
translation, *“in* all flesh.”  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md)
There is no question but that Moses applies this epithet to God in
connection with the present matter; as if he desired to induce God to
preserve His own work, just as a potter spares the vessels formed by
himself. To the same effect is the prayer of Isaiah:

<span id="ii.xix-p146"></span>“But now, O Lord, thou art our father; we
are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.
Be not wroth very sore,” (<span id="ii.xix-p146.1"></span>[Isa.
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#009)<span id="ii.xix-p146.1"></span>:.md)

<span id="ii.xix-p147"></span>for hence he alleges a reason why God
should relent, and be inclined to mercy. There is this difference, that
Isaiah refers to that special grace wherewith God had embraced His
people, whereas Moses carries his address further, viz., to the general
grace of creation. It is of little importance whether we choose to
expound this  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) with reference to all
animals, or only to the human race, since Moses merely prays that, since
God is the Creator and Maker of the world, He should not destroy the men
whom He has formed, but rather have pity upon them, as being His work.
In passing, however, we may infer from this passage,  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) that all (men.md) have their separate souls,
for God is not said to have inspired all flesh with life, but to have
created their spirits. Hence the monstrous delusion of the Manicheans is
refuted, that our souls are so infused by the transmission of the Spirit
of God, as that there should still be only one spirit.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) But if it be preferred to include the
animals, we must mark the grades of distinction between the spirit of
man and the spirit of a dog or an ass. It is, however, more fitting to
restrict it to men.

<span id="ii.xix-p155"></span><span id="ii.xix-p155.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p156"></span>**24.** *Speak unto the congregation,
saying.* It is evident, from this answer, that Moses was heard as
regarded the general preservation of the people, on condition, however,
that they should give proof of their repentance, by deserting the
authors of the wicked rebellion; for, when God commands them to retire
from amongst them, He indirectly implies, that, if they remain mixed up
with them, they shall share in the same destruction. Yet it is probable
that the elders who “followed” Moses, held to his side, and continued
firm in the performance of their duty. And, indeed, it is not at all
consistent that Caleb and Joshua, and such like, were ever drawn away
into so great a sin. We must not, therefore, take what is said of the
whole congregation without exception. When Moses, in his delivery of
God’s command, does not address Korah, Dathan, and Abiram by their
names, but calls them “these wicked men,” it is not the reviling of
anger, but an urgent mode of exhortation; for, had he not thus
vehemently marked his detestation of them, there was danger lest his
words should have been but coldly received by many, and lest they should
have been of little avail. To the same effect also is what he
immediately adds: “Lest ye be consumed in all their sins;” as if tie had
said, Lest the contagion of so many and such great crimes should infect
yourselves. Since they obeyed Moses, it is plain that many of the
multitude had been carried away before by folly and levity, for
deliberate iniquity would not have been so quickly or so easily
corrected. But on the other hand, the marvelous stolidity of Dathan and
Abiram is described, in that they came forth unawed, with their wives
and children. Still it is not to be doubted but that they were
terrified, after they saw themselves to be stripped of all aid and
favor; but although the withdrawal of the people disturbed them, they
nevertheless stood like maniacs; nor did fear subdue them or prevent
them from proceeding in their fatal audacity to their doom. Thus  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) do the wicked often stand astounded, yet
in their fear they by no means think of appeasing God.

<span id="ii.xix-p158"></span><span id="ii.xix-p158.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p159"></span>**28.** *And Moses said, Hereby ye shall
know.* Moses now begins more clearly to show wherefore he has brought
the rebels to this open contest, viz., that God may sanction before the
whole people, by a terrible exertion of His power, the system
established by Himself. For it was no ordinary effort of confidence to
concede the victory to His enemies, unless the earth should swallow them
up alive. But, inasmuch as this was to be a most conspicuous judgment of
God, he arouses their attention by the striking words he uses. If they
should be cut off by a sudden death, he would have justly boasted that
his cause was approved by God; but not content with this, he desires to
be accounted a mere impostor, if they should die the common death of
men. In order to express the strangeness of the miracle, whereby men’s
senses should be ravished, he employs the word *create*  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) emphatically; as much as to say, that the
mode of their death would be no less unusual than as if God should add
something to His creation, and change the face of the world. Thus David,
when he prays that his enemies should go down alive into hell
*(infernos)* or the grave, seems to allude to this history, (<span
id="ii.xix-p160.1"></span>[Ps
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.xix-p160.1"></span>;) for although that descent be understood to
mean sudden death overtaking the wicked in a moment in the midst of
their happiness and security, still, he at the same time indicates by it
this horrible retribution, which had occurred in times past, inasmuch as
memorable punishments pass into proverbial instances of God’s wrath.

<span id="ii.xix-p161"></span><span id="ii.xix-p161.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p162"></span>**34.** *And all Israel that were round
about them.* We must suppose that the people were standing around,
expecting at a distance the event that was to take place; for they had
previously retired from the tents, in token of their separation (from
this wicked company.)  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) That they
should now fly in confusion, lest the same destruction should overwhelm
themselves, is a sign of their bad conscience, which is always troubled
in itself, and agitates the wicked with sore inquietude. It is needful,
indeed, that even the pious should be alarmed by God’s judgments, in
order that their consternation or dread should instruct them  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) in his holy fear, and therefore they
never reflect without dread on the punishments which God has inflicted
upon the crimes of men. But, since hypocrites carry in their hearts a
hot iron, as it were, they fall down like dead men, as if the lightning
fell from God upon their own heads. Thus we shall presently see that
this blind fear profited them but little.

<span id="ii.xix-p165"></span><span id="ii.xix-p165.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p166"></span>**35.** *And there came out a fire from
the Lord.* The diver-sky of the punishments had the effect of awakening
more astonishment in the people, than as if all had been destroyed in
the same manner, although God’s anger raged more fiercely against the
original authors of the evil, so as to make it manifest that each
received a recompense according to the measure of his iniquity. He says
that a fire went forth from Jehovah, because it was not kindled
naturally, nor accidentally, but was accompanied by conspicuous marks,
which showed that it was sent by Him. Yet I do not reject the opinions
of others, viz., that God thundered from heaven, since thus His power
would have been more manifestly exerted.

<span id="ii.xix-p167"></span><span id="ii.xix-p167.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p168"></span>**37.** *Speak unto Eleazar the son of
Aaron.* Since there is no manifestation of God’s wrath so conspicuous as
not to be forgotten too often by man’s stupidity, God was willing to
anticipate this evil, and set up a monument for posterity, lest the
recollection of this memorable judgment should ever be obscured. He
commands, therefore, that a covering for the altar should be made of the
censers, in order that none should rashly intrude himself to make the
sacred offerings. When He calls them *“hallowed,”* some understand that
it was sinful to transfer them to profane purposes, because they had
once been devoted to the service of God. I am, however, rather of
opinion that they were set apart *(sacratas)* as things accursed
*(anathemata.)* Thus the fire which had been upon them is scattered
afar, in order that the altar should be cleansed from its pollution.
Although, however, there was the same pollution in the censers, yet God
would have them preserved as accursed, so that all posterity might
understand that none but the priests were to be admitted to the
sacrifices. Nor is it superfluous for Him to speak of the rebels as
having acted criminally “against their own souls;” but it was in order
that the memory of their punishment might be inn manner engraved upon
those brazen enclosures, in order to awaken continued dread.

<span id="ii.xix-p169"></span><span id="ii.xix-p169.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p170"></span>**40.** *To be a memorial unto the
children of Israel.* This passage again confirms what I have just said,
that God’s judgments, which ought to remain in full remembrance in every
age, straightway escape, and are blotted out front men’s minds, unless
they are provided with certain aids to meditate upon them. This,
however, does not happen so much from ignorance as neglect. Wherefore we
ought to be the more attentive to the aids to memory, which may retain
us in the path of duty.

<span id="ii.xix-p171"></span><span id="ii.xix-p171.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p172"></span>**41.** *But on the morrow all the
congregation.* There is something more than monstrous in this madness of
theirs. The conflagration was yet smoking, wherein God had appeared as
the awful avenger of pride: the chasm in which the leaders of the
rebellion had been swallowed up, must still have been almost before
their eyes. God had commanded the plates to be molten, which might
record that severe judgment through many succeeding ages. All had
confessed by their alarm and hasty flight that there was danger lest
they should themselves also be exposed to similar punishments. Yet, on
the next day, am if they desired deliberately to provoke God, who was
still, as it were, armed, they accuse God’s holy servants of having been
the authors of the destruction, though they had never lifted a finger
against their enemies. Was it in the power of Moses to command the earth
to open? Could he draw down the fire from heaven at his will? Since,
then, both the chasm and the fire were manifest tokens of God’s
wonderful power, why do not these madmen reflect that they are engaging
in fatal warfare against Him? For to what purpose was this extraordinary
mode of punishment, except that in their terror they might learn to
humble themselves beneath God’s hand? Yet hence did they only derive
greater wildness in their audacity, as if they desired to perish
voluntarily with these sinners, whose punishment they had just been
shuddering at. In two ways they betray their senselessness; first, by
substituting Moses and Aaron as guilty of the murder, in place of God;
and, secondly, by sanctifying these putrid corpses, as if in despite of
God. They accuse Moses and Aaron of the slaughter, of which God had
plainly shown Himself to be the author, as they themselves had been
compelled to feel. But such is the blindness of the reprobate with
respect to God’s works, that His glory rather stupifies them than
excites their admiration. The foulest ingratitude was also added; for
they do not consider that only a very few hours had elapsed since they
had been preserved by the intercession of Moses from impending
destruction. Thus, in their desire to avenge the death of a few, they
call those the killers of the people of the Lord, to whom they ought to
have been grateful for the safety of all. Again, what arrogance it is to
count among the people of God, as if against His will, those reprobates,
when He had not only cut them off from His Church, but had also
exterminated them from the world, and from the human race! But thus do
the wicked wax wanton against God under the very cover of His gifts, and
especially they do not hesitate to mock Him with empty titles and
outward signs, as the masks of their iniquity.

<span id="ii.xix-p173"></span><span id="ii.xix-p173.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p174"></span>**42.** *And it came to pass when the
congregation.* From the fact that Moses and Aaron were protected by the
covering of the cloud, we gather how uncontrollable was the rage of the
people. For, although the glory of God only stood over the tabernacle,
so that Moses and Aaron were still exposed to stoning, and any other
acts of violence, yet it so dazzled the eyes of these wicked men, that
they could not touch the holy persons. Nor can we doubt but that they
betook themselves to the sanctuary, because, in the extremity of their
danger, the only hope that remained to them was in the help of God.
When, therefore, they had fled to this sacred asylum, God received them
under the shadow of His wings. Thus did He testify, that the prayers and
hopes of His people are never in vain, but that He succors them whenever
they call upon Him. For although, now-a-days, He does not appear in a
visible abode, still He is nigh unto all those who cast their cares upon
Him. It might, indeed, have been the case that the sign of God’s glory
was seen by none but Moses and Aaron, in order that they might be fully
assured that God was near to help them; but, since the expression is
indefinite, it is probable that God threatened also the frantic
multitude, lest they should proceed to any further acts of violence,
although the light was presented in vain to them in their blindness.

<span id="ii.xix-p175"></span><span id="ii.xix-p175.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p176"></span>**45.** *Get you up from among this
congregation.* I have expounded the meaning of this expression a little
above, namely, that as God regards His people with constant and peculiar
love, so He defers His vengeance against the wicked, until these people
are set apart, and placed in safety. For tie declares that, as soon as
Moses and Aaron have secured themselves, all the rest shall perish in a
moment. But incredible was the kindness of both of them, thus humbly to
intercede for so ungrateful a people, who deserved to die a hundred
times over; for, forgetful of their own lives, which they saw to be
imperiled, they were ready to make atonement for the guilt, so as to
rescue from death those abandoned wretches who were plotting their
destruction. I do not, however, understand this, *“Get* you up,” merely
with reference to place, for they were already separated, having taken
refuge in the tabernacle; but it is just as if God had commanded them to
sever themselves from the people, and, quitting them altogether, and
casting away all care for the public welfare, to provide for their own
private safety.

<span id="ii.xix-p177"></span><span id="ii.xix-p177.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p178"></span>**46.** *And Moses said unto Aaron.* The
expiation of so great a sin did not indeed depend on the
incense-offering, nor are we to imagine that God is appeased by the
savor of frankincense; but thus was a symbol set before this
grosshearted people, whereby they might be alike aroused to repentance
and faith; for however insensible they might be in their rebellion, yet
the dignity of the priesthood was so conspicuous in the censer, that
they ought to have been awakened by it to reverence. For who would not
view his impiety with horror, when he is made conscious of having
despised and violated that sanctity wherein the Divine power displays
itself for life or death? The sight of the censer might have justly
availed to subdue their hardness of heart, so that at last they might
begin to condemn and detest their unrighteous act. The second warning
which it gave them was no less profitable, *i.e.,* that they might
perceive that God was only propitiated towards them by virtue of a
mediator; but., in so far as the actual state of things allowed, the
visible type directed them to the absent Savior. Since, however, men
corrupt and obscure the truth by their fond inventions, His majesty is
asserted by the Divine institution of sacrifice. Whilst Aaron, the
typical priest, stands forth, until the true, and only, and perpetual
Mediator shall be revealed.

<span id="ii.xix-p179"></span>The verb <span
id="ii.xix-p179.1"></span>כפר, *caphar,* properly signifies, as I have
said elsewhere, to reconcile God to men through the medium of an
expiation *(piaculum;)* but, since here it refers to the people, the
sense of Moses is rightly expressed by a single word, as one may say, to
purge, or lustrate from pollution.

<span id="ii.xix-p180"></span><span id="ii.xix-p180.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p181"></span>**48.** *And he stood between the living
and the dead.* If *you* understand that the living were everywhere
mingled with the dead, you may conjecture that God’s wrath did not so
fall upon one part of the camp, as to destroy all that came in its way
without exception, as had been the case in the other revolt, but that He
selected those who had sinned most grievously. But it is probable that
Aaron proceeded so far as to leave behind those who still remained
uninjured, and, in the very place where the destruction had occurred,
encountered the wrath of God, and arrested its course. Hence it was that
both the fervor of his zeal might be the better perceived, and his
office of appeasing God was more fully confirmed by its actual success.
For what more evident miracle could be required, than when the
slaughter, which had both begun to rage suddenly, and then to proceed in
a course no less rapid than continuous, was stopped by the arrival of
Aaron, exactly as if a hedge had been set up against it? The efficacy of
the priesthood in propitiating God, is therefore both clearly and
briefly set before us; and hence we are taught, that though we are so
dose to the reprobate when they perish, as that their destruction should
reach to ourselves, still that we shall be safe from all evil, if only
Christ intercede for us.

<span id="ii.xix-p182"></span><span id="ii.xix-p182.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p183"></span>**49.** *Now they that died in the
plague.* Already three hundred, or thereabouts, had been destroyed on
account of the conspiracy made with Korah; now a much larger number was
added. And this, forsooth, is what the wicked reap from their obstinacy,
that God being more and more provoked redoubles His punishments; even as
He threatens that, unless those whom He chastises shall repent, he will
deal “seven times more” severely with them. (<span
id="ii.xix-p183.1"></span>[Le
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.xix-p183.1"></span>.) Wherefore let us learn, when we are warned
by His rebukes, to humble ourselves betimes beneath His mighty hand,
since nothing is worse than to kick against the pricks; and let us
always bear in mind what the psalm says,

<span id="ii.xix-p184"></span>“Be ye not as the horse or as the mute,
whose mouth must be held with bit and bridle; (because) many sorrows
shall be to the wicked.” (<span id="ii.xix-p184.1"></span>[Ps.
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010)<span id="ii.xix-p184.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xix-p185"></span>They rebelliously exclaimed that the
people of the Lord were slain, when three hundred had perished; they now
experience how much better it would have been to be dumb before God, and
to give glory to His holy severity, than, instead of three hundred, to
devote to destruction nearly fifty times as many. Let us, then, remember
the admonition of Paul:

<span id="ii.xix-p186"></span>“Let us beware lest we murmur, lest
perchance the destroyer should destroy us,”  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) (<span id="ii.xix-p187.1"></span>[1Co
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.xix-p187.1"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xix-p188"></span>for nothing is less tolerable in us than
that we should frowardly presume to speak evil of God, when Scripture so
often exhorts us to be silent in His presence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc06020.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p107.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p108"></span> *A.V*., “took *men*.” There has been very
much discussion among the commentators respecting this word. Holden
says, “There is nothing in the Hebrew answering to the word *men,* and
the verb is in the singular number; the received version, therefore, can
scarcely be correct. The most easy and natural construction of the
original is, ‘And Korah took (i.e., won over, or drew into a conspiracy
with him) both Dathan and Abiram,’ etc. This agrees with other parts of
Scripture which attribute this rebellion to Korah, <span
id="ii.xix-p108.1"></span>[Nu
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.xix-p108.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xix-p108.2"></span>[Jude
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.xix-p108.2"></span>.”
And this appears to be the general opinion.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc06020.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p108.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p109"></span> *A.V.*, “famous in the congregation.”
*S.M.* Vocabantur ad concilium. — *W.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc06020.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p109.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p110"></span> <span id="ii.xix-p110.1"></span>עדה,
*A.V.*, “of the assembly.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc06020.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p113"></span> “Sat sit vobis;” let it be enough for
you. — *Lat.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc06020.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p116"></span> “Telle humilite a prier;” such humility
in prayer. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc06020.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p123"></span> “Comme si Dieu en l’honorant luy avoit
dresse une banniere d’orgueil;” as if God by honoring him had raised for
him a banner of pride. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc06020.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p131.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p132"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “comme dit Sainct
Paul.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc06020.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p144"></span> In the clause under consideration, <span
id="ii.xix-p144.1"></span>אל, *El,* is immediately followed by <span
id="ii.xix-p144.2"></span>אלהי*, Elohey,* the form given to Elohim, when
it is to be used in connection with the next word. The different roots
of El and Elohim seem to indicate that El has an especial reference to
the power of the Deity, and Elohim to His authority as a judge. There
being no practicable equivalent distinction in Latin or English, and the
word *Almighty* being appropriated to rendering <span
id="ii.xix-p144.3"></span>שדי, *Shaddai, C.* and our *A.V.* do but
repeat the word God, whilst the *V.* and *S.M.* have *fortissime Deus;*
but *C.* saw in *S.M.’s* notes, *Aut sic, O Deus, Deus.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc06020.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p144.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p145"></span> *C.’s* supposition, that the preposition
<span id="ii.xix-p145.1"></span>ל prefixed to *all,* is equivalent to
<span id="ii.xix-p145.2"></span>ב or *in*, would not facilitate the
version. Noldius, giving instances where, the <span
id="ii.xix-p145.3"></span>ל prefixed has the effect of a genitive, cites
this passage amongst: others. — *W.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc06020.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p148"></span> “Le mot de chair;” the word *flesh* —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc06020.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p148.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p149"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “Moyennant qu’il soit
prins des hommes, comme e’est le plus vray-semblable;” supposing it be
taken as having reference to men, as is the more probable conjecture.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc06020.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p150"></span> “Lesquels pensent que les ames procedent
de la substance de Dieu;” who think that our souls proceed from the
substance of God. — *Fr*.

<span id="ii.xix-p151"></span>This doctrine of the Manicheans is often
referred to in the writings of Augustine. The Benedictine Editors, in
their index to his works, point out by citations the following
particulars: “Manichaeorum error circa animam. Docent animam nostram hoc
esse quod Deus est; esse partem, seu particulam Dei; animas non solum
hominum, sed etiam pecorum, de Dei esse substantia, et partes Dei
asserunt.”

<span id="ii.xix-p152"></span>The word which I have translated
*transmission,* is in the Latin *ex traduce,* a well-known metaphor in
theological controversy, derived from the practice of *inarching,* or
grafting by *approach,* when two neighboring branches are tied together
so as to cohere and form one, whilst the parent stocks, to which they
belong, continue still to possess a separate and individual vitality.
Thus Prudentius, Apoth. 919-921.

<span id="ii.xix-p153"></span>*Vitandus tamen error erit, ne* traduce
*carnis  
Transfundi in sobolem credatur fons animarum,  
Sanguinis exemplo, etc.*

<span id="ii.xix-p154"></span>*C.* makes frequent allusions to this
heretical doctrine as having been resuscitated by Servetus, amongst his
other pantheistic notions. See Instit. Book 1. ch. 15. Section 5. *C.
Soc. Edit.,* vol. 1, p. 223; and also on <span
id="ii.xix-p154.1"></span>[Psalm
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.xix-p154.1"></span>. *C. Soc. Edit.,* vol. 4, p. 168.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc06020.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p156.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p157"></span> This final sentence omitted in *Fr.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc06020.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p159.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p160"></span> *A.V.*, “Make a new thing;” margin,
“Create a creature.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc06020.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p162.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p163"></span> Added from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc06020.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p163.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p164"></span> “A s’humilier devant luy;” to humble
themselves before Him. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc06020.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="ii.xix-p186.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p187"></span> It will be seen that he gives the
substance, and not the actual words, of St. Paul’s exhortation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 17:1-13](cc06021.md)
