[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06006)  [Next](cc06008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
12](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#000)<span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span><span id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
12:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)<span id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span>**1.** And Miriam and Aaron spoke against
Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married: for he had
married an Ethiopian woman.

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquuta est Maria et Aharon contra
Mosen propter uxorem AEthiopissam quam acceperat: uxorem enim
AEthiopissam acceperat.

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span>**2.** And they said, Hath the Lord indeed
spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the Lord heard
it.

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span>**2.** Et dixerunt, Nunquid solummodo per
Mosen loquutus est Jehova? nonne etiam per nos loquutus est? Et audivit
Jehova.

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span>**3.** (Now the man Moses was very meek,
above all the men which were upon the face of the earth.)

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span>**3.** Vir autem ille Moses mansuetissimus
fuit prae cunctis hominibus qui erant super faciem terrae.

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span>**4.** And the Lord spoke suddenly unto
Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the
tabernacle of the congregation. And they three cane out.

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span>**4.** Ergo extemplo dixit Jehova ad Mosen,
Aharon et Mariam, Egredimini vos tres ad tabernaculum conventionis. Et
egressi sunt ipsi tres.

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span>**5.** And the Lord came down in the pillar
of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron
and Miriam: and they both came forth.

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>**5.** Et descendit Jehova in columna nubis,
et stetit ad ostium tabernaculi: vocavitque Aharon et Mariam, et egressi
sunt ambo ipsi.

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span>**6.** And he said, Hear now my words: If
there be a prophet among you, f the Lord will make myself known unto him
in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span>**6.** Quibus dixit, Audite nunc verba mea,
Si fuerit propheta vobis, ego, Jehova in visione apparebo ei, in somnio
loquar cum eo.

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span>**7.** My servant Moses is not so, who is
faithful in all mine house.

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span>**7.** Non sic servus meus Moses, qui in
tota domo mea fidelis est.

<span id="ii.vi-p17"></span>**8.** With him will I speak mouth to mouth,
even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the
Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against
my servant Moses?

<span id="ii.vi-p18"></span>**8.** Ore ad os loquor cum eo, atque in
visione: non autem per aenigmata, neque (vel, sed) per similitudinem
Jehovae aspiciet: quare ergo non timuistis loqui adversus servum meum
Mosen?

<span id="ii.vi-p19"></span>**9.** And the anger of the Lord was kindled
against them; and he departed.

<span id="ii.vi-p20"></span>**9.** Exarsit ergo furor Jehovae in eos, et
discessit.

<span id="ii.vi-p21"></span>**10.** And the cloud departed from off the
tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron
looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.

<span id="ii.vi-p22"></span>**10.** Nubesque recessit a tabernaculo: et
ecce Maria erat leprosa sicut nix, respexitque Aharon Mariam, et ecce
erat leprosa.

<span id="ii.vi-p23"></span>**11.** And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas! my
Lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done
foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.

<span id="ii.vi-p24"></span>**11.** Tunc dixit Aharon ad Mosen, Quaeso
domine mi, ne nunc nobis imputes peccatum: quia stulte egimus, et quia
peccavimus.

<span id="ii.vi-p25"></span>**12.** Let her not be as one dead, of whom
the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of his mother’s womb.

<span id="ii.vi-p26"></span>**12.** Ne, quaeso, sit quasi abortivus
foetus, qui dum egreditur ex utero matris suae consumptus est dimidio
suae carnis.

<span id="ii.vi-p27"></span>**13.** And Moses cried unto the Lord,
saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee.

<span id="ii.vi-p28"></span>**13.** Clamavit itaque Moses ad Jehovam,
dicendo, Deus, quaeso, sana nunc illam:

<span id="ii.vi-p29"></span>**14.** And the Lord said unto Moses, If her
father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?
let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be
received in again.

<span id="ii.vi-p30"></span>**14.** Respondit Jehova ad Mosen, Quod si
pater ejus spuendo spuisset in faciem ejus, nonne erubesceret septem
diebus? Excludatur septem diebus extra castra, et deinde recipietur.

<span id="ii.vi-p31"></span>**15.** And Miriam was shut out from the
camp seven days; and the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in
again.

<span id="ii.vi-p32"></span>**15.** Itaque reclusa est Maria extra
castra septem diebus: neque populus progressus est, donec reciperetur
Maria.

<span id="ii.vi-p33"></span>**16.** And afterward the people removed
from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="ii.vi-p34"></span>**16.** Postea autem profectus est populus
de Haseroth, et castrametati sunt in deserto Paran.

<span id="ii.vi-p35"></span><span id="ii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p36"></span>**1.** *And Miriam and Aaron spoke against
Moses.* This relation is especially worthy of observation for many
reasons. If Aaron and Miriam had always quietly and cordially supported
the honor of their brother, and had not been carried away by perverse
and ungodly jealousy, their harmony, however holy it was, would have
been perverted by the injustice of many, and alleged against them as a
deceitful and insidious conspiracy. It came to pass, then, in the
wonderful providence of God, that his own brother and sister set on foot
a contention with respect to the supremacy, and endeavored to degrade
Moses from the position in which God had placed him: for thus all
suspicion of family favor was removed, and it was clearly shown that
Moses, being opposed by his own belongings, was sustained by the power
of God alone. At the same time it may be perceived how natural is
ambition to the minds of almost all men, and also how blind and furious
is the lust of dominion. Aaron and Miriam contend with their own brother
for the supremacy; and yet they had received the most abundant proofs,
that lie, whom they desire to overthrow, had been elevated by the hand
of God, and was thus maintained in his position. For Moses had arrogated
nothing to himself; and, therefore, it was not allowable that man should
attempt to undermine the dignity of that high office, which God had
conferred upon him. Besides, God had ennobled their own house and name
in the person of Moses, and out of favor to him they had also been
endued with peculiar gifts of their own. For by what right had Miriam
obtained the gift of prophecy, except for the fuller ratification of her
brother’s power? But the arrogance and ingratitude of Aaron was still
more disgraceful. He had been by his brother associated with himself:
Moses had allowed the high-priesthood to be transferred to him and his
descendants, and rims had placed his own in subjection to them. What,
then, was there for Aaron to begrudge his brother; when so exalted a
dignity was vested in his own sons, whilst all the race of Moses was
degraded? Still he was so blinded as to deem the honor of his brother a
reproach to himself; at any rate, he could not endure to be second to
him in dignity, although he was his superior in right of the priesthood.
By this example, then, we are taught how anxiously we should beware of
so baneful a plague (as ambition). The wicked brother  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) in the tragic Poet says: —

<span id="ii.vi-p41"></span>“For, if injustice must at all be done,  
‘Tis best to do it for dominion;”

<span id="ii.vi-p42"></span>that, under this pretext, he might through
treachery and murder proceed against his own blood with impunity. Now,
although we all hold this sentiment in detestation, still it plainly
shows that, when the lust for rule takes possession of men’s hearts, not
only do they abandon the love of justice, but that humanity becomes
altogether extinct in them, since brothers thus contend with each other,
and rage, as it were, against their own bowels. Indeed it is astonishing
that, when this vice has been so often and so severely condemned in the
opinion of all ages, the human race has not been ever freed from it;
nay, that the Church of God has always been infested by this disease,
than which none is worse: for ambition has been, and still is, the
mother of all errors, of all disturbances and sects. Since Aaron and his
sister were infected by it, how easily may it overspread the multitude!
But I now proceed to examine the words.

<span id="ii.vi-p43"></span>Miriam is here put before Aaron, not by way
of honorable distinction, but because she stirred up the strife, and
persuaded her brother to take her side; for the ambition of the female
sex is wonderful; and often have women, more high-spirited than men,
been the instigators not merely of squabbles, but of mighty wars, so
that great cities and countries have been shaken by their violent
conduct. Still. however, this does not diminish the guilt of Aaron, who,
at the instance of his foolish sister, engaged in an unjust and wicked
contest with his brother, and even declared himself an enemy to God’s
grace. Further, because they were unable to allege any grounds, upon
which Moses in himself was not far their superior, they seek to bring
disgrace upon him on account of his wife; as if in half of himself he
was inferior to them, because he had married a woman who was not of
their own race, but a foreigner. They, therefore, cast ignominious
aspersions upon him in the person of his wife, as if it were not at all
becoming that he should be accounted the prince and head of the people,
since his wife, and the companion of his bed, was a Gentile woman. I do
not by any means agree with those who think that she was any other than
Zipporah,  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) since we hear nothing of
the death of Zipporah, nay, she had been brought back by Jethro, her
father, only a little while before the delivery of the Law; whilst it is
too absurd to charge the holy Prophet with the reproach of polygamy.
Besides, as an octogenarian, he would have been but little suited for a
second marriage. Again, how would such a marriage have been practicable
in the desert? It is, therefore, sufficiently clear that they refer to
Zipporah, who is called an Ethiopian woman, because the Scripture
comprehends the Midianites under this name: although I have no doubt but
that they maliciously selected this name, for the purpose of awakening
greater odium against Moses. I designedly forbear from adducing the
frivolous glosses in which some indulge.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) Moses, however, acknowledges that it
 <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) was not accorded to him to have a
wife of the holy race of Abraham.

<span id="ii.vi-p47"></span><span id="ii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p48"></span>**2.** *And they said, Hath the Lord indeed
spoken only by Moses?* They pride themselves on their gift of prophecy,
which ought rather to have schooled them to humility. But such is the
natural depravity of men, not only to abuse the gifts of God unto
contempt of their brethren, but so to magnify them by their ungodly and
sacrilegious boasting, as to obscure the glory of their Author. Miriam
and Aaron had received the spirit of prophecy, in order that the grace
of God might shine forth in them; but from thence they raise up clouds
to throw darkness upon the light, which was far brighter in Moses. They
boast themselves to be prophets; why, then, do they not consider that
there was no ground for glorying in this, inasmuch as that, which had
been gratuitously bestowed upon them by God, was not their own? Again,
why do they not correctly estimate their own insignificance in
comparison with the excellency of Moses, so as, by willingly yielding to
him, to show that they set at its proper value what God had respectively
conferred upon them? Lest, then, the knowledge of those graces which God
has intrusted to us, should puff us up with pride and presumption, let
us remember that the more each of us has received, the greater
obligations are we under to God and our brethren; and let us also
reflect how much is wanting, in us, and how much, too, God has conferred
on others, so as to prefer to ourselves those whom God has designed to
honor.

<span id="ii.vi-p49"></span><span id="ii.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p50"></span>**3.** *Now the man Moses was very meek.*
This parenthesis is inserted, in order that we might perceive that God
was not moved by any complaint of Moses, to be so greatly wroth with
Aaron and Miriam. It is said that “the Lord heard,” that is to say, to
undertake the cause in His character of Judge: and it is now added, that
He spontaneously summoned the criminals to His tribunal, though no
accuser requested that justice should be done him. For this is the,
tendency of the eulogium of his meekness, as if Moses had said that he
submitted in silence to the wrong, because, in his meekness, he imposed
patience on himself. Moreover, he, does not praise his own Virtue for
the sake of boasting, but in order to exhort us by his example, and, if
it should be our lot to be treated with indignity, quietly and calmly to
wait for the judgment of God. For whence does it come that, when any one
has injured us, our indignation carries away our feelings in all
directions, and our pain boils up without measure, except because we do
not think that our ills are regarded by God until we have made loud and
boisterous complaints? This passage, then, teaches us that although the
good and gentle refrain from reproaches and accusations, God
nevertheless keeps watch for them, and, whilst they are silent, the
wickedness of the ungodly cries out to, and is heard by, God. Again, the
silence of long-suffering itself is more effectual before God than any
cries, however loud. But if God does not immediately proceed to execute
vengeance, we must bear in mind what is written elsewhere, that *the
blood* of Abel *cried out* after his death, that the murder which Cain
had committed might not be unpunished. (<span
id="ii.vi-p50.1"></span>[Ge 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)<span
id="ii.vi-p50.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p51"></span><span id="ii.vi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p52"></span>**4.** *Come out ye three unto the
tabernacle.* God calls Aaron and Miriam to the tabernacle, that the very
sanctity of the place may cast down their haughtiness; for forgetfulness
of God had overspread their minds, when they began to be so insolent
before men. They are, therefore, brought back to the presence of God,
from which all their senses had turned away, in order that they at
length might learn to revere Moses, whose cause is upheld by God. God
commands them to “hear His words,” because they would never have dared
to murmur against Moses if they had reflected on the account they would
have to give. God, therefore, claims their attention, that they may
learn to recollect themselves, and to awaken from the senselessness of
their presumption. Moreover, they are separated from Moses, that they
may confess their inferiority, and be ashamed of their temerity in
daring to compare themselves with him.

<span id="ii.vi-p53"></span><span id="ii.vi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p54"></span>**6.** *If there be a prophet among you.* He
makes mention of two methods by which the will of God was wont to be
revealed to the prophets, viz., visions and dreams. He does not,
however, here use the word <span id="ii.vi-p54.1"></span>חזון *chazon,*
 <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) which signifies a prophecy as well
as a vision, but <span id="ii.vi-p55.5"></span>מראה, *marah,* expressive
of some visible appearance, which confirms and ratifies the truth of His
word *(oraculi)* to the eyes and all the senses. Thus has God often
appeared to His servants, so that His majesty might be inscribed upon
His addresses to them. Before the giving of the Law such visions were
frequently vouchsafed to the Patriarchs; whilst sometimes they were
instructed by dreams. Thus Joel, when he promises that under the kingdom
of Christ there shall be a complete fullness of all revelations, also
enumerates these two forms of them,

<span id="ii.vi-p56"></span>“Your sons (he says) and your daughters
shall prophesy: your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall
see visions.”  
(<span id="ii.vi-p56.2"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="ii.vi-p56.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p57"></span>But we know that the prophets described the
kingdom of Christ under the likeness of their own times: when,
therefore, God sets forth these two ordinary modes of revelation, he
withdraws Moses from the condition of others, as if to exalt him by a
special privilege. Now, since Aaron and Miriam were not superior to
others, they were thus reminded that they were far behind Moses in rank.
With this view he is said to be “faithful in all God’s house;” in
quoting which passage in order to prove his inferiority to Christ, the
Apostle says he was *a servant,* and a member of the Church, whereas
Christ was its Lord and builder, or creator. (<span
id="ii.vi-p57.1"></span>[Heb
3:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span id="ii.vi-p57.1"></span>.)
But the difference between them is more clearly specified immediately
afterwards, viz., that God speaks to him “mouth to mouth,” by which
expression, as I have said elsewhere,  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) more intimate and familiar communication
is denoted. Still God does not thus deprive the prophets of anything
which is requisite for the discharge of their office; but merely
establishes Moses as the chief of them all. It is true, indeed, that the
Patriarchs are so ranked, as Abraham was called a prophet by the mouth
of God, (<span id="ii.vi-p58.3"></span>[Ge
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p58.3"></span>;)
and the Prophet thus names him together with Isaac and Jacob in <span
id="ii.vi-p58.4"></span>[Ps
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015)<span id="ii.vi-p58.4"></span>;
but still God at the same time includes the whole dispensation, which He
afterwards chose to employ under the Law; and so prefers Moses to all
who were hereafter to arise.

<span id="ii.vi-p59"></span>Further, the word *vision* is used in a
different sense from that which it had just above; for God,
distinguishing Moses from others, says that He speaks with him *in
vision,*  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) which it would be absurd
to explain as meaning an ordinary or common vision. It therefore here
signifies actual sight,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) which He
contrasts with “dark speeches *(aenigmata)* and similitude,” which word
is equivalent to a representation *(figura,)* if the negative be
referred to both. For there are some who take similitude for a lively
and express image; as if God should assert that He reveals His face to
Moses; and therefore read the clause *adversatively,* as I have given it
in the margin. But the former reading is the most natural.

<span id="ii.vi-p62"></span>I have elsewhere treated of dreams and
visions. It will then be sufficient to give the sum in one word, namely,
that they were seals for the confirmation of prophecies; so that the
Prophets, as if sent from heaven, might with full confidence declare
themselves to be God’s lawful interpreters. For visions had their own
peculiar marks, to distinguish them from phantoms and false
imaginations; and dreams also were accompanied by their signs, in order
to remove all doubt of their authenticity. The prophets, therefore, were
fully conscious of their vocation, so that nothing was wanting to the
assurance of faith. Meanwhile, the false prophets dressed themselves up
in these masks to deceive. Thus Jeremiah, in refutation of their ungodly
*pretences,* says,

<span id="ii.vi-p63"></span>“The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell
a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully.
What is the chaff to the wheat, saith the Lord?” (<span
id="ii.vi-p63.1"></span>[Jer
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028)<span id="ii.vi-p63.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p64"></span><span id="ii.vi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p65"></span>**9.** *And the anger of the Lord was
kindled against them.* The expostulation is succeeded by punishment.
God’s departure was a sign of immediate condemnation; because there was
no need of any further questioning, as concerning some matter of
obscurity. After God, then, had convicted them of their sin, and had
inveighed in a severe and stern reprehension against the ingratitude of
Miriam and Aaron, He first pronounced their sentence, and then suddenly
withdrew. What follows, that “the cloud departed,” is added in
explanation; for God, who fills all things, never moves from His place;
but His name is applied metaphorically to the cloud, which was the
symbol of His absence or presence.

<span id="ii.vi-p66"></span>The nature of the punishment which was
inflicted upon Miriam was very appropriate to the offence. The foolish
woman, puffed up with pride, had coveted more than was lawful; and her
ignominy was the just reward of her arrogance, according to the
declaration of Christ, “Every one that exalteth himself shall be
abased.” (<span id="ii.vi-p66.1"></span>[Lu
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="ii.vi-p66.1"></span>.)
Let us understand, then, that in proportion as the proud are led away by
their ambition to long for unlawful honors, they bring upon themselves
nothing but disgrace; and although they may gloriously triumph for a
season, still, it cannot be but that their glory will at length be
turned into disgrace. For inasmuch as all who exalt themselves wage war
with God, He must needs encounter them with the awful power of His hand,
in order to restrain their madness. Now, whosoever are moved by envy to
enter into contention with His servants, endeavor, as hr as in them
lies, to overthrow His glory by obscuring the gifts of the Spirit. No
wonder, then, that God should avenge the insult offered to Himself, and
should repay them with the infamy they deserve; as it is written,

<span id="ii.vi-p67"></span>“Them that honor me I will honor, and they
that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.” (<span
id="ii.vi-p67.1"></span>[1Sa 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)<span
id="ii.vi-p67.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p68"></span>Miriam desired to be equal with her brother,
whom God had exalted above all others; what she attains is, that she
should not occupy the extremist corner of the people, but be cut off
from companionship with mankind. A similar instance occurred in the case
of king Uzziah, who, not contented with the royal dignity, when he had
unlawfully attempted to make an incense-offering, was also smitten with
leprosy, so as to be no longer suffered to continue in association even
with the common people. (<span id="ii.vi-p68.1"></span>[2Ch
26:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#016)<span
id="ii.vi-p68.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.vi-p69"></span>Here, however, the question arises, why,
when Aaron participated in the guilt, he was exempted from the
punishment? If no reason existed, still we should have to adore the
judgment of God; for it is not our business to complain, when He has
mercy upon whom He will have mercy, nevertheless, it appears probable
that God’s wrath was more exceedingly kindled against Miriam, because
she had applied the torch to the ungodly contention, and had inflamed
her brother’s mind, as we see at the beginning of the chapter. It was
just, then, that the blame should rest on her, since she had been the
origin of the evil. I imagine, however, that in sparing Aaron, He had
regard to the priesthood, inasmuch as, in his person, it would have been
subjected almost to eternal disgrace. Since, therefore, Aaron was an
image of God’s only-begotten Son and our only Mediator, and this great
dignity had recently had its commencement in him, it was of exceeding
importance that he should be exempted from such infamy, lest any
diminution of the reverence due to religion should arise.

<span id="ii.vi-p70"></span><span id="ii.vi-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p71"></span>**11.** *And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas! my
lord.* Although Aaron was aware that, through God’s indulgence, his own
punishment was remitted, still he does not cease to consider what he had
deserved. For we ought not to wait until God smites ourselves, but since
in chastising others He invites us to repentance, although He may spare
ourselves, we should profit betimes by their punishments. The
disfigurement, therefore, of his sister, alarmed and terrified Aaron, so
that, examining his own condition, he acknowledged himself to be
deserving of a similar judgment. His humble prayer manifests that those
high aspirations were subdued, which had carried him away into unholy
jealousy. Moses, who was younger than himself, and whose superiority he
just before could not endure, tie now calls his *lord,* and confesses
himself to be subject to his authority and power. Thus the dread of
punishment was the best medicine to cure his disease of ambition. In
beseeching Moses not to impute his sin to him, he does not usurp for
mortal man a right which God by Isaiah claims for Himself alone;  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) but inasmuch as Moses had been injured,
he asks his pardon, lest by his accusation he should be brought before
the divine tribunal. Where he confesses his own and his sister’s
foolishness, he does not extenuate the grossness of his crime, as most
people do, when they generally seek to cover their transgressions under
the plea of error or thoughtlessness; but it is precisely as if he had
said that they were senseless, and out of their minds, as we gather from
the next clause, in which he plainly acknowledges their criminality.

<span id="ii.vi-p73"></span>By the comparison which he introduces, it is
evident that the leprosy of Miriam was of no ordinary kind, for nothing
can be more disgusting than the dead body of any abortive *foetus,*
corrupt with purulence and decay.

<span id="ii.vi-p74"></span><span id="ii.vi-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p75"></span>**13.** *And Moses cried unto the Lord.* The
event now proves, what was recently asserted, that Moses was of a meek
and gentle disposition beyond all other men; for he is not only ready at
once to forgive, but also intercedes with God for them. And thus the
presumption of Miriam is best reproved; for the only hope of safety that
remains to her is in the dignity of Moses, which of late she could not
endure.

<span id="ii.vi-p76"></span>From the reply of God, it is manifest that
the punishment which she alone had received was intended for the
instruction of all. The pride and temerity of Miriam were sufficiently
chastised, but God wished it to be a lesson for all, that every one
should confine himself to his own bounds. Meanwhile, let us learn from
this passage to pay due honor to the judgments of God, so that they may
suffice us as the rule of supreme equity. For if such power over their
children is accorded to earthly parents, as that they may put them to
shame at their will, how much more reverence is due to our heavenly
Father, when he brands us with any mark of disgrace? This was the reason
why Miriam was shut out for seven days, not only that she might mourn
apart by herself, but also that her chastisement might be profitable to
all. It is likewise addressed to us, that we may learn to blush
whensoever God is angry with our sins, and thus that shame may produce
in us a dislike of sin. This special example afterwards passed into a
law, as we have already seen, (<span id="ii.vi-p76.1"></span>[De
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#009)<span id="ii.vi-p76.1"></span>);
 <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) for when God commands lepers to be
separated, He recalls to the recollection of the people what He had
appointed with respect to Miriam, lest, if internal impurity be
cherished, its infection may spread beyond ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc06007.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p37"></span> They are the words of Eteocles in the
Phoenissae of Euripides: —

<span id="ii.vi-p38"></span><span id="ii.vi-p38.1"></span>Εἴπερ γὰρ
ἀδικεῖν χρὴ, τυραννίδος πέρι  
<span id="ii.vi-p38.3"></span>Κάλλιστον ἀδικεῖν· τἄλλα δ <span
id="ii.vi-p38.4"></span>᾿ εὐσεβεῖν. — 538.9

<span id="ii.vi-p39"></span>Cicero refers to them, De Off. 3:21.

<span id="ii.vi-p40"></span>Nam, si violandum est jus, regnandi
gratia,  
Violandum est: aliis rebus pietatem colas.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc06007.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p44"></span> Josephus (Antiq. 2:10) has led some to
suppose that she was Tharbis, daughter of the king of Ethiopia.
Augustin, however, *(Quaest. in <span id="ii.vi-p44.1"></span>[Numbers
20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span id="ii.vi-p44.1"></span>*.,)
and the great majority of commentators, agree with *C.* in believing
that she was Zipporah, and not a second wife, as contended by
Rosenmuller, Michaelis, and others, The main difficulty arises from her
being called a *Cushite,* which our translators have followed 70. and
*V.* in rendering “the Ethiopian.” Bochart endeavors to prove that the
Cushites and Midianites were the same people; and Shuckford (vol. 1, p.
166, edit. 1743) states his opinion that “by the land of Cush is always
meant some part of Arabia.” <span id="ii.vi-p44.2"></span>[Hab
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p44.2"></span>, in
which “the tents of Cushan,” and “the land of Midian,” are mentioned
together, seems to corroborate this view.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc06007.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.vi-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p45"></span> “The Hebrew doctors make his not companying
with his wife to be the occasion,” etc. — Ainsworth. So also De Lyra.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc06007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p46"></span> “Qu’il n’a pas eu ce bien et honneur;” that
he had not the advantage and honor. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc06007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.vi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p55"></span> <span id="ii.vi-p55.1"></span>חזון, a
vision, from <span id="ii.vi-p55.2"></span>חזה, to see, to look upon.
<span id="ii.vi-p55.3"></span>מראה, either the act of sight, or the
object of sight; a seeing, or an appearance, from <span
id="ii.vi-p55.4"></span>ראה, to see, to perceive. — W.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc06007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.vi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p58"></span> On <span id="ii.vi-p58.1"></span>[Exodus
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011)<span id="ii.vi-p58.1"></span>,
*ante,* vol. 3, p. 372.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc06007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.vi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p60"></span> *A.V.* “apparently.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc06007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.vi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p61"></span> “Veue, ou regard de quelque figure
visible;” the view or look of some visible figure. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc06007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.vi-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p72"></span> No reference is here given by *C.* He
probably alludes to <span id="ii.vi-p72.1"></span>[Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025)<span id="ii.vi-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc06007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.vi-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p77"></span> *Ante,* vol. 2, p. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 13:1-33](cc06008)
