[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06042)  [Next](cc06044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
36](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
36:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p3"></span>**1.** And the chief fathers of the
families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of
Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake
before Moses, and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children
of Israel.

<span id="ii.xlii-p4"></span>**1.** Accesserunt vero principes patrum e
familia filiorum Gilad filii Machir, filii Manasse de familiis filiorum
Joseph, et loquuti sunt coram Mose, et cotare prineipibus capitibus
patrum filiorum Israel:

<span id="ii.xlii-p5"></span>**2.** And they said, The Lord commanded my
lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of
Israel: and my lord was commanded by the Lord to give the inheritance of
Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.

<span id="ii.xlii-p6"></span>**2.** Ac dixerunt, Domino meo praecepit
Jehova ut daret terram in possessionem sorte filiis Israel, etiam domino
meo praeceptum est a Jehova ut daret possessionem Salphaad fratris
nostri filiabus ejus.

<span id="ii.xlii-p7"></span>**3.** And if they be married to any of the
sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then shall their
inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be
put to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so
shall it be taken from the lot of our inheritance.

<span id="ii.xlii-p8"></span>**3.** Quae si alicui de filiis aliarum
tribuum filiorum Israel dentur in uxores, minuetur haereditas earum ah
haereditate patrum nostrorum, addeturque haereditati tribus quibus
nupserunt, et de sorte haereditatis nostrae minuetur.

<span id="ii.xlii-p9"></span>**4.** And when the jubilee of the children
of Israel shall be, then shall their inheritance be put unto the
inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received; so shall their
inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our
fathers.

<span id="ii.xlii-p10"></span>**4.** Quumque fuerit jubilams fillis
Israel, addetur haereditas earum haereditati tribus quibus nupserint:
atque de haereditate tribus patrum nostrorum detrahetur haereditas
earum.

<span id="ii.xlii-p11"></span>**5.** And Moses commanded the children of
Israel according to the word of the Lord, saying, The tribe of the sons
of Joseph hath said well.

<span id="ii.xlii-p12"></span>**5.** Princepit itaque Moses filiis
Israel juxta sermonem Jehovae, dicendo, Rectum tribus filiorum Joseph
loquitur.

<span id="ii.xlii-p13"></span>**6.** This is the thing which the Lord
doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them
marry to whom they think best: only to the family of the tribe of their
father shall they marry:

<span id="ii.xlii-p14"></span>**6.** Hoc est quod praecepit Jehova de
filiabus Salphaad, dicendo, Ut placebit illis, sint in uxores,
veruntamen familiae tribus patris sui sint in uxores.

<span id="ii.xlii-p15"></span>**7.** So shall not the inheritance of the
children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe; for every one of the
children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of
his fathers.

<span id="ii.xlii-p16"></span>**7.** Ne transferatur haereditas filiorum
Israel de tribu ad tribum: nam filii Israel singuli adhaerebunt
haereditatibus patrum suorum.

<span id="ii.xlii-p17"></span>**8.** And every daughter that possesseth
an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife
unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of
Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers.

<span id="ii.xlii-p18"></span>**8.** Et omnis filia quae possederit
haereditatem de tribubus filiorum Israel, uni de familia tribus patris
sui erit in uxorem, ut possideant filii Israel singuli haereditatem
patrum suorum:

<span id="ii.xlii-p19"></span>**9.** Neither shall the inheritance
remove from one tribe to another tribe; but every one of the tribes of
the children of Israel shall keep himself to his own inheritance.

<span id="ii.xlii-p20"></span>**9.** Ne transferatur possessio de tribu
ad tribum aliam: sed singuli ex tribubus filiorum Israel haereditati sum
adhaarebunt.

<span id="ii.xlii-p21"></span>**10.** Even as the Lord commanded Moses,
so did the daughters of Zelophehad:

<span id="ii.xlii-p22"></span>**10.** Quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova
Mosi sic fecerunt filiea Salphaad.

<span id="ii.xlii-p23"></span>**11.** For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah,
and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto
their father’s brothers’ sons.

<span id="ii.xlii-p24"></span>**11.** Nam Mahalah, Thirsah, et Hoglah,
et Milcah, et Noah, filiae Salphaad, filiis patruorum suorum fuerunt in
uxores:

<span id="ii.xlii-p25"></span>**12.** And they were married into the
families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph; and their
inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.

<span id="ii.xlii-p26"></span>**12.** His qui erant de familia filiorum
Manasse filii Joseph fuerunt in uxores, fuitque haereditas earum tribui
familiaepatris earum.

<span id="ii.xlii-p27"></span>**13.** These are the commandments and the
judgments which the Lord commanded, by the hand of Moses, unto the
children of Israel in the plains of Moab, by Jordan near Jericho.

<span id="ii.xlii-p28"></span>**13.** Ista aunt praecepta et judicia
quae princepit Jehova per manum Mosis filiis Israel in campestribus Moab
juxta Jordanem Jericho.

<span id="ii.xlii-p29"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlii-p30"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p31"></span>**1.** *And the chief fathers of the
families.* It might appear strange that God had given an imperfect law
with reference to succession, as if what will be now stated had not
occurred to His mind until Moses was reminded by the chief men of the
families (of Machir,)  <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) that it
was unjust that the inheritances should be alienated, which would have
been the case if the daughters of Zelophehad had married into other
tribes, whereas their portion had fallen in the lot of the tribe of
Manasseh. For whatever fell into the hands of those of another tribe,
was a diminution of that lot. As, therefore, God had lately made
provision for preserving the rights of individuals, He now treats of the
general advantage or loss. What, then, can be the meaning of the
objection, that God only half considered what was right? In my opinion,
He so arranged His replies, that only when inquired of He assigned to
each one his rights. The daughters of Zelophehad come, and demand
justice of Moses and the elders, and God complies with their prayers.
Now the heads of the tribe come, and agitate the question respecting the
loss they would incur by the alienation of the inheritances; and it is
then provided that other tribes should not be enriched by their loss. In
short, whereas God might have spontaneously anticipated this, He
preferred to grant it at the request of those who asked nothing but what
was just and equitable. For it cannot be said that in this case it
happened, as it often does, that, whilst every one pertinaciously
maintains his own cause, and is eager to advance his own interests, one
question arises out of another; for, when God has taken cognizance of
the case, He pronounces that both parties only demanded what was right.
It follows, therefore, that God designedly withheld His decisions until
they naturally arose out of the circumstances of the case. It is a
common saying that the law makes no provision for those things which
rarely occur.  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) Thus it would
have been commonly supposed that this law was superfluous; and
especially it would have detracted somewhat from the authority of his
teaching, if Moses had treated of this trifling matter, had not
circumstances led to it. In fine, God allowed Himself to be interrogated
familiarly with respect to doubtful points of no primary importance, in
order that posterity might recognize His reply as a proof of His
fatherly indulgence. Meanwhile, let us bear in mind that if heavenly
things are the subject of as much anxiety to us, as earthly things were
to the children of Manasseh, the rule that we should observe will always
be made clear to us.

<span id="ii.xlii-p34"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p35"></span>**2.** *And they said, The Lord commanded
my lord.* They here allege a kind of discrepancy, in that the tribes had
had the land allotted to them agreeably to God’s command, but now their
lots would be thrown into confusion, when the inheritance should pass
over to another tribe. They assume it, however, to be an acknowledged
impossibility, that God should be inconsistent with Himself: hence it
was necessary that an interpretation should be delivered in order to
remove the legal contradiction *(*<span
id="ii.xlii-p35.1"></span>ἀντινομίαν*)* The Law of God, say they, which
ought to remain inviolable, enjoins that the land should be distxibuted
by lot; how, then, will it accord that women should carry elsewhere the
inheritance of their own tribe? Thus, in seeking a remedy for this evil,
they submit themselves to God’s governance, and reverently accept what
He had prescribed. And further, they enlarge upon the absurdity which
would arisen from hence; viz., that in the fiftieth year, when they were
to return to their original lots, so much would be withdrawn from the
portion of the tribe of Manasseh as the daughters of Zelophehad had
taken away with them. Reasonably, therefore, do they demand that a
decree should be given to reconcile the two former laws, which otherwise
appeared to be at variance with each other.

<span id="ii.xlii-p36"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p37"></span>**5.** *And Moses commanded the children
of Israel.* The account here given is not identical with the previous
one, that Moses referred the matter to God; yet the same thing is more
briefly stated, viz., that Moses answered the people out of the mouth of
God, from whence we infer that God was consulted by him. Moreover, God
not only decides in favor of the children of Manasseh, but approves of
their appeal, in that they were contented with their allotment, and
claim for themselves what could not be alienated without the violation
of the Divine decree. From this particular occasion, a general law is
laid down, that no woman to whom an inheritance had fallen, was to marry
out of her tribe, because she would defraud her own relatives of her
marriage portion. In this way, however, a free permission to marry was
accorded to females, provided they renounced their paternal inheritance.
The words, indeed, seem to be of wider application, *i e.,* that no man
should marry a wife, except of his own kindred; but the meaning of the
law is to be sought from the cause which led to its enactment. Moreover,
there is no doubt but that promiscuous marriages are here forbidden, in
so far as they confound the order of hereditary rights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc06043.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="ii.xlii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p32"></span> Added from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc06043.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="ii.xlii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p33"></span> “De his, quae frequenter fieri solent,
non quae raro, leges fieri debent.” 1. 3. et sequentibus ff. de legib.;
1. 3. Digest. si pars haeredit, petatur; 1.28 ff. de judiciis; 1. ea
quae 64, de regul. juris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 31:1-54](cc06044.md)
