[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06011)  [Next](cc06013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
14:10-38](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p3"></span>**10.** But all the congregation bade stone
them with stones. And the glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle
of the congregation before all the children of Israel.

<span id="ii.xi-p4"></span>**10.** Tunc dixit tota multitudo, ut eos
lapidibus obruerent: et gloria Jehovae apparuit in tabernaculo
conventionis omnibus filiis Israel.

<span id="ii.xi-p5"></span>**11.** And the Lord said unto Moses, How
long will this people provoke. me? and how long will it be ere they
believe me, for all the signs which! have showed among them?

<span id="ii.xi-p6"></span>**11.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Usquequo
vilipendet me populus iste? et usquequo non credent mihi in cunctis
signis quae feci in medio eorum?

<span id="ii.xi-p7"></span>**12.** I will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation
and mightier than they.

<span id="ii.xi-p8"></span>**12.** Percutiam cum peste, expellamque eum:
te autem faciam in gentem magnam et robustiorem eo.

<span id="ii.xi-p9"></span>**13.** And Moses said unto the Lord, Then
the Egyptians shall hear it; (for thou broughtest up this people in thy
might from among them;)

<span id="ii.xi-p10"></span>**13.** Et dixit Moses ad Jehovam, Atqui
audient AEgyptii (quia eduxisti in virtute tua populum istum e medio
ejus:)

<span id="ii.xi-p11"></span>**14.** And they will tell it to the
inhabitants of this land: for they have heard that thou, Lord, art among
this people; that thou, Lord, art seen face to face; and that thy cloud
standeth over them; and that thou goest before them, by day-time in a
pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night.

<span id="ii.xi-p12"></span>**14.** Dicentque habitatori terrae ejus,
qui audierunt quod tu Jehova sis, in medio hujus populi: quandoquidem
oculo ad oculum visus sis tu Jehova: et nubes tua steterit super eos, et
in columna nubis praecesseris eos per diem, et in columna ignis per
noctem.

<span id="ii.xi-p13"></span>**15.** Now, if thou shalt kill all this
people as one man, then the nations, which have heard the fame of thee,
will speak, saying,

<span id="ii.xi-p14"></span>**15.** Si interfeceris populum hunc quasi
virum unum, tunc dicent gentes quae audierint famam tuam.

<span id="ii.xi-p15"></span>**16.** Because the Lord was not able to
bring this people into the land which he swore unto them, therefore he
hath slain them in the wilderness.

<span id="ii.xi-p16"></span>**16.** Quia absque potentia est Jehova, ut
introducat populum istum in terram, quam juravit eis, ideo mactavit eos
in deserto.

<span id="ii.xi-p17"></span>**17.** And now, I beseech thee, let the
power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken, saying,

<span id="ii.xi-p18"></span>**17.** Et nunc magnificetur quaeso
fortitudo Domini mei, sicut loquutus es, dicens:

<span id="ii.xi-p19"></span>**18.** The Lord is long-suffering, and of
great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and by no means
clearing the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation.

<span id="ii.xi-p20"></span>**18.** Jehova tardus ad iram, et multae
misericordiae, tollens iniquitatem et peccatum, et innocentem non
faciens: visitans iniquitatem patrum in filios super tertiam et quartam
generationem.

<span id="ii.xi-p21"></span>**19.** Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity
of this people, according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou
hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.

<span id="ii.xi-p22"></span>**19.** Propitius esto agedum iniquitati
populi hujus, secundum magnitudinem clementiae tuae, sicut remisisti
populo huic ex AEgypto usque nunc.

<span id="ii.xi-p23"></span>**20.** And the Lord said, I have pardoned,
according to thy word:

<span id="ii.xi-p24"></span>**20.** Tune dixit Jehova, Peperci secundum
sermonem tuum.

<span id="ii.xi-p25"></span>**21.** But as truly as I live, all the
earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.

<span id="ii.xi-p26"></span>**21.** Veruntamen vivo ego, et replebit
gloria mea universam terram.

<span id="ii.xi-p27"></span>**22.** Because all those men which have
seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and in the
wilderness, have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened
to my voice;

<span id="ii.xi-p28"></span>**22.** Quoad cunctos homines qui viderunt
gloriam meam, et signa mea quae edidi in AEgypto, et deserto, et
tentaverunt me jam decem vicibus, nec paruerunt voci meae:

<span id="ii.xi-p29"></span>**23.** Surely they shall not see the land
which I swore unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that
provoked me see it:

<span id="ii.xi-p30"></span>**23.** Si videbunt terram, de qua juravi
patribus eorum, omnes, inquam, qui me irritaverunt, non videbunt eam.

<span id="ii.xi-p31"></span>**24.** But my servant Caleb, because he had
another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring
into the land whereunto he went; and his seed shall possess it.

<span id="ii.xi-p32"></span>**24.** At servum meum Caleb, eo quod alius
fuit spiritus cum eo, et adimplevit ire post me, ipsum quoque introducam
in terram quam ingressus est, et semen ejus haereditate accipiet eam.

<span id="ii.xi-p33"></span>**25.** (Now the Amalekites and the
Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) Tomorrow turn you, and get you into the
wilderness, by the way of the Red sea.

<span id="ii.xi-p34"></span>**25.** Amalec et Chananaeus habitat in
valle: cras revertimini et proficiscimini in desertum via maris Suph.

<span id="ii.xi-p35"></span>**26.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses and
unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="ii.xi-p36"></span>**26.** Loquutus est itaque Jehova ad Mosen
et Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xi-p37"></span>**27.** How long shall I bear with this evil
congregation, which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of
the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.

<span id="ii.xi-p38"></span>**27.** Usque quo congregationem hanc
perversam feram, quae murmurat adversum me? murmurationes filiorum
Israel, quibus ipsi murmurant contra me, audivi.

<span id="ii.xi-p39"></span>**28.** Say unto them, As truly as I live,
saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you:

<span id="ii.xi-p40"></span>**28.** Dic ergo eis, Vivo ego, dicit
Jehova, nisi quemadmodum loquuti estis in auribus meis sic fecero vobis.

<span id="ii.xi-p41"></span>**29.** Your carcasses shall fall in this
wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole
number, from twenty years old and upward, which have murmured against
me,

<span id="ii.xi-p42"></span>**29.** In deserto isto cadent cadavera
vestra, et omnes numerati vestri, secundum omnem numerum vestrum, a
filio viginti annorum et supra, qui murmurastis contra me.

<span id="ii.xi-p43"></span>**30.** Doubtless ye shall not come into the
land concerning which I swore to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the
son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="ii.xi-p44"></span>**30.** Si vos ingrediemini terram de qua
levavi manum meam, ut habitare vos facerem in ea: praeter Caleb filium
Jephuneh, et Jehosua filium Nun.

<span id="ii.xi-p45"></span>**31.** But your little ones, which ye said
should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land
which ye have despised.

<span id="ii.xi-p46"></span>**31.** Ac parvulos vestros, de quibus
dixistis, In praedam erunt, ipsos introducam: et cognoscent terram istam
quam despexistis.

<span id="ii.xi-p47"></span>**32.** But as for you, your carcasses, they
shall fall in this wilderness.

<span id="ii.xi-p48"></span>**32.** Cadavera autem vestra cadent in
deserto hoc.

<span id="ii.xi-p49"></span>**33.** And your children shall wander in
the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your
carcasses be wasted in the wilderness.

<span id="ii.xi-p50"></span>**33.** Et filii vestri pastores erunt in
deserto hoc quadraginta annis: et portabunt scortationes vestras donec
consumantur cadavera vestra in deserto.

<span id="ii.xi-p51"></span>**34.** After the number of the days in
which ye searched the land, even forty days, (each day for a year,)
shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years; and ye shall know my
breach of promise.

<span id="ii.xi-p52"></span>**34.** Secundum numerum dierum quibus
explorastis terram quadraginta diebus, unoquoque die pro anno uno,
portabitis iniquitates vestras in deserto, et cognoscetis vanitatem
meam.

<span id="ii.xi-p53"></span>**35.** I the Lord have said, I will surely
do it unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered together
against me: in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they
shall die.

<span id="ii.xi-p54"></span>**35.** Ego Jehova loquutus sum, Si non hoc
fecero universae congregationi huic perversae, quae congregata est
adversum me, in deserto isto consumentur, ibique morientur.

<span id="ii.xi-p55"></span>**36.** And the men which Moses sent to
search the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur
against him, by bringing up a slander upon the land,

<span id="ii.xi-p56"></span>**36.** Viri itaque illi quos miserat Moses
ad explorandam terram, qui reversi murmurare fecerant adversus eum
cunctam congregationem, detrahendo terrae:

<span id="ii.xi-p57"></span>**37.** Even those men that did bring up the
evil report upon the land, died by the plague before the Lord.

<span id="ii.xi-p58"></span>**37.** Morientur viri illi qui terrae
detraxerunt, plaga coram Jehova.

<span id="ii.xi-p59"></span>**38.** But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh, which were of the men that went to search the
land, lived still,

<span id="ii.xi-p60"></span>**38.** Jehosua vero filius Nun, et Caleb
filius Jephuneh vivent, ex hominibus illis qui profecti sunt ad
explorandam terram.

<span id="ii.xi-p61"></span><span id="ii.xi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p62"></span>**10.** *But all the congregation bade stone
them.* When these wicked men began by murmuring against God, and openly
casting censure upon Him, no wonder that they should also rage against
His servants; for, when we endeavor to subdue pride, it generally begets
cruelty; and so also, when iniquity is reproved, it always ends at last
in fury. Caleb and Joshua did not constrain them by force of arms,
neither did they menace them; but only persuaded them to trust in God’s
promise, and not to hesitate to advance into the land of Canaan; yet,
because in their obstinacy the people had determined not to believe God,
they champ the bit, as it were, upon being chastised, and desire to
stone their reprovers. How great was the impetuosity of their wrath is
manifest from this, that God does not attempt to appease their fury, nor
to restrain them by threats, or by His authority, but openly displays
His power from heaven, and miraculously protects His servants by the
manifestation of His glory, as if He were rescuing them from wild
beasts. There is, indeed, no express mention made of the cloud, but we
may infer that the sign to which they were accustomed, was given not
merely to terrify them, but also to cast them prostrate, so that they
might be deprived of their power to inflict injury, and might desist
even against their wills. For the majesty of God, although it truly
humbles believers only, yet sometimes subdues the reprobate and the
lost, or renders them astounded in all their ferocity.

<span id="ii.xi-p63"></span><span id="ii.xi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p64"></span>**11.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.* God
remonstrates with respect to their indomitable obstinacy, because they
had just now hesitated not petulantly to despise and reject Him with the
most atrocious insults, and notwithstanding all the clearest
manifestations of His power. For I know not whether the sense which some
give be suitable, when they translate the verb <span
id="ii.xi-p64.1"></span>נאף, *naatz,* “to provoke.”  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) Jerome comes nearer to the genuine sense,
How long will they detract me? But let us be contented with the genuine
intention of God, which He confirms by the succeeding *antithesis,*
where He complains that He is disparaged, because they do not take into
consideration the many miracles whereby He had abundantly testified His
power and loving-kindness; and thus He proves their contempt, because
they deliberately refuse credit to the many signs of which the
accumulation at least ought to have subdued or corrected their
stubbornness.

<span id="ii.xi-p66"></span>The denunciation of their final punishment
follows, together with a statement of the atrocity of their crime; for
the particle “How long” indicates its long continuance, as well as the
enduring patience of God. He had, indeed, punished others severely, but
only for example’s sake, in order that the name of their *race* should
remain undestroyed, whereas he now declares that He will deal with them
as. with persons in a desperate condition, who cease not to make a mock
of His patience. Hence we are taught, that, although God is placable in
His nature, still the hope of pardon is deservedly cut off from
unbelievers, who are so obdurate as that tie produces no effect upon
them by His hand, or by His countenance, or His word. he then briefly
adverts to the use of the signs, viz., that their object was, that the
knowledge or experience of them should awaken hopes of success.

<span id="ii.xi-p67"></span>If the apparent contradiction offends any
one, that God should declare the people to be cast off, when it was
already decreed that tie would pardon them, a reply may be sought from
elsewhere in three words; for God does not here speak of His secret and
incomprehensible counsel, but only of the actual circumstances, showing
what the people had deserved, and how horrible was the vengeance which
impended,  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) in respect to their
wicked and detestable revolt, since it was not His design to keep Moses
back from earnest prayer, but to put the sincerity of his piety and the
fervency of his zeal to the proof. And, in fact, he does not contravene
the prohibition, except upon the previous exhibition of some spark of
faith. See <span id="ii.xi-p68.1"></span>[Ex
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xi-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p69"></span><span id="ii.xi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p70"></span>**13.** *Then the Egyptians shall hear it.*
Moses here, according to his custom, stands “in the breach” of the wall,
as it is said in <span id="ii.xi-p70.1"></span>[Ps
106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.xi-p70.1"></span>,
to sustain and avert the anger of God, which else would burst forth,
since through his intercession it came to pass that the fire was
speedily extinguished, and the people were not consumed. In order to
support his request., he only objects that God’s holy namo would be the
sport of the wicked, if the people should perish altogether I have
endeavored to reduce to their proper meaning the words which translators
variously render. First, he says, “The Egyptians shall hear, whereas it
is a thing sufficiently notorious, and testified by miracles, that this
people was rescued from among them by thy might. The same report will
also obtain currency among; the nations of Canaan, who have already
heard that thou: art the protector of this people, and have undertaken
the charge of governing them. If, therefore, they should altogether
perish, all the nations which have heard of thy fame will east the blame
on thee, and will think that thy power is broken down in the midst of
its course, so that thou could not carry through to the end the work
thou hadst undertaken.” The substance amounts to this, that because God
had manifested by clear and evident signs that He was the deliverer of
this people, He would be exposed to the reproach of the wicked, unless
He should preserve in safety those whom He had once redeemed. For
nothing else would occur to the minds of the heathen nations, except
that God was unable to maintain His blessing, however desirous He might
be to do so. And assuredly this is no ordinary effect of God’s goodness,
so to connect the glory of His name with our salvation, that whatever is
adverse to us brings with it reproach upon Him, because the mouth of the
wicked will be open to blaspheme. And this will in fact turn to our
advantage, if on our part, without dissimulation, and in zealous
sincerity, we beseech God to uphold His own glory in saving us; for many
boldly plead the name of God in their own behalf, although they are
unaffected by any real care or love for it. Moreover, because the more
illustrious God’s exercise of His power has been, the more insolently
are the ungodly disposed to blaspheme, if it has appeared to fail; we
must always entreat of Him that He should not desert the work of His
hands which He has begun in us. To this effect are the words, “They have
heard that thou art seen face to face;” for, if the people’s safety were
not maintained, the failure would have been imputed to none but God, who
had put. forth the power of His hand to preserve them. In fine, since
their astonishing exodus had been a testimony of God’s favor, so, if he
had suffered the people to perish in the desert, all would have
considered it a sign of His weakness, inasmuch as it was not probable
that He should not accomplish what tie desired, unless He were unable to
do so.

<span id="ii.xi-p71"></span><span id="ii.xi-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p72"></span>**17.** *And now, I beseech thee, let the
power of my Lord be great.* He derives another ground of confidence from
the vision, in which God had more clearly manifested His nature, from
whence it appears how much he had profited by it, and what earnest and
anxious attention he had paid to it. Hence, however, we derive a general
piece of instruction, that there is nothing more efficacious in our
prayers than to set His own word before God, and then to found our
supplications upon His promises, as if He dictated to us out of His own
mouth what we were to ask. Since, then, God had manifested Himself to
Moses in that memorable declaration, which we have already considered,
he was able to derive from thence a sure directory for prayer; for
nothing can be more sure than His own word, on which if our prayers are
based, there is no reason to fear that they will be ineffectual, or that
their results should disappoint us, since He who has spoken will prove
Himself to be true. And, in fact, this is the reason why He speaks,
viz., to afford us the grounds for addressing Him, for else we must
needs be dumb.

<span id="ii.xi-p73"></span><span id="ii.xi-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p74"></span>Since I have expounded the 18th verse
elsewhere,  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) let my readers refer to
that place.

<span id="ii.xi-p76"></span><span id="ii.xi-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p77"></span>**19.** *Pardon, I beseech thee, the
iniquity of this people.* In order to encourage his hope of pardon, he
first sets before himself the greatness of God’s mercy, and then the
past instances by which it had been proved that God was inclined to
forgiveness. And, indeed, the mercy of God continually invites us to
seek reconciliation whenever we have sinned; and, though iniquities
heaped upon iniquities, and the very enormity of our sins, might justly
make us afraid, still the abundance of His grace, of which mention is
here made, must needs occur to us, so as to swallow up all dread of His
wrath. David, also, betaking himself to this refuge, affords us an
example how all alarm is to be overcome. (<span
id="ii.xi-p77.1"></span>[Ps 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p77.1"></span>) But, since the bare and abstract recognition
of God’s goodness is often insufficient for us, Moses applies another
stay in the shape of experience: Pardon, (he says,) as thou hast so
often done before. For, since the goodness of God is unwearied and
inexhaustible, the oftener we have experienced it, the more ought we to
be encouraged to implore it; not that we may sink into the licentious
indulgence of sin, but lest despair should overwhelm us, when we are
lying under the condemnation of God, and our own conscience smites and
torments us. In a word, let us regard this as a most effective mode of
importunity, when we beseech God by the benefits which we have already
experienced, that He will never cease to be gracious.

<span id="ii.xi-p78"></span><span id="ii.xi-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p79"></span>**20.** *And the Lord said, I have pardoned,
according to thy word.* God signifies that tie pardons for His servant
Moses’ sake, and makes, as it were, a present to him of those whom He
had already devoted to destruction. Hence we gather how much the
entreaties of the pious avail with God: as He is said, in <span
id="ii.xi-p79.1"></span>[Ps
145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.xi-p79.1"></span>,
to “fulfil the desire of them that fear him.” He would, indeed, have
done of His own accord what He granted to Moses; but, in order that we
may be more earnest in prayer, the use and advantage of prayers is
commended, when God declares that He will not only comply with our
requests, but even obey them.

<span id="ii.xi-p80"></span>But how is it consistent for Him to declare
that He had spared those, upon whom He had determined to inflict the
most extreme punishment, and whom He deprived of their promised
inheritance? I reply that the pardon in question was not granted to the
individuals, but to their race and name. For the opinion of some is
unnatural, who think that they were released from the penalty of eternal
death, and thence that God was propitiated towards them, because He was
contented with their temporal punishment. I do not doubt, then, but that
Moses was so far heard, as that the seed of Abraham should not be
destroyed, and the covenant of God should not fail For He so dispensed
the pardon as to preserve their posterity uninjured, whilst He inflicted
on the unbelievers themselves the reward of their rebellion. Thus the
conditions of the pardon were of no advantage to the impious rebels,
though they opened a way for the faithful fulfillment of His promise.

<span id="ii.xi-p81"></span><span id="ii.xi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p82"></span>**21.** *But as truly as I live, all the
earth.* It is, indeed, plain that God here swears by His life and glory:
the meaning is only ambiguous in this respect, that some translate it in
the past tense, that the earth had been filled with His glory, which had
already been displayed in so many miracles. And this seems to accord
well with what follows, “Those, who have seen my glory — shall not see
the land;” still the future tense suits the context better, viz., that
God should call to witness His glory, which He will hereafter assert.
Moses feared lest the destruction of the people should be turned into a
reproach and contumely against God; God now declares with an oath that
He would so vindicate His glory, as that those, who were guilty of so
great a crime, should not escape punishment. He proclaims that those
should not see the land, who had shut their eyes against the miracles,
of which they had been spectators and eye-witnesses, and in their
blindness had endeavored to set them at naught. For, inasmuch as they
had not been taught to fear God by so many signs, they were worse than
unworthy of beholding the land, the possession of which ought to have
been assured to them by those very signs, if God’s truth had not been
utterly rejected by their ingratitude.

<span id="ii.xi-p83"></span>God complains that He had been “tempted” by
them “ten times;” because they had not ceased constantly to provoke Him
by their frowardness; for it is no fixed or definite number, which is
intended, but God would merely indicate that they had done so without
measure or end. We have elsewhere  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md)
shown what it is to tempt God, viz., to subject His power to the narrow
rule of our own senses, and to prescribe to Him the mode in which He is
to act, according to our own desires: so as to defer to Him no further
than our carnal reason dictates. The source and cause of this tempting
of God is subjoined, *i.e.,* when men refuse to listen to His voice;
since nothing but obedience, which is the mistress of humility, can
restrain our insolence.

<span id="ii.xi-p85"></span><span id="ii.xi-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p86"></span>**24.** *But my servant Caleb.* By
*synecdoche* Caleb alone is now excepted, although Joshua was a partaker
of the same grace, as he had been also a sharer in his courageous
conduct; but Caleb is especially distinguished, because he had, as it
were, uplifted the banner, and had stood forth first to encourage
Joshua, The sum of his praise is that he “fulfilled  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) to go after God.” The word “will,” which
some understand, is superfluous, since the expression is complete
without any addition. God, therefore, commends Caleb’s perseverance in
obeying; because he not only promptly exhorted the others, but also
proceeded boldly and unhesitatingly, without being deterred by any
obstacles. God, however, magnifies his perseverance, because he looked
to Him alone in his noble conflict with so great a multitude. For it is
an extraordinary case for a person to stand firm, and to hold a straight
course in the midst of violent and tempestuous disturbances, when all
the world is, as it were, convulsed. Although the word <span
id="ii.xi-p87.3"></span>רוח, *ruach,*  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) is sometimes used for the disposition of
the mind, yet I have no doubt but that Moses signifies, by *metonymy,*
that Caleb was thus influenced by divine inspiration.

<span id="ii.xi-p89"></span><span id="ii.xi-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p90"></span>**25.** *Now the Amalekites and the
Canaanites.* Some thus resolve these words; “Although the Amalekites
dwell in the valley;” and others thus: “Since the Amalekites abide in
the valleys to lay ambuscades.” Others think that their object is to
inspire terror, lest the Israelites should remain too long in the
enemy’s country, since they would be daily exposed to fresh attacks. I
am, however, rather of opinion that they are spoken in reproach. For
they had already arrived at the borders of the inhabited land, so that
their enemies might be put to the rout at once: whereas God commands
them to retire, and thus expels them from the land, which they had
actually reached. Still I do not deny that He sets before them the
necessity of the case, and thus enforces their obedience; as if He had
said, that nothing now remained but to retreat, and again to throw
themselves into the desert.

<span id="ii.xi-p91"></span><span id="ii.xi-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p92"></span>**26.** *And the Lord spoke unto Moses.*
 <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) I have translated the *copula* by
the word *itaque* (therefore,) to indicate the connection with what
precedes: for Moses does not here recount anything new, but, by way of
explanation, repeats a point of great importance, viz., that they, who
had refused to enter the land, would be deprived of *its* possession. He
begins with the passionate interrogation:  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) “How long shall this troublesome dregs of
a people be borne with, who never cease to murmur against me?” And God
says that He “had heard” their turbulent cries; in order that they might
more certainly perceive that their pride was intolerable, since God
Himself was weary of it, although He is long-suffering and slow to
anger. It is in bitter irony that He says He will deal with them in
accordance with their own resolution and desire. Nothing, indeed, was
further from their intention than to wander in the wilderness, but,
since they had held back from entering the land, God says that He will
gratify them in a very different sense, viz., that they shall never
enjoy the sight of that land, which they had despised. By His oath, He
expresses His extreme wrath, as also it is said in <span
id="ii.xi-p94.1"></span>[Ps 95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p94.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.xi-p95"></span>“Unto whom I swore in my wrath, that they  
shall not enter into my rest.”  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md)

<span id="ii.xi-p97"></span>It was necessary that their stolidity should
be thus aroused, lest, when God was so greatly provoked, they should
still continue self-satisfied, according to their went. He aggravates
their punishment by another circumstance, *i.e.,* that, they were to be
deprived of the inheritance which He had sworn to give to Abraham; for
the lifting up of the hand  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) (as I
have said elsewhere) was a form of oath; just as if God were called down
from heaven by the outstretched hand to be witness and judge: and,
although this does not indeed literally apply to God, still we know that
He commonly transfers to Himself the things that belong to men.
Moreover, this was a most severe reproof, that they by their wickedness
and self-will should nullify a promise, which God had ratified by an
oath, in so far, at least, as its fulfillment affected themselves: for
He points out immediately afterwards that, although they had rejected
the proffered blessing, he would still be true; and would bestow on
their little ones that which they had refused for themselves. It is thus
that God tempers His judgments against those hypocrites, who falsely
profess to honor His name, so as to preserve a seed for the propagation
of His Church: nor is He ever so severe towards the reprobate, as to
fail in sustaining His mercy towards His elect. Nay, He here declares
that Hie will be gracious towards their children, as a means of
inflicting punishment on the fathers. It was an indirect accusation of
God, when they lamented over their children, as if they were to be
carried away as “a prey;” whereas, God promises that they shall be the
possessors of the land, in order to reprove this wicked blasphemy.

<span id="ii.xi-p99"></span><span id="ii.xi-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p100"></span>**33.** *And your children shall wander in
the wilderness.*  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) He here
pronounces that their children shall be in some measure partakers of
their punishment, inasmuch as they shall wander in the desert until the
time prescribed: for by the word shepherds, He means sojourners,  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) who have no certain or settled residence.
To this effect is the similitude in the song of Hezekiah:

<span id="ii.xi-p103"></span>“My lodging is departed as a shepherd’s
tent.”  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md)  
(<span id="ii.xi-p104.4"></span>[Isa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#012)<span id="ii.xi-p104.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xi-p105"></span>In short, He declares that they shall be
wandering and unsettled, and lead a life, like shepherds conducting
their flocks from place to place.

<span id="ii.xi-p106"></span>He calls the wicked rebellions, whereby
they had corrupted themselves, metaphorically “whoredoms;” for, from the
time that God had espoused them to Himself, their true chastity would
have been to embrace His grace in sincere faith, and at the same time to
devote themselves to His service; but by rejecting tits pure worship,
they had broken their sacred marriage-vow like gadding harlots.

<span id="ii.xi-p107"></span>This example teaches us how God visits the
iniquities of the fathers on their children, and yet chastises no one
undeservedly; since the descendants here referred to,  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) although atoning for the fault of others,
were still by no means innocent themselves. But in the judgments of God
there is always a deep abyss, into which if you fear to be plunged,
adore that which it is not lawful to question. Nevertheless, there is no
doubt but that thus also God provided for the welfare of those, towards
whom He appeared to show some marks of severity. For He waited not only
until they had grown up, but also, as was advantageous to themselves,
until they had attained the strength of manhood, and until a new
generation had sprung up. He assigns a second reason why He postponed
the fulfillment of His promise for forty years, viz., that tie might
repay the ill-spent days by as many years. Having, then, spoken of their
children, He again returns to the actual criminals themselves, who were
to be consumed in all that long period of time, as if by a lingering
disease. The noun <span id="ii.xi-p108.1"></span>תנואת, *tenuoth,* which
I have rendered *vanity,*  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) is
derived from the verb <span id="ii.xi-p109.1"></span>נוא, *nu,* which
signifies to render ineffectual. Translators, however, extract from it
various meanings. Some thus construe it: Ye shall know whether I am
false, or whether my word shall be vain. Others, rendering it
*prohibition,* depart more widely from the sense. But, in my judgment,
it is an ironical concession, whereby God reproves their detestable
pride, which had no other object than to accuse God of falsehood, and to
charge Him calumniously with failing to fulfil His words. Unless,  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) perhaps, it should be preferred to take
it passively; because the people had endeavored to annihilate, as it
were, God himself. But still I rather adopt this sense, that they should
perceive by certain and experimental proof, whether God’s promises were
frivolous or vain. Moreover, we must bear in mind the admonition of the
Prophet, to which I have referred, (<span id="ii.xi-p110.1"></span>[Ps
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)<span id="ii.xi-p110.1"></span>,.md)
and which the Apostle adapts to our present use, (<span
id="ii.xi-p110.2"></span>[Heb 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p110.2"></span>,) viz., that a better rest is now offered to
us, from which we are to fear lest our unbelief should withhold us. For
it is not sufficient for us that God’s hand should once have been
extended to us, unless we allow ourselves to be directed by it, until
our earthly wanderings are concluded, and it conducts us into our
heavenly rest.

<span id="ii.xi-p111"></span><span id="ii.xi-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p112"></span>**36.** *And the men, which Moses sent to
search the land.* I do not at all approve of the view which some take,
that this is recorded by anticipation; for there is no question but that
Moses recounts the special punishment which was inflicted by God upon
the perfidious spies. He had previously treated of the general
punishment of the whole people; when he now relates that the ten men
were smitten by the plague, he intimates that God would begin with them,
so as to manifest by this conspicuous and notable example how grossly He
was offended by their very disgraceful contempt of His grace. Their
sudden and unnatural death was, therefore, a kind of presage to all the
others of the punishment which awaited them. For in the first place, the
expression, “the plague,” is emphatic, as much as to say that they
should not die in the ordinary course of nature. Again, by “the sight of
God,”  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) he means something else than
as if he had said, “before God;” for God was not merely a beholder of
their destruction, but in a strange and unusual manner He executed His
awful judgment, as if He had publicly ascended the tribunal. And this
appeared more clearly by His prolonging the life of Caleb and Joshua,
who were the only survivors of that generation until the end of the time
prescribed. It is true, indeed, that the verbs  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) are in the past tense; but, since there
is an evident <span id="ii.xi-p114.3"></span>πρόληψις, I have not
hesitated to change the tense, which is a sufficiently common idiom of
the language; and thus the connection of the address is better
preserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc06012.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p65"></span> *A.V.,* “How long will this people
*provoke,* me?” *V.* “Usquequo *detrahet* mihi populus iste?” Ainsworth
says, *“provoke me,* or *despite, blaspheme, contemptuously provoke me.*
So the Apostle expoundeth this word *blaspheme,* in <span
id="ii.xi-p65.1"></span>[Ro 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p65.1"></span>, from <span id="ii.xi-p65.2"></span>[Isa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.xi-p65.2"></span>;
and it implieth also a contempt or despising, <span
id="ii.xi-p65.3"></span>[Prov. 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#030.md),
[Prov. 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p65.3"></span>; <span id="ii.xi-p65.4"></span>[Isa
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.xi-p65.4"></span>.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc06012.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p68"></span> “Et quelle punition luy seroit apprestee,
si Dieu se vouloit venger d’une revolte si detestable;” and what
punishment would be prepared for them, if God chose to take vengeance on
so detestable a revolt. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc06012.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p75"></span> See <span id="ii.xi-p75.1"></span>[Exod.
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.xi-p75.1"></span>. Vol.
3, pp. 386-388.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc06012.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p84"></span> See *ante,* vol. 1, p. 421, on <span
id="ii.xi-p84.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.xi-p84.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc06012.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p87"></span> *A.V.,* “Followed me fully.” *“Hebr.,* he
fulfilled after me: so in <span id="ii.xi-p87.1"></span>[De
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#036.md)<span id="ii.xi-p87.1"></span>,
and <span id="ii.xi-p87.2"></span>[Jos
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.xi-p87.2"></span>.” —
Ainsworth. “*Implevit*, subaudi, verbum meum, vel voluntatem meam.” —
*S.M.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc06012.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p87.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p88"></span> “This *other spirit* was the spirit of
faith, which the Law cannot give, (<span id="ii.xi-p88.1"></span>[Ga
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)<span id="ii.xi-p88.1"></span>.md) —
the spirit of adoption of sons, not of bondage to fear again, <span
id="ii.xi-p88.2"></span>[Rom. 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.xi-p88.2"></span>. By
the guidance of this spirit, Caleb constantly followed the Lord, and
obtained the promised inheritance.” — Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc06012.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p93"></span> “The Lord spoke *therefore* to Moses,”
*etc.* — *Lat.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc06012.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p94"></span> “Pathetica interrogatio.” — *Lat.* “Or,
Dieu use d’un proeme vehement a la facon d’un homme passione;” now, God
uses a vehement exordium, after the fashion of an angry man. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc06012.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p96"></span> “Si introibunt in requiem meam.” — *Lat.*
See *Margin A.V.,* and <span id="ii.xi-p96.1"></span>[Heb.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.xi-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc06012.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p98"></span> See <span id="ii.xi-p98.1"></span>[Nu
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.xi-p98.1"></span>,
*Margin A.V.Item,* vol. 1, p. 131, on <span
id="ii.xi-p98.3"></span>[Exodus
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.xi-p98.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc06012.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p101"></span> *Lat.,* “shall be shepherds.” *Margin
A.V.,* “or *feed*.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc06012.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p102"></span> “Il entend qu’ils seront errans comme
estrangers, ayant tousiours un pied leve, et nul arrest;” he means that
they shall wander as strangers, having one foot always lifted, and
without any stay. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc06012.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p104"></span> A.V., “Mine age is departed, etc.” A.
Barnes’s translation pretty nearly agrees with that of *C*., which he
defends in the following note: “The word <span
id="ii.xi-p104.1"></span>דורי, which is here used, means properly the
revolving period, or circle of human life. The parallelism seems to
demand, however, that it should be used in the sense of *dwelling,* or
habitation, so as to correspond with the “shepherd’s tent.” Accordingly,
Lowth and Noyes render it *habitation.* So also do Gesenius and
Rosenmuller. The Arabic word has this signification; and the Hebrew verb
<span id="ii.xi-p104.2"></span>דור, also means to *dwell,* to *remain,*
as in Chaldee.” *C.’s* Latin is here *hospitium;* in his Commentary on
Isaiah, *habitatio.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc06012.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p107.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p108"></span> “Ayant porte la paste au four (comme on
dit) pour le peche de leurs peres;” having carried the dough to the oven
(as they say) for the sin of their fathers. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc06012.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p108.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p109"></span> A.V., “My breach of promise. *Margin, Or,*
altering of my purpose.” *Fr.,* “Mensonge.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc06012.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p110"></span> “Sinon qu’on aimast mieux prendre ce mot
en temps passif, Vous cognoistrez men aneantissement: pource que le
peuple s’estoit efforce d’abolir Dieu;” unless it be preferred to take
this word in a passive sense, You shall know my annihilation; because
the people had striven to annihilate God. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc06012.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p113"></span> It will be seen that *C.’s* own
translation is, “coram Deo;” but the *V.* renders the words, “in
conspectu Domini.”

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc06012.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p114"></span> *A.V.* concludes the denunciation of the
Almighty at <span id="ii.xi-p114.1"></span>[Nu
14:35](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#035.md)<span id="ii.xi-p114.1"></span>.
*C.* continues it to the end of <span id="ii.xi-p114.2"></span>[Nu
14:38](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#038.md)<span id="ii.xi-p114.2"></span>;
and hence arose the necessity for changing the tenses. Vatablus and the
Geneva version agree with *C.;* Dathe with *A.V.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 1:34-36,39,40](cc06013.md)
