[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06045)  [Next](cc06047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p1"></span>A Repitition of the same History

<span id="ii.xlv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#000)<span id="ii.xlv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
3:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)<span id="ii.xlv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p4"></span>**12.** And this land, which we possessed at
that time, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, and half mount
Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites, and to the
Gadites

<span id="ii.xlv-p5"></span>**12.** Et hanc terram possedimus eo tempore
ab Aroer, qum sita erat ad torrentem Arnon: et dimidium montis Galaad,
et urbes ejus dedi Rubenitis et Gadiris.

<span id="ii.xlv-p6"></span>**13.** And the rest of Gilead, and all
Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half-tribe of Manasseh;
all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of
giants.

<span id="ii.xlv-p7"></span>**13.** Residuum vero Galaad, et universam
Basan regni Og dedi dimidiae tribui Manasse, et omnem regionem Argob,
totam Basan qum vocabatur terra gigantum.

<span id="ii.xlv-p8"></span>**14.** Jair the son of Manasseh took all
the country of Argob, unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi, and
called them after his own name, Bashan-havoth-jair, unto this day.

<span id="ii.xlv-p9"></span>**14.** Jair filius Manasse cepit omnem
regionem Argob usque ad terminum Gesuri et Maachathi: et vocavit eas
secundum nomen suum Basan Havoth Jair usque ad diem istam.

<span id="ii.xlv-p10"></span>**15.** And I gave Gilead unto Machir.

<span id="ii.xlv-p11"></span>**15.** Porro ipsi Machir dedi Galaad:

<span id="ii.xlv-p12"></span>**16.** And unto the Reubenites, and unto
the Gadites, I gave from Gilead even unto the river Arnon, half the
valley, and the border, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border
of the children of Ammon;

<span id="ii.xlv-p13"></span>**16.** Rubenitis vero et Gaditis dedi
Galaad, usque ad torrentem Arnon, medium torrentis, et terminum: et
usque ad Jabboc torrentem terminum filiorum Ammon:

<span id="ii.xlv-p14"></span>**17.** The plain also, and Jordan, and the
coast thereof, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the
salt sea, under Ashdoth-pisgah eastward.

<span id="ii.xlv-p15"></span>**17.** Et planitiem, et Jordanem, et
terminum a Chinnereth usque ad mare planitiei, mare salis, sub
effusionibus aquarum collis ad orientem.

<span id="ii.xlv-p16"></span>**18.** And I commanded you at that time,
saying, The Lord your God hath given you this land to possess it: ye
shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all
that are meet for the war.

<span id="ii.xlv-p17"></span>**18.** Pracepique vobis co tempore
dicendo, Jehova Deus vester dedit vobis terram istam, ut possideatis
eam, accineti armis transibitis ante fratres vestros filios Israel,
quotquot robusti estis.

<span id="ii.xlv-p18"></span>**19.** But your wives, and your little
ones, and your cattle, (for I know that ye have much cattle,) shall
abide in your cities which I have given you;

<span id="ii.xlv-p19"></span>**19.** Tantummodo uxores vestrae, et
parvuli vestri, et pecudes vestrae (novi quod pecora multa sint vobis)
remanebunt in urbibus vestris quas dedi vobis:

<span id="ii.xlv-p20"></span>**20.** Until the Lord have given rest unto
your brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the Lord your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall ye
return every man unto his possession, which I have given you.

<span id="ii.xlv-p21"></span>**20.** Donec requiem dederit Jehova
fratribus vestris sicut vobis, et possideant ipsi etiam terram, quam
Jehova Deus vester dat eis trans Jordanem: tunc revertemini singuli ad
possessionem suam quam dedi vobis.

<span id="ii.xlv-p22"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlv-p23"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p24"></span>**12.** *And this land, which we possessed
at that time.* In this passage Moses confirms his decision, that the
possession of the country beyond Jordan should be insured to the
Reubenites and Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasseh. For, since it
had fallen to them exceptionally, the matter might be brought into
controversy with posterity. Lest, then, any should disturb them, he
again declares that they were the rightful possessors of that district.
Moreover, inasmuch as the very gift of it might be called in question,
since it was situated outside the bounds of the inheritance promised by
God, Moses anticipates this objection also, asserting that God had not
in vain given it to be possessed by His people. Hence it follows that
the right of inhabiting it was conferred upon them. Lest, then, so
unequal a partition should be made a subject of contention, he marks out
their boundaries on every side, as though he set up the authority of God
as a wall and rampart against any who should presume to invade it.

<span id="ii.xlv-p25"></span>With reference to the names of the places,
the Dead Sea is called the Sea of Salt, and the Lake of Genesera or
Gennesareth, Chinnereth. As to the “outpourings of the hill,”
translators are not agreed; for some consider Ashdoth-Pisgah to be the
proper name of a city.  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) I
prefer, however, to take the word “outpourings” *(effusionum)*
appellatively, not for fountains and streams, but for the root (of the
hill) where the ground by a gentle descent seems in a manner to pour
itself forth. We shall presently see that Pisgah was one of the summits
of Mount Abarim.

<span id="ii.xlv-p27"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p28"></span>**18.** *And I commanded you at that time.*
This address is directed only to those to whom an inheritance was given
on the other side of Jordan; but Moses declares that he had introduced
an agreement that the two tribes and a half should not enjoy their
possession until they had accommpanied their brethren in the subjugation
of the land of Canaan. He says, therefore, that he had given them a
place, not where they were at once to settle themselves, but where they
might deposit their wives and cattle, until the whole people were
peaceably established in their land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc06046.htm#fr_219) <span
id="ii.xlv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p26"></span> <span id="ii.xlv-p26.1"></span>אשדת הפסגה
*A.V.* “Ashdoth-Pisgah;” *marg.,* “The springs of Pisgah, or, of the
hill.” The *LXX*. in like manner only substitutes Greek letters for the
Hebrew, treating both words as proper names. But when the same words
occur at the close of the next chapter, our translators have placed
their previous marginal translation in their text, and the *LXX.*
instead of <span id="ii.xlv-p26.2"></span>Φασγὰ have <span
id="ii.xlv-p26.3"></span>τὴν λαξευτήν, as though <span
id="ii.xlv-p26.4"></span>פסגה were an appellative, from <span
id="ii.xlv-p26.5"></span>פסג to cut. In construing <span
id="ii.xlv-p26.6"></span>אשדת as a noun, from <span
id="ii.xlv-p26.7"></span>אשד and rendering it *effusions, C.* followed
*S.M.,* as also in putting the *hill* for Pisgah. Our translators and
Luther have agreed in rendering the former word *springs,* when it
occurs in <span id="ii.xlv-p26.8"></span>[Jos
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040)<span id="ii.xlv-p26.8"></span>,
and 12:8; whilst the *LXX.* and Diodati have treated it as a proper name
in both those texts. — *W*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 4:41-43](cc06047)
