[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06008)  [Next](cc06010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span>The Repetition of the same Narrative

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span><span id="ii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p3"></span><span id="ii.viii-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p4"></span>**19.** And when we departed from Horeb, we
went through all that great and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the
way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the Lord our God commanded us;
and we came to Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="ii.viii-p5"></span>**19.** Profecti de Horeb perambulavimus
totam solitudinem magnam et terribilem hanc quam vidistis per viam
montis Emorrhaei, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Deus noster nobis, ac
pervenimus usque ad Cades Barnea.

<span id="ii.viii-p6"></span>**20.** And I said unto you, Ye are come
unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the Lord our God doth give unto
us.

<span id="ii.viii-p7"></span>**20.** Et dixi vobis, Pervenistis usque ad
montem Emorrhaei quem Jehova Deus noster dat nobis.

<span id="ii.viii-p8"></span>**21.** Behold, the Lord thy God hath set
the land before thee; go up and possess it, as the Lord God of thy
fathers hath said unto thee; fear not, neither be discouraged.

<span id="ii.viii-p9"></span>**21.** Vide, dedit Jehova Deus tuus coram
te terram, ascende, posside quemadmodum dixit Jehova Deus patrum tuorum
tibi, ne timeas, neque consterneris.

<span id="ii.viii-p10"></span>**22.** And ye came near unto me every one
of you, and said, We will send men before us, and they shall search us
out the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and
into what cities we shall come.

<span id="ii.viii-p11"></span>**22.** Accessistis autem ad me omnes vos,
et dixistis, Mittamus viros ante nos qui explorent nobis terram, et
referant nobis rem, et viam per quam ascendamus, et urbes ad quas
veniamus.

<span id="ii.viii-p12"></span>**23.** And the saying pleased me well;
and I took twelve men of you, one of a tribe:

<span id="ii.viii-p13"></span>**23.** Quod placuit in oculis meis, et
sumpsi ex vobis duodecim viros, virum unum ex quaque tribu.

<span id="ii.viii-p14"></span>**24.** And they turned, and went up into
the mountain, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.

<span id="ii.viii-p15"></span>**24.** Qui abierunt et ascenderunt in
montem, veneruntque usque ad vallem Eschol, et exploraverunt eam.

<span id="ii.viii-p16"></span>**25.** And they took of the fruit of the
land in their hands, and brought it down unto us, and brought us word
again, and said, It is a good land which the Lord our God doth give us.

<span id="ii.viii-p17"></span>**25.** Tuleruntque in manu sua e fructu
terrae illius, et attulerunt nobis, retuleruntque nobis rem, ac
dixerunt, Bona est terra quam Jehova Deus noster dat nobis.

<span id="ii.viii-p18"></span><span id="ii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p19"></span>**<span id="ii.viii-p19.1"></span>[Numbers
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p19.1"></span>.** *And afterward the people departed from
Hazeroth.* At first sight Moses appears to be at variance with himself:
for he here states that he sent the spies at God’s command, whereas in
<span id="ii.viii-p19.2"></span>[De
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022.md)<span id="ii.viii-p19.2"></span>,
he relates that he made this concession at the request of the people;
 <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) but the two statements are easily
reconciled. It is, indeed, unquestionable that God had regard to the
infirmity and distrust of the people; for the spies are not sent to see
in what direction the land was to be attacked, with which design two
were afterwards sent by Joshua, but God had here no other object than to
encourage them, when they else were cowardly and inert, to throw off
their inactivity, and eagerly to advance. The necessity of such a remedy
was evidently shown, when they all demanded this of Moses. The second
narrative, therefore, is fuller, and in it Moses goes back further than
he had done in the first, viz., that it arose from the timidity and
pusillanimity of the people that he did not at onto hasten whither God
invited him; for, if they had straightway obeyed, they would have won
the land of their enemies without any delay; but they requested that a
respite might be given them. It is, then, by no means inconsistent that
Moses did, at the request of the people, what God at the same time
enjoined, because tie saw that they were otherwise hesitating, and but
little disposed to advance, and needed this stimulus. For, if the spies
had honestly per.-formed their duty, the people would have been led
forward as if they had seen the land themselves, which would have been
the readiest means for putting an end to all delays.

<span id="ii.viii-p21"></span>First, however, the place is described,
from whence the spies were sent, viz., at no great distance from mount
Sinai, although they had encamped twice, so that it was their third
station. It has already been stated in chapter 10, that the cloud rested
in the wilderness of Paran, which some understand to have been said by
anticipation, (<span id="ii.viii-p21.1"></span>πρόληψιν,) as if Moses
had said that, from the time when the people left Mount Sinai, they had
not made any permanent halt, until they came to that wilderness, and
there pitched their tents. But this opinion is by no means consistent;
for it is clear that they stayed some time in Taberah; and many days
were spent at the graves of lust, (Kibroth-hattaavah;) for there they
were gorged for a month with the flesh of the birds, and then the
pestilence attacked them, which cut off many of them, for whose burial
it was necessary to provide. Now, their next halt was for more then
seven days. It, therefore, appears probable to me that by the word
Paran, a different place is not expressed; but that it is merely meant
that, though they advanced, they still remained in some part of that
wilderness. For, since the wilderness of Paran was in one direction
contiguous to Mount Sinai, that name is sometimes given to it; for Moses
certainly confounds them elsewhere, as also does the Prophet Habakkuk.
(<span id="ii.viii-p21.2"></span>[De
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.viii-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.viii-p21.3"></span>[Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)<span id="ii.viii-p21.3"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.viii-p22"></span><span id="ii.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p23"></span>**2.** *Of every tribe of their fathers
shall ye send a man.* If all had been taken from one tribe, or from any
single portion of the people, their fidelity might have been suspected
by the others. God, therefore, would have each tribe assured by its own
witness, in order that their report might be more unquestionable. All
cause for jealousy was also to be taken away; lest, if any tribe had
been passed over, it might have excepted against the messengers, whom it
supposed to have been elected in contempt of it. This, then, was the
advantage of the equal distribution, lest any sinister suspicion or
offence might disturb the unanimity of the whole people. Secondly, it is
required that they should be possessed of personal dignity, since God
commands that chief men should be chosen, whose testimony would be of
greater authority; for it would have been easy to throw discredit upon
obscure individuals. Since, however, both precautions were unsuccessful,
it appears from hence that there is no counsel so wise and salutary as
not to be capable of perversion by the wickedness of mankind. Thus this
excellent providence of God rendered the people the more inexcusable. At
the same time, God has reminded us once for all by this example that,
however those, who seemed to be like pillars, may totter and stumble, or
even fall altogether, still our minds must be supported by faith, so as
not to give way.

<span id="ii.viii-p24"></span>Their names are enumerated, in perpetual
remembrance of their ignominy, except in the case of two, Joshua and
Caleb; for it was just that their crime should be handed down to all
ages, and that the infamy of their perfidiousness should never be
blotted out, since they endeavored, as far as in them lay, to bring to
naught the promise and the grace of God.

<span id="ii.viii-p25"></span>Moses gave the name of Jehoshua to the son
of Nun in the spirit of prophecy, as a presage of the exalted function
to which he was destined. Ambition is so rash, that men are often
disappointed in the result, when they invent titles of honor of their
own accord; but Moses was not induced by the blindness of affection to
change the name Oshea into Jehoshua; but God directed his tongue and
mind thus to commend, beforehand, him who  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) was to be the future minister of their
preservation. Still it cannot be inferred with certainty from this
passage at what time the new name was given him; for it is not specified
that he was called Jehoshua at the time he was sent out; nay, it is
probable that he had been previously thus distinguished, viz., from the
period in which he had been associated with Moses as his companion and
minister in all important matters.

<span id="ii.viii-p28"></span><span id="ii.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p29"></span>**18.** *And see the land what it is.* The
counsel of Moses had this object, that the people might be made aware
how rich and fertile the land was; for a barren country does not support
a large population; and the healthfulness of a locality is inferred from
the rigor of its inhabitants, tie, therefore, chiefly insists on the
goodness of the land and its abundant production of fruits. Still,
perhaps, God would intentionally have the Israelites forewarned, that
they would have to do with strong and powerful enemies; lest they might
be alarmed and discouraged at suddenly beholding them. But the main
point was, that the pleasantness and fertility of the land might allure
them to take possession of it.

<span id="ii.viii-p30"></span><span id="ii.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p31"></span>**22.** *And they ascended by the south,
and came unto Hebron.* Their direct course was not, indeed, towards the
south, but they *proceeded* along the southern border, until they came
to Rehob and Hamath, after having passed the mountains. Hebron, however,
in which Abraham had sojourned, is specified from amongst the other
cities; and it is probable that the three sons of the giant, who are
here named, were in possession of that city. But some think that Anak is
not a proper name, and is used, by *enallage* of the number, for giants.
In fact, giants are elsewhere called Anakim. Nor is there any doubt but
that these three, who are mentioned, were formidable from their great
stature and strength, as we gather from the book of Joshua. It is, then,
equivalent to saying that this city was then possessed by warlike men,
famous for their prowess. It will, however, appear from the end of the
chapter, that Anak was the proper name of a man, whose sons were of
excessive height. The antiquity of the city is afterwards signalized by
comparison, viz., that it was founded seven years before Zoan, one of
the chief cities of Egypt, and of which mention is often made in
Scripture. Heathen writers call it Tanis;  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) and it is situated on one of the seven
famous mouths of the Nile, which is called from the city, *Ostium
Taniticum.* Now, since the Egyptians gloried in their antiquity above
all other nations, it is evident that the land of Canaan was well
peopled immediately after the deluge; and this is a sign of its great
fertility, for if the neighboring countries had been more so, they
would. not have settled themselves there by preference, when they were
at liberty to make their choice. A *prolepsis* is to be noted in the
name of the valley of Eshcol: for it was afterwards that it began to be
so called by the Israelites in memory of the remarkable cluster of
grapes which Moses states to have been brought from hence; and this is
immediately after specified,

<span id="ii.viii-p33"></span><span id="ii.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p34"></span>**25.** *And they returned from searching
of the land.* The activity and diligence of the twelve men is commended,
who in so short a time examined the whole of the land from the desert of
Sin to the sea, and along the whole course of the Jordan; and this, too,
in the hottest part of the year, when the grapes were beginning to
ripen. Thus far, then, they faithfully executed the task intrusted to
them. In their report, also, there seems to be nothing unworthy of
honest men. They had been commanded by Moses to consider the inhabitants
of the land, whether they were strong or weak, and also whether the
cities were fortified; and they relate nothing which was not true and
fully ascertained by them. In a word, at first sight their relation
contains nothing worthy of reprehension. Nevertheless, we may gather
from the context that the ten of them, whose desire was to turn away the
people, spoke in such discouraging terms of their difficulties, that
they produced exactly the contrary effect to what Moses had hoped. No
other accusation, however, is as yet alleged against them, than that, by
maliciously and deceptively inspiring despondency, they held back the
people from entering the land. Although, therefore, they had not openly
lied, they were wanting in sincerity. Perhaps, too, the whole of their
address is not recorded; because Moses deemed it sufficient to state
their perversity of feeling, in that they added to their praises of the
land an exception, which overwhelmed the people’s minds with fear. From
whence also we gather a useful admonition, that crafty sophists avail
nothing with God, when they endeavor to cover their deceit by tortuous
prevarication’s. Wherefore, if we desire to approve our discourse to
God, we must take care to lay aside all such unfair evasions, and,
rejecting all disguise, to speak simply and from the heart. The ten
spies, then, lay a foundation of good faith, in order that they may
afterwards be more competent to deceive. The land, they say, is a good
one, except that the people are strong; and what is this but that there
was little hope that the Israelites would obtain the blessing promised
them by God, and that the attempt must by no means be made? With the
same view they thunder out  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) the
names of several nations, in order to increase the alarm; for, after
having reported that they had seen the sons of Anak, they state that
their contests would be too arduous with the various peoples, who would
advance from all sides to resist them.

<span id="ii.viii-p36"></span><span id="ii.viii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p37"></span>**30.** *And Caleb stilled the people
before Moses.* That is, he restrained the murmurs of the people before
Moses, against whom they had begun to rise tumultuously. Hence it
appears that much was said on both sides which is passed over in
silence, for there would have been no need of restraining the violence
of the people, unless the contention had waxed warm. His words, however,
show what was the state of the whole case and question, viz., that the
ten treacherous spies had dissuaded the people from foolishly advancing
to the land, which it was impossible to win; and urged them not to
attack rashly very powerful enemies, to whom they would be far from
equally matched. But Caleb opposes them with the confidence of victory.
We (he says) shall conquer the land, and upon this he grounds his
exhortation. Moreover, there is no doubt but that, relying on God’s
promise, he believed that they would, be successful, and thus boldly
foretold it, whilst the others took not at all into consideration that,
with the banner of the Lord before them, the people would come into the
promised inheritance.

<span id="ii.viii-p38"></span>This does not appear to accord with what
Moses relates in <span id="ii.viii-p38.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.viii-p38.1"></span>,
where he absolves the spies, and casts the whole blame on the people;
but the contradiction is easily reconciled, for there he had no other
object than to assert the criminality of the Israelites, who, by their
contumacy, had for a long time impeded the fulfillment of God’s promise.
Omitting, therefore, that part of the history which did not affect the
matter in hand, he only adverts to that which convicted them of wicked
ingratitude, *i.e.,* that the fertility of the land was commended by the
spies; and consequently, since the people were abundantly assured of
God’s liberality, that they sinned grossly by rejecting it. He,
therefore, states their crime to have been, that they were rebellious
against the mouth or word of Jehovah, viz., because they had refused to
follow Him when He invited them.

<span id="ii.viii-p39"></span>What Moses here ascribes to Caleb alone,
he elsewhere attributes to Joshua also. It is plain, then, that Caleb
spoke for both of them, and that Joshua was prudently and modestly
silent, lest a tumultuous altercation should arise. It may, however, be
probably conjectured that the bravery and firmness of him, who is
praised, was the more conspicuous, whilst the honesty of Moses is
perceivable, inasmuch as, by his preference of Caleb, he obscures and
diminishes the praise due to his own minister.

<span id="ii.viii-p40"></span><span id="ii.viii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p41"></span>**32.** *But the men that went up with him
said.* We here see, as in a mirror, how impiety gradually gathers
audaciousness in evil. At the outset, the authors of the rebellion were
ambiguous in their expressions, and contented themselves with obscure
insinuations; they now throw aside all shame, and openly and
acrimoniously oppose the address of Caleb, which was certainly nothing
less than casting discredit on God’s words, and setting at naught His
power. God had promised to give the land to the Israelites; they deny
that He will do so. He had afforded them many proofs that nothing is
difficult to Him: they deny that His aid will suffice against the forces
of their enemies. Moreover, they at length break out into such
impudence, that in their falsehood they contradict themselves. They had
confessed that the land was rich; they now declare that it consumes or
devours its inhabitants, which is entirely the reverse. For this is
equivalent to saying, that the wretched men, who cultivated it, wore
themselves out with their assiduous labors; or, at ally rate, that it
was pestilential from the inclemency of its climate; either of which
statements was utterly false. The mode in which some understand it,
viz., that the giants  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) in their
violence committed indiscriminate slaughter, is without foundation; for
this evil was by no means to be feared by the people, after the
extermination of the inhabitants. I do not doubt, then, but that it
means that the cultivation of the land was difficult, and full of much
inconvenience.

<span id="ii.viii-p43"></span>At the end of the last verse, where it is
said, “as grasshoppers,” etc., I think the words are inverted, and ought
to be thus connected; “As grasshoppers are despised in our eyes, so we
were looked down upon by these giants on account of our lowness of
stature.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc06009.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p20"></span> Hengstenberg (Dissertations on the
Genuineness of the Pentateuch, vol. 2, p. 344,) discusses this point, in
opposition to Vater and De Wette, though he reminds us that “the
discrepancy is no new discovery, but has been thoroughly canvassed;
compare Gerhard on Deut., p. 53.” “That the contradiction is only
apparent (he says) is clear from <span id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>[Nu
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>;
for, since those, to whom the answer was brought back, must be
identical. with the persons who sent out the spies, it appears from this
passage that. not merely Moses and Aaron, but also the congregation, had
a share in giving the commission. The author, therefore, cannot intend
to *deny* this, when, in verse 1 and 2, he refers the matter to God.”
“The sending out of the spies (he further argues) was a part of God’s
plan, and hence was expressly commanded by Him, as soon as its
indispensable condition, the proposal on the part of the people, had
taken place. For one thing, it would insure to the well-disposed a
strengthening of their weak faith; on the other hand, it formed a part
of God’s design, that the evil-disposed should take occasion by this
undertaking to manifest their unbelief, and be ripened by it for
judgment, This design we learn from the result, which can never be
contrary to the design. If the divine purpose was the essential point,
and the proposal of the people the mere *conditio sine qua non* of its
being carried into effect, it will be easily understood how the latter
might be passed over in the Book of Numbers, although, as we have
already seen, it is pre-supposed. After what has been remarked, Calvin’s
view of the mutual relation of the two passages will clearly appear to
be the correct one.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc06009.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p26"></span> “Afin que ce nom d’honneur servist a
l’authoriser;” in order that this name of honor might serve to give him
authority. — *Fr.*

<span id="ii.viii-p27"></span>*Calvin* here alludes to the apparent
contradiction arising from the fact that Joshua had already been called
by his new name in <span id="ii.viii-p27.1"></span>[Exod.
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009.md), [Exod.
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013.md), [Exod.
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.viii-p27.1"></span>;
and <span id="ii.viii-p27.2"></span>[Nu
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.viii-p27.2"></span>,
which, as Hengstenberg remarks, was a topic of discussion as early as
the times of Justin Martyr. Hengstenberg reviews the three modes of
meeting the difficulty proposed, viz., 1. That he was so called in the
earlier passages by *prolepsis.* 2. That Moses now only renewed the
name. 3. That a statement is here made of what had taken place a
considerable time before. To this view he himself inclines, and says,
“That the author here first mentioned that he, whom he had originally
called simply Joshua, originally bore the name of Hoshea, was not
without good reason. What had been hitherto related of Joshua, belonged
to him as a servant of God; the sacred name was, therefore, properly
employed. But here Hoshea must stand; for he went to spy out the land,
not as a servant of Moses, but as one of the heads of the children of’
Israel,’ — one of the plenipotentiaries of the congregation.” —
Genuineness of Pentateuch, vol. 2, p. 323.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc06009.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p32"></span> Thus the word is translated by the *LXX*.
See note on <span id="ii.viii-p32.1"></span>[Psalm
78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.viii-p32.1"></span>. —
*C. Soc. Edit.* Vol. 3 p. 239.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc06009.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p35"></span> “Ils parlent a plene bouche;” they speak
with open mouth. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc06009.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p42"></span> Corn. a Lapide has the following note on
verse 33; “<span id="ii.viii-p42.1"></span>נפלים, *nephilim, i.e.,*
giants, who are called *nephilim,* that is, *falling,* because they were
so tall, that those who saw them fell from terror, or rather *falling,
i.e.,* making to fall, (the *Kal* being put for the *Hiphil*,) laying
prostrate and slaying other men in all directions, for these giants were
savage men and truculent tyrants.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 14:1-9](cc06010.md)
