[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06014)  [Next](cc06016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#041.md)<span id="ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p3"></span>**41.** Then ye answered and said unto me,
We have sinned against the Lord, we will go up and fight, according to
all that the Lord our God commanded us. And when ye had girded on every
man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go up into the hill.

<span id="ii.xiv-p4"></span>**41.** Et respondistis et dixistis ad me,
Peccavimus Jehovae: nos ascendemus et pugnabimus omnino sicut prancepit
nobis Jehova Deus noster. Et accinxistis vos singuli armis suis
bellicis, et parastis ascendere in montem.

<span id="ii.xiv-p5"></span>**42.** And the Lord said unto me, Say unto
them, Go not up, neither right; for I am not among you; lest ye be
smitten before your enemies.

<span id="ii.xiv-p6"></span>**42.** Dixit autem mihi Jehova, Dic eis, Ne
ascendatis, neque pugnetis: quia non sum in medio vestri, et ne
percutiamini coram inimicis vestris.

<span id="ii.xiv-p7"></span>**43.** So I spoke unto you; and ye would
not hear, but rebelled against the commandment of the Lord, and went
presumptuously up into the hill.

<span id="ii.xiv-p8"></span>**43.** Loquutus sum haec apud vos sed non
audistis, ac rebelles fuistis ori Jehovae, et temere egistis ut
ascenderetis in montem.

<span id="ii.xiv-p9"></span>**44.** And the Amorites, which dwelt in
that mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and
destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah.

<span id="ii.xiv-p10"></span>**44.** Itaque egressus est Amorrhaeus qui
habitabat in monte in occursum vestri, et vos persequuti sunt,
quemadmodum facere solent apes, et contriverunt vos in Seir usque Horma.

<span id="ii.xiv-p11"></span>**45.** And ye returned, and wept before
the Lord; but the Lord would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear
unto you.

<span id="ii.xiv-p12"></span>**45.** Et reversi flevistis coram Jehova:
sed non exaudivit Jehova vocem vestram, nec auscultavit vobis.

<span id="ii.xiv-p13"></span>**46.** So ye abode in Kadesh many days,
according unto the days that ye abode there,

<span id="ii.xiv-p14"></span>**46.** Et mansistis in Cades diebus
multis, secundum numerum dierum quibus mansistis.

<span id="ii.xiv-p15"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p16"></span>**41.** *Then ye answered and said unto
me.* The repentance was too late, which impelled the Israelites to their
unseasonable effort of activity; although, as I have above explained,
they did not truly and seriously repent, since, when they ought
patiently to have borne the chastening of God, they endeavored to shake
it off, and to drive it far away from them by a new act of disobedience.
In a word, they did nothing else but kick against the pricks. But such
is the energy of men, when their own fancy leads them, that they will
dare anything which God forbids. But herein did their far worse folly
betray itself, in that, when they were again withheld, they still refuse
to obey. Besides, He does not merely forbid them to fight, but denies
them His assistance. What then could be more monstrous than that, in
opposition to God’s will, and when the hope of His assistance was
withdrawn, they should engage in what they had just before obstinately
refused to attempt under His auspices, and by His command, and with the
sure promise of success? And yet, so does hypocrisy blind men’s minds,
that they imagined they were correcting and compensating for the evil
which they doubled. Moses then relates how they received the reward
which they deserved; as much as to say, that, although they might be
slow to learn, still they were made acquainted, by the reverse which
they experienced, how fatal a thing it is not to obey God: for fools
never learn wisdom except beneath the rod.

<span id="ii.xiv-p17"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p18"></span>**45.** *And ye returned and wept before
the Lord.* He here appeals to the testimony of their own conscience; for
they never would have been brought to weeping and prayers, except by the
force of their own feelings. Since, then, they were abundantly
convinced, that a just punishment was inflicted upon their obstinacy,
necessity drove them to seek after God: consequently they had no cause
to complain, though God manifested Himself to be implacable.

<span id="ii.xiv-p19"></span>In the last verse there is an ambiguity in
the meaning of these words, “many days, according to the number of the
days.” Some, rendering the verb in the pluperfect tense, “in which we
had remained there,”  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) suppose that
they still abode there another forty days. But it is equally probable;
that an indefinite time is referred to: as if he had said, that the
people delayed there a long time, from whence it might be inferred, that
they lay like persons stupified, from lack of knowing what to do.

<span id="ii.xiv-p21"></span>It is Kadesh-barnea to which Moses refers,
from whence the spies had been sent forth; and not the Kadesh where
Miriam died, and where the people murmured for want of water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc06015.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p20"></span> “Quibus *antea* manseratis.” — Pagninus in
Poole. The *V.* has only “Sedistis ergo in Cades-barne multo tempore.”
On this Corn. a Lapide has the following note: “In Hebrew it is added,
*according to the days that ye abode,* which Vatablus thus explains, Ye
remained in Kadesh-barnea as many days after the return of the spies, as
ye had remained there before their return. Again, the Hebrews
themselves, in *Sealer Olam,* thus explain it, Ye remained in
Kadesh-barnea as many days as ye afterwards remained in all your other
stations together, viz., 19 years: for twice 19 make 38, to which if you
add the two years that had elapsed before they came to Kadesh-barnea,
you will have the forty years of their journeyings in the desert.
Nothing like this, however, can be gathered from our version, nor from
the Hebrew either; for the expression, ‘according to the days that ye
abode,’ is merely a Hebrew form of repetition, explanatory of what had
preceded, and meaning ‘for a long time.’ — Hence our interpreter has
omitted this Hebrew repetition as redundant, and strange to Latin ears.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 9:22-24](cc06016.md)
