[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06037)  [Next](cc06039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
24:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p3"></span>**1.** And when Balaam saw that it
pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he went not, as at other times, to
seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p4"></span>**1.** Quum autem videret Balaam qued
placeret Jehovae, ut benediceret Israeli, non abiit sicut semel et
iterum in occursum auguriorum: sed posuit versus desertum faciem suam.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p5"></span>**2.** And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and
he saw Israel abiding in his tents according to their tribes; and the
Spirit of God came upon him.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p6"></span>**2.** Ac quum elevasset oculos suos,
vidit Israelem dispositum per tribus suas: fuitque super eum Spiritus
Dei.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p7"></span>**3.** And he took up his parable, and
said, Balaam the son of Beer hath said, and the man whose eyes are open
hath said:

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p8"></span>**3.** Tunc assumpsit parabolam suam, et
ait, Dicit Balaam filius Beor, dicit vir reconditus oculo.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p9"></span>**4.** He hath said, which heard the
words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a
trance, but having his eyes open:

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p10"></span>4, Dicit qui audivit eloquia Dei, qui
visionem Omnipotentis vidit, qui cadit et aperiuntur oeuli ejus.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p11"></span>**5.** How goodly are thy tents, O
Jacob! and thy tabernacles, O Israel!

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p12"></span>**5.** Quam pulchra tabernacula tua
Jacob, habitacula tua Israel!

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p13"></span>**6.** As the valleys are they spread
forth, as gardens by the river’s side, as the trees of lign-aloes, which
the Lord hath planted, and as cedar-trees beside the waters.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p14"></span>**6.** Sicut valles diffusae, sicut
horti juxta flumen, sicut arbores aloes, quas plantavit Jehova, sicut
cedri juxta aquas.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p15"></span>**7.** He shall pour the water out of
his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters; and his king shall be
higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p16"></span>**7.** Defluet aqua e situla ejus, et
semen ejus in aquis multis, et elevabitur rex ejus super Agag, et
extolletur regnum ejus.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p17"></span>**8.** God brought him forth out of
Egypt: he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up
the nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them
through with his arrows.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p18"></span>**8.** Deus eduxit eum ex AEgypto: sicut
vires unicornis ei. Consumet gentes hostes suos, et ossa eorum conteret,
et sagittis suis confodiet (vel, sagittas suas tinget sanguine.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p19"></span>**9.** He couched, he lay down as a
lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed is he that
blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p20"></span>**9.** Incurvabit se ut accubet tanquam
leo minor, et tanquam leo major: quis excitabit eum? Quisquis
benedixerit tibi, erit benedictus: et quisquis maledixerit tibi; erit
maledictus.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p21"></span>**10.** And Balak’s anger was kindled
against Balaam, and he smote his hands together: and Balak said unto
Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast
altogether blessed them these three times.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p22"></span>**10** Et excanduit furor Balac contra
Balaam, et percussit manus suas, ac dixit ipsi Balaam, Ut maledicercs
inimicis meis vocavi te, et ecce, benedixisti benedicendo jam tribus
vicibus.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p23"></span>**11.** Therefore now flee thou to thy
place: I thought to promote thee unto great honor; but, lo, the Lord
hath kept thee back from honor.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p24"></span>**11.** Nunc ergo fuge in locum tuum:
dixeram, Honorando honorabo te, et ecce, privavit te Jehova gloria.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p25"></span>**12.** And Balaam said unto Balak,
Spake I not also to thy messengers, which thou sentest unto me, saying,

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p26"></span>**12.** Cui respondit Balaam, Annon
etiam nuntiis tuis quos miseras ad me loquutus sum, dicendo:

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p27"></span>**13.** If Balak would give me his house
full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the Lord,
to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the Lord saith, that
will I speak?

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p28"></span>**13.** Si dederit mihi Balac plenam
domum suam argento et auro, non potero transgredi sermonem Jehovae, ut
faciat bonum sive malum e corde meo: quod loquetur Jehova, illud loquar?

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p29"></span>**14.** And now, behold, I go unto my
people: come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this people shall
do to thy people in the latter days.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p30"></span>**14.** Nunc itaque ecce, ego discedo ad
populum meum: age, consulam tibi quid facturus sit populus iste populo
tuo in novissimis diebus.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p31"></span>**15.** And he took up his parable, and
said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open
hath said;

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p32"></span>**15.** Tunc assumpsit parabolam suam,
et dixit, Dixit Balaam filius Beor, dixit, inquam, vir apertum habens
oculum.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p33"></span>**16.** He hath said, which heard the
words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the
vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p34"></span>**16.** Dixit audiens eloquia Dei, et
sciens scientiam Excelsi, videns visionem Omnipotentis: cadens, et
discoopertum habens oculum.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p35"></span>**17.** I shall see him, but not now; I
shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob,
and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of
Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p36"></span>**17.** Video eum: sed non modo: intueor
illum: sed non prope: procedet stella ex Jacob, et surget sceptrum ex
Israele: et confodiet principes (vel, angulos) Moab, et destruct omnes
filios Seth.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p37"></span>**18.** And Edom shall be a possession,
Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies: and Israel shall do
valiantly.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p38"></span>**18.** Et erit Edom possessa et
possidebitur Seir ab inimicis Seir, et Israel faciet virtutem.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p39"></span>**19.** Out of Jacob shall come he that
shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the city.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p40"></span>**19.** Et dominabitur ex Jacob, et
perdet reliquias ex civitate.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p41"></span>**20.** And when he looked on Amalek, he
took up his parable, and said, Amalek was the first of the nations; but
his latter end shall be that he perish for ever.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p42"></span>**20.** Et quum vidisset Amalec,
assumpsit parabolam suam, et dixit, Principium gentium Amalec, ideo
novissimum ejus usque ad perditionem.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p43"></span>**21.** And he looked on the Kenites,
and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwelling-place, and
thou puttest thy nest in a rock:

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p44"></span>**21.** Viso etiam Cenaeo, assumpsit
parabolam suam, et dixit, Robustum habitaculum tuum, et ponis in petra
nidum tuum.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p45"></span>**22.** Nevertheless the Kenite shall be
wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p46"></span>**22.** Certe expelletur Cain, usquequo
Assur captivum te ducet.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p47"></span>**23.** And he took up his parable, and
said, Alas! who shall live when God doeth this?

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p48"></span>**23.** Assumpsit item parabolam, et
dixit, Vae quis vivet quum statuerit istud?

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p49"></span>**24.** And ships shall come from the
coast of Chittim, and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and
he also shall perish for ever.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p50"></span>**24.** Et naves e littore Chitthim quae
affligant Assur, affligent Heber, sed hoc quoque usque ad perditionem.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p51"></span>**25.** And Balaam rose up, and went and
returned to his place; and Balak also went his way.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p52"></span>**25.** Surrexit itaque Balaam, et
abiit, reversusque est in locum suum: atque etiam Balacabiit in viam
suam.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p53"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p54"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p55"></span>**1.** *And when Balaam saw that it
pleased the Lord.* It is evident that Balaam, in order to gratify the
wicked king for the sake of the reward, endeavored by various shifts and
expedients to obtain an answer in accordance with his wishes. Thus do
the wicked seek to propitiate God by delusive means, just as we soothe
children by coaxing. And God for some time allowed him  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md) to gloat upon his fallacious oracle.
He now, however, lays closer constraint upon him, and, breaking off all
delay, dictates an answer, which He compels him to deliver. For his
obedience is not here praised as if, when he understood the will of God,
he yielded voluntarily and abandoned his monstrous cupidity; but,
because now there was no more room for subterfuge, he dared not stir his
foot, as if God had put forth His hand to retain him in his place.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p57"></span>When it is said that “the Spirit of God
was upon him,”  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) after he turned
his eyes “toward the wilderness” and beheld the camp of Israel, how they
were marshalled “according to their tribes,” we must understand it thus:
not that he was influenced by a sincere feeling of good-will, so that
the sight itself suggested grounds for blessing; but that he was induced
by the inspiration of the same Spirit, who afterwards put forth His
influence in the prophecy itself. It is said, then, that the Spirit of
God was upon him, not as if it had begun to inspire him at that
particular moment when he cast his eyes upon the camp of Israel; but
because it prompted him to look in that direction, in order that the
impulse of prophecy might be stronger in him, as respecting a thing
actually before his eyes. But after the Spirit had thus affected his
senses, or at any rate had prepared them to be fit instruments for the
execution of his office, it then also directed his tongue to prophesy;
but in an extraordinary manner, so that a divine majesty shone forth in
the sudden change, as if he were transformed into a new man. In a word,
“the Spirit of God was upon him,” shewing by manifest token that He was
the author of his address, and that he did not speak of his own natural
intelligence. To the same intent it is said that “he took up his
parable,” because  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) the character
of his address was marked with unusual grandeur and magnificent
brilliancy.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p60"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p61"></span>**3.** *And the man whose eyes are
open,*  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) *hath said.* This
preface has no other object than to prove that he is a true prophet of
God, and that he has received the blessing, which he pronounces, from
divine revelation; and indeed his boast was true as regarded this
special act, though it might be the case that pride and ambition
impelled him thus to vaunt. It is, however, probable that he prefaced
his prophecy in this way by the inspiration of the Spirit, in order to
demand more credit for what he said. From a consideration of this
purpose we may the better gather the meaning of his words. Balaam
dignifies himself with titles, by which he may claim for himself the
prophetic office; whatever, therefore, he predicates of himself, we may
know to be the attributes of true prophets, whose marks and distinctions
he borrows. To this end he says that he is “hidden in his eye,” by which
he means that he does not see in the ordinary manner, but that he is
endued with the power of secret vision. Interpreters agree that <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p62.1"></span>שתם *shethum,* is equivalent to <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p62.2"></span>סתם *sethum,* which is *closed* or *hidden.*
Thus some render it in the pluperfect tense: The man who had his eyes
closed; and this they refer to the blindness of Balaam, since his ass
saw more clearly than himself. Others, who perceive this gloss to be too
poor, expound it by *anti-phrasis,* Whose eye was open; but, since this
interpretation, too, is unnatural, I have no doubt but that he says his
eyes were hidden, because in their secret vision they have more than
human power.  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) For David makes
use of the word to signify mysteries, when he says:

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p64"></span>“Thou hast manifested to me the hidden
things  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) of wisdom.” (<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p65.4"></span>[Ps
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p65.4"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p66"></span>Unless, perhaps, we may prefer that he
was called the man with hidden eyes, as despising all human things, and
as one with whom there is no respect of persons; the former
interpretation, however, is the more suitable. And assuredly, when he
adds immediately afterwards, the hearer of “the words of God, which saw
the vision of the Almighty,” it must be taken expositively. To the same
effect is what is added in conclusion: “He who falls  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) and his eyes are opened;” for the
exposition which some give, that his mind was awake whilst he was asleep
as regarded his body, is far-fetched; and there is a tameness in the
opinion of those who refer it to the previous history, where it is
recorded that, after Balaam had fallen under the ass, his eyes were
opened to see the angel (chap. 22:31.) Comparing himself, therefore, to
the prophets, he says that he fell down in order to receive his visions;
for we often read that the prophets were prostrated, or lost their
strength, and lay almost lifeless, when God revealed Himself to them;
for thus did it please God to cast down His servants as to the flesh, in
order to lift them up above the world, and to empty them of their own
strength, in order to replenish them with heavenly virtue.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p68"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p69"></span>**5.** *How goodly are thy tents, O
Jacob!* The internal condition of prosperity enjoyed by the people is
described by various similitudes akin to each other, and expressive of
the same thing. He compares them to valleys and well-watered gardens,
and then to trees which were rendered succulent by abundance of
moisture, and finally to fields whose seeds imbibe fatness from the
waters. The word we translate “*valleys* spread forth,” some prefer to
render “streams;” and the Hebrew word signifies both; but the course of
the metaphors requires that valleys should be rather understood. For the
same reason I have given the translation “aloe-trees;” for, although the
word <span id="ii.xxxvii-p69.1"></span>אהלים *ohelim,* often means
“tabernacles,” I have no doubt but that it here refers to trees, so as
to correspond with what follows as to the cedars. They are called trees
“which the Lord hath planted,” as surpassing the ordinary growth of
nature in their peculiar excellency, and exhibiting something more noble
than the effect of human labor and skill.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p70"></span>In the concluding similitude the
interpreters have erred, in nay opinion. Some translate it, “His seed
(*is*) many waters;” others, “on many waters;” but  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) the literal translation which I have
given runs far better, viz., that he is like a rich and fertile field,
whose seed is steeped in much water.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p72"></span>Thus far Balaam has been speaking of
God’s blessing, which shall enrich the people with an abundance of all
good things.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p73"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p74"></span>**7.** *And his king shall be higher
than Agag.* He now begins to enlarge on their outward prosperity, viz.,
that the people of Israel shall be powerful and flourishing, and endowed
with a warlike spirit to resist the assaults of their enemies; for it
would not be sufficient that they should abound with all blessings,
unless the ability to defend them should also be superadded. It is by no
means a probable conjecture that he speaks of Saul who made prisoner of
their king, Agag, in the battle with the Amalekites; but their opinion
is the more correct one, who suppose that this was a name common to all
the kings of that nation. It was, therefore, God’s intention to declare
the superiority of His chosen people to the Amalekites; nor need we be
surprised that they should be thus brought into especial antagonism with
them, not only because they were the constant enemies of Israel, but
because their power was then excessively great, as we shall very soon
see: “Amalek was the first of nations,” etc. (verse 20.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p75"></span>Although for a long time afterwards,
there was no king in Israel, still there is no absurdity in the fact
that the commonwealth should be designated by the name of *“king,”* and
*“kingdom;”* especially since God had postponed the full accomplishment
of His grace until the time of the establishment of the kingdom. Hence,
in this prophecy, Balaam, however little he might have been aware of it,
embraced the time of David; and consequently he predicted things which
were only accomplished in Christ, on whom the adoption was founded.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p76"></span>What follows has been already expounded,
viz, that God, in delivering His people, had made it plain that He would
have them remain in safety and perpetuity; and that He was able to bring
this to pass.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p77"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p78"></span>**9.** *Blessed is he that blesseth
thee.* This mode of expression signifies that the Israelites were
elected by God, on these terms, that He would account as conferred upon
Himself whatever injury or benefit they might receive. Nor is there
anything new in this, that God should declare that He would be an enemy
to the enemies of His Church; and, on the other hand, a friend to her
friends, which is a token of the high favor with which He regards her.
Hence, however, we are taught, that whatever good offices are performed
towards the Church, are conferred upon God Himself, who will recompense
them faithfully: and, at the same time, that believers cannot be
injured, without His avenging them: even as He says; “He that toucheth
you toucheth the apple of my eye.” (<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p78.1"></span>[Zec
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p78.1"></span>.) If any should object that Balaam himself
went unrewarded, although he blessed the people, the reply is an easy
one, that he was unworthy of any praise, who was by no means disposed in
the people’s favor of his own accord, and out of pure and generous
feeling; but who was forcibly drawn in a direction whither he was
unwilling to go. Meanwhile, this point remains unshaken, that whosoever
have contributed their labors for the Chureh’s welfare, and have been
her faithful helpers, shall be sure partakers of the blessing which is
here promised.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p79"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p80"></span>**10.** *And Balak’s anger was kindled
against Balaam.* Inasmuch as the obstinacy of the wicked is not
overcome, so that they should submit themselves to God, when He would
bring their lusts under the yoke, it must needs be that, when they are
still further pressed, they are carried away into passion. Thus now,
Balak, after murmurings and expostulations, bursts forth into impetuous
wrath, and rejects, and drives away with reproaches from his presence
Balaam, whom he had hitherto been endeavoring to cajole. For, when he
smites his hands together, it is because he can no longer restrain
himself. He is especially indignant, because Balaam had not hesitated
freely and openly to bear witness to the blessing of the children of
Israel, against whom he was so full of hatred. For nothing is more
galling to kings than when they see private individuals regarding their
presence at least without alarm. Since he determines to give no reward
to the untoward and ill-starred prophet, he throws the blame upon God,
lest he should himself incur discredit from this, as if he were
illiberal. And, indeed, what he says is true, that God had kept back
Balaam from honor; yet impiously, and, as it were, reproachfully, does
he lay the blame upon God, and, in fact, accuses Him of being the cause
of the non-fulfillment of his promise.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p81"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p82"></span>**12.** *And Balaam said unto Balak.*
Balaam speaks the truth, indeed, yet in a bad spirit, as we have seen:
for he excuses himself with servility  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) to Balak, that it did not depend on
himself that he did not comply with his wishes, but that God had stood
in the way. For he grieves at the loss of his reward; and however
grandly he may declaim on the supremacy of God, he still signifies that
he has rather acted upon compulsion than willingly executed what was
enjoined upon him. By “the word *(sermonem)* of *Jehovah,”*  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) he means not only His decree, but what
had been dictated to him, and which he would have still greatly desired
to alter; but he indicates that he was bound by the power of the Spirit
to declare, even against his own will, whatever revelation he received.
Thus the word “do” refers to his tongue, or his charge as a prophet;
since he had not been hired by Balak to perform any manual act, but only
to injure the people by his words. The word “heart”  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) is contrasted with the revelation of
the Spirit; for impostors are said to speak out of their own heart, when
they falsely make use of God’s name to cover their own inventions. He,
therefore, declares that he was not at liberty to speak “of his own
heart,” because he was the minister of the Spirit.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p86"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p87"></span>**14.** *And now, behold, I go unto my
people.* Since the counsel which he gave is not here expressly
mentioned,  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) it is the opinion of
some that his address is unfinished, and they suppose that he referred
to the cunning advice so destructive to the people, which will be
presently related; *i.e.,* that the Moabitish women should prostitute
themselves. Others rather imagine that Balaam counselled Balak to rest
quiet, since the prosperity of the Israelites would do no harm to the
Moabites in his lifetime. I, however, take it simply for to teach, or to
admonish what would be for his advantage. Thus he commends his prophecy,
in order that Balaam may willingly submit to it. Still, when he speaks
of the “latter days,” he signifies that there was no cause for Balak
himself to fear or be anxious; since the punishment of his nation would
be deferred for a long time. In the meantime we see what Balak had
gained by his trouble; for, whereas he had hitherto only heard the
people of Israel blessed, he is not compelled to listen to what is more
painful still, viz., the ruin of his own nation. This is the reward of
those who strive against God.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p89"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p90"></span>**15.** *Balaam the son of Beor hath
said.* Inasmuch as he was preparing to treat of most important matters,
it is not without reason that he renews his preface, in order to obtain
more authority for his prophecy: and although it was not without
ambition that he proclaimed these magnificent titles, still we cannot
doubt but that God would ratify by them what he had determined to
deliver through the mouth of the prophet. It was requisite that this
worthless man, whose doctrine would otherwise have been contemptible:
should be marked out by Divine indications; and thus it was that he
assumed a character that he did not possess, and attributed to himself
what only belongs to true prophets. I have before explained how the open
and the closed eye are spoken of in the same sense, though for different
reasons: forhe calls the eye “hidden,” as perceiving the secret things
of darkness, which are incomprehensible to the human sense; but he
claims for himself “open eyes,” in that he beholds, by prophetic vision,
what he is about to say, as if he would deny that he was going to speak
of things which were obscure, and scarcely intelligible to himself.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p91"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p92"></span>**17.** *I shall see him, but not now.*
 <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md) Though the verbs are in the
future tense, they are used for the present; and again, the pronoun
*him* designates some one who has not yet been mentioned; and this is a
tolerably common usage with the Hebrew, especially when referring to
Jerusalem, or God, or some very distinguished man. The relative is,
therefore, here put <span id="ii.xxxvii-p93.1"></span>κατ ἐξοχὴν for the
antecedent: and although there can be no doubt but that he alluded to
the people of Israel, it is still a question whether he designates the
head or the whole body; on which point I do not make much contention,
since it is substantially the same thing.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p94"></span>The reason why Balaam postpones his
prophecies to a distant period, is in order to afford consolation to
Balak, for, as much as he possibly can, he seeks to avoid his ill-will,
and therefore assures him that, although he denounces evil, it was not
to be feared at an early period, since he treats of things which were as
yet far off.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p95"></span>The second clause must be unquestionably
restricted to the head of the people, called metaphorically “a Star,”
and then expressly referred to without a figure; for this repetition is
common with the Hebrews, by which they particularize the same thing
twice over. Assuredly he means nothing else by “the Sceptre,” except
what he had indicated by the “Star;” and thus he connects the prosperity
of the people with the kingdom. Hence we gather that its state was not
perfect until it began to be governed by the hand of a king. For,
inasmuch as the adoption of the family of Abraham was founded on Christ,
only sparks of God’s blessing shone forth until its completed brightness
was manifested in Christ. It must be observed, therefore, that when
Balaam begins to prophesy of God’s grace towards the people of Israel,
he directs us at once to the scepter, as if it were the true and certain
mirror of God’s favor. And, in fact, God never manifested Himself as the
Father of this people except by Christ. I admit, indeed, that some
beginnings existed in the person of David, but they were very far from
exhibiting the fullness of the reality: for the glory of his kingdom was
not lasting, nay, its chief dignity was speedily impaired by the
rebellion of the ten tribes, and was finally altogether extinguished;
and when David’s power was at its height, his dominion never extended
beyond the neighboring nations. The coming forth of the Star and the
Sceptre, therefore, of which Balaam speaks explicitly, refers to Christ;
and what we read in the Psalm corresponds with this prophecy;

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p96"></span>“The Lord shall send the sceptre  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md) of thy strength out of Sion.” (<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p97.1"></span>[Ps
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p97.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p98"></span>Hence it follows that the blessing, of
which Balaam speaks, descends even to us; for, if the prosperity of the
ancient people, their rest, their well-ordered government, their
dignity, safety, and glory, proceeded from the scepter as its unmixed
source, there is no doubt but that Christ by His coming accomplished all
these things more fully for us.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p99"></span>The destruction of the nation of Moab is
added as an adjunct of the kingdom. And first, indeed, Balaam declares
that “its princes shall be transfixed.” If any prefer to read its
“corners,”  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md) the expression is
metaphorical, implying that the Sceptre will break through its
munitions, or destroy what may seem to be strongest. I do not doubt but
that the same thing is confirmed in what is said of the children of
Sheth;” for those who take it generally for the whole human race,  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) violently wrest the text by their
gloss. Balaam is speaking of the neighboring nations; and, when in the
next verse he goes on to specify Edom, he adds Mount Seir by way of
explanation. Since the form of the two sentences is identical, it is
probable that none others than the Moabites are meant by the children of
Sheth. Still the question arises why Balaam attributes to a single
nation what was common to all, for all who were of the descendants of
Sheth equally derived their origin from Noah. Some think that they
boasted of this descent in order to conceal their shame, for we know
that the founder of this nation sprang from an incestuous connection.
But another more satisfactory reason occurs to me, viz., that they
boasted, like the Amalekites, of the extreme antiquity of their race;
since, therefore, they desired to be reckoned amongst the most ancient
nations, it will not be improbable that by this ironical appellation
their vain-glory was reproved. It may, however, have been the case that
some one amongst the descendants of Moab was distinguished by this name.
Still, as I have lately said, the Moabites as well as the Edomites were
subdued by David, for David thus justly celebrates his triumphs over
them,

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p102"></span>“Moab is my wash-pot; over Edom will I
cast out my shoe,”  
(<span id="ii.xxxvii-p102.2"></span>[Ps
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p102.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p103"></span>but then was merely typified, what
Christ at length fulfilled, in that He reduced under His sway all
adverse and hostile nations. Therefore it is said, he “shall destroy him
that remaineth of the cities,” *i.e.,* all enemies whom He shall find to
be incorrigible.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p104"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p105"></span>**20.** *And when he looked on Amalek.*
This people had already been destined to destruction by a Divine decree;
but what God had before declared, is here again ratified by Moses.
Although the vengeance, which God was about to take, lay dormant for
many ages, it was at length experimentally proved that God had not
threatened in vain. But, whilst it is true that they were destroyed by
Saul, still we learn from the history that some still survived, and
again inhabited their land. In order, therefore, to arrive at the entire
accomplishment of this prophecy, we must come to Christ, whose kingdom
is the eternal destruction of all the wicked. Poor and unsatisfactory is
the view of some commentators  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md)
who think that Amalek is called “the first of the nations,” because they
first took up arms against Israel, and encountered them in order to
prevent their advance. Rather is the pride of Amalek indirectly rebuked,
because they claimed superiority for themselves over other nations, and
this on the score of their antiquity, as if they had been created
together with the sun and moon. There is then a pointed comparison
between this noble origin, and the slaughter which awaited them at their
end.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p107"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p108"></span>**21.** *And he looked on the Kenites.*
I have not yet referred to the sense in which Balaam is said to have
*seen* the Kenites, as well as the other nations; and now, also, I
should refrain from doing so, if some did not attribute it to
prophetical vision, in which opinion I cannot agree: for Moses relates
as a matter of history that Balaam turned his face in the directions in
which they respectively lived: and, although he did not actually see the
people themselves, the sight of the place in which they dwelt was
sufficient for the purpose of prophecy.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p109"></span>By the Kenites I understand the
Midianites, who were contiguous to the Amalekites; for it is altogether
unreasonable to refer the name to the descendants of Jethro. Forty years
had not yet elapsed since Jethro had left his son with Moses; and his
was only one small family in the wilderness of Midian, whereas mention
is here made of a people already celebrated. Balaam, therefore,
designates by *synecdoche* the Midianites, and devotes them also to the
punishment they well deserved. Of this Gideon was in some measure the
minister and executioner, when he routed their immense army with three
hundred men; and his victory is celebrated in <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p109.1"></span>[Ps
83:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p109.1"></span>, and <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p109.2"></span>[Isa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p109.2"></span>. It is probable that their power was
broken at that time.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p110"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p111"></span>**22.** *Until Asshur shall carry thee
away captive.* It is a harsh and unnatural construction to apply this to
the Kenites; and the majority, indeed, consent that it should be
referred to the Israelites; yet they differ as to the meaning of it, for
some take it affirmatively, that the Kenites should be wasted, until the
Assyrians should conquer the Israelites and carry them away captive;
some, however, take it interrogatlvely,  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) as if it were an abrupt exclamation,
How long shall Asshur hold thee captive? Thus they conceive the
prolonged exile of the people is indicated. Undoubtedly it was the
purpose of the Spirit to shew, by way of correction, that their
prosperity, which had been previously mentioned, should be mixed with
heavy afflictions: for slavery is a bitter thing, and exile even worse.
Hence we gather that, though the Church is blessed by God, it is still
in such a way as that it shall not cease to be exposed to various
calamities. The interrogation, therefore, will be most appropriate.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p113"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p114"></span>**24.** *And ships shall come from the
coast of Chittim.* It is unquestionable that the word Chittim is
sometimes used for the Greeks. Some, indeed, imagine that the
Macedonians alone are strictly called by this name; it is, however,
plain that it is applied generally to the whole of Greece. But since the
countries beyond the sea were not so well known to the Jews as to allow
of their distinguishing them, Scripture sometimes transfers this same
name to Italy. Without doubt in Daniel, (<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p114.1"></span>[Da
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p114.1"></span>,) “the ships of Chittim” must be taken for
those of Italy or Rome;  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) because
the angel there predicts that the ships of Chittim would come, which
should overcome, and render frustrate the efforts of Antiochus; which
was plainly brought to pass by the mission of Popilius. With regard to
the present passage, first of all the Greeks under Alexander afflicted
both Judea and Assyria; and then another affliction followed at the
hands of the Romans. Since, however, Balaam has begun to prophesy of the
kingdom of Christ, it is probable that the Romans are included together
with the Greeks. But from hence we more clearly perceive, what I have
lately adverted to, that the children of God are not so exempted from
common evils as not to be often involved in them promiscuously with
unelievers, as if their conditions were precisely identical. Although
the Hebrews are placed on a par with the Assyrians as their companions
in misfortune, still a consolation is added, *i.e.,* that the Assyrians
also shall perish like Chittim, when they have persecuted the Church.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p116"></span>What Moses adds in conclusion, viz.,
that Balaam returned to his people, and Balak also went to his place,
tends to the commendation of God’s grace, since He dissipates the evil
counsels of the wicked like clouds, and overthrows their machinations;
even as Moses commemorates elsewhere this peculiar blessing of God.
 <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) Micah, too, celebrates this
amongst other Divine mercies:

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p118"></span>“O my people, (he says,) remember now
what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor
answered him,” etc. (<span id="ii.xxxvii-p118.1"></span>[Mic
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p118.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p119"></span>The sum is, that the enemies of the
chosen people departed in dishonor without accomplishing their purpose,
since God put them to confusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc06038.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p56"></span> “Inhiare fallaci oraculo.” — *Lat.*
“Q’uil fust comme a la chasse, pour obtenir quelque fausse revelation;”
to be, as it were, in chase of some false revelation. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc06038.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p58"></span> *A. V.,* “came upon him.”

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc06038.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p59"></span> “Sa facon de parler a eu une gravite
authentique, pour toucher plus au vif ceux qui l’orroyent;” his manner
of speaking possessed a genuine grandeur, in order to touch more closely
to the quick those that might hear it. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc06038.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p62"></span> “Reconditus oculo;” covered in the
eye.— Lat. “Qui a l’oeil couvert;” who has the eye covered. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc06038.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p63"></span> This word has occasioned much
discussion among the commentators. *A. V.* subjoins in the margin:
“*Heb.* who had his eyes shut, *but now* opened.” Ainsworth says:
*“Shethum*, the original word, is of contrary significance to *Sethum,*
that is, *closed* or *shut up;* however, some take it to be of the same
meaning, which may then be explained thus, *The man* who had his *eye*
*shut,* but now open. And *eye* is put for *eyes,* understanding the
eyes of his mind opened by the spirit of prophecy; though some of the
Hebrews (as Jarchi here observeth) have from hence conjectured that
Balaam was blind of one eye!” Dathe, in accordance with the most ancient
interpreters, (*LXX.* Onkelos, and the Syriac,) agrees with the text of
*A. V.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc06038.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p65"></span> *A. V.* “And in the hidden *part* thou
shalt make me to know wisdom.” *C.’s* exposition *in loco* appears
rather to agree with. *A. V.* than with his citation in this place.
“Some interpret <span id="ii.xxxvii-p65.1"></span>בסתום, *besathum,* as
if he here declared that God had discovered secret mysteries to him, or
things hidden from the human understanding. He seems rather to mean that
wisdom had been discovered to his mind in a secret and intimate manner.”
See Cal. Soc. edit. of Psalms, vol. 2, pp. 292, 293, and note

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc06038.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p67"></span> *A. V.*, “falling *into a trance,* but
having his eyes open.”

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc06038.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p71"></span> Ainsworth says: “This *seed* may be
understood, as before, of children; and *many waters,* of many peoples,
as in <span id="ii.xxxvii-p71.1"></span>[Re
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p71.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xxxvii-p71.2"></span>[Isa
57:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p71.2"></span>; <span id="ii.xxxvii-p71.3"></span>[Ps
144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p71.3"></span>. Or *seed* may mean *corn* sown in watery,
moist, and fruitful places, to bring forth much increase; as <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p71.4"></span>[Isa
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p71.4"></span>.” *C.’s* own translation is, after all,
equivocal; however, his opinion may incline to the literal meaning of
the word *seed.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc06038.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p83"></span> “II fait le chien couchant.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc06038.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p84"></span> “The commandment of the Lord.” — *A.
V.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc06038.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p85"></span> “Of mine own mind.” — *A. V.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc06038.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p88"></span> C. translates <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p88.1"></span>איעצך, which *A. V.* renders, “I will
advertise thee,” *consulam tibi,* I will counsel thee: so also
Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc06038.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p93"></span> “I see him,” etc. — *Lat.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc06038.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p97"></span> *A. V.,* “The rod.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc06038.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p100"></span> Dr. Boothroyd has a curious conjecture
on this passage. he says, “Most of the ancients, after *LXX.,* give to
<span id="ii.xxxvii-p100.1"></span>פאתי the signification of chiefs,
princes, or the like. They are supposed to have read <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p100.2"></span>פחתי But I am persuaded that <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p100.3"></span>פאתי is the genuine reading, and to be
taken here in the same sense as in <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p100.4"></span>[Jer
48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p100.4"></span>, where a very similar passage occurs: and
in both places, it is my belief, the word signifies *whiskers.”*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc06038.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p100.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p101"></span> “*The children of Seth, i.e.,* all
men; so the Chaldee.” — Corn. a Lapide *in loco.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc06038.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p106"></span> “So all the paraphrasts,” says
Drusius, in Poole’s Syn. See margin *A. V.,* and the gloss in the Geneva
Bible.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc06038.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p112"></span> It will be seen that the *A. V.*
renders the clause interrogatively in the margin, though with a slight
difference from the sense of *C.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc06038.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p115"></span> See *C.* on Daniel, *(C. Soc. Edit.,)*
vol. 2, pp. 316, 317, 318. “Writers on the geography of the Bible
entertain remarkably different ideas as to the country or countries
intended by this denomination. The most probable opinion seems to us to
be that which considers that the Hebrews used it to express, in a
general sense, all the coasts and islands of the Mediterranean Sea, so
far as known to them.” — Illustr. Corn. *in loco.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc06038.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p117"></span> This deliverance is commemorated by
Moses again in <span id="ii.xxxvii-p117.1"></span>[De
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p117.1"></span>, 5, 6; but the *Fr*. reads Joshua for
Moses, and refers to <span id="ii.xxxvii-p117.2"></span>[Jos
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p117.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 25:1-18](cc06039.md)
