[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06050)  [Next](cc06052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.l"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p1"></span><span id="ii.l-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
27](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.l-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p2"></span><span id="ii.l-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
27:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.l-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p3"></span>**15.** And Moses spake unto the Lord, saying,

<span id="ii.l-p4"></span>**15.** Loquutus est igitur Moses ad Jehovam,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.l-p5"></span>**16.** Let the Lord, the God of the of all
flesh, set a man over the spirits of the flesh, set a man over the
congregation,

<span id="ii.l-p6"></span>**16.** Praeficiat Jehova Deus spirituum omnis
carnis, virum super congregationem:

<span id="ii.l-p7"></span>**17.** Which may go out before them, and
which may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may
bring them in; that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which
have no shepherd.

<span id="ii.l-p8"></span>**17.** Qui egrediatur ante eos, et qui
ingrediatur ante eos, id est, qui educat eos, et introducat eos, ne sit
congregatio Jehovae velut pecudes quae nullum habent pastorera.

<span id="ii.l-p9"></span>**18.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Take
thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine
hand upon him:

<span id="ii.l-p10"></span>**18.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Cape tibi
Josue filium Nun, virum in quo est spiritus, et imponas manum tuam super
eam.

<span id="ii.l-p11"></span>**19.** And set him before Eleazar the
priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their
sight.

<span id="ii.l-p12"></span>**19.** Statuasque illum coram Eleazar
sacerdote, et coram universa congregatione: et dabis illi mandata in
oculis corum.

<span id="ii.l-p13"></span>**20.** And thou shalt put some of thine
honor upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may
be obedient.

<span id="ii.l-p14"></span>**20.** Et pones de gloria tua super illum,
ut audiant illurn universa congregatio filiorum Israel.

<span id="ii.l-p15"></span>**21.** And he shall stand before Eleazar the
priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before
the Lord: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come
in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the
congregation.

<span id="ii.l-p16"></span>**21.** Qui postea coram Eleazar stabit, et
interrogabit eum de judicio Urim coram Jehova: ad verbum ejus
egredientur ipse et omnes filii Israel cum eo, et tota congregatio.

<span id="ii.l-p17"></span>**22.** And Moses did as the Lord commanded
him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and
before all the congregation.

<span id="ii.l-p18"></span>**22.** Fecit ergo Moses quemadmodum
praeceperat ei Jehova: accepit namque Josua, et statuit illum coram
Eleazar sacerdote, et coram universa congregatione.

<span id="ii.l-p19"></span>**23.** And he laid his hands upon him, and
gave him a charge; as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="ii.l-p20"></span>**23.** Imposuitque manus super illum, ac
dedit illi mandata quemadmodum dixerat Jehova per manum Mosis.

<span id="ii.l-p21"></span> 

<span id="ii.l-p22"></span><span id="ii.l-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p23"></span>**15.** *And Moses spake.* Moses here sets
forth not only God’s providence in attending to the welfare of the
people, but also his own zeal for them. Hence it appears how paternal
was his affection for them, in that he not only performed his duty
towards them faithfully and earnestly, and shunned no pains that it cost
him, even to the end of his life, but he also makes provision for the
future, and is anxious about a suitable successor, lest the people
should remain without one, like a headless body. We perceive also his
humility, when he does not arrogate the right of appointment to himself,
nor on his own authority submit the matter to the election of the
people, but establishes God as its sole arbiter. It was, indeed,
permitted him to choose the officers, and this was a part of the
political constitution; but this was too difficult a task, to find by
man’s judgment one who should suffice for its performance; and,
consequently, it behoved that the power should be intrusted to God
alone, who did not indeed refuse to undertake it. And this special
reason had much force in so difficult a point, viz., that the people
should receive their leader at His hand, in order that the supreme power
should always remain vested in Himself. As, therefore, He had chosen
Moses in an extraordinary manner, and had appointed him to be His
representative, so He continued the same grace in the case of Joshua.
Already, indeed, had He designated him; but, out of modesty, Moses omits
his name, and simply prays that God would provide for His people.

<span id="ii.l-p24"></span>The title, with which he honors God, has
reference to the matter in question. It is true, indeed, that God may be
often called “the God of the spirits of all flesh,” and for another
reason, in chap. 16:22, Moses makes use of this expression; but he now
alludes to this attribute, as much as to say, that there must be some
one ready, and as it were in His hand, who should be appointed, since He
has the making of all men according to His own will. Men often are
mistaken and deceived in their opinions, and, even although the Spirit
of God may enlighten them, they go no further than to discern the
peculiar endowment for which a person is eminent; but God is not only
the best judge of each man’s ability and aptitude, nor does He only
penetrate to the inmost recesses of every heart; but He also fashions
and refashions the men whom He chooses as His ministers, and supplies
them with the faculties they require in order to be sufficient for
bearing the burden. We gather from hence a useful lesson, i.e., that,
when we are deprived of good rulers, they should be sought from the
Maker Himself, whose special gift the power of good government is. And
on this ground Moses calls Him not only the Creator of men, but “of all
flesh,” and expressly refers to their “spirits.”

<span id="ii.l-p25"></span>When he compares the people to *sheep,* it is
for the purpose of awakening compassion, so that God may be more
disposed to appoint them a shepherd.

<span id="ii.l-p26"></span><span id="ii.l-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p27"></span>**18.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.* We
here see that Joshua was given in answer to the prayers of Moses, which
is not stated elsewhere. But, in order that he may obtain his dignity
with the consent of all, he is honored with a signal encomium: for, when
God declares that the Spirit is in him, He does not merely intimate that
he has a soul, but that he excels in the necessary gifts, such as
intelligence. judgment, magnanimity, and skill in war: and the word
“spirit” is used, in a different sense from that which it has just
above, for that eminent and rare grace, which manifested itself in
Joshua. For this metonymy  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) is a
tolerably common figure in Scripture.

<span id="ii.l-p29"></span>The solemn rite of his consecration by the
imposition of hands follows, respecting which I have treated so fully
elsewhere,  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) that it is now
superfluous to say much upon it. It was in use before the giving of the
Law, for thus the holy patriarchs blessed their sons. We have seen that
the priests were inaugurated in their office, and that victims were
offered to God, with this ceremony. The apostles followed this custom in
the appointment of pastors. Moses, therefore, in order to testify
publicly that Joshua was no longer his own master, but dedicated to God,
and no longer to be regarded as a private individual, since he was
called by God to the supreme command, laid his hands upon his head.

<span id="ii.l-p31"></span>There was also another reason, viz., that,
according to the requirements of the office intrusted to him, God would
more and more enrich him (with His gifts;(Added from *Fr*.)) for there
is nothing to prevent God from conferring richer endowments upon His
servants according to the nature of their vocation, although they may
have previously been eminent for spiritual gifts. Thus to Timothy, when
he was appointed a pastor, new grace was given by the imposition of the
hands of Paul, although he had before attained to no ordinary eminence.
(<span id="ii.l-p31.1"></span>[2Ti
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006)<span id="ii.l-p31.1"></span>..md) To
the same effect is what follows, that Moses should put some of his glory
 <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) upon him, as if resigning his
own dignity; for by the word *glory,* not only external splendor, but
rather spiritual honor is signified, whereby God commands reverence
towards His servants; not that he was stripped of his own virtues by
transferring them to Joshua, but because, without diminution of his own
gifts, he made the person who was about to be his successor his
associate in their possession.

<span id="ii.l-p33"></span>It was fitting that this should be done
before all the people, that all might willingly receive him as presented
to them by God.

<span id="ii.l-p34"></span>The charge given to him partly tended to
confirm the authority of Joshua, and partly to bind him more solemnly to
discharge his duties; for, inasmuch as Moses commanded him what he was
to do in the name of God, he exempted himself from all suspicion of
temerity; and, on the other hand, by the introduction of this duly
authorized engagement, Joshua must have been more and more encouraged to
faith and diligence.

<span id="ii.l-p35"></span><span id="ii.l-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p36"></span>**21.** *And he shall stand before Eleazar
the priest.* Joshua is here subordinated to the priest on one point,
viz., to inquire of him by the Urim and Thummim: for, as we have seen
before,  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) the dignity of the
priesthood was exalted by this symbol, that the prince should consult
God by the mouth of the priest, who, being clothed in the sacred Ephod,
the emblems of which were the Urim and Thummim, gave replies as the
interpreter of God Himself. This passage, then, shows that the rule of
Joshua was not profane; as in all legitimate dominion religion ought
surely to hold the first place; for, since all things depend upon God,
it is absurd that they should be separated from His service.

<span id="ii.l-p38"></span><span id="ii.l-p38.1"></span>משפט*,
mishphat,* that is, judgment, is here used for a rule, or prescribed
course of action, as if he were commanded to seek the Law  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md) from the oracles of God, which the
priest was to receive and deliver from him, and that in perplexing
matters he was to follow nothing else.

<span id="ii.l-p40"></span>Moses adds, in conclusion, that he did what.
God had enjoined, so that all might be fully assured that God would
rule, no less than before, in the person of Joshua.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc06051.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="ii.l-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p28"></span> “De mettre l’Esprit pour les dons qui en
previennent;” to put *the Spirit* for the gifts which proceed from it. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc06051.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="ii.l-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p30"></span> See *ante* on <span
id="ii.l-p30.1"></span>[Leviticus
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.l-p30.1"></span>,
vol. 3, p. 422.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc06051.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="ii.l-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p32"></span> A.V., “honor.”

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc06051.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="ii.l-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p37"></span> See on <span id="ii.l-p37.1"></span>[Exodus
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.l-p37.1"></span>, vol
2, p. 196.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc06051.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="ii.l-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p39"></span> “Sa lecon;” his lesson. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 3:21-29](cc06052.md)
