[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06023)  [Next](cc06025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
20:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**14.** And Moses sent messengers from
Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou
knowest all the travel that hath befallen us;

<span id="ii.xxiii-p4"></span>**14.** Misit autem Moses nuntium e Cades
ad regem Edom, Sic dicit frater tuns Israel, Tu nosti omnem laborem qui
apprehendit nos.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p5"></span>**15.** How our fathers went down into
Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed
us and our fathers:

<span id="ii.xxiii-p6"></span>**15.** Quia descenderunt patres nostri in
AEgyptum, et mansimus in AEgypto diebus multis, afflixeruntque nos
AEgyptii, et patres nostros.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p7"></span>**16.** And when we cried unto the Lord,
he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of
Egypt; and, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy
border.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p8"></span>**16.** Et clamavimus ad Jehovam, qui
exaudivit vocem nostram, et misit angelum qui nos eduxit ex AEgypto. Et
ecce, sumus in Cades, urbe in extremitate termini tui.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p9"></span>**17.** Let us pass, I pray thee, through
thy country: we will not pass through the fields, or through the
vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the wells: we will go
by the king’s high-way, we will not turn to the right hand nor to the
left, until we have passed thy borders.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p10"></span>**17.** Transeamus, agedum, per terram
tuam, non transibimus per agros aut per vineas, neque bibemus aquam
putei, via regia gradiemur: neque declinabimus ad dexteram aut ad
sinistram, donec transierimus terminum tuum.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p11"></span>**18.** And Edom said unto him, Thou
shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p12"></span>**18.** Cui respondit Edom, Non transibis
per me, ne forte cum gladio egrediar in occursum tui.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p13"></span>**19.** And the children of Israel said
unto him, We will go by the high-way; and if I and my cattle drink of
thy water, then I will pay for it: I will only (without doing any thing
else) go through on my feet.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p14"></span>**19.** Et dixerunt ei filii Israel, Per
viam ascendemus: quod si aquas tuas biberimus ego et animalia mea, dabo
pretium illarum. Tantummodo sine negotio transeam pedibus meis.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p15"></span>**20.** And he said, Thou shalt not go
through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a
strong hand.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p16"></span>**20.** Verum dixit, Non transibis. Et
egressus est in occursum ejus cum populo multo, et manu forti.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p17"></span>**21.** Thus Edom refused to give Israel
passage through his border: wherefore Israel turned away from him.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p18"></span>**21.** Renuit igitur Edom permittere
Israeli, ut transiret per terminum suum: tunc Israel declinavit ab eo.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p19"></span>**22.** And the children of Israel, even
the whole congregation, journeyed from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p20"></span>**22.** Et profecti sunt e Cades,
veneruntque filii Israel, tota congregatio ad montem Hor.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p21"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p22"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p23"></span>**14.** *And Moses sent messengers from
Kadesh.* His first narrative does not explain the cause of the embassy,
but from the account in Deuteronomy it is plain float peace  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) was sought for from the Edomites as
brethren by the command of God. God, therefore, prescribes the
conditions of peace and war; lest the Israelites should rashly attack
ally, who were not to be reckoned enemies, although they might act
towards them with little humanity. Undoubtedly this would seem hard to
His people that they were to leave a country, which was close to them,
untouched, and to seek a more distant place of abode. But God restrains
their impatience for a twofold reason; first, because it was unjust and
by no means humane to assail their kindred; and both these nations were
descended from Isaac, and their original ancestors were twin brothers.
Circumcision, too, was common to them both, a mark of their being’ of
the same origin, and a bond of fraternal connection. But the other
reason ought to have had more weight in restraining them, because it was
unlawful to cast the children of Esau out of the possession, which they
had obtained by a similar right as that whereby the land of Canaan had
been promised to the posterity of Jacob. If, therefore, they desired to
enjoy their own inheritance, the decree was not to be violated which God
had pronounced by the mouth of Isaac, (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>[Ge
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>;) especially since Esau the founder of the
race (of the Edomites) had fixed his home in Mount Seir by the secret
inspiration of God, and to that place had his posterity beck confined.
God, therefore, now admonishes them that it would have been an act of
sacrilegious audacity, if the Israelites should attempt to overthrow the
prophecy of Isaac, by which Esau had been declared the possessor of a
rich and fertile soil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc06024.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p24"></span> “Sauf conduit, et amitie;” safe conduct
and friendship. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 2:2-8](cc06025)
