[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc06030)  [Next](cc06032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#000)<span id="ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
21:4-20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p3"></span>**4.** And they journeyed from mount Hor by
the way of the Red sea, to compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the
people was much discouraged because of the way.

<span id="ii.xxx-p4"></span>**4.** Et profecti sunt de Hor monte per
viam maris Suph, ut circuirent terram Edom: et angustiis affecta est
anima populi in via.

<span id="ii.xxx-p5"></span>**5.** And the people spake against God, and
against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in
the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and
our soul loatheth this light bread.

<span id="ii.xxx-p6"></span>**5.** Itaque loquutus est populus contra
Deum et Mosen, Ut quid ascendere nos fecistis ex Aegypto, ut moreremur
in deserto? Non est enim panis neque aqua. Et taedet animam nostram
super pane levi (aut, vili.)

<span id="ii.xxx-p7"></span>**6.** And the Lord sent fiery serpents
among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel
died.

<span id="ii.xxx-p8"></span>**6.** Misit igitur Jehova in populum
serpentes urentes, qui momorderunt populum: ita ut morcretur populus
multus ex Israele.

<span id="ii.xxx-p9"></span>**7.** Therefore the people came to Moses,
and said, We have sinned; for we have spoken against the Lord, and
against thee: pray unto the Lord, that he take away the serpents from
us. And Moses prayed for the people.

<span id="ii.xxx-p10"></span>**7.** Tunc venit populus ad Mosen, et
dixerunt, Peccavimus, quia loquuti sumus contra Jehovam et contra te:
ora Jehovam ut auferat a nobis serpentes istos. Et oravit Moses pro
populo.

<span id="ii.xxx-p11"></span>**8.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Make
thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass,
that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

<span id="ii.xxx-p12"></span>**8.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Fac tibi
urentem, et pone eum super vexillum: et erit, quicunque morsus fuerit,
et aspexerit ilium, tunc vivet.

<span id="ii.xxx-p13"></span>**9.** And Moses made a serpent of brass,
and put it upon a pole; and it came to pass, that if a serpent had
bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.

<span id="ii.xxx-p14"></span>**9.** Fecit ergo Moses serpentem aeneum,
quem posuit supra vexillum: et fuit, quando momorderat serpens quenquam,
aspiciebat ad serpentem aeneum, et vivebat.

<span id="ii.xxx-p15"></span>**10.** And the children of Israel set
forward, and pitched in Oboth.

<span id="ii.xxx-p16"></span>**10.** Et profecti sunt filii Israel, et
castrametati sunt in Oboth.

<span id="ii.xxx-p17"></span>**11.** And they journeyed from Oboth, and
pitched at Ije-abarim, in the wilderness which is before Moab, toward
the sun rising.

<span id="ii.xxx-p18"></span>**11.** Profecti vero ex Oboth
casstrametati sunt in Ije-abarim in deserto, quod erat in conspectu Moab
ab ortu solis.

<span id="ii.xxx-p19"></span>**12.** From thence they removed, and
pitched in the valley of Zared.

<span id="ii.xxx-p20"></span>**12.** Inde profecti castrametati sunt in
valle Zered.

<span id="ii.xxx-p21"></span>**13.** From thence they removed, and
pitched on the other side of Arnon, which is in the wilderness that
cometh out of the coasts of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of
Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.

<span id="ii.xxx-p22"></span>**13.** Profecti deinde illinc castrametati
sunt citra Arnon, qum est in deserto, et portenditur a termino
Emorrhaei. Arnon enim est terminus Moab inter Moab et Emorrhaeum.

<span id="ii.xxx-p23"></span>**14.** Wherefore it is said in the book of
the wars of the Lord, What he did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of
Arnon.

<span id="ii.xxx-p24"></span>**14.** Ideirco dicetur in narratione
praeliorum Jehovae, Vaheb in Suphah, et torrentes ad Arnon.

<span id="ii.xxx-p25"></span>**15.** And at the stream of the brooks
that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the border of
Moab,

<span id="ii.xxx-p26"></span>**15.** Et decursum torrentium, qui pergit
ut quiescat in Ar, et recumbit in termino Moab.

<span id="ii.xxx-p27"></span>**16.** And from thence they went to Beer:
that is the well whereof the Lord spake unto Moses, Gather the people
together, and I will give them water.

<span id="ii.xxx-p28"></span>**16.** Illinc in Beer. Is est puteus de
quo dixerat Jehova ad Mosen, Congrega populum, et dabo illis aquam.

<span id="ii.xxx-p29"></span>**17.** Then Israel sang this song, Spring
up, O well; sing ye unto it:

<span id="ii.xxx-p30"></span>**17.** Tunc cecinit Israel carmen hoc,
Ascende Beer, canite ei.

<span id="ii.xxx-p31"></span>**18.** The princes digged the well, the
nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with
their staves. And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah;

<span id="ii.xxx-p32"></span>**18.** Puteus quem loderunt principes,
loderunt eum principes populi cum legislatore baculis suis. Et e deserto
in Mathanah.

<span id="ii.xxx-p33"></span>**19.** And from Mattanah to Nahaliel; and
from Nahaliel to Bamoth;

<span id="ii.xxx-p34"></span>**19.** Et e Mathanah in Nahaliel: et de
Nahaliel in Bamoth.

<span id="ii.xxx-p35"></span>**20.** And from Bamoth in the valley, that
is in the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looketh toward
Jeshimon.

<span id="ii.xxx-p36"></span>**20.** Et de Bamoth Hagaie, quae est in
regione Moab, in vertice coilis, et respicit contra faciem deserti,
(vel, Gessimon.)

<span id="ii.xxx-p37"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxx-p38"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p39"></span>**4.** *And they journeyed from mount Hor.*
This also is narrated in their praise, that they bore the weariness of a
long and circuitous march, when they were already worn down by their
wanderings for forty years. Moses, therefore, tells us that, since God
had forbidden them to pass the borders of Edom, they went by another
way; but immediately afterwards he adds, that they basely rebelled,
without being provoked to do so by any new cause. They had before been
rebellious under the pressure of hunger or thirst, or some other
inconvenience; but now, when there were no grounds for doing so, they
malignantly exasperate themselves against God. Some understand that they
were afflicted in mind because of the way,  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) so that the <span
id="ii.xxx-p40.4"></span>ב, *beth,* indicates the cause of their grief
and trouble. It might, indeed, be the case that their passage through
the mountains was steep and difficult; but a pleasant region was almost
in sight, gently to attract them onward. Again, they falsely complain of
want of water, in which respect God had already applied a remedy.
Nothing, then, could be more unfair than odiously to recall to memory a
past evil, in which they had experienced the special aid of God. But
their depravity is more thoroughly laid open in their loathing of the
manna, as a food affording but little nutriment, or contemptible.

<span id="ii.xxx-p41"></span>The verb  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) <span id="ii.xxx-p42.2"></span>קצר,
*katzar,* is used first, which signifies to *constrain;* thus some
explain it, that they were rendered anxious by distress. But since the
same word is used for to *shorten,* others translate it that their minds
were broken down with weariness, so as to faint by the way. In any case,
a voluntary bitterness is indicated, whereby they were possessed, so
that their alacrity in advancing altogether failed them. The verb  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) , <span id="ii.xxx-p43.6"></span>קצה,
*katzah,* which Jerome renders *sickens,* is not used simply for
disgust, but signifies that weariness which excruciates or agonizes the
mind.

<span id="ii.xxx-p44"></span>They call the manna “light” food; as much
as to say that it inflates rather than satisfies or nourishes; or, as I
deem more probable, the word <span id="ii.xxx-p44.1"></span>קלקל,
*kelokel,* is used metaphorically for vile, or contemptible, and
valueless.

<span id="ii.xxx-p45"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p46"></span>**5.** *And the people spake against God
and against Moses.* Either because they murmured against God in the
person of Moses, or else because their impiety broke forth to such a
furious extent, that they openly blasphemed against God; and this latter
opinion is most in accordance with the words, because by their use of
the plural number they accuse two parties together.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) But, inasmuch as Moses had nothing
separate from God, no one could enter into a contest with him without
warring also against God Himself. Here, however, as I have said, their
insolence proceeded still further, so as not only to rail against the
minister, but to vomit forth also their wicked blasphemy against God
Himself, as if He had injured them most grossly by their deliverance.

<span id="ii.xxx-p48"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p49"></span>**6.** *And the Lord sent fiery serpents.*
Their ingratitude was justly and profitably chastised by this
punishment; for they were practically taught that it was only through
God’s paternal care that they had been previously free from innumerable
evils, and that He was possessed of manifold forms of punishment,
whereby to take vengeance on the wicked.

<span id="ii.xxx-p50"></span>Although deserts are full of many poisonous
animals, still it is probable that these serpents suddenly arose, and
were created for this special purpose; as if God, in His determination
to correct the people’s pride, should call into being new enemies to
trouble them. For they were made to feel how great their folly was to
rebel against God, when they were not able to cope with the serpents.
This, then, was an admirable plan for humbling them, contemptuously to
bring these serpents into the field against them, and thus to convince
them of their weakness. Consequently, they both confess their guilt and
acknowledge that there was no other remedy for them except to obtain
pardon from God. These two things, as we are aware, are necessary in
order to appease God, first, that the sinner should be dissatisfied with
himself and self-condemned; and, secondly, that he should seek to be
reconciled to God. The people seem faithfully to fulfill both of these
conditions, when they of their own accord acknowledge their guilt, and
humbly have recourse to God’s mercy. It is through the influence of
terror that they implore the prayers of Moses, since they count
themselves unworthy of favor, unless an advocate *(patronus)* should
intercede for them. This would, indeed, be erroneous, that those who are
conscience-struck should invite an intercessor to stand between them and
God, unless they, too, should unite their own prayers with his; for
nothing is more contrary to faith than such a state of alarm as prevents
us from calling upon God. Still the kindness of Moses, and his
accustomed gentleness is perceived by this, that he is so readily
disposed to listen to these wicked ones; and God also, on His part,
shews that the prayer of a righteous man is not unavailing, when He
heals the wound He had inflicted.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120)

<span id="ii.xxx-p52"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p53"></span>**8.** *Make thee a fiery serpent.* Nothing
would, at first sight, appear more unreasonable than that a brazen
serpent should be made, the sight of which should extirpate the deadly
poison; but this apparent absurdity was far better suited to render the
grace of God conspicuous than as if there had been anything natural in
the remedy. If the serpents had been immediately removed, they would
have deemed it to be an accidental occurrence, and that the evil had
vanished by natural means. If, in the aid afforded, anything had been
applied, bearing an affinity to fit and appropriate remedies, then also
the power and goodness of God would have been thrown into the shade. In
order, therefore, that they might perceive themselves to be rescued from
death by the mere grace of God alone, a mode of preservation was chosen
so discordant with human reason, as to be almost a subject for laughter.
At the same time it had the effect of trying the obedience of the
people, to prescribe a mode of seeking preservation, whichbrought all
their senses into subjection and captivity. It was a foolish thing to
turn the eyes to a serpent of brass, to prevent the ill effects of a
poisonous bite; for what, according to man’s judgment, could a lifeless
statue, lifted up on high, profit? But it is the peculiar virtue of
faith, that we should willingly be fools, in order that we may learn to
be wise only from the mouth of God. This afterwards more clearly
appeared in the substance of this type: for, when Christ compares
Himself to this serpent which Moses lifted up in the wilderness, (<span
id="ii.xxx-p53.1"></span>[Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxx-p53.1"></span>,)
it was not a mere common similitude which He employs, but He teaches us,
that what had been shewn forth in this dark shadow, was completed in
Himself. And, surely, unless the brazen serpent had been a symbol of
spiritual grace, it would not have been laid up like a precious
treasure, and diligently preserved for many ages in God’s sanctuary. The
analogy, also, is very perfect; since Christ, in order to rescue us from
death, put on our flesh, not, indeed, subject to sin, but representing
“the likeness of sinful flesh,” as Paul says. (<span
id="ii.xxx-p53.2"></span>[Ro 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xxx-p53.2"></span>.) hence follows, what I have above adverted
to, that since “the world by wisdom knew not God,” He was manifested in
the foolishness of the cross. (<span id="ii.xxx-p53.3"></span>[1Co
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span id="ii.xxx-p53.3"></span>.)
If, then, we desire to obtain salvation, let us not be ashamed to seek
it from the curse of Christ, which was typified in the image of the
serpent.

<span id="ii.xxx-p54"></span>Its lifting up is poorly and incorrectly,
in my opinion, explained by some, as foreshadowing the crucifixion,
 <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) whereas it ought rather to be
referred to the preaching of the Gospel: for Moses was commanded to set
up the serpent on high, that it might be conspicuous on every side. And
the word <span id="ii.xxx-p55.1"></span>נס *nes,* is used both for a
standard, and the mast of a ship, or any other high pole: which is in
accordance with the prophecy of Isaiah, where he says that Christ should
be “for an ensign” to all nations, (<span id="ii.xxx-p55.2"></span>[Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxx-p55.2"></span>)
which we know to have been the case, by the spreading of the doctrine of
the Gospel through the whole world, with which the look of faith
corresponds. For, just as no healing was conveyed from the serpent to
any who did not turn their eyes towards it, when set up on high, so the
look of faith only causes the death of Christ to bring salvation to us.
Although, therefore, God would give relief to their actual distress, it
is still unquestionable that He even then admonished all believers that
the venomous bites of the devil could only be cured by their directing
their minds and senses by faith on Christ.

<span id="ii.xxx-p56"></span>The brazen serpent is, furthermore, a proof
to us how inclined to superstition the human race is, since posterity
worshipped it as an idol, until it was reduced to powder by the holy
king Hezekiah. (<span id="ii.xxx-p56.1"></span>[1Ki
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxx-p56.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxx-p57"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p58"></span>**10.** *And the children of Israel set
forth.* Moses does not here enumerate all the stations, which will be
mentioned hereafter, when he recapitulates them all separately and in
order: for, in hastening to record certain memorable circumstances, he
passes over those of minor importance, which, however, he does not omit
elsewhere; since the account of their circuitous course, when they were
turning away from the Edomites, was of some moment. For it was, as we
have observed, no ordinary proof of obedience, when God had forbidden
them to attack the Edomites, that they should undertake a difficult and
rugged march. Still in this place Moses deemed it sufficient to mark the
principal places in which they stopped. Meanwhile, what I have stated
appears to be the case, that he hastens onwards to relate circumstances
of much importance, for, when they came to Arnon, he highly magnifies
the power of God, with which He succoured His people.

<span id="ii.xxx-p59"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p60"></span>**13.** *From thence they removed, and
pitched.* I will presently add, what Moses relates in Deuteronomy
respecting the Moabites and Ammonites. Since here he only briefly
touches upon the main facts, he only specifies that the people came to
the borders of their enemies, where it was necessary to give battle,
because there was no means of entering the land of Canaan, except by
force of arms. Here, then, was the end of their journeying, for, when
the Amorites were conquered, they began to inhabit their cities. He,
therefore, immediately adds, that this place would be memorable in all
ages, because in it God again exerted His power, by putting to flight
their enemies. Still translators appear to me to be mistaken as to the
meaning of the words. Almost all of them render the word <span
id="ii.xxx-p60.1"></span>ספר, *sepher,* “the book;” and afterwards
eagerly discuss what book it is, without coming to any satisfactory
conclusion. I rather understand it to mean *“narration;”* as if Moses
had said, that when the wars of Jehovah shall be recounted, the memory
of this place would be celebrated; as David, when he is recounting, and
magnifying God’s mercies, expressly mentions that king Sihon and Og were
conquered.

<span id="ii.xxx-p61"></span>There is also another ambiguity in the
following words: for some suppose *Vaheb* to be the proper name of a
city, and *Suphah* a noun common, which they translate “in a whirlwind;”
 <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) but, since the shore of the Red
Sea was not habitable, I do not see how mention could be suitably made
of any city situated there. But if they think it was a city near Arnon,
it is surprising that it should never be spoken of elsewhere, and yet
here referred to, as if it were well known. I therefore rather incline
to their opinion, who explain it as a vero, and suppose that <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.10"></span>ו *(vau)* is used for <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.11"></span>י *(yod,)* so that the sense should be; As God
had begun to fight gloriously for the Israelites at the Red Sea, so also
He continued the same grace at Arnon. I admit, that if the points be
scrupulously insisted upon, this meaning would not be altogether
accordant with grammar; but I prefer eliciting a probable meaning at the
cost of a single point, than to go out of the way in search of poor
conjectures, as they do who imagine *Vaheb* to be the proper name of a
place. Appropriately, indeed, does Moses compare Arnon with the Red Sea,
in order to shew that God’s grace, at its end, is thoroughly in
accordance with its commencement. He had mightily fought against the
Egyptians, and had destroyed the army of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, but
small would have been the fruit of this deliverance, unless, with equal
efficacy, He had succoured His people when they had to contend with the
Canaanitish nations: for the question here is not as to God’s blessings
in general, but only as to the victories, wherein it was manifested that
the Israelites did not fight without the approval and guidance of God.
Moses, therefore, does not recount the miracles performed in the desert:
but only says, that in the history of the wars of God the name of Arnon
would be equally renowned with that of the Red Sea. Still, in the word
Arnon it must be observed that there is a *synecdoche;* forMoses
comprehends in it all the subsequent battles. Since, therefore, from the
time that the people arrived at Arnon, where their enemies came forth to
meet them, God again lifted up His standard, and gloriously honored His
people by continued victories — hence the special celebrity of the place
arose. There is a poetical repetition in the verse, where, for the
torrents, the stream of the torrents  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) is spoken of, which *descends* to Ar,
and reposes in the border of Moab.

<span id="ii.xxx-p64"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p65"></span>**16.** *And from thence they went to
Beer.* Some think that a circumstance is here narrated, which had never
been mentioned before, since a song is recorded, which we do not find
elsewhere. But since Moses repeats the same words which he had used
before, and speaks as of a very notorious matter, that he was there
commanded to assemble the people, to partake of the water which God had
given, it appears probable to me that the name was given to the place,
whereby both God’s goodness and the people’s ingratitude might be
testified to posterity. I do not, however, contend that this is the same
place, from whence we previously read that water was extracted: for it
was not there only that the people was satisfied by drinking it, but it
flowed forth beside them wherever they went. In which sense Paul writes
that “the Rock followed them,” (<span id="ii.xxx-p65.1"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxx-p65.1"></span>;)
not that the rock was torn from its roots, but because God miraculously
drew on the water which flowed from it, so that it should accompany
them, and thus continually supply them with drink. And this we gather
also from the next verse, where Moses says, that the people “sang this
song, Ascend, Beer.”  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) For when
they saw that, contrary to nature, the water rose into higher levels
from the source which was recently called into existence, so as to
supply them with drink in dry places, they began to pay more attention
to the miracle, and to celebrate the grace of God. Still it might be the
case that the water did not flow down like a river, but bubbled up from
the open veins of the earth, whenever it was required. At any rate, by
its ascent he indicates an extraordinary effect produced by God. When it
is said, that “the princes digged the well,” there is, in my opinion, an
implied contrast between a few persons, and those but little fitted for
manual labors, and a great body of engineers. Whenever armies have need
of water, the soldiers dig wells with much labor; here quite another
mode of proceeding is expressed, viz., that the leaders of the people,
together with Moses, dug the well, not by artificial or mechanical
means, but by the simple touch of a staff. Moses, indeed, speaks of
“staves,” in the plural nmnber, because mention of the princes is made;
but I have no doubt but that the rod of Moses is contrasted with all
other implements, in order to exalt the power and grace of God. I think,
too, that the name of Beer was given to the place, where that water
forsook the Israelites; since they had come to well-watered regions,
which would supply water in abundance without miraculous interference.
Let us, however, learn from this canticle, that, although the people had
at first impiously rebelled against God, still, by long experience of
the blessing, they were at length induced to gratitude, so as to burst
forth into praise of God. Hence we gather, that they were not obstinate
in their senselessness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc06031.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.xxx-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p40"></span> *Heb.* <span id="ii.xxx-p40.1"></span>בדרך
*Lat*, in via. *A.V*. “because of the way.” *“In* often noteth the cause
of a thing; as, ‘the Lord’s soul was grieved in *(that is,* for, *or*
because of) the misery of Israel,’ <span id="ii.xxx-p40.2"></span>[Jud
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)<span id="ii.xxx-p40.2"></span>;
or, according to the like phrase in <span id="ii.xxx-p40.3"></span>[Zec
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxx-p40.3"></span>,
their soul ‘loatheth the way,’ both for the longsomeness of it, and for
the many wants and troubles they found therein.” — Ainsworth *in*
*loco.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc06031.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.xxx-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p42"></span> *A. V.,* “discouraged;” *margin, “or,*
grieved; *Heb.* shortened.” <span id="ii.xxx-p42.1"></span>קצר, To
shorten, to cut short, to cut off, and hence to reap. *S.M.* says,
“Their spirit was shortened, *i.e.,* became impatient; being a species
of antithesis to longanimity, or long forbearing.” — *W.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc06031.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.xxx-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p43"></span> *A. V., “loatheth.”* <span
id="ii.xxx-p43.1"></span>קצה is likewise *to* *cut off,* but is said by
the lexicographers to borrow a meaning in this instance from <span
id="ii.xxx-p43.2"></span>קוף to *loathe,* and *be weary of.* It would be
simpler to say that <span id="ii.xxx-p43.3"></span>קצה is the praet. 3d.
pers. of <span id="ii.xxx-p43.4"></span>קוף, and that a feminine verb is
required by the subs. <span id="ii.xxx-p43.5"></span>נפשנו — *W*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc06031.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.xxx-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p47"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “sinon qu’ils
s’addressent aussi a Aaron;” unless they also address Aaron.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc06031.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.xxx-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p51"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “si tost;” so speedily.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc06031.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.xxx-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p55"></span> *C.* here is opposed to the great body of
the commentators, although he has with him “some of reverent account in
the Church,” as Attersoll calls them. Perhaps it may be admissible to
include, with Lampe, both views: “*Exaltatio* serpentis hujus in
*pertica* primo quidem designat exaltationem in cruce, ita tamen ut
pertica simul possit emblema gerere praeconii Evangelici, per quod
Christus crucifixus mundo innotuit.”—In Johan. 3:14.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc06031.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.xxx-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p62"></span> <span id="ii.xxx-p62.1"></span>את-והב
בסופה *eth-vaheb b’suphah.* None of the most ancient translations can be
said to be in unison with the present reading of the Hebrew in this
clause. The *LXX.* appear to have read <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.2"></span>זהב and render it <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.3"></span>τὴν Ζωὸβ ἐφλόγισε The Chaldee Paraphrast,
Onkelos, has <span id="ii.xxx-p62.4"></span>על ימא דסוף, “By the sea of
Suph,” *i.e.,* the Red Sea. The Syriac has, “A flame with a whirlwind,”
translating <span id="ii.xxx-p62.5"></span>סופה instead of treating it
as a proper name, and having apparently read some form of <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.6"></span>להב instead of <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.7"></span>את-והב. The *V*. has, “Sicut fecit in mari
rubro;” our *A.V.* “What he did in the Red Sea,” but in the Margin,
“Vaheb in Suphah.” The translation of *S. M.* agrees with that in the
text of *A. F.;* but in his notes he says, “Kimchi interprets <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.8"></span>והב to be the name of a place, but R. Salomon
treats it as equivalent to <span id="ii.xxx-p62.9"></span>יהב *he*
*gave,* and expounds the clause thus, As God gave many signs by the Red
Sea, so was He wonderful in his works by the brook Arnon. — *W*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc06031.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.xxx-p62.12"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p63"></span> *A.V.* “the brooks” — “the stream of the
brooks.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc06031.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.xxx-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p66"></span> See *Margin A.V.* The original word for a
well is <span id="ii.xxx-p66.1"></span> באר*Beer.* — *W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 2:9-23](cc06032)
