[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06010)  [Next](cc06012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p1"></span>The Repetition of the same Narrative

<span id="ii.x-p2"></span><span id="ii.x-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p3"></span><span id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
1:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p4"></span>**26.** Notwithstanding ye would not go up,
but rebelled against the commandment of the Lord your God:

<span id="ii.x-p5"></span>**26.** Et tamen noluistis ascendere, sed
rebellastis verbo Jehovae Dei vestri.

<span id="ii.x-p6"></span>**27.** And ye murmured in your tents, and
said, Because the Lord hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the
land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy
us.

<span id="ii.x-p7"></span>**27.** Et murmurastis in tabernaculis vestris
dicentes, Propterea quod odio habebat nos Jehova, eduxit nos e terra
AEgypti, ut traderet nos in manum Emorrhaei, ut perderet nos.

<span id="ii.x-p8"></span>**28.** Whither shall we go up? our brethren
have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is greater and taller
than we; the cities are great, and walled up to heaven: and, moreover,
we have seen the sons of the Anakims there.

<span id="ii.x-p9"></span>**28.** Quo nos ascendimus? fratres nostri
dissolverunt cor nostrum, dicendo, Populus iste major et procerior nobis
est, urbes magnae et munitae usque ad coelum: et etiam filios gigantum
vidimus ibi.

<span id="ii.x-p10"></span>**29.** Then I said unto you, Dread not,
neither be afraid of them.

<span id="ii.x-p11"></span>**29.** Tunc dixi vobis, Ne pavearis neque
timeatis ab eis:

<span id="ii.x-p12"></span>**30.** The Lord your God, which goeth before
you, he shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in
Egypt before your eyes;

<span id="ii.x-p13"></span>**30.** Jehova Deus vester qui praecedit vos,
ipse pugnabit pro vobis, prorsus ut fecit vobiscum in AEgypto in oculis
vestris.

<span id="ii.x-p14"></span>**31.** And in the wilderness, where thou
hast seen how that the Lord thy God bare thee, as a man doth bear his
son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this place.

<span id="ii.x-p15"></span>**31.** Et in ipso deserto vidistis quod
portaverit Jehova Deus tuus, quemadmodum portare solet homo filium suum,
et hoc per totam viam per quam ambulastis, donec veneritis ad locum
istum.

<span id="ii.x-p16"></span>**32.** Yet in this thing ye did not believe
the Lord your God,

<span id="ii.x-p17"></span>**32.** Atqui ea in re non credidistis
Jehovae Deo vestro,

<span id="ii.x-p18"></span>**33.** Who went in the way before you, to
search you out a place to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to show
you by what way ye should go, and in a cloud by day.

<span id="ii.x-p19"></span>**33.** Qui praecedebat vos per viam ad
explorandum vobis locum in quo castra figeretis, per ignem in nocte, ut
ostenderet vobis viam per quam ambularetis, et per nubem in die.

<span id="ii.x-p20"></span><span id="ii.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p21"></span>**27.** *And ye murmured in your tents.*
Elsewhere he says that they also wept; here he only speaks of their
murmuring, which better suited his reproof. He then reminds them how
malignant had been their ingratitude and perversity in upbraiding God on
account of the special blessing which He had conferred upon them, as if
He had done them a grievous injury. He could not have afforded them a
more manifest proof of His paternal love towards them than by their
deliverance. Most iniquitous, therefore, is their mode of repaying Him,
viz., by complaining that they had been cruelly brought forth to die,
and by construing into hatred His exceeding great love. It is clear from
the next verse that, although Moses does not relate the details in their
proper order, there is still no contradiction in his words. A little
before, he had seemed to give unqualified praise to the spies, as if
they had performed their office honestly and faithfully, but now, from
the language of the people, he shows that they were the authors of the
revolt, inasmuch as they rendered inert, by the terror they inspired,
those whom they ought to have encouraged.

<span id="ii.x-p22"></span><span id="ii.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p23"></span>**29.** *Then I said unto you, Dread not.* He
here omits the address of Caleb and Joshua: since he only states briefly
the heads of what he had spoken to the people. He merely shows that,
when he endeavored to recall them to their right senses, his efforts and
pains were ineffectual. Moreover, he reasons from experience that they
might well place their hopes in the assistance of God, because He went
before them as a light; and, in proof of this, he reminds them that,
after the discomfiture of the Egyptians, He did not fail still to exert
His power, so as to protect even to the end those whom He had once
delivered. This, then, is his proposition, that although they might be
aware of their own weakness, still, through the power of God, they would
be conquerors, since He had taken them under His *care,* and had
declared Himself their leader; which he indicates by the expression,
“goes before you.” And, lest any hesitation should remain, he sets
against their present obstacles the miracles of God’s power, which they
had experienced, not only in the commencement of their redemption, but
in the continued progress of their deliverance’s, when, in their lost
and desperate state, He had by ways innumerable restored them from death
unto life. Hence he concludes that they ought not to be afraid, not that
he would wish them to be altogether free from all fear and *care,* but
so that they might overcome all hindrances, when confidence derived from
the ready help of God should prevail in their hearts. He says
emphatically that God had fought “before their eyes,” to lead them to
fuller conviction by the evidence of their own senses.

<span id="ii.x-p24"></span><span id="ii.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p25"></span>**31.** *And it, the wilderness where thou
hast seen.* The constant course of God’s grace is here commemorated;
from whence they might safely infer, that He, who had pursued them with
so many benefits, would still be the same in this crowning act. He,
therefore, uses the image of *bearing,* because the way would have been
by no means passable unless God had borne them, as it were, on His
shoulders, just as a father is wont to bear his infant child. Thus, on
the one hand, the incredible goodness of God is exalted, who had deigned
so far to condescend as to take up the people in His arms; and, on the
other hand, the people are reminded of their own infirmity, for, unless
upheld by the power of God, they would scarcely have been competent to
advance a step. Elsewhere, retaining a portion of this similitude, Moses
compares God to an eagle,  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) who
bears her young upon her wings, and teaches them to fly. And surely,
unless (the Israelites) had been uplifted by supernatural means, they
would never have been equal to a hundredth part of the difficulties they
encountered.

<span id="ii.x-p27"></span><span id="ii.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p28"></span>**32.** *Yet in this thing ye did not believe
the Lord. He* signifies that they had been most prejudiced observers of
the works of God, since His power, so often experienced and. so
thoroughly understood, had not aroused them to confidence in Him. For in
the word <span id="ii.x-p28.1"></span>דבר, *dabar,* which we have
translated *thing,* he embraces all the proofs whereby God had
testified, that in Him alone there was all that was necessary to insure
their complete salvation. And this was, so to speak, real or practical
doctrine, when God called upon them to trust Him by stretching forth His
hand. Still, He accuses them of unbelief with reference to the promise;
for, whilst faith is not only prompt and ready in obedience, but
invigorates and quickens the whole mall, so the cause of their inertness
was that they gave no heed to God who had promised to bestow upon them
the land of Canaan, and did not rest upon His covenant. In relation to
this also, he says, that God marked out the places and stations where
they should pitch their camp, for, unless it had been His design to
guide them onwards, this change of places would have been superfluous.
It was, therefore, gross supineness not to refer these signs for halting
and proceeding to their proper object, since it was equivalent to
despising God when He held out His hand to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc06011.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="ii.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p26"></span> <span id="ii.x-p26.1"></span>[De
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.x-p26.1"></span>.
The last sentence of the paragraph in omitted in *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 14:10-38](cc06012.md)
