[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc06028)  [Next](cc06030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 6: Harmony of the Law, Part IV*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p3"></span>**1.** And when king Arad the Canaanite,
which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came by the way of the
spies, then he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p4"></span>**1.** Quum audisset Chananaeus rex Arad
habitans in meridie quod veniret Israel per viam exploratorum, pugnavit
cum Israele, et abduxit ab eo praedam (vel, captivitatem.)

<span id="ii.xxviii-p5"></span>**2.** And Israel vowed a vow unto the
Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand,
then I will utterly destroy their cities.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p6"></span>**2.** Vovit ergo Israel votum Jehovae,
et dixit, Si tradendo tradideris populum istum in manum meam, delebo
urbes eorum.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p7"></span>**3.** And the Lord hearkened to the
voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly
destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place
Hormah.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p8"></span>**3.** Et exaudivit Jehova vocem
Israelis, et dedit Chananaeum, et delevit eos ac urbes eorum: vocavitque
nomen loci illius Horma.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxviii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p11"></span>**1.** *And when king Arad the
Canaanite.* It is not altogether agreed among commentators who this king
Arad was. Some think that he was an Amalekite, but this error is refuted
by the fact that the Amalekites had already attempted in vain to
interrupt the journey of the people. Nor is it credible that after so
great a slaughter, they would have endeavored to do so again, especially
since their territories remained untouched. Besides, it would have been
absurd to call the Amalekites Canaanites, since they derived their
origin not from Canaan but from Esau, and thus were connected with the
Israelites by a common descent from Shem. We shall, however, rightly
understand this as referring to the Amorites, who were certainly
reckoned among the Canaanites, as being of the same race; as Moses tells
us in his first book, (<span id="ii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>[Ge
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>, and <span id="ii.xxviii-p11.2"></span>[Ge
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.xxviii-p11.2"></span>;) nay, he elsewhere designates all the
people of Canaan by the name of Amorites. Moreover, in the thirty-fourth
chapter of this book, we shall see that their boundaries reached to
mount Hor and Kadesh-barnea. Since, then, the Amorites were in this
neighborhood towards the south, the name will suit them very well. That
king Arad, however, alone made war upon them, arose from the paternal
providence of God, who wished to accustom His people to the conquest of
their enemies by degrees. If all these nations had united their forces,
and made a combined attack upon an unwarlike people, it would have
succumbed in astonishment and fear. But it was easier for them to defend
themselves against a single nation. And yet, in the first combat, God
permitted the Israelites to be routed, so that the victorious Canaanite
took some booty, or led away some captives. And this also was useful to
the Israelites, in order that, mistrusting their own strength, they
might humbly betake themselves to the succor of God; for it behooved
them to learn that, unless they were aided from on high, they would be
altogether insufficient, when they had to resist many powerful nations,
since they had not been able to withstand even a single people.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p12"></span>With respect to “the way of the spies,”
some understand that, as the people had been taught by Joshua and Caleb,
they followed the footsteps of those who had been sent to explore the
land; but, inasmuch as it appears that the course was a different one, I
know not whether this opinion is very tenable. Thus, some take the word
<span id="ii.xxviii-p12.1"></span>דרך, *derek, to* mean “after the
manner of,”  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) which appears to be
harsh and constrained. Thus, then, I explain it, Since they had to
advance through unknown regions, spies were sent on, according to
custom, to direct the whole march; and hence king Arad knew that his
territory was to be invaded, before the army had proceeded so far.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p15"></span>**2.** *And Israel vowed a vow unto the
Lord.* This was a manifestation of piety, when they had sustained a
loss, not to cast away hope, nor to murmur against God; but to encourage
themselves by entreating His aid. To this slate of submissiveness they
had been subdued by the chastisements of God, although the continuance
of their obedience, as we shall presently see, was not of long duration.
Any one at first sight would say that there was something absurd in this
vow; but we gather from the result, that it was lawful and approved by
God; for the sign of His approbation was that tie hearkened to the vows
and cry of the people. I admit, indeed, that God sometimes answers
defective prayers, but there is no doubt whatever but that Moses here
commends their piety in the vow. We must consider, then, how it was
lawful for them to offer the destruction of cities and the wasting of
lands to God as a sacrifice of sweet savor; and the reply to this
question will be easy, if we bear in mind that the vow did not originate
in inconsiderate zeal, but rather in the command of God. It seems cruel
to destroy an entire nation; but God had not only decreed its
destruction, but had appointed the Israelites to execute His sentence.
Hence the vow, of which we are now treating, was not idly spoken, being
founded on God’s word, which is the first rule for vowing rightly. It
was, indeed, allowable for them to spare the cities, in order to possess
them themselves; but it was also allowable to devote them as an offering
*(in anathema)* of first-fruits to God, as we are elsewhere told of the
city of Jericho. This at any rate we must conclude, that although God
had not openly and expressly commanded the cities to be utterly
destroyed, still this vow was dictated by the Holy Spirit, lest the
people should yield to sloth, and set themselves down in a single
corner, but that, having desolated and wasted this region, they might
encourage themselves the more to further progress. The vero <span
id="ii.xxviii-p15.1"></span>חרם *charam,* which Moses employs,
signifies, indeed, *to destroy,* and from it is derived the word, <span
id="ii.xxviii-p15.2"></span>חרמה *chormah,* or *Hormah,* which implies a
species of anathema, as if they devoted the land to the curse of God.
Moses, however, adds, that the people performed the vow, under the
obligation of which they had laid themselves; and praiseworthy indeed
was their magnanimity, in refusing to avail themselves of a comfortable
home by destroying the cities, which they had acquired by the right of
war.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p16"></span>We know not whether the cities were
destroyed immediately after the victory over their enemies; indeed, I
rather conjecture that there was some interval of time, because the
people did not straightway enter the boundaries of the promised land.
And this more clearly appears from chapter 33, where, after this battle
was fought, certain stations are enumerated, which are in another
direction. It is probable, therefore, that they fought outside the
boundaries of the Canaanites, and that, when the people came here soon
afterwards, the land was finally put to the sword.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc06029.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="ii.xxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p13"></span> It is again *S.M.* who has mentioned
this opinion. — *W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 33:40](cc06030.md)
