[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast10)  [Next](dast12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### ATMAN, THE ETERNAL LIGHT.

#### Seventh Stanza of the Hymn.

To Him who, by means of the blessed symbol, manifests to the disciples
the True Self that always shines within as the Ego, Constant in all the
varying states of infancy, (manhood, and old age), of jagrat (svapna and
sushupti) and so on; to Him who is incarnate in the Teacher, to Him in
the Effulgent Form Facing the South, to Him (Siva) be this bow!

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="small">The blessed symbol here referred to is variously
named as follows: *Chinmudra*, the symbol of consciousness;
*Vyakhya-mudra*, the symbol of exposition; *Tarka-mudra*, the symbol of
investigation; *Jnana-mudra*, the symbol of wisdom. It consists of a
circle formed by joining the thumb and the index-finger at their
tips.</span>

#### Authority of pratyabhijna questioned.

1\. *Question:* If it be concluded, on the strength of *pratyabhijná* or
recognition of self-identity, that Atman is a persistent entity, (we
ask), what is this *pratyabhijná*? and what its purpose?

2\. *Pratyabhijná* is not enumerated among pramánas—right sources of
knowledge—along with pratyaksha, etc. How can it be a pramâna? The
questioner is enlightened (by the seventh stanza of the Hymn).

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

#### Pratyabhijna proves Atman's Eternality.

<span class="small">The meaning of the stanza may be explained as
follows:</span>

3\. Pratyabhijnána consists in recognising a thing—in the form 'this is
the same as that'—which, having once before presented itself to
consciousness, again becomes an object of consciousness at present.

4\. Just as (in the case of external objects) an identical thing which
is continuously present is referred to in the words "this is that"—all
the accidental circumstances of place, time and form being left out of
account,—so also:

5\. The *pratyabhijnána* of Atman consists in His becoming conscious
that He is omniscient, etc., after casting aside the notion that He is
of limited knowledge,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

and so on,—a notion engendered by His association with Mâyâ.

<span class="small">That is to say, the recognition of Atman's
self-identity consists in the intuitive realisation of His essential
nature as the infinite Consciousness and infinite Bliss, after
eliminating all limitations of Maya and its effects ascribed to Him by
the ignorant.</span>

6\. By a recollection of the experience in a former birth, the new-born
animal proceeds, of itself, to suck the mother's milk.

<span class="small">Thus, just as Atman remains the same through all the
varying states of jagrat, svapna, and sushupti, unchanging though the
body changes in infancy, childhood, youth, manhood, and old age,—so,
too, He continues the same while passing in succession through the
bodies of Devas, animals, men, and so on,—not born when the bodies are
born, not dying when the bodies die.</span>

7\. It is, therefore, concluded that Atman exists the same even in other
bodies,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

inasmuch as, without the recollection of a former experience, it is not
possible for the child to suck the mother's milk.

<span class="small">Pratyabhijna is thus a source of right knowledge;
and it may be brought under pratyaksha; only its process is somewhat
different from other kinds of pratyaksha. While in other kinds of
pratyaksha the contact of the sense-organ with the object is alone
sufficient, in *pratyabhijnana*, smriti or recollection operates as an
additional factor along with the contact of the sense-organ with its
object. *Bhranti* or illusion, for example, is indeed classed under
pratyaksha, though it is produced by the sense-organ in a morbid
state.</span>

8\. Present both before and after, both at the time of experience and at
the time of recollection, Atman recollects the thing which has persisted
in Himself in the form of a *samskára* or latent impression.

Recollection here means consciousness of something as having been
experienced before.

On hearing the word 'recollection (smriti)' here used, and without fully
understanding the meaning of the definition given above of
*pratyabhijna*, and

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="small">thinking that the Vedantin tries to establish the
identity, of Atman on the strength of pratyabhijna which is none other
than mere recollection, an objector asks as follows.</span>

9\. (Question): If by *pratyabhijná* is meant *smriti* or recollection
of things, then how can mere recollection be an authority as to the
persistent existence of Atman?

10–11. It may be objected:—In memory (smriti) the thing (remembered)
does not directly appear nor is there an actual experience of the thing;
nor can they be both the thing and the experience (related to each
other) like two fingers; nor is the thing an object of experience, (the
thing and experience thus related together) like the stick and the man
holding it;

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

for, then, the same thing would apply to all cases of memory. Listen now
to our answer:

The objection may be explained as follows:—If Pratyabhijnana is mere
memory, it cannot prove the identity of Atman as the Vedantin supposes.
Now, it is held that Pratyabhijnana bears testimony to former experience
of a thing. So, it is mere memory. And as memory, it cannot have the
probative force of pratyaksha as to the thing itself remembered, because
the thing is not present to the senses; nor as to the actual experience
itself, because the actual experience passed away. It cannot, therefore,
have the probative force of pratyaksha as to both the thing and
experience, regarded as independent of each other as two fingers are;
and much less can it prove the thing to have been an object of
experience.

If memory be held as a sufficient evidence as to the experience, then
the same probative force will have to be attached to the memory of a
thing called up by a mere word.

(*Answer*): The Vedantin does not hold that mere recollection is a
pramana, a source of right knowledge. He only means that recollection
(smriti) cannot be explained in the absence of a persistent Atman. Now,
as to the origin of memory:

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

12\. When a former experience has disappeared, its memory springs from a
cause abiding in Atman and called *samskára*, the latent impression
produced on the seat, of that experience

13\. (This memory) gives us to understand that Atman is persistent, as
being conscious of the object of a former experience after the immediate
experience vanished away.

<span class="small">Atman, passing through an experience of the present
moment, and remembering a former event in virtue of the, latent
impression produced in him by the actual experience of that event,
thinks thus "I who formerly ruled a kingdom, now lead, an ascetic
[life](errata.htm#21) on the banks of the Ganges." He is thus conscious
of his personal identity as persisting through two different periods of
time. So, too, remembering the events of former births, he recognises
his personal identity through many births. Thus, as memory enters</span>

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="small">as a factor into the process by which recognition of
identity is produced, *pratyabhijna* has been spoken of as
memory.</span>

14\. When the object has vanished away as also the experience thereof,
the Divine Atman, never vanishing, never unconscious, recollects the
object abiding in Himself.

<span class="small">The object has lain dissolved in Himself in the form
of a samskara or latent impression.</span>

15\. It is the *pramatris*, the percipients, that become unconscious by
the darkness of Mâyâ. Illusion and Wisdom are the two potentialities of
the Lord, like unto the sun's shade and light.

<span class="small">Atman is not unconscious even in sushupti. Though
Atman does not manifest Himself in, any particular form in sushupti, He
continues to shine by Himself, is self-conscious as before. It is the
upadhis, buddhi, etc., which lie dormant</span>

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="small">during sleep; so that the idea that Atman is
[unconscious](errata.htm#22) during sleep is a mere illusion. This
darkness of Maya, which has been as old as the universe, disappears on
the dawn of the sun of wisdom. Both Maya and Vidya reside in the Lord as
His saktis, or powers, like the shade and the light of the sun. They are
the causes of bondage and liberation. They are said to abide in Atman as
His saktis or powers, simply because He is conscious of bondage and
liberation caused by them; not that they ever constitute the inherent
nature of Atman, unattached and self-luminous as He always is. Neither
can He be said to gain wisdom as though He had not possessed it before;
for, He is never affected by Maya, any more than the sun is affected by
the clouds. And, as in the case of the sun, it is a mere illusion to
speak of Atman as distinct from His light.</span>

16\. Mâyâ enshrouds, and Vidyâ uncovers and manifests, all things. It is
indeed Pratyabhijna, the all-witnessing Consciousness, which underlies
all pramânas, all sources of right knowledge.

<span class="small">That is to say, Vidya, though a state of the mind
which is in itself insentient, can dispel</span>

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">Maya by the power of the all-witnessing Consciousness
underlying it. Or, it may mean that the consciousness—in the form "I
have known this"—which accompanies every act of cognition, shows that
Vidya can remove the veil which conceals an object. Or, it may even mean
that Vidya is Pratyabhijna itself which dispels ignorance and unfolds
the true nature of all things, and which is none other than the very
Pratyagatman, the all-witnessing Consciousness illumining all
things.</span>

17\. It (pratyabhijnâ) is the consciousness that I am Isvara, arising on
the removal, by wisdom (Vidyâ), of the veil of Mâyâ which causes the
(idea of) separation that "the Isvara is one and I am another."

18\. Screened by the curtain of Mâyâ, Isvara emitted but little light.
The curtain fully removed, like the sun may He shine.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

19\. Not from the operation of causes nor of the organs of perception
(does this recognition (come). To cause recognition is only to remove
ignorance.

20\. Whatever pramânas (organs of knowledge) there are whereby to guide
our conduct in life, they all operate in no wise other than by removing
ignorance.

<span class="small">Accordingly, the teaching of the Upanishads
constitutes a pramana or source of knowledge as to the true nature of
Atman, as doing no more than removing the veil of ignorance which has
concealed the true nature of Atman, and thus bringing about the
cessation of the bondage caused by that ignorance.</span>

#### Adhyasa or Illusion.

<span class="small">Now the Vartikakara proceeds to show that the
bondage of samsara is not real, as arising from an illusion caused by
the confounding of Atman and the body with one another.</span>

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

21–22. By ignorance, the attributes of he insentient, unreal, and finite
body are ascribed to the conscious Atman; as also the reality,
consciousness and bliss (of Atman) are ascribed to the body; just as the
mother-o’-pearl is mistaken for silver which is quite a different thing.

22\. If the silver which here presents itself to
[consciousness](errata.htm#23) be really existent, then how, according
to thy theory, can it be reduced to nothing (by knowledge)?

23\. Again what is altogether nonexistent can never present itself to
consciousness, any more than a man's horn.

<span class="small">That is to say, the silver which here presents
itself to consciousness cannot be altogether nonexistent.</span>

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

If illusion be a case of memory, then the silver would present itself to
consciousness as that seen on the hand of a woman or so.

24\. If illusion be due to similarity (between the things confounded
together), then we should be conscious (of similarity at the time) in
the form that "this (mother-o’-pearl) is similar to that silver." When
the white conch appears (to the jaundiced eye) as yellow, or when sugar
tastes bitter (to the diseased tongue), there is, indeed, no similarity
(between the colours or the tastes confounded).

25\. If it be held that the mother-o’-pearl presents itself to
consciousness, at the time, as silver itself,—as in fact identical with
it,—then the illusory consciousness would have no real basis

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

whatever; and when contradicted by experience, no residual truth would
be left (in the consciousness).

<span class="small">If the mother-o’-pearl do not enter into
consciousness at all and be perceived wholly as one with the silver,
which alone enters into consciousness, the whole state of consciousness
is an illusion, because it is quite opposed to fact. This is tantamount
to saying that illusion which is a fact of consciousness is based on no
reality whatever, and that when investigated it ends in nothing. If one
fact of our experience be thus *entirely* made independent of reality,
then what is there to prevent one from coming to the conclusion that the
remaining portion of our experience is based on no reality? This view of
*illusion* would thus lead to utter nihilism.</span>

26\. If silver, existent (as an idea) in the buddhi, appears to be
external, then, when a *gunja* berry is mistaken for fire, there would
be a burning of the body.

<span class="small">Some regard that the silver which manifests here is
real as an idea existing in the mind and externalising itself. So, then,
when a gunja</span>

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="small">berry is mistaken for fire, the fire also must be
real existing as an idea and externalising itself like every thing else
as the Buddhist Idealist would say. Accordingly, like other fires it
must cause the burning of the body in which it lies.</span>

27\. Illusion being an unaccountable appearance, it cannot be defined
(as *sat* or *asat*). If it could be defined, then there would be no
illusion.

Thus, the appearance of silver cannot be accounted for in any one of the
ways shown above; it cannot be defined as existent or non-existent. If
it could be defined as the one or the other, then it would no longer be
an illusion, and no knowledge could remove it; a conclusion which is
opposed to our experience.

Having thus far illustrated the nature of illusion by an example, the
Vartikakara concludes that the whole universe is a mere illusory
appearance of the One Self.

28\. The one (Atman) appears to be many as one moon appears to be many

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

in waters; the Fearless appears to cause fear like the rope appearing to
be a serpent. The. Cause appears to be the effect, like gold appearing
to be a bracelet.

29–30. By illusion this almost nonexistent universe is imagined to exist
in Atman—in the one self-existent (Atman), as silver in the
mother-o’-pearl; in the all-pervading (Atman), as a city of Yakshas
conjured up in the âkâsa; in the Luminous (Atman), as the mirage appears
in the rays of the sun; in the Immutable (Atman), as a thief in a pillar
(which is mistaken for a thief at night).

30–31. The illusion removed, the self-luminous and existent Reality,
never

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Himself) subject
to illusion or contradiction, is recognised as He is. The body and other
upâdhis shaken off, Atman verily is the Mahesvara, the Great Lord.

32\. The True Word cites the Smriti, Intuition, Tradition and other
pramânas in proof of this recognition of identity.

<span class="small">The Sruti says "Smriti, pratyaksha, aitihya and
anumana pure,—by all these the Sun is to be known"
(*Taittiriya-Aranyaka:* 1. 2.) *Smriti*, such as the Bhagavadgita.
*Pratyaksha:* the intuition of the sages: *Aitihya:* the traditionary
teaching of the Masters. *Anumana:* inference. All these point to the
unity of Brahman and Atman.</span>

33\. Thus ends the seventh chapter in brief in the work called
Mânasollâsa which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinamurti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Maya](dast12)
