[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast05)  [Next](dast07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### ATMAN AS THE FIRST CAUSE.

#### Second Stanza of the Hymn.

To Him who, like unto a magician, or even like unto a mighty Yogin,
displays by His own will this universe, undifferentiated in the
beginning like the plant within the seed, but made afterwards
picturesque in all its variety in combination with space and time
created by Mâyâ, to Him who is incarnate in the Teacher, to Him in the
Effulgent Form Facing the South, to Him (Siva) be this bow!

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="small">In the preceding chapter it has been shown that the
whole external universe has really no existence independent of the Self,
that it appears by Maya as though external to the Self. This chapter
proceeds to establish the Vedic doctrine that Atman is the First Cause
of the universe, by way of refuting the theories which maintain that the
material cause of the universe is something else really existent, and
independent of Atman.</span>

#### Vaiseshika's Atomic theory.

1\. The *paramanus*, the extremely small atoms, combined together,
constitute the upâdâna or material cause of the universe. Hence it is
that a pot manifests itself in constant association with clay, but not
with Isvara.

<span class="small">It is the indivisible extremely subtle things called
*paramanus* which, combining together in various ways, give rise to the
universe comprising all created objects with their attributes and
activities. We speak of a substance as the upadana or material cause of
other things when it is found invariably associated with them, and upon
whose existence the existence of those other things depends. Nothing
in</span>

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="small">our experience is thus invariably found associated
with Atman, the Self, or Isvara. On the other hand, every created object
is found invariably associated with something other than Atman, with
something or other which is insentient. A pot, for instance, is
invariably associated with clay. Hence the conclusion that the
insentient atoms, not the sentient Isvara nor His Maya, are the material
cause of the universe.</span>

2\. It is the qualities, such as colour, taste, etc., inherent in the
atoms themselves, which produce qualities of a kindred sort in the
effect separately.

<span class="small">Thus, the atoms and their qualities give rise to all
objects in creation as well as their qualities, so that Isvara is not
the material cause either of the substances or of their
qualities.</span>

#### Vaiseshika's threefold cause.

3\. That with which the effect is intimately associated is the
*samavâyi-kârana*, the inseparable or material cause, as.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

opposed to the accessories such as the potter's wheel, which belong to a
category different from the *samavâyi-kârana*.

4\. That is said to be the *asamavayi-karana*, the accidental or
separable cause, which, while quite necessary to produce the effect,
resides in the samavâyi, or in the substratum of the samavâyi.

5\. An efficient (*nimitta*) cause of all effects is Isvara, like the
potter.

<span class="small">The Vaiseshika says that there are three kinds of
causes for every positive effect, known respectively as the *samavayi*
or *upadana-karana*, the material cause; the *asamavayi-karana*, the
accidental cause; the *nimitta-karana*, the efficient or intelligent
cause. *Thread* is the material cause of a cloth, because the latter is
in constant relation with the other. According to the definition of the
*asamavayi-karana* given in the verse 4, *the combining of threads with
one another* constitutes the asamavayi-karana of the cloth, because
the</span>

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="small">act of combining resides in the threads which form
the samavayi-karana of the cloth. Again, according to the definition,
the *colour* of the thread is the asamavayi-karana of the colour of the
cloth, because the former which gives rise to the latter resides in the
thread which forms the substratum (the samavayin) of the cloth, and the
cloth again is the substance wherein the colour of the cloth inheres in
constant relation and is therefore called the samavayi of that colour.
The remaining factors in the causal aggregate comprise (1) what is
called the *nimitta-karana*, the efficient cause like the weaver, and
(2) the *sahakari* or auxiliary cause such as the instruments used by
him in producing the cloth out of the thread. Isvara is said to be a
mere efficient cause in all effects. And as the efficient cause He is a
necessary factor in the creation of the universe; for, we see that
without an impulse from a sentient being no effect is ever produced out
of a material. Without a potter, for instance, no pot is ever produced
out of clay. Isvara being thus only one of the factors in the creation
of the universe, to hold that the sole cause of the universe is the
sentient Brahman is opposed to all our experience.</span>

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

5–6. Whencesoever an effect is born, there it abides; a pot abides in
clay, a cloth in thread, a finger-ring in gold. Thus say the Vaiseshikas
as well as the Naiyâyikas.

#### The Sankhya Theory.

7–8. Rajas, Sattva and Tamas,—these are the three qualities of Pradhâna.
Rajas is impassioned and mobile; Sattva, pure and luminous; Tamas, dark
and concealing: they are the causes of creation, preservation and
destruction.

<span class="small">Pradhana, otherwise called Prakriti, is said to be
composed of three distinct elements called *Gunas* perceived as
intimately associated, or even identical, with one's own self by those
who cannot discriminate between matter and spirit. Rajas, *literally*
the colouring element, is characterised by passion and motion and forms
the support by which the other two are held in their place. Sattva,
*lit*. goodness, is very subtle acid light, and is the</span>

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

element by which we become conscious of the external world. Tamas, lit.
darkness, is heavy, dull and impure, concealing the reality from our
vision. The respective functions of these three distinct constituents of
Pradhana manifest themselves in the creation, preservation and
destruction of the universe. How they cause these will be explained
later on. This school of Sankhya holds that no Intelligent Being is
necessary even as the efficient cause of the universe.

Now follows the refutation of these.

The second stanza of the Hymn is intended to refute the theories as to
the cause of the universe advanced by the Vaiseshikas, Naiyayikas,
Sankhyas, Svabhava-vadins, Nihilists (Sunyavadins), Saivas and
Pauranikas.

The meaning of the second stanza may be explained as follows:

#### Refutation of the Atomic Theory.

9\. In the series of effects from the sprout. of the plant up to its
fruit, *existence* is admitted. Whence do, then, come those atoms and
conjoin into fig-seeds?

<span class="small">That is to say, the doctrine that the atoms are the
cause of the universe is contradicted by</span>

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="small">experience. For, the upadana or material cause of
the universe is defined to be that which is perceived in association
with all objects of creation. It being only *existence*, not *atoms*,
that we cognize in all objects of creation, the upadana of the universe
must be Brahman spoken of as the *Sat* or existent, not the atoms or
anything else. How, for instance, can atoms be said to be the upadana of
the fig-seed, the final effect? Though atoms be the upadana of the
*dvyanukas*, molecules of two atoms, yet they are not perceived to be as
such in all products. Three dvyanukas are said to form a *tryanuka*, the
next compound; a hypothesis not warranted by experience. If such were
the case, we would perceive along with the pot the lump of clay out of
which it was produced, and the pot along with pot-sherds. This cannot
be, inasmuch as no after-state is perceived without the previous state
entirely vanishing, and that what has vanished out of sight cannot be
said to be the upadana. If this last were possible, then atoms
themselves might be the upadana of the final products, which is
contrary. to the hypothesis of the Vaiseshikas. Atoms are, moreover,
assumed to be supersensuous; so that the effects which are made of
supersensuous atoms must also be supersensuous. Wherefore, Brahman
alone, the Existence, as present in all objects of creation, is the
upadana of the universe.</span>

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="small">The upadana-karana is sometimes defined—as the word
upadana literally means,—to be the substance which one must primarily
lay hold of in producing an effect. On the strength of this definition,
the Vaiseshika might argue, in defence of his theory, that it is the
seed, not Brahman's existence, which one must primarily lay hold of in
order to produce the tree, and that therefore Brahman cannot be the
material cause of all effects. In reply, the Brahmavadin says that the
objection applies to both alike. The Vaiseshika must admit that he who
wishes to produce a tree resorts primarily not to atoms, but to the
seed. If he should try to explain this difficulty by saying that the
seed which is resorted to is originally built out of atoms, the
Brahmavadin defends his theory by saying that the seed itself is a
*vivarta* or an illusory aspect of Brahman. The Brahmavadin's position
is further strengthened by the fact that in the seed *existence* is
cognised, but not the *atoms*.</span>

10\. It is admitted by all that the effect is accompanied with the cause
(upâdana). Hence it is that *existence* and *light* are present in every
object.

<span class="small">Every object of creation appears in the light
of</span>

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="small">consciousness as something existent. Wherefore the
self-luminous Existence is the material cause.</span>

11\. When the flower becomes the fruit, when milk becomes curd,
properties—such as form, taste and the like—of a distinct class from
those of the cause are cognised.

<span class="small">Whereas, according to the Vaiseshika theory, the
qualities of the effect should be of the same kind as those of the
cause, the former being caused by the latter. Thus though one effect
follows another, the preceding effect cannot be said to be the material
cause of the succeeding one as the Vaiseshika maintains.</span>

#### The Theory of Illusion.

<span class="small">It may be asked, how can the mere self-luminous
Existence which is formless give rise to the universe of forms? We
reply: It is said to be the Cause merely because It underlies all
manifested illusory forms, like the rope which is the basis of the
illusory form of the serpent, etc. Accordingly the Vartikakara
says:</span>

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

12\. Cause and effect, part and whole, genus and individual, substance
and attribute, action and agent, and others like these are imaginary
forms of the One Light.

<span class="small">It being impossible—either according to the
*Arambhavada*, the Vaiseshika theory of creation, or according to the
*Parinamavada*, the Sankhya theory of transformation,—to explain that
one thing can really cause another, and all other theories being
altogether unfounded, we have to conclude that the universe is a mere
display of Maya on the background of self-conscious Brahman.</span>

#### Intelligence and activity inhere only in the Sentient.

13\. Neither for the atoms nor for the Pradhana is sentiency claimed in
creating the Universe. Intelligence and activity are found to inhere in
a sentient being.

<span class="small">The Vaiseshikas and Sankhyas do not claim sentiency
for the atoms and the Pradhana, which they respectively hold to be the
cause of the universe. Sruti (*Vide* Chhandogya-upanishad, 6–2)</span>

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="small">declares that creation proceeds from a
self-conscious Being, Himself becoming the universe in its manifold
aspects. Consciousness and activity are never found in insentient matter
unassociated with a self-conscious entity. From this it necessarily
follows that creation proceeds from a self-conscious Principle who can
think and act. Thus, according to the Sruti, the universe cannot be said
to actually proceed from the insentient atoms or the insentient Pradhana
as such, or even from either of these acted on by the will of a
self-conscious Being, of an extra-cosmic God, existing quite apart from
the matter out of which the universe is built. On the other hand, the
Sruti teaches that the universe proceeds from Isvara by an act of will,
that He is both the efficient and the material cause of the universe.
Though He is immutable in Himself, not subject to any change, not
affected by anything whatsoever, still it may be supposed that He thinks
and acts, is conscious of an external world and acts upon it, when
viewed in association with His Maya-Sakti, the power of illusion
containing within it the potentialities of the universe as made up of
causes and effects.</span>

14\. By His Kriya-Sakti or energy of activity assuming the form of Time,
milk

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

is transformed into curd. By His Jnana-Sakti or energy of intelligence,
the universe comes into being as made up of the
[perceiver](errata.htm#12) and the objects of perception.

<span class="small">The Sankhya holds that an effect comes into being
independently of a sentient being, and adduces, in evidence of his
theory, the fact of milk transforming itself into curd without the
intervention of a sentient being. As against this, the Vedantin holds
that it is the Isvara dwelling, as the Sruti (Bri-Up. 5–7-15) declares,
in all objects of creation controlling and guiding them from within,
who, by His Kriya-Sakti, assuming the form of Time acts upon milk so as
to transform it into curd. Milk by itself cannot become curd. If it
could, then it would ever be changing into curd. Again, there is a state
of Maya in which it is associated with a semblance of Brahman's
consciousness and forms the consciousness of Isvara, the author of the
universe, who, at the beginning of creation, is said to have had before
his view all that was to be created, and from whom proceeds our
consciousness of the universe. This consciousness of Isvara is what is
called Jnana-Sakti, the energy of intelligence. Itself thus assuming the
form of intelligence, Maya converts its basis, Brahman associated with
Maya, into a conscious entity, while, it also presents itself to His
view as</span>

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="small">the universe to be created, as the object of
perception. Thus by Jnana-Sakti of Isvara the universe comes into
being.</span>

15\. Consciousness is of two kinds: Nirvikalpaka or the undifferentiated
consciousness illumines the Thing itself, while Savikalpa or the
differentiated consciousness is manifold as illumining the designations,
etc.

The Jnana-Sakti takes two forms. First, there is the consciousness which
at the beginning of creation expressed itself in the form "may I become
many," and relates to the external universe as a whole in general. It is
known as *nirvikalpaka* or the undifferentiated consciousness. Again,
the same consciousness, when relating to the objects of external
universe in their respective special characteristics, such as the
several elements of matter and material objects, becomes what is called
*savikalpa* or differentiated consciousness.

Thus though consciousness is one and homogeneous in itself, it appears
to be different in the different forms illumined by it. As, for
instance:

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

16\. Imagination, doubt, confusion, memory, consciousness of similarity,
determination, guess, and non-apprehension; and so also other states of
consciousness.

<span class="small">These other states of consciousness comprise those
which are generally regarded as *pramas*,—forms of right knowledge as
relating to the real state of things. They are differently enumerated in
the different systems of philosophy, as follows:</span>

17\. The Chârvakas hold to *pratyaksha* (sensuous perception) alone,
whereas Kanâda and Sugata recognise that as well as *anumâna*
(inference). Sânkhyas recognise the two as well as *Sabda* (verbal
statement);

18\. And so do some of the Naiyâyikas so called, while other
(Naiyâyikas) add *upamana* (comparison). Prabhâkara

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

mentions these four along with *arthâpatti* (presumption).

19\. The Vedântins and the followers of Bhatta recognise a sixth one
named *Abhâva;* while the Paurânikas mention these with the addition of
*Sambhava* (consistency) and *Aitihya* (tradition).

<span class="small">Charvakas: otherwise known as the *Lokayatas*, those
who hold that nothing is real except what is revealed by the senses.
*Kanada:* the founder of the Vaiseshika system of philosophy. *Sugata:*
Buddha, who preached that Atman was nothing independent of the states of
consciousness which change from moment to moment. *Sankhyas:* the
followers of Kapila's and Patanjali's systems of philosophy. The
followers of *Gautama's* system of Nyaya recognise upamana as an
independent source of right knowledge. *Prabhakara* and *Bhatta* were
leaders of two different schools of Jaimini's system of Karma-Mimamsa;
*Vedantins:* those who follow the lead of *Badarayana*, the founder of
the system called Sariraka-mimamsa, which treats of the nature of
Brahman. *Pauranikas:* those who base their system of philosophy on the
teaching of the Puranas.</span>

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

*Pratyaksha:* sensuous perception; right knowledge obtained by
sense-organs coming in contact with external objects, like our knowledge
of colour, etc., obtained through the eye, etc.

*Anumana:* right knowledge obtained by a process of inference. First, by
observation we find that wherever there is smoke there is fire. Then,
when in a certain place we see smoke, we infer that fire exists in that
place. The knowledge of the existence of fire has here been obtained by
a process of inference.

*Sabda:* right knowledge obtained through a verbal statement proceeding
from a trustworthy source.

*Upamana:* right knowledge of similarity obtained by a process of
comparison. To explain: A man learns for the first time from a forester
that a gayal (a wild animal) is like a cow. Afterwards, on seeing an
animal like a cow in a forest, the perception of similarity reminds him
of the forester' directions, and he concludes that it is
[a](errata.htm#13) gayal.

*Arthapatti:* right knowledge in the form of presumption: surmising a
thing to account for something else known. Thus, in the case of a fat
man who does not eat by day, his fatness cannot be explained except
through the surmisal of his eating at night. By presumption, we come to
know that he eats at night.

*Abhava:* an immediate consciousness of the non-existence of something
by the non-perception

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

thereof where, if it existed, it ought to have been perceived. When, for
instance, in a lighted room we do not perceive a jar, we become
immediately conscious that the jar does not exist there.

*Sambhava:* the right knowledge we have as to the existence of a part
when we know that the whole of which it is the part exists. If we know
that a man has one hundred rupees, it is a right knowledge to know that
he has ten rupees.

*Aitihya:* right knowledge obtained by tradition, which is transmitted
from generation to generation, and of which the source is unknown; such
is the knowledge concerning a Yaksha (an invisible being) said to occupy
a tree.

These terms, *pratyaksha*, etc., are applied to *prama* or the right
knowledge thus obtained, as well as to *pramana*, the *karana* or the
means by which such a knowledge is obtained. While the Charvakas
dogmatically discard as unreliable all sources of information other than
sensuous perception, others reduce some of the eight sources of
knowledge mentioned above, to one or another of those which they
recognize as independent sources of knowledge.

#### The Vaiseshika's Categories.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

20\. The followers of Kanâda mention six padârthas or categories of
existence; *viz*.:

<span class="small">I. *Dravya*, substance. II. *Guna*, quality. III.
*Karma*, motion or activity. IV. *Samanya*, genus. V. *Visesha*,
difference. VI. *Samavaya*, intimate relation or co-inherence.</span>

21–23. I. Substances are nine:

*Bhutas* or elements (1. earth, 2. water, 3. light, 4. air and 5.
ether.) 6. *Dis*, space. 7. *Kala*, time. 8. *Atman*, soul. 9. *Manas*,
mind.

II\. Qualities are twenty-four:

1\. *Sabda*, sound. 2. *Sparsa*, tangibility. 3. *Rupa*, colour. 4.
*Rasa*, taste. 5. *Gandha*, odour. 6. *Parimana*, dimension. 7.
*Sankhya*, number. 8. *Samyoga*, conjunction. 9. *Vibhaga*, disjunction.
10. *Prithaktva*, mutual separateness. 11. *Gurutva*, weight. 12.
*Dravatva*, fluidity. 13. *Paratva*, priority. 14. *Aparatva*,
posteriority. 15. *Sneha*,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="small">viscidity. 16. *Samskara*, tendency. 17. *Dhi*,
understanding. 18. *Dvesha*, aversion. 19. *Sukha*, pleasure. 20.
*Duhkha*, pain. 21. *Ichchha*, desire. 22. *Dharma*, merit. 23.
*Adharma*, demerit. 24. *Prayatna*, effort.</span>

24–25. Tendency is of three kinds:—(1) *Vega* or speed, like that which
causes the flight of an arrow, etc. (2) *Bhavana*, that latent
impression, caused by experience, which subsequently helps to call forth
a memory of the same under favourable circumstances. (3)
*Sthitasthapakata* or elasticity, that which causes return to the former
state. When the leaf of the birch or the branch of a tree is first
dragged and then let go, it will revert to its former state.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

26\. III. Motion or action is of five sorts as the wise say: 1.
*Utkshepa*, throwing upwards. 2. *Avakshepa*, throwing downwards. 3,
*Gamana*, going. 4. *Prasarana*, expansion. 5. *Akunchana*, contraction.

27–28. IV. Genus is said to be of two kinds;—I. *Para* or the higher,
namely, *satta*, existence. 2. *Apara* or lower, such as the genus of
substance, of quality, and so on.

28\. V. *Viseshas* or ultimate differences are those which cause the
knowledge that one thing is different from another; and they are
infinite in number.

<span class="small">They are said to reside in the eternal substances,
such as manas, soul, time, space, ether; the paramanus of earth, water,
light and air.</span>

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

29\. VI. *Samavaya* is eternal relation, such as that between a pot and
its colour.

<span class="small">The pairs which are thus intimately related are, the
whole and its parts, substance and its qualities, action and its agent,
genus and the individual, viseshas and the eternal substances.</span>

Time, ether, space and soul are eternal and all-pervading.

30 The four kinds of *paramanus* are infinitesimally small and eternal.

Thus have been enumerated the six categories according to the
*Vaiseshika* Doctrine.

#### The Sankhya's Categories.

<span class="small">Now the *Vartikakara* proceeds to give the
classification of principles according to Theistic Sankhya:</span>

31\. Mâyâ (illusion) is designated as Pradhâna (the primary germ),
Avyakta (the unmanifested), Avidyâ (ignorance),

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ajnâna
(nescience), Akshara (indestructible), Avyâkrita (undifferentiated),
Prakriti (the material cause), Tamas (darkness).

<span class="small">These are the terms applied to *Mulaprakriti*, the
root of matter, the ultimate material cause of the universe, in *Sruti*,
*Smriti* and *Puranas*.</span>

32\. From Mâyâ, when conjoined with Brahman's consciousness reflected in
it, there come into being Mahat, Time and Purusha; from the principle of
Mahat comes forth Ahankâra.

<span class="small">When Maya becomes united with the consciousness of
Isvara controlling it, there come into being the three principles
mentioned above: Kala, that which causes disturbance in the balanced
condition of the *gunas* of Prakriti. It is only Brahman's consciousness
in a particular state as induced by conjunction with Prakriti. Under the
influence of Kala, Prakriti evolves into Mahat (intellect); and with
this first evolution of Prakriti as their background, the Jivas or
Purushas start into being, each Purusha being independent and eternal.
They are to ensoul all the created forms. The whole samsara is in fact
intended for their evolution and</span>

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="small">benefit. They are conscious of, and become affected
by, the various changes that take place in nature. From Mahat, Ahankara
or Egoism is evolved. This Ahankara is either tamasic, or rajasic or
sattvic.</span>

33–34. From the tâmasic Ahankâra proceed the âkâsa, air, fire, water and
earth as also sound touch, colour, taste and smell, in orderly
succession, forming the objects of the senses and the specific qualities
of the bhûtas (elements). Their deities are Sadasiva, Isa, Rudra,
Vishnu, the Four-faced (Brahmâ).

<span class="small">Sound, etc., respectively form the characteristic
nature of the five elements such as akasa, all infused with Ahankara.
*Deities:* Devas or the Intelligences working in the five subtle
elements, controlling them from within, guiding their evolution
according to certain laws.</span>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

35–36. From the sâttvic Ahankâra proceed the antah-karana, (the inner
organ) and the organs of sensation.

The antah-karana, (the inner organ of sensation is fourfold:

Manas, Buddhi, Ahankara and Chitta. Doubt, determination, pride,
recollection,—these are their objects. Chandra, Prajapati, Rudra,
Kshetrajana,—these are the Devatas.

37\. Ear, skin, eye, palate, and nose are known as jnânendriyas, organs
of sensation. Dis, Vâta, Sûrya, Varuna, Asvins,—these are said to be
their Devatas.

38\. From the râjasic Ahankâra come forth the Karmendriyas or organs of
action and the vital airs. The Karmendriyas are tongue, hands, feet,
anus, and the organ of generation.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

39\. Their functions are speaking, taking, going, leaving, and enjoying.
Their Devatas are Vahni, Indra, Upendra, Mrityu, and Prajapati.

40\. The (vital) airs are prâna, apâna, vyâna, udâna, and samâna.

<span class="small">The respective seats of these vital energies are the
heart, the anus, the whole body, the throat, and the navel.</span>

#### The twenty-four principles of the Theistic Sankhya.

40–41. The doctors of Sânkhya-Sâstra enumerate twenty-four *tattvas*
(principles) comprising the five bhûtas (elements of matter), the five
vital airs, and the fourteen indriyas (organs of sensation and action).

<span class="small">The Theistic Sankhyas enumerate these only as the
twenty-four principles said to be taught in the</span>

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">Sankhya system. According to them, all the principles from
Brahman and Maya up to the Tanmatras (the primary essential elements of
matter) being present in all these twenty-four principles as their
causes, they are not to be separately counted.</span>

#### The Twenty-four Principles of the Atheistic Sankhya.

<span class="small">The Atheistic School of Sankhya enumerates the
twenty-four principles in the following order of evolution: 1.
Mulaprakriti; 2. Mahat; 3. Ahankara; 4–8, the five Tanmatras (evolved
out of Tamasic Ahankara); 9–13, the five Mahabhutas or gross elements of
matter (evolved out of the five Tanmatras); 14–18, the five organs of
activity (evolved out of Rajasic Ahankara); 19–24, the antah-karana and
the five external organs of sensation (evolved out of the Sattvic
Ahankara). The first of these is the cause of all, not the effect of
anything else. The principles enumerated from 2 to 8 are each the effect
of what precedes it and the cause of what follows it. Those enumerated
from 9 to 24 are mere effects, and they. do not give rise to any
distinct principles in their turn. Prangs or vital energies are not
regarded as distinct principles in themselves, being looked upon as
functions of the sense-organs taken in their totality. Purushas are
infinite in number and are neither causes nor effects of anything else.
What is called Time has</span>

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="small">no existence independent of the things spoken of as
having existed in the past, or as existing in the present, or as going
to exist in the future.</span>

#### The Thirty Principles of Pauranikas.

41–42. To these adding Mahat, Time, Pradhâna, Mâyâ, Avidyâ and Purusha,
the Paurânikas enumerate thirty principles.

<span class="small">*Pradhana* is the Mula-prakriti whose first
modification is Mahat. Maya and Avidya are thus distinguished: Maya does
not delude the Being in whom it abides, and is entirely under His
control, while the reverse is the case with Avidya which abides in Jiva.
Kala is simply the activity of Isvara when in conjunction with Avyakta.
Purusha is an *amsa* or mere ray of Paramatman.</span>

#### The Thirty-six Principles of Saivagama.

42–43. Adding to these Bindu and Nâda, Sakti and Siva, Sânta and Atîta,
the doctors of Saivâgama enumerate thirty-six principles.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="small">*Bindu:* the principle called Sadasiva, the Entity
governing the whole existence, and devoid of attributes. *Nada:* another
form of the same Being manifested as Pranava, the illuminator of all
things. *Sakti:* a power distinct from Maya and Avidya, and by which
Isvara governs all. *Siva:* He in whom that power inheres, and who
voluntarily assumes a body for the benefit of devotees. *Santa* (the
Tranquil) and *Atita* (the Transcendent) are only two different aspects
of Siva, as the Sruti says: ''This fire is verily Rudra Himself: of Him
there are two bodies, one fierce, the other gentle." (*Tattiriya
Samhita*, 5–7–3).</span>

#### Vedic Doctrine of Maya.

<span class="small">The different principles enumerated above are none
of them absolutely real in themselves. According to the Sruti they are
only manifestations of the one Parabrahman caused by Maya. So the
Vartikakara says:</span>

43–44. All the principles thus assumed existed in the Atman before, as
the plant in the seed. By Mâyâ, acting in the form of will, intelligence
and activity, have they been displayed.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

44–45. Because every event is the result of will, intelligence and
activity, therefore it is certain that all creatures are so many
Isvaras.

<span class="small">The universe proceeds from will, intelligence and
activity which cannot inhere in any being other than Isvara endued with
Maya. The universe is maintained, as we see, by the will, intelligence
and activity inherent in the sentient existence, in the Jivas. This
sentient existence is therefore none other than Isvara, there being no
evidence whatever by which to establish a distinction in consciousness
pure and simple except what is caused by external conditions with which
it is associated. All volition, thought and activity being the results
of Maya, it is but right to maintain that the whole universe which they
bring into existence is made up of nothing but Maya.</span>

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

45–47. From the seed is born the tree; again from that tree is another
seed born, and so on in succession. With a view to prevent such a
supposition, the illustration of a Yogin has been adduced. The ancients
such as Visvâmitra, perfect in Samâdhi, without any material instrument,
without any personal end in view, by their mere will brought about
creation complete with all enjoyments.

48\. Almighty as possessed of infinite power, independent as having
nothing to resort to outside Himself, by His mere will He creates,
preserves and destroys all.

<span class="small">The illustration by seed and plant may lead one to
the conclusion that there are many Isvaras and many universes coming one
after another, as cause and effect in turn. This is opposed to the
teaching of the Sruti which says that Isvara is never born and never
dies. The illustration of Yogin is intended to avoid the opposite
conclusion, by showing that Isvara is one and is the sole creator of the
universe.</span>

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="small">Now the question arises as to how the immutable
Isvara can be said to create, preserve, and destroy the universe. It is
answered as follows:</span>

49\. The Isvara does not create by way of operating on materials
(external to Himself); self-conscious as He is, neither is He the knower
by way of operating on pramânas or organs of perception.

<span class="small">Isvara undergoes no change of state in Himself when
He creates, preserves or destroys the universe. If He were to perform
these acts by actively operating on the material cause with necessary
instruments and so on, then He would be subject to change of state, like
a potter producing a pot. On the other hand, like a king or a magnet, by
mere presence He induces activity in His environment, without actively
engaging in any act.</span>

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

50–51. His consciousness and agency are quite absolute because of His
independence. In the very variety of His will consists His absolute
freedom. Who can define the self-reliant will of Isvara by which He is
free to act, or not to act, or to act otherwise?

<span class="small">He is conscious and active independently of all
else, without undergoing any change in Himself. So, too, is His will
characterized by thorough independence and absence of all
obstruction.</span>

52\. The Sruti also has declared Isvara's creation by will, in the
words, "He desired," and "From Him, the Atman, was âkâsa born."

<span class="small">Thus by way of comparing Isvara to the magician and
to the Yogin, has been expounded the Vedantic doctrine that Isvara is
both the material and the efficient cause, as manifesting by force of
His Maya the universe made up of names and forms which cannot be spoken
of as either real or unreal. As this doctrine is taught in one
harmonious voice by all the Upanishads, it should not</span>

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="small">be set aside on the strength of evidence furnished
from other sources of knowledge.</span>

#### Isvara is not a mere efficient cause.

53\. If the Supreme Lord were merely the efficient cause of this
universe, like a potter He would be subject to change and liable to
death.

It cannot be that, like the potter operating with external instruments
upon an external material cause, Isvara is merely the efficient cause of
the universe; for none can operate upon things external to himself
without himself undergoing change. Like other operators He should have
been endowed with a body, which would make Him liable to decay.
Accordingly the conception that Isvara is the mere efficient cause of
the universe is opposed to the express teaching of the Vedanta that He
is eternal and immutable.

To avoid the absurdity that has been shown to follow from the doctrine
that Isvara is the mere efficient cause, the Vaiseshika may say that
Isvara, as belonging to the category of Atman, has the nine qualities
(the last nine enumerated in vartika 23) including ichchha (desire or
will) inherent in

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">His nature, *i.e.*, independent of a body. But this -would
lead to another absurdity, as shown below:</span>

54\. If the nine qualities including intellect were eternal coinhering
attributes of Isvara, then, endowed as He is with eternal will, He
should constantly be engaged in the creation of the universe.

55\. In the absence of all cessation of activity, samsâra would never
cease. The teaching as to moksha would be vain, and the Revelation would
be of no purpose.

56\. Wherefore the Isvara's creation of the universe is all a display of
Mâyâ, and all worldly experience including Revelation as to bondage and
liberation is (the effect) of Mâyâ.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

57\. Thus ends the second chapter in brief in the work called
Mânasollâsa which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinâmûrti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Unity of Atman](dast07)
