[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast07)  [Next](dast09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### ATMAN THE ONE EXISTENCE AND LIGHT.

#### Fourth Stanza of the Hymn.

All this world shines after Him alone shining in the consciousness "I
know,"—after Him alone whose consciousness, luminous like the light of a
mighty lamp standing in the bosom of a many-holed pot, moves outwards
through the sense-organs such as the eye. To Him who is incarnate in the
Teacher, to Him in the Effulgent Form Facing the South, to Him (Siva) be
this bow!

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

#### Objection to the Vedic doctrine of the one Existence and Light.

<span class="small">The identity of Brahman and Jiva, thus far set forth
as the teaching of the Vedas, is objected to by some who allege that it
is opposed to all evidence furnished by pratyaksha and other right
sources of knowledge. By way of answering their objections, the Vedic
doctrine of the identity of Jiva and Brahman will be more firmly
established in this and the two following chapters:</span>

1\. "Self-existent do the pot, the cloth, and other phenomena shine,—not
because of Isvara entering into them." To this as a reply is (the fourth
stanza) chanted.

The Vedic doctrine that there is only one Existence and Light which is
Atman (*vide* chap. iii. 3) is objected to on the ground that it is
opposed to our immediate experience. It is, some say, an uncontradicted
fact of experience that a pot exists and shines by itself; and they
contend that there is no evidence whatever to show that Isvara has
entered into the phenomena so that they all shine by His light.

The meaning of the fourth stanza may be explained as follows:

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

#### External objects have no existence and light of their own.

2\. If in the objective consciousness "I know it," the thinker were not
to manifest himself as 'I,' what is there to shine, or to whom? And the
whole world would be like one asleep.

If an object were to shine alone by itself, then there would be no
manifestation of the Thinker as the cogniser of the object, in the form
"I am conscious of the object." Then, like a lamp burning in a
mountain-cave closed up on every side by solid rocks, no object will
present itself to the consciousness of any individual. Thus unconscious,
as in sushupti, of the universe around, man would ever be quite as inert
and unconcerned in the universe around as he is during. sleep. Wherefore
it must be admitted that the universe depends on something else for its
manifestation. That something else, that light upon which the universe
depends for its manifestation, must be a constant and independent light,
itself not depending on another for manifestation.

Just as the universe depends for its manifestation upon a light beyond
itself, so also it depends

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="small">on another for its existence. So, the Vartikakara
says:</span>

3\. The non-existent in the past and in the future cannot exist by
themselves even in the present; therefore, they have their being in the
Isa, the Lord, as to whom there is no before and after.

External objects have no existence of their own, inasmuch as, like a
serpent seen in a rope, they are only occasionally perceived. If they
could exist by themselves, they would also manifest by themselves like
Atman, and thus they would not be objects of consciousness of an
individual, which they are invariably now found to be.

On the other hand, as the Being whence everything proceeds at its birth
and whither everything recedes at the end, as the Pratyagatman who
witnesses all states of being in His never-failing light, Isvara's
existence and consciousness must be unfailing. Never was a time when He
was not li and did not shine; never will be a time when He will not be
and will not shine.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

4–5. If the insentient objects were to shine by themselves independent
of Isvara, either everything would present itself to every one's
consciousness, or nothing at all would present itself to consciousness.
Therefore the whole world would be on one level, either all-knowing or
knowing nothing.

<span class="small">*Independent of Isvara:* without a self-conscious
Atman perceiving them. If external objects were to shine by their own
light, they would always shine and appear to all individuals alike as
objects of consciousness. If it be, however, in their nature not to
become objects of consciousness, then no individual would be conscious
of any of the objects. All individuals being thus situated alike as to
their knowledge of external objects, it would be difficult to account
for the varying degrees of knowledge of the different individuals. Then
the result would be:</span>

5–6 If the sentient and the insentient

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

be alike self-luminous, then it would follow that each alike will both
perceive, and be in turn perceived by, the other, and so on; and, the
sense-organs being unrestricted in their scope of perception, taste
could be known by the eye, and so on.

<span class="small">Thus the contention that external objects are
self-luminous and self-existent is opposed to our uncontradicted
experience of a distinction between subject and object, as well as to
the fact that the external objects have all of them a more or less
temporary existence.</span>

#### Isvara cognises and acts through upadhis.

7–8. Manifesting Himself by way of reflection in the Kriyâ-sakti and
Jnâna-sakti, in the two sides of Antah-karana which are like unto the
dull and the clear,—the back and the front—sides of a mirror, the Lord
is spoken of as the doer and the knower.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="small">Prana constitutes that aspect of Antah-karana which
is spoken of as Kriya-sakti, *i.e.*, wherein Isvara manifests Himself in
many a form of activity. It corresponds to the dark or back side of a
mirror. Manas and Buddhi constitute that aspect of Antah-karana which is
here spoken of as Jnana-sakti, wherein Isvara manifests Himself as a
self-conscious cogniser. This corresponds to the clear or front side of
a mirror. The self-conscious Atman, when associated with the upadhi of
prana in activity, by way of lending to it His own existence and light,
is spoken of as the doer; and when associated, in the same way, with the
Manas and Buddhi which undergo changes of condition, He is said to
cognise.</span>

#### The organ of cognition.

8–9. Like unto a clear mirror, Buddhi, because of the predominance of
Sattva in it and in virtue of the reflection of Atman in it receives
images of external objects.

<span class="small">The predominance of Sattva is necessary, since
otherwise Rajas and Tamas would give rise to covetousness and
forgetfulness.</span>

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

9–10. And so do all the indriyas (senses), because of their connection
with the Antahkarana; they are like spokes attached to the felly of a
wheel.

<span class="small">That is to say, though by nature the indriyas move
towards their respective objects, still their action is limited and
controlled by the Buddhi; so that perception or non-perception or
misperception of sense-objects through the sense-organs depends, at any
given moment, on the state of the antahkarana at the time.</span>

#### Nadis, the vehicles of the sense-organs.

10–11. There are nâdîs woven in the antah-karana, like unto threads
woven into a net. By them, verily, reaching up to the physical regions
of sensation, all sense-organs move, like sparks of fire, towards their
respective objects.

<span class="small">*Antah-karana* is the Linga-Sarira impregnated with
Jnana-sakti and Kriya-sakti, *i.e.*, endued with the faculties of
cognition and action.</span>

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="small">*Nadis* are tube-like threads of subtle ethereal
matter in the body. It is through these Nadis that all the senses,
accompanied with the mind in one or another of its forms, pass towards
their respective objects in the external world. When passing from the
sushupti to the jagrat or waking state of consciousness, these
sense-organs pass up to the very physical regions of sensation, such as
the eye, the ear, etc.</span>

12\. The midmost portion of the body is spoken of as the Mulâdhâra, 'the
primary seat'; it is two inches above the anus and two inches below the
penis.

13–14. It is triangular, with the apex turned downwards, like a young
girl's organ of generation; and there dwells the Parâ-Sakti, the Supreme
force called Kundalinî, the mother of Prâna, Agni, Bindu, and Nada; she
is called Sarasvati.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Kundalini is the Devata or the governing Intelligence in the Muladhara.
She is so called because she manifests Herself in the form of a serpent.
This Supreme Force, called also Mulaprakriti, illumined by the Light of
the Supreme Atman, generates Prana, etc. Prana is Vayu or the Universal
Force of activity, specified, on entering each individual being, into
its vitality in its five-fold function. Agni, in one of its forms, is
the digestive fire in the stomach. Agni and Prana are mentioned together
in the Yoga-sastra under the designations of sun and moon. These are the
Devatas of Ida and Pingala to be mentioned below. *Bindu* is the
unmanifested sound; and *Nada* is the manifested sound in general, the
Omkara, that form of sound which is common to all articulate sounds, and
which one may hear on closing both the ears. All these are generated and
propelled by Kundalini. She is also. called Sarasvati when, in one of
her aspects as prana, she manifests herself in the nada, and then in the
form of articulate sounds.

The Muladhara, the primary seat of the three great Nadis, has been thus
described in some detail in order that the devotee who seeks
illumination may meditate upon it for the purpose.

14–15. Starting from the apex of the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mûlâdhâra, the
Sushumna reaches the Brahmarandhra; it is like a half-cut bamboo at the
root, and has six supports.

<span class="small">The Sushumna manifests itself at the apex of the
Muladhara and extends into the cavity of the head. It is uniform
throughout, long and straight, visible only to the yogins. The six
supports of the Sushumna, called *Chakras*, have each of them a
particular form and a particular seat of its own. They may be presented
in a tabular form as follows:—</span>

<div align="center">

|                  |                     |                                  |
|------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------|
| Name of Chakra.  | Its form            | Its seat.                        |
| 1\. Muladhara    | Four-petalled lotus | Muladhara.                       |
| 2\. Svadhisthana | Six-petalled lotus  | Linga or organ of generation.    |
| 3\. Manipuraka   | Ten „               | Navel.                           |
| 4\. Anahata      | Twelve „            | Heart.                           |
| 5\. Visuddha     | Sixteen „           | Throat.                          |
| 6\. Ajna         | Two „               | Region between the two eyebrows. |

</div>

15–16. Starting from the corners thereof there are two Nadis, Ida and
Pingala. These, as the Yogins say, constitute the Nâdi-chakra, or
Nadi-system. Thence all nâdis proceed.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="small">Ida lies on the left, and Pingala lies on the right.
They extend up to the basis of the forehead.</span>

16–22. Gândhârî and Hastijihvâ run up to the eyes. Joined to the
Nâdî-chakra, there are two nādīs reaching up to the nose. Starting from
the region of navel called Nādī-chakra, which is shaped like a hen's
egg, Pûshâ, and Alambushâ nâdis

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

extend up to the two ears. The nâdî called Sukla (white, starts from the
same place and goes to the mid-region between the eye-brows. The nâdî
named Sarasvatî goes to the tip of the tongue and gives vent to speech.
The nâdî (in the stomach) named Visvodarî eats the four kinds of food.
Payasvinî, situated in the throat, drinks water and causes sneezing.
Three nâdîs start downwards from the Nâdî-chakra: Râkâ excretes semen;
Sinîvâlî, the urine; and Kuhû, the dung. That nâdî, again, which is
called Sankhinî takes up the essence of the food when eaten, and
reaching the âkâsa of the cerebral cavity, there in the head gathers the
immortal nectar.

<span class="small">This immortal nectar is, as the yogins say
obtainable in that region of the head which is called Sahasrara-padma,
the Thousand-petalled Lotus, by the process called Lambika-yoga. (*Vide*
Chap. IX., 32).</span>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

22–23. "There are one-hundred-and-one nâdîs. Of them one goes to the
head. Going upwards by that, one becomes liberated." Such is the
Vedânta's teaching.

<span class="small">The passage referred to is the Katha-Upanishad VI.,
16.</span>

#### Jagrat state.

23–24. When the Atman, through the sense-organs which are impelled by
the good (and bad) karma ingrained in the Buddhi, perceives sound and
other objects of sense, then it is the Jâgrat or waking state.

<span class="small">It is certain that whenever Jiva does any act, he
does not do so by himself, but only as identifying himself with the
Buddhi, into which he enters by a reflected image as it were.
Accordingly it is the Buddhi that is affected by the good or evil act,
and its character is changed to the extent that it is affected by the
act. When proper time, place, and other circumstances present themselves
for a good or evil deed to bear its fruit, then the Antah-karana</span>

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="small">impels the sense-organs to action. By the
sense-organs which, starting from the heart—the seat of
Antah-karana—reach the extremities of the physical organs of sensation,
Atman becomes conscious of sound and other sense-objects within and
without the body. This constitutes the Jagrat-avastha, the waking state
of Jiva. Thus Jagrat state consists in cognising sense-objects by means
of the sense-organs.</span>

#### Svapna.

24–25. When these sense-organs are withdrawn, A’tman is conscious of the
mental images generated by the impressions of Jâgrat experience. It is
the Svapna-avasthâ or the dream-state.

<span class="small">When the senses are withdrawn into the cavities of
the nadis within the body, *i.e.*, when the network of the nadis,
through which the senses are coursing, is drawn back from the
extremities of the physical organs of sensation into the body by the
thread of the antah-karana (inclusive of prana), then Atman is no longer
conscious of external objects. He sees, however, the mental
forms,</span>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="small">images which are purely manasic, evolved out of the
impressions made on the mind during the jagrat state. Thus Svapna
consists in cognising, on the withdrawal of the senses, those forms of
mind which are evolved out of the impressions received during jagrat
state.</span>

#### Sushupti.

25\. The withdrawal of even manas itself is spoken of as Sushupti.

The manas is said to withdraw, when, with all its vasanas or
impressions, it attains to the causal stage, to the state of avidya.
Thus Sushupti consists in the Buddhis attaining to the form of its
cause,—in all forms of cognition ceasing to appear.

Thus all the three avasthas of self-conscious A’tman are due to his
association with the upadhis undergoing changes of state such as Jagrat;
and these upadhis cannot come into association with the self-conscious
A’tman except by Maya.

#### Atman is ever Sat-Chit-Ananda.

26\. Then the Atman remains as pure Existence, veiled by Mâyâ. It is by

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

connection with Mâyâ that He appears as deluded, inert, ignorant, and so
on.

<span class="small">Atman is ever one with Brahman, the Absolute
Existence; but, owing to Maya which veils his true character as Brahman,
we are not conscious of the fact, except in so far as we always feel
that we exist.</span>

27\. "I slept happy:" thus on awaking does Atman clearly manifest
Himself as Existence, Consciousness and Bliss.

The word 'happy' refers to the essential constant nature of Atman as
self-conscious Existence and Bliss. The word 'slept' refers to the then
quiescent state of all upadhis. The happiness experienced in sushupti is
not, indeed, accidental; it does not come from an external source, since
then the sense-organs by which the external objects can be experienced
are quiescent. The happiness does not certainly arise from the mere
cessation of all active processes of life and conscious existence,
inasmuch as there is no instance in all our experience where any
positive result comes out of circumstances of a purely negative
character. Nor again should it be supposed that happiness then
experienced

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="small">is itself of a negative character, consisting in the
mere absence of pain; for there is, then, no organ by which to
experience the absence of pain, and what has not been experienced cannot
subsequently be remembered. The feeling "I slept happy" is clearly a
case of remembering what has been experienced. Thus the happiness
experienced during sleep points to the self-luminous nature of Atman as
Bliss. The immutable, partless, self-conscious Atman cannot be spoken of
as lying down or as going, or as sleeping, in Himself. All this is,
therefore, due to His association with the upadhis which undergo changes
of state. Wherefore the words "I slept" refer to the quiescent state of
the upadhis in sushupti. Hence in all states of consciousness, Atman
remains the same as Existence, Consciousness and Bliss.</span>

#### Isvara, the one Light and Existence.

26\. It Is by Mahesvara, penetrating the whole universe and manifesting
Himself, that even the sun and other (lights) shine; how much more so
pots and other things?

<span class="small">Brahman's manifestations in the upadhis of the
cosmos and of the individual body may be exhibited in a tabular form as
follows:—</span>

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<div align="center">

|                                          |                                                       |                                       |          |                          |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------|--------------------------|
| Macrocosm (Adhidaiva, Samashti, Karana). |                                                       | Microcosm (Adhyatma, Vyashti, Karya). |          | State of Consciousness.  |
| Upadhi.                                  |                                                       | Brahman's manifestation               | Upadhi.  | Brahman's manifestation. |
| Avyakrita or Avyakta.                    | Isvara or Akshara. <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1) | Karana-sarira.                        | Prajna.  | Sushupti.                |
| Hiranyagarbha.                           | Sutratman.                                            | Linga-sarira.                         | Taijasa. | Svapna.                  |
| Viraj.                                   | Vaisyanara.                                           | Sthula-sarira.                        | Visva.   | Jagrat.                  |

</div>

29\. Therefore, all things derive their being and light from the being
and light of Isvara in whom they abide. And by Sruti Brahman is declared
to be "the Real, Consciousness, the Endless."

<span class="small">That is to say, things have no being of their own.
They are said to exist because they are illusory expressions of Isvara,
the one Existence.</span>

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

30\. All that comes into being in Jagrat and Svapna is unreal, senseless
like a blind man.

#### Isvara as the Ego.

And Isvara manifests Himself as the Ego in all creatures.

31–32. The undifferentiated or Universal (Ego), the Pure, and the
impure: thus the Ego is threefold. The undifferentiated or Universal
(Ego) is the Supreme Brahman, who is devoid of all distinctions, like
unto âkâsa free from dust, darkness, smoke and cloud.

32–33. The Pure (Ego is seen) at the time of discrimination, when He is
rid of the body and other upâdhis, as âkâsa is

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

seen a little through the starlight to a limited extent.

<span class="small">Though, under ordinary circumstances, Atman does not
present Himself to all, He does occasionally manifest Himself to him who
has thoroughly investigated the nature of Jiva and the Isvara, and is
convinced that the physical body and other upadhis are not the Ego; and
who has accordingly stripped his Real Ego of all the limitations
ascribed to Him. This Pure Ego, manifested temporarily as He is at the
moment of discrimination, is somewhat removed from the Absolute or
Universal Ego, who is Brahman Himself.</span>

33–34. Impure is the Ego stained by an intimate association with the
body and sense-organs and other upâdhis; just as âkâsa, pervaded by
darkness, looks as if affording no space.

34–35. When Jiva is well awakened to his Ego being one with Isvara, then
can he be the all-knower and the all-maker.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

35–36. The Lord, by Mâyâ quite deluded, by Vidyâ manifests Himself. By
meditating on the Nirvikalpa or the Un- differentiated Ego, Atman shines
in full.

36–37. The veil of avidyâ removed, the Supreme Lord, He who is
Dakshinâmûrti in form, shines in full Himself.

37–38. Thus ends the fourth chapter in brief in the work called
Mânasollâsa which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinâmûrti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[92:\*](dast08.htm#fr_1) The name "Isvara" is
given to Brahman's manifestation in the upadhi called Avyakrita, as well
as to Brahman beyond the upadhis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. False Personations of Atman](dast09)
