[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb03)  [Next](bb05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# PREFACE

INDIAN TYPES of ethical and philosophical Buddhism did not easily find
acceptance in China; it took centuries of contact before a distinctively
Chinese adaptation of Buddhism was effected that proved to be congenial
to Chinese soil. This Chinese type of Buddhism is called Ch’an in China,
and Zen in Japan, and Zen seems to be the more familiar name for it in
America and Europe. Other sects have risen and decreased but they proved
to be more or less exotic, they never became indigenous as did Zen. An
exception may be suspected in the case of the Pure Land Sects, but it
should be remembered that the Pure Land Sects developed from Zen and not
independently.

To tell the story of this adaptation of the Indian type of Buddhism
until it became fixed in the teachings of the Sixth Patriarch, is the
purpose of this book. The main part of the book is given over to English
Versions of the favorite scriptures of the Zen Sect. To this is added
Historical and Literary Introductions and a few notes that seem to be
called for to make certain phases of the Sutras more easily
intelligible.

Let us recall the fact that the knowledge of Buddhism in America and
Europe has all come within a hundred years. For seventy-five years of
that time it

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

was presented largely by Christian linguistic scholars who were more or
less unconsciously prejudiced against it and who very imperfectly
understood its deeper implications. It is only within the last
twenty-five years that books written by competent and sympathetic
Buddhist scholars have begun to appear. Moreover, knowledge of Buddhism
has come at first through translations of Pali texts which represent an
older and more primitive type of Buddhism. It is only recently that the
great Sanskrit texts, revealing the later philosophical and metaphysical
riches of the Mahayana type, have been translated and appreciated.
Buddhism was represented by the earlier Christian scholars as being
"atheistic" and "pessimistic," which a more sympathetic study of the
Sanskrit texts has shown to be a misunderstanding and a
misrepresentation. Surely, an eternal process based on unchanging law
and leading to peace of mind and self-less compassion and the
self-giving of Bodhisattvas and Buddhas, and the undifferentiated Love
and Wisdom which is Buddhahood and Dharmakaya is far removed from
"atheism"; and the "Blissful peace and cessation of change," and the
self-realisation of Noble Wisdom, have nothing in common with
"pessimism." But intelligent interest in Buddhism is increasing and the
old time question, that used to be the only question, "What is
Buddhism?" is giving way to a new question, "What type of Buddhism is
best adapted to meet modern questions and modern problems?" To answer
these questions is this book presented.

Ch’an Buddhism in China and Korea and Zen in Japan, for a thousand
years, have been powerful in

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

moulding the spiritual, ethical and cultural life of great nations.
Today, when Christianity seems to be slipping, it is the most promising
of all the great religions to meet the problems of European civilisation
which to thinking people are increasingly forboding. Zen Buddhism, with
its emphasis on mind-control, its dispassionate rationality, its
cheerful industry, not for profit but for service, its simple-hearted
love for all animate life, its restraint of desire in all its subtil
manifestations, its subjection of desire to wisdom and kindness, its
practical and efficient rule of life, its patient acceptance of karma
and reincarnation, and its actual foretaste of the blissful peace of
Nirvana, all mark it out as being competent to meet the problems of this
materialistic and acquisitive age.

\*

The original texts of these Scriptures are very corrupt, disorderly,
loaded with accretions and, in places very obscure. The purpose of the
present Versions is to provide an easier and more inspiring reading. For
scholarly study students are expected to refer to the more precise
translations of linguists.

The rules that have been followed in preparing these Versions are as
follows:

*To omit all matter not bearing directly upon the theme of the Sutra.*

*To arrange into a more orderly sequence.*

*To interweave and condense cognate teachings.*

*To interpret obscure words and teachings*.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

The need. for this course will be apparent to any earnest minded person
who goes to the Scripture for spiritual guidance, inspiration and
comfort.

In the Sutras there are certain Sanskrit words that are of great
importance to the understanding of the teaching that are difficult to
translate in single words. It seems advisable to speak about them at
this time.

DHARMA: Law, Truth. Specifically Dharma has come to be used for the
Buddha's teaching as a whole, and also as Truth in its universal aspect.

DHARMAKAYA: Truth-body, Truth-principle, Truth-essence. It is used
synonymously with such terms as: Buddhahood, Tathagatahood, Nirvana,
Noble Wisdom, Universal or Divine Mind, to refer to Ultimate Reality as
being universal, undifferentiated, harmonious, inscrutable.

BUDDHA: The Perfectly Enlightened One; the One who has fully attained
the goal of spiritual unification.

TATHAGATA: The One who has "thus come." It is used synonymously with
Buddha to express the highest personification of Reality. The two terms
may be differentiated in the sense that Buddha is the "ingoing" aspect
of spiritual attainment, while Tathagata is the "forth-going" aspect of
spiritual self-giving and service, both being manifestations of
Dharmakaya.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

PRAJNA: the active aspect of Dharmakaya; Ultimate Principle of unified
Love and Wisdom. It is commonly translated Wisdom but it means far more
than that as it includes both the differentiating principle of
intellection and the integrating principle of Love. In significance it
resembles the Chinese Tao.

ARYA-PRAJNA: Noble Wisdom, synonymous with all other terms denoting
Ultimate Reality.

TATHAGATA-GARBHA: The Womb from which emerge all manifestations and all
individuations. It is used synonymously with Universal or Divine Mind.
Dharmakaya refers to the universal, or pure essence, or "such-ness" of
Reality, in contrast to the transformations of the Tathagata.

ALAYA-VIJNANA: Universal, or Divine Mind, or all-conserving Mind. It is
used synonymously with Tathagata-garbha and Noble Wisdom.

ARYA-JNANA: that which transcends knowledge, or Transcendental
Intelligence. It is used synonymously with Arya-prajna, but signifies
the realisation-aspect of Noble Wisdom.

BODHI: is the wisdom content of Prajna.

KARUNA: is the love or compassion content of Prajna.

JNANA: is the knowledge, or cognition, or thinking content of Prajna.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

MANAS: the intuitive mind; the connecting link between Universal Mind
and the individual, or conscious, or discriminating, mind.

MANO-VIJNANA: the conscious, perceiving, discriminating, thinking,
intellectual, mind.

VIJNANA: the principle of discrimination; the sense-minds.

CITTA: mind in general.

DWIGHT GODDARD.

*Thetford, Vermont, U. S. A.  
1932*.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: History of Ch'an Buddhism Previous to the Times of Hui-Neng
(Wei-Lang)](bb05.md)
