[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb04)  [Next](bb06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# HISTORY OF CH’AN BUDDHISM PREVIOUS TO THE TIMES OF HUI-NENG (WEI-LANG)

THE TRAFFIC between India and China in very early times was very
considerable in spite of the tremendous difficulties and dangers of the
passes over the high Himalayas, the Tibetan deserts and the appalling
wastes and tempests of the Southern seas. But in spite of the
difficulties intimations of Buddhism began to percolate into China
certainly as early as the First Century before the Christian Era and by
the First Century after eminent Indian scholars were finding it worth
their trouble to make the arduous journey for the sake of the welcome
and the honor they received at the Imperial Court and by the literati,
so that by the Second Century Buddhist scriptures were being rapidly
translated into Chinese.

The Chinese while being notably intellectual were not especially
philosophical or religiously minded. They were a practical people and
their culture was largely given up to ethics, history, poetry and art.
The exuberant imagery, subtle symbolism, erudite philosophy, and deep
psychological insight of the Mahayana Buddhist Scriptures came as an
intellectual revelation to Chinese scholars and was everywhere received

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

with scholarly enthusiasm. For five hundred years this went on with
increasing momentum but. with very little adaptation and change to make
it more in line with Chinese mentality and racial habits of thought and
national customs. To be sure it had found a certain affinity with
Confucian scholarship and ethical idealism, and with Taoist mysticism
and naturalistic iconoclasm. All the outstanding Buddhist leaders were
Indian born and educated and it was an Indian type of Buddhism that was
being pressed upon the Chinese converts; it was Indian philosophy that
was being studied and Indian ways of meditation that were being
practiced; Buddhism was still a foreign cult. It was not until the
Fourth Century that signs of the birth and development of a Chinese type
of Buddhism began to be apparent.

When Buddhism reached China it found two main currents of cultural
conditions with which it had to contend and make terms, namely,
Confucianism and Taoism, neither of which, strictly speaking, were
religions. The teachings of Confucius were intellectual and were almost
wholly devoted to inculcating habits of ethical idealism among all
classes of people. By its presentation of an ideal "superior man" and
its emphasis on "propriety" and "obedience" it appealed principally to
the educated and official classes and tended to conservatism and the
perpetuation of ancient customs and intellectual ideas. It was an
admirable culture that resulted in a high type of social ethics and
customs second to none even today. It was no mean protagonist for
Buddhism to meet, but it had little in common with the rationalistic and
disciplinary

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and self-less ideals of Buddhism. It tended to individual pride of
intellect and averice for position and power, while effecting at the
same time ideals of a noble and courteous social structure. Buddhism
tended toward mind-control; Confucianism tended toward mind culture;
Buddhism was revolutionary and iconoclastic; Confucianism was
conservative and inert.

As we have said, at first Confucianists welcomed the amazing and
abounding philosophy and metaphysics and psychology of Indian Buddhism,
but later they came to realise that ultimately it would undermine the
foundations of Confucianism. In its distrust of Buddhism during the
centuries from the Sixth to the Ninth it inspired wave after wave of
nationalistic persecution. It was not until the Eighth and Ninth
centuries that it came to appreciate the good qualities of Buddhism and
learned not only to tolerate it but also to accept it as supplying those
mystical elements which the human heart craves and which in its own
teachings were entirely lacking.

The teachings of Taoism on the other hand had many things in common with
Buddhism; it can be truly said that Laotsu by his doctrines of Tao and
Wu-wei had prepared the way and made ready a welcome for the coming of
Buddhism. Nevertheless, there was something in the easy-going
laissez-faire naturalism of Laotsu that was diametrically opposed to the
austere restraint and discipline of Buddhism. They both loved the quiet
of solitude, but the Taoist sage wanted a little congenial company with
whom to play checkers and drink wine and quote poetry; while the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Buddhist saint sought real solitude that he
might be less hindered in his strenuous concentration of mind in the
attainment of a self-realisation of ultimate truth.

The doctrines of Tao and Buddha could be harmonised without strain in
both their active aspect and their essence of mingled wisdom and
beneficence. As the Sanskrit terms of Indian Buddhism slowly gave way to
Chinese, the term Tao was freely used for Buddhahood both by itself and
in many compounds; in fact at one time it looked as though the term Tao
would almost entirely displace the Sanskrit term of Buddha. If a
distinction is made in the meaning content of the two terms perhaps the
term Buddha came to have a more static significance colored as it was by
the conception of the Buddha in samadhi with all its realisation of
blissful peace and equanimity; while Tao always carried a significance
of dynamic activity. The words Tao and Buddha are often used almost
synonymously, but still there remains a shade of distinction between the
active and passive sides of reality. One of the early Ch’an Masters
said: "Buddha is Tao, Tao is dhyana." The common use of Tao in Buddhist
names is also very significant.

To illustrate this free use of Tao by the Ch’an Masters, let me quote a
strictly Buddhist production written by Rinsai which is much admired
even down to today. It was given to me by my own Master as part of his
instruction.

"*Buddha-nature is the symbol of purity;  
Dharma-mind is the symbol of enlightenment;  
The Tao is the Way of unobstructed truth*. <span id="page_19">p.
19</span>  
*In essence these three are truly One,  
But by themselves they are merely words.  
The mind of the Tao-man should be pure, enlightened and free*."

Originally Laotsu had a conception of the value of mind-concentration as
an intuitive method of arriving at a self-realisation of reality, but in
Taoism it had become buried under a burden of self-induced trance and
vision and revelation as a guide for the attainment of success and good
luck. Nevertheless, there was an underlying similarity or affinity
between the conceptions of the value of concentration of mind in both
Buddhism and Taoism.

When Buddhism came to China it most decidedly had to make terms with
Taoism, for while Confucianism was the cult of the literati, Taoism was
the faith of the common people. Taoism was indigenous and while the
teachings of Laotsu had been atheistic and sensible, in the course of a
thousand years Taoism had taken up into itself the crude animism of a
great racial inheritance to make it most decidedly spiritistic and
superstitious and geomantic.

Moreover there was the Taoist doctrine of Wu-wei. Wu-wei can be
translated, "non-assertion." In Taoism it generally carries the meaning
of the acceptance of Tao as being infinitely wise and beneficent and
powerful, and therefore Taoism emphasises the futility of Interfering
with the cosmic currents, and the wisdom of falling in with the natural
unfoldment of the Tao in both nature and human affairs. To Taoists, the
human interference either by force or legislation or

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

culture with the course of nature is looked upon as the height of
foolishness. To take things as they are and as they come is the teaching
of Taoist wisdom. In one sense this is what Buddhism by its doctrine of
"patient acceptance" teaches, but in another sense, Buddhism is quite
opposed to any lazy inertness in meeting the difficulties of life. While
Buddhism teaches the patient acceptance of the results of old karma, it
also teaches that good karma is to be attained by the disciplined
restrain of desire, habits of clear thinking, the extinction of egoism,
and concentrated meditation, thus making a rational interference with
the course of nature which if yielded to would result in suffering, the
course of wisdom.

Another circumstance that tended undoubtedly to the yielding of Buddhism
to Taoist influences in these early days was to escape the virulence of
the nationalistic persecutions which were fomented by Confucianists and
which for two hundred years were directed against all forms of Buddhism
as being a foreign religion prejudicial to the welfare of the state.
This persecution was largely escaped as Buddhism became disguised as a
form of Taoism. And often it was not so much a disguise as it was the
real thing. For instance, in the case of Hsuanchien who is usually
reckoned as a Ch’an Buddhist of a rather extreme type, he is reported to
have said to his disciples:

"Here there is no Buddha, nor Patriarch. Bodhidharma was only an old
bearded barbarian. The Bodhisattvas are only dung-heap coolies. Nirvana
and bodhi are dead stumps to tie your donkey to. The twelve divisions of
the Tripitika are only lists of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

ghosts and sheets of paper fit only to wipe the puss from your skin. And
all your four merits and ten stages are mere ghosts lingering in their
decaying graves. Can these have any thing to do with your salvation?"

Of course such words as these must not be taken too literally for the
literature of Ch’an Buddhism abounds with the most extravagant and
seemingly foolish remarks of the Masters that to be understood and make
sense of must be considered intuitively rather than logically. But they
all go to show how serious and deep was the reaction between Buddhism
and Taoism in those early centuries. At this distance of time it is hard
to realise how difficult was the process toward adjustment between these
two cults that had so much that was similar. For a century it was a
question whether the result would be Taoism as modified by Buddhism, or
Buddhism modified by Taoism. Most fortunately it proved to be the
latter. Even down to day Taoist temples and Taoist monks are often
indistinguishable from Buddhist temples. In 1927 the writer visited a
Taoist friend at his hermitage-temple just outside of Nanking; it was
arranged and decorated precisely like a Buddhist temple, had a Buddhist
image of Amida, but when we left, the Taoist monk gave us as a parting
gift, a copy of Laotsu's Tao Teh King. In Henri Borel's well known
essays <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) dealing with Laotzu's
philosophy, his Taoist monk gives to his parting guest a beautiful image
of Kwanon and in the essays themselves it is hard to say whether they
are more Taoist or Buddhist.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

Dr. Hu-shih, the eminent Chinese philosopher and. historian in a
tentative and as yet unpublished study of this very subject and period,
speaks of this reaction as "a revolt of Taoism against Buddhism"; while
Dr. Daisetz Suzuki, the equally eminent authority of Zen Buddhism,
speaks of it as the natural evolution of Buddhism under Taoist
conditions. Of the two it would seem as though Dr. Suzuki was the nearer
right, but in either case the result was the same: the development of a
type of Buddhism that was free from the extravagancies of Indian
philosophising and intellectual inertia and sentimental
personalisations, and true to the original commonsense practicality of
Shakyamuni.

By the Fourth Century most of the outstanding Mahayana scriptures had
been translated into Chinese. Among them were many books about the
Indian yoga practices of breathing and other methods for the attainment
of mind-control and concentrated meditation, that made up the Indian
practice of Dhyana. The Chinese were a practically minded people and had
never cared very much for philosophy and metaphysics; being intellectual
they were amazed and excited by the elaborate metaphysics and exuberant
literature of the Mahayana, but they were more particularly attracted to
the practical systems of dhyana that promised tangible results of
enlightenment and ecstasy and blissful peace that could be tested and
evaluated. It naturally came about, therefore, that the first serious
popular acceptance of Buddhism was in the practice of Dhyana, and as the
most popular subject for meditation and concentration was the Divine
Name, with its

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

promise of re-birth in the Pure Land, the later sects that go under that
name, on the surface, appear to have a certain claim to priority. But it
is a question whether this earliest acceptance can rightly be called a
"salvation by faith" type of Buddhism, for its emphasis on dhyana
practice would mark it as a "meditation" type. Much depends on whether
the phrase, "Na-moo-mit-t’o-fu" was used in those early days as a
subject for meditation and concentration, or as a mantra with magic
working powers. Dr. Suzuki has discussed this question at length in his
Essays in Zen Buddhism, Second Series, where it can be studied to
advantage.

The first name that emerges in this connection is Tao-an (   -385). He
was a notable monk, learned in both Confucian and Taoist lore and books
of his are still extant dealing with these yoga practices of dhyana and
commenting upon them. It is easy to see from them that he looked upon
these Indian practices as good working methods for attaining Taoist
ideals of non-activity and non-desire.

Tao-an left a disciple, Hui-yuan (333-416), who was also a great scholar
and learned in Taoist mysticism. He is most remembered as the founder of
a Buddhist center or fraternity near Kuling, known as the White Lotus
Society, whose characteristic was their concentration on the Divine
Name, in consequence of which he is commonly looked upon as the founder
of the Pure Land Sects of China and Japan. But history shows that he was
more interested in the serious practise of dhyana and to him the
repetition of the Divine Name was the best method for attaining
concentration of mind. There was nothing new in the practice of

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

dhyana; it had existed in India for a millennium and was taken over by
Shakyamuni and given a new content of meaning as the Eighth Stage of his
Noble Path. As it appeared in China it was at first largely a practise
of Indian yoga methods as an aid to meditation but it had degenerated
into a popular and easy going "still-sitting" and a lazy habit of
thinking. The characteristic that now began to emerge in the teachings
and interest of Tao-an and Hui-yuan was the more definite focussing of
mind and its more energetic character.

After Hui-yuan there came into prominence one of his disciples, Tao-seng
(   -434), who with his disciple, Tao-you, developed the doctrine of
"Sudden Awakening," as against the almost universal belief in the
"Gradual Attainment," that thereafter entered into Chinese Buddhism to
condition its distinctive characteristic. By this teaching the old
conception of the gradual attainment of Buddhahood through myriads of
kotis of re-births was challenged and in its place was offered, through
the right concentration of dhyana, the possibility of sudden and perfect
enlightenment. The Chinese Ch’an Buddhism that came to monopolise the
religious field was the mingling of these two distinctively Chinese
elements: A more strenuous dhyana, and the possibility of a sudden
awakening and attainment of enlightenment, with the Indian philosophy of
the Mahayana.

The next outstanding name, and the one to whom is usually given the
chief credit for being the founder of Ch’an Buddhism in China, is
Bodhidharma. He was an Indian monk of princely family who must have
arrived in South China about 470 A.D., and who lived

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and travelled in China for fifty years until about 520. This length of
stay in China is much longer than is usually given but it appears to be
necessary to account for all that is recorded concerning him. He must
have been a most extraordinary man, a great personality, stubborn,
taciturn, gruff and positive, but withal, honest, straightforward and
clear minded. There are two incidents in his life that will bear
repeating. Emperor Wu of Liang was very favorably inclined toward
Buddhism; he founded temples, supported monks, and translated
scriptures, but when he asked Bodhidharma during an interview what
credit he had earned, the gruff old monk replied, "None whatever, your
majesty." To the question, "What is the first principle of the holy
doctrine?" Bodhidharma replied, "Vast emptiness, and there is nothing in
it to be called 'holy,' Sire."

"Who is it, then, that confronts me?" asked the Emperor.

"I do not know, Your Majesty."

There is a famous poem that refers to the above incident, that has for
these present times a deep significance:

"I don't know," replied Bodhidharma,  
Baffled by the classical speech of the Imperial Court;  
But if the Emperor had been a man of insight and spirit  
He would have chased after Bodhidharma,  
Over the desert sand to Tien-mu."

Bodhidharma, finding in the North no interest in his presentation of
Buddhism, returned to the South and shut himself in his own monastery of
Shao-lin, to

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

which few disciples ever came and where, tradition says, he practised
for nine years a kind of concentrative dhyana that came to be called,
"wall gazing." It consisted in an honest and earnest effort to
definitely realise the oneness of one's true Buddha-nature with
Universal Buddhahood, by the single method of mind-concentration on
Mind-essence. To Bodhidharma, books, logical ideas, study, ritual,
worship were useless; only simple but "seeking" and tireless
"wall-gazing" was sufficient. All distinctions of self and not-self,
comfort or discomfort, joy or suffering, desire or aversion, success or
failure, and mental discrimination of all kinds must be ignored and left
behind, in the sole effort to merge oneself with Mind-essence which
alone is reality, Inasmuch as one's own inner conscience is
Mind-essence, why seek for it elsewhere? This "treasure of the heart" is
the only Buddha there ever was, or is, or ever will be. "There is no
Buddha but your own. thoughts. Buddha is Tao. Tao is dhyana. Dhyana
cannot be understood by the definitions of the wise. Dhyana is a man's
successful seeing into his own fundamental nature." "I have come from
India only to teach you that Buddha is thought. I have no interest in
monastic rules, nor ascetic practises, nor miraculous powers, nor merely
sitting in meditation."

In Bodhidharma's distrust of scriptures and intellectual knowledge, he
made an exception of the Lankavatara Sutra. The reason for this
exception was because that Sutra alone taught the doctrine of the
Self-realisation of the Oneness of all things in Mind-essence. When at
last after nine years of "wall-gazing" he gained one disciple who
understood him, Hui-k’e

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (486-593). Bodhidharma gave him certain
instruction that could only be transmitted from mind to mind, and gave
him his begging-bowl and his robe and his copy of the Lankavatara Sutra,
which afterward became the insignia of the Patriarchate, thus
constituting Hui-k’e as the Second Patriarch. There is a tradition that
Bodhidharma soon after returned to India, but the place and time of his
death is unknown.

There is no doubt that at first and for a long time the "Sudden
Awakening" Ch’an school was a hard one to attend. It was well over the
border of asceticism and self-denial, with no marks of sympathy between
Master and disciple to make it bearable, but from that hard school rose
a succession of great Masters and deep experiences and an
extraordinarily virulent social influence.

Concerning the teachings of Bodhidharma and the Ch’an sect, Dr. Suzuki
quotes the following passage:

"The Master (Bodhidharma) first stayed in Shao-lin Temple for nine years
and when at last he taught the Second Patriarch it was in this manner.
Externally keep yourself away from all relationships, and internally
cherish no hankerings in your heart. When your mind becomes like an
upright wall (that is, resistant to the entrance of discriminative
ideas) you will enter into the path. At first Hui-k’e tried in various
ways to explain (to himself) the reason of mind-only but failed to
realise the truth itself. The Master would say: 'No, no,' but would do
nothing to explain it or make clear what Mind-essence in its
undifferentiated, no-thought, state might be. Later on Hui-k’e said to
the Master, 'Now I know how to keep myself away from all relationships.'

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When the Master asked him to demonstrate it,
Hui-k’e replied: 'I know it always in a most convincing manner but to
express it in words--that is impossible.' Thereupon said the Master,
'That is the Mind-essence itself that is transmitted by all the Buddhas.
Have no doubt about it.'"

The story runs that Hui-k’e before he was finally successful had tried
again and again to gain Bodhidharma's consent to become his Master, even
waiting at his gate one cold winter's night while the snow fell to his
knees, and was finally successful only when he cut off his right arm to
show the earnestness of his desire. Hui-k’e was very learned in the
Chinese classics and also in the common lore of Buddhism; he seems to
have come to Bodhidharma at first more to win his approval than with any
great expectation of added instruction, but after he had attained his
deep experience with Bodhidharma, he made light of his great learning,
became very humble minded and earnestly' sought for perfect
enlightenment. After the passing of Bodhidharma, Hui-k’e did not at once
assume leadership as the Second Patriarch, but withdrew to a hermitage
in the mountains and lived quite humbly with the lowest classes of
society. He did not shun preaching but tried to do it quietly and
inconspicuously. He was finally murdered by an envious Master whose
disciples Hui-k’e had unintentionally drawn away.

The Third Patriarch was Seng-ts’an (   -606) about whom very little is
known. One tradition has it that he suffered from leprosy and therefore
retired to a hermitage in the mountains. There is a record of his
transmitting the begging-bowl and the robe to Tao-

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

hsin (580-651). Tao-hsin was also a recluse and very little is known of
him except that he left a composition which has always been highly
valued by disciples of Ch’an Buddhism.

The Fifth Patriarch was Hung-jen (605-675). It is recorded of him that
he was a near neighbor or relative of Seng-ts’an and came to be with him
when quite young. With his assumption of the Patriarchate there was
introduced a decided change in the character of the presentation of
Ch’an Buddhism. Hitherto the Patriarchs had been of a retiring
disposition, or else the times had changed making it possible for the
Masters to work more publicly and assemble disciples. At any rate we
find Hung-jen the head of a great establishment with hundreds of
disciples and attaining imperial favor.

Among the disciples of Hung-jen were two who afterwards came into great
public notice; Hui-neng whose Sutra we shall study in the following
chapters and Shen-hsui, who was second only in rank in the great
monastery to Hung-jen. Shen-hsui was a very learned man and a notable
orator and teacher, but he was egoistic and deficient in the insight
that marks the true Ch’an Master. Hung-jen was aware of this and so when
the time came for him to appoint a successor, he passed by Shen-hsui and
appointed Hun-neng. Having failed in securing the coveted rank of Sixth
Patriarch, Shen-hsui returned to the North from whence he had originally
come and there established a rival school that for a time was very
successful and he came to be highly honored by the Emperor. His school
differed from that of Hung-jen and came to be known as

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the "Gradual Attainment," or Northern School of Ch’an Buddhism, but at
his death it was less successful and finally lost standing.

This brings us to the main interest of this book, the life and Sutra of
Hui-neng, the Sixth Patriarch, but before we do so it is wise to say a
few words about the general character of Ch’an Buddhism as it was in his
day and show how it differed from the ordinary run of Buddhism
throughout China. As we have already pointed out Buddhism as generally
held was of the foreign type which had been presented by Indian monks
and Indian scriptures. It was largely given up to a study of the various
scriptures and an easy-going practice of dhyana. It was still a foreign
religion, and only slightly affected by its Chinese environment. On the
contrary Ch’an Buddhism was not at all intellectual, was far from being
easy-going, and had become profoundly influenced by Chinese Taoism and
Chinese customs.

In closing this introductory chapter it is well to sum up the
characteristics of Ch’an Buddhism as they differed from the orthodox
Buddhism of that early period. Negatively, it was more atheistic.
Shakyamuni had been more agnostic concerning the nature of Reality,
Nestorian Christianity was emphatically theistic, while Taoism was
decidedly atheistic, looking upon Tao as being Ultimate Principle rather
than personality. Mahayanistic Buddhism in contact with the great
theistic religions of Central Asia had grown to be more philosophic,
looking upon Reality in its three phases of essence, principle, and
transitory appearances as existing in a state of undifferentiated
Oneness.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

In contact with the polytheism of India and the animistic spiritism of
Tibet it had absorbed much of their love for differentiated images and
ranks of divinities; but that was for the accommodation of its more
ignorant believers than for its elite. Under the influence of Taoism,
Ch’anism became at first quite decidedly atheistic and iconoclastic,
shading off later on into a more tolerant attitude, but even down to
today, Ch’an in China and Zen in Japan make very little of their images
which are used more for decoration than for worship. The deification of
Shakyamuni Buddha that marked the Hinayana of Ceylon and Burma is almost
entirely absent in Ch’an; in fact, the adoration shown Amitabha is much
more apparent, and images of Kwan-yin, Manjushri and Kasyapa are just as
frequently seen, while adoration to the image of the Founder of each
particular temple and even for the Master of the Founder, seems to be
more sentimentally sincere and earnest.

Further, under the influence of Taoism, Ch’an Buddhism had very little
use for the Sutras that the Buddhism of those early days made so much
of, the Lankavatara being the only exception. Ch’anists, intent in their
strenuous practice of Dhyana, had found a more direct and immediate
realisation of Reality and therein were satisfied. The same can be said
of all the rest of the common paraphenalia of worship; they had no use
for ritual, or public services, or prayer, or priests, or ranks of
Dignity, or sentimentalism or emotionalism of any kind whatever. Every
thing had to give way to the one thing of self-realisation of Oneness.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

The result of this contact of Indian Buddhism with Taoism, therefore,
was to develop in Ch’an a type of Buddhism that was coldly rational,
experiential, positive and iconoclastic, and that led to a life of
extreme simplicity, strict discipline, humility, industry, sympathy with
all animate life, and to an equitable and cheerful peace of mind. At
first Ch’an Buddhists had no temples of their own, nor organisations of
any kind; they were either isolated individuals living a solitary life,
or were groups of disciples gathered about a Master. This later
developed into the calling of Ch’an Masters to be the heads of
monasteries belonging to other sects, and still later to the acquiring
of their own monasteries and temples, with all their vested abbots of
high degree, and ceremonial ritual and worldly pride. Nevertheless, as
of old, the true Ch’an monk is more often to be found in some solitary
hermitage, busy and cheerful at his manual work, humble and zealous at
his practice of Dhyana, intent on the one goal of self-realisation of
enlightenment, Nirvana and Buddhahood.

While Bodhidharma is usually credited with being the founder of Ch’an
Buddhism and rightly so, it was Hui-neng the Sixth Patriarch who gave it
more definite character and permanent form that time has tested and
approved. Ch’an Buddhism seems to have discerned the essentials of
Shakyamuni's teachings and spirit better than any other sect, and to
have developed their deeper implications more faithfully. This
development came through its contact with Chinese Taoism under the lead
of Bodhidharma and Hui-neng, making it a virile and wholesome influence
for all

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

nations thereafter. Hui-yuan yielded to the seduction of the Divine Name
and thereby gained the credit of being the founder of the Pure Land
sects with all their glamour of "salvation by faith." Chih-chi
(   -597), one of China's greatest philosophic minds, grew up as an
earnest Ch’an Buddhist but yielding to the lure of his profound study of
the Scriptures became known as the founder of the Tien-T’ai school of
philosophic Buddhism, Shen-shui, the learned Master of the very temple
where Hui-neng worked as a laborer in the granary, yielded to the lure
of egoism and popularity to become the founder of the passing school of
"Gradual Attainment."

But Hui-neng more or less illiterate as he was said to be, had the force
of personality, and insight and common-sense, to determine the
essentials of the Dharma and the humble and patient zeal to work out and
to apply them in the wisest way. The outstanding features of Hui-neng's
Ch’an were as follows:

1\. Distrust of all Scriptures and dogmatic teachings.

2\. An enquiring mind and earnest search into the depths of one's own
nature.

3\. Humble but positive faith in the possibilities of such an enquiring
search, in a sudden self-realisation of enlightenment, Nirvana and
Buddahood.

4\. Loyal and patient acceptance of such self-realisation in a following
life of simplicity, self-restraint, industry, and sympathy with all
animate life.

In arriving at these convictions Hui-neng's inherited and experiential
acquaintance with Taoism was

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

very influential. He was said to be illiterate but this could have been
only relatively true of one who had mastered the Diamond Sutra and
frequently discoursed to his disciples about the other great Sutras of
the Mahayana. His study of the Diamond Sutra had convinced him of the
truth of "Emptiness" and prepared his mind for the later truth of
"Self-realisation of Mind-essence" which the Lankavatara taught him. But
it was the conception of the Tao, active, limitless, inscrutably wise
and benevolent, universal, eternal, ineffable, that gave depth and
substance to his convictions and brought sympathy and patience with
himself and with all animate life. It was the blending of all these
elements in the mind and spirit of Hui-neng, the Sixth Patriarch, that
through him gave Chinese Ch’an, and Japanese Zen, Buddhism their
characteristic form and spirit.

Hui-neng was deeply influenced by his inherited and personal
acquaintance with Taoism. In his leadership and teachings he made little
of the personal Buddha and very much of Prajna in which he saw the
Ultimate Principle of Tao in both its irradiant and integrating forms,
as both intellection and compassion. The term he used for Ultimate
Reality, and made so much of, was Mind-essence. A self-realisation of
this was all the Buddha he cared about. It was Dharmakaya and Buddhahood
and Nirvana and Tathata and Prajna. It was universal, undifferentiated
and inscrutable, but was clouded over and hidden by karma and
discriminative thought and desire and grasping. If these clouds could be
driven away, and they all might be, then it would shine forth in all its
pristine purity

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and potency. To Hui-neng, perfect enlightenment and self-realisation of
Mind-essence and Buddhahood were the same thing. This perfect
culmination of life would come suddenly as the result of an earnest and
sincere concentration of mind on the search for it with in one's own
mind, and this was the only way it could come. In his mind all scripture
and all teachings were subordinate to the self-realisation attained
suddenly by earnest Dhyana and Samadhi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[21:1](bb05.htm#fr_0) *Laotsu's Tao and Wu-wei,
by Dwight Goddard and Henri Borel. Pub. by Brentano*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](bb06)
