[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb05)  [Next](bb07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

# SELF-REALISATION OF NOBLE WISDOM

*Based on Professor Suzuki's Translation of the Lankavatara*

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### Preface

PROFESSOR SUZUKI'S STUDIES IN THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA was published in
1929, and his TRANSLATION OF' THE LANKAVATARA in 1932 (George Routledge
& Son, London). The books awakened a great deal of interest in the
LANKAVATARA which, until these books appeared, had been almost unknown
to the European world. They also awakened a great deal of admiration for
Professor Suzuki's scholarship and patience in carrying to a conclusion
so great a task and in so scholarly a manner.

Owing to the nature of the original Sanskrit text, the English
translation is very difficult reading and Professor Suzuki felt, if the
Sutra was ever to be read by many general readers, that an editing of it
in the interest of easier reading was almost a necessity. For that
reason he encouraged the editor to undertake the task, but, of course,
Professor Suzuki is in no sense to be held responsible for its character
or interpretations.

Under the general rube adopted by the editor, the long introductory
chapter, the "meat-eating" chapter, and the chapter on Dharani, were
omitted entirely as being later accretions and in no direct sense
relating to the theme of the Sutra. The long chapter of verses is also
omitted as being obscure and repetitious; and as the essence of the
verses; is given in the prose sections,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

they can be omitted without loss for the sake of easier reading. In
addition, certain small sections are omitted because of their obscurity,
or because they do not appear to add anything to the elucidation of the
main thesis.

Under the second rule, the Sutra was cut up into more or less small
sections and rearranged into something like an orderly sequence. Under
the third rule, these small sections were interwoven and condensed by
omitting repetitions, matter that was obscure or tiresomely
argumentative. Under the fourth rule, a minimum amount of interpretation
was introduced. This was absolutely necessary if the Sutra was to be
easily or agreeably read, but the interpretations were confined to
matter found within the text itself. Often the author of the Sutra would
refer to an important doctrine by a single compound word which if
translated would be meaningless to modern occidental ears; in such cases
there was nothing else to be done, if the reading was to be easily
understood, but to interpret it at more or less length, but I have been
scrupulously careful not to do any more than was necessary to bring out
the full meaning of the text.

As readers become interested in the Sutra by the reading of this Version
they are urged to continue their study of it from the original Sanskrit,
or from Prof. Suzuki's books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](bb07.md)
