[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb07)  [Next](bb09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### Chapter I

### Discrimination

THUS HAVE I HEARD. The Blessed One once appeared in the Castle of Lanka
which is on the summit of Mt. Malaya in the midst of the great Ocean. A
great many Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas had miraculously assembled from all
the Buddha-lands, and a large number of bhikshus were gathered there.
The Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas with Mahamati at their head were all perfect
masters of the various Samadhis, the tenfold Self-mastery, the ten
Powers, and the six Psychic Faculties. Having been anointed by the
Buddha's own hands, they all well understood the significance of the
objective world; they all knew how to apply the various means, teachings
and disciplinary measures according to the various mentalities and
behaviors of beings; they were all thoroughly versed in the five
Dharmas, the three Svabhavas, the eight Vijnanas, and the twofold
Egolessness.

The Blessed One, knowing of the mental agitations going on in the minds
of those assembled (like the surface of the ocean stirred into waves by
the passing winds), and his great heart moved by compassion, smiled and
said: In the days of old the Tathagatas of the past who were Arhats and
fully-enlightened Ones came to the Castle of Lanka on Mount Malaya and
discoursed on the Truth of Noble Wisdom that is beyond the reasoning
knowledge of the philosophers as well as being beyond the understanding
of ordinary disciples and masters; and which is realisable only within
the inmost

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

consciousness; for your sakes, I too, would discourse on the same Truth.
All that is seen in the world is devoid of effort and action because all
things in the world are like a dream, or like an image miraculously
projected. This is not comprehended by the philosophers and the
ignorant, but those who thus see things see them truthfully. Those who
see things otherwise walk in discrimination and, as they depend upon
discrimination, they cling to dualism. The world as seen by
discrimination is like seeing one's own image reflected in a mirror, or
one's shadow, or the moon reflected in water, or an echo heard in the
valley. People grasping their own shadows of discrimination become
attached to this thing and that thing and failing to abandon dualism
they go on forever discriminating and thus never attain tranquillity. By
tranquillity is meant Oneness, and Oneness gives birth to the highest
Samadhi which is gained by entering into the realm of Noble Wisdom that
is realisable only within one's inmost consciousness.

Then all the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas rose from their seats and
respectfully paid him homage and Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva
sustained by the power of the Buddhas drew his upper garment over one
shoulder, knelt and pressing his hands together, praised him in the
following verses:

*As thou reviewest the world with thy perfect intelligence and
compassion, it must seem to thee like an ethereal flower of which one
cannot say: it is born, it is destroyed, for the terms being and
non-being do not apply to it*.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

*As thou reviewest the world with thy perfect intelligence and
compassion, it must seem to thee like a dream of which it cannot be
said: it is permanent or it is destructible, for being and non-being do
not apply to it.*

*As thou reviewest all things by thy perfect intelligence and
compassion, they must seem to thee like visions beyond the reach of the
human mind, as being and non-being do not apply to them.*

*With thy perfect intelligence and compassion which are beyond all
limit, thou comprehendest the egolessness of things and persons, and art
free and clear from the hindrances of passion and learning and egotism.*

*Thou dost not vanish into Nirvana. nor does Nirvana abide in thee, for
Nirvana transcends all duality of knowing and known, of being and
non-being.*

*Those who see thee thus, serene and beyond conception, will be
emancipated from attachment, will be cleansed of all defilement, both in
this world and in the spiritual world beyond.*

*In this world whose nature is like a dream, there is place for praise
and blame, but in the ultimate Reality of Dharmakaya which is far beyond
the senses and the discriminating mind, what is there to praise*? *O
thou most Wise*!

\*

THEN SAID MAHAMATI the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva: O blessed One, Sugata,
Arhat and Fully-enlightened One, pray tell us about the realisation of
Noble Wisdom which is beyond the path and usage of the philosophers;

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

which is devoid of all predicates such as being and non-being, oneness
and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, existence and non-existence,
eternity and non-eternity; which has nothing to do with individuality
and generality, nor false-imagination, nor any illusions arising from
the mind itself; but which manifests itself as the Truth of Highest
Reality. By which, going up continuously by the stages of purification,
one enters at last upon the stage of Tathagatahood, whereby, by the
power of his original vows unattended by any striving, one will radiate
its influence to infinite worlds, like a gem reflecting its variegated
colors, whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, will be enabled to
bring all beings to the same perfection of virtue.

Said the Blessed One: Well done, well done, Mahamati! And again, well
done, indeed! It is because of your compassion for the world, because of
the benefit it will bring to many people both human kind and celestial,
that you have presented yourself before us to make this request.
Therefore, Mahamati, listen well and truly reflect upon what I shall
say, for I will instruct you.

Then Mahamati and the other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas gave devout
attention to the teaching of the Blessed One.

Mahamati, since the ignorant and simple-minded, not knowing that the
world is only something seen of the mind itself, cling to the
multitudinousness of external objects, cling to the notions of being and
nonbeing, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, existence
and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

and think that they have a self-nature of their own, all of which rises
from the discriminations of the mind and is perpetuated by habit-energy,
and from which they are given over to false imagination. It is all like
a mirage in which springs of water are seen as if they were real. They
are thus imagined by animals who, made thirsty by the heat of the
season, run after them. Animals, not knowing that the springs are an
hallucination of their own minds, do not realise that there are no such
springs. In the same way, Mahamati, the ignorant and simple-minded,
their minds burning with the fires of greed, anger and folly, finding
delight in a world of multitudinous forms, their thoughts obsessed with
ideas of birth, growth and destruction, not well understanding what is
meant by existent and non-existent, and being impressed by the erroneous
discriminations and speculations since beginningless time, fall into the
habit of grasping this and that and thereby becoming attached to them.

It is like the city of the Gandharvas which the unwitting take to be a
real city though it is not so in fact. The city appears as in a vision
owing to their attachment to the memory of a city preserved in the mind
as a seed; the city can thus be said to be both existent and
non-existent. In the same way, clinging to the memory of erroneous
speculations and doctrines accumulated since beginningless time, they
hold fast to such ideas as oneness and otherness, being and nonbeing,
and their thoughts are not at all clear as to what after all is only
seen of the mind. It is like a man dreaming in his sleep of a country
that seems to be filled with various men, women, elephants, horses,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

cars, pedestrians, villages, towns, hamlets, cows, buffalos, mansions,
woods, mountains, rivers and lakes, and who moves about in that city
until he is awakened. As he lies half awake, he recalls the city of his
dreams and reviews his experiences there; what do you think, Mahamati,
is this dreamer who is letting his mind dwell upon the various
unrealities he has seen in his dream,--is he to be considered wise or
foolish? In the same way, the ignorant and simple-minded who are
favorably influenced by the erroneous views of the philosophers do not
recognise that the views that are influencing them are only dream-like
ideas originating in the mind itself, and consequently they are held
fast by their notions of oneness and otherness, of being and non-being.
It is like a painter's canvas on which the ignorant imagine they see the
elevations and depressions of mountains and valleys.

In the same way there are people today being brought up under the
influence of similar erroneous views of oneness and otherness, of
bothness and not-bothness, whose mentality is being conditioned by the
habit-energy of these false-imaginings and who later on will declare
those who hold the true doctrine of no-birth which is free from the
alternatives of being and non-being, to be nihilists and by so doing
will bring themselves and others to ruin. By the natural law of cause
and effect these followers of pernicious views uproot meritorious causes
that otherwise would lead to unstained purity. They are to be shunned by
those whose desires are for more excellent things.

It is like the dim-eyed ones who seeing a hairnet exclaim to one
another: "It is wonderful! Look, Honorable

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sirs, it is wonderful!" But the hairnet has
never existed; in fact, it is neither an entity, nor a nonentity, for it
has both been seen and has not been seen. in the same manner those whose
minds have been addicted to the discriminations of the erroneous views
cherished by the philosophers which are given over to the realistic
views of being and non-being, will contradict the good Dharma and will
end in the destruction of themselves and others.

It is like a wheel of fire made by a revolving firebrand which is no
wheel but which is imagined to be one by the ignorant. Nor is it
not-a-wheel because it has not been seen by some. By the same reasoning,
those who are in the habit of listening to the discriminations and views
of the philosophers will regard things born as non-existent and those
destroyed by causation as existent. It is like a mirror reflecting
colors and images as determined by conditions but without any
partiality. It is like the echo of the wind that gives the sound of a
human voice. It is like a mirage of moving water seen in a desert. In
the same way the discriminating mind of the ignorant which has been
heated by false-imaginations and speculations is stirred into
mirage-like waves by the winds of birth, growth and destruction. It is
like the magician Pisaca, who by means of his spells makes a wooden
image or a dead body to throb with life, though it has no power of its
own. In the same way the ignorant and the simpleminded, committing
themselves to erroneous philosophical views become thoroughly devoted to
the ideas of oneness and otherness, but their confidence is not Well
grounded. For this reason, Mahamati, you and

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should cast off all discriminations
leading to the notions of birth, abiding and destructions, of oneness
and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, of being and non-being and
thus getting free of the bondage of habit-energy become able to attain
the reality realisable within yourselves of Noble Wisdom.

\*

THEN SAID MAHAMATI to the Blessed One: Why is it that the ignorant are
given up to discrimination and the wise are not?

The Blessed One replied: It is because the ignorant cling to names,
signs and ideas; as their minds move along these channels they feed on
multiplicities of objects and fall into the notion of an ego-soul and
what belongs to it; they make discriminations of good and bad among
appearances and cling to the agreeable. As they thus cling there is a
reversion to ignorance, and karma born of greed, anger and folly, is
accumulated. As the accumulation of karma goes on they become imprisoned
in a cocoon of discrimination and are thenceforth unable to free
themselves from the round of birth and death.

Because of folly they do not understand that all things are like maya,
like the reflection of the moon in water, that there is no
self-substance to be imagined as an ego-soul and its belongings, and
that all their definitive ideas rise from their false discriminations of
what exists only as it is seen of the mind itself. They do not realise
that things have nothing to do with qualified

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and qualifying, nor with the course of birth, abiding and destruction,
and instead they assert that they are born of a creator, of time, of
atoms, of some celestial spirit. It is because the ignorant are given up
to discrimination that they move along with the stream of appearances,
but it is not so with the wise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. False-Imagination and Knowledge of Appearances](bb09.md)
