[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb20)  [Next](bb22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

# THE DIAMOND SUTRA

### Based on William Gemmell's Translation Edited, Rearranged and Interpreted

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

### Preface

THIS VERSION is based upon the English translation by William Gemmell,
of the Chinese translation made by Kumarajiva, and was published by
Kegan Paul in 1912. It is not an exact translation of the Chinese but is
in a measure interpreted; it is very well done and proved to be more
suitable for the present purpose than Max Muller's more scholarly one
which was made direct from the Sanskrit original text.

There is no knowledge as to its author nor as to the date of its
composition, but it must have been written about the beginning of the
Christian era. It is the ninth section of a much larger treatise
entitled: *Mahaprajnaparamita Sutra*. It is very metaphysical and
difficult reading, but has always been very highly valued by Buddhist
scholars. Apparently the text had become more or less confused long
before the Chinese translations were made, so that in its present form
there is little progressive unfolding of the theme. The Truth is there
but it takes a scholar to dig it out. In this Version, the editor
interprets its theme to be: The observance of the Six Paramitas in the
light of the fundamental Dharma of emptiness and egolessness. With this
in mind the Sutra has been rearranged and divided into sections and
freely interpreted. To bring its

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

teaching into clear and emphatic notice, quotations have been made from
THE AWAKENING OF FAITH SUTRA to provide definitions of the Paramitas and
they have been inserted near the head of each section.

As explained in the Preface to the Self-realisation of Noble Wisdom,
this Sutra was greatly used from the very beginning by the founders of
the Zen Sect concurrently with the LANKAVATARA, but because of the
greater difficulties of the latter, it gradually displaced it, and after
the Tenth Century was almost exclusively used as its chief Sutra. Its
chief teaching that all phenomenal things and definitive ideas are
subjective and a manifestation of one's own mind, that even the
Scriptures are "empty," largely explains the characteristic tenets of
the Zen Sect:

"A special transmission outside the Scriptures;  
No dependence upon words and letters;  
Direct pointing to one's deepest consciousness;  
Seeing into one's nature and the attainment of Buddahood."

The Sutra teaches, according to Max Muller, "In contradistinction to the
fallacious phenomena, there is the true essence of mind. Underlying the
phenomena of mind, there is an unchanging principle." This is true, but
the Sutra also teaches that all good disciples should practice the
Paramitas in the light of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Diamond Scripture](bb22)
