[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb23)  [Next](bb25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

### Sutra of Transcendental Wisdom

### (*Maha-prajna-paramita-hridaya*)

THUS HAVE I HEARD. At one time the Blessed One together with a number of
the highest Bodhisattvas and a great company of bhikshus was staying at
Rajagriha on Mount Gridhrakta.

The Blessed One was sitting apart absorbed in Samadhi, and the noble
Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara was meditating on the profound
Prajna-paramita, thinking thus: Personality is made up of five grasping
aggregates--form, sensation, perception, discrimination and
consciousness--all of which the Blessed One has taught us are by nature
dream-like and empty.

Then the venerable Sariputra, influenced by the power of the Blessed One
absorbed in Samadhi, spoke thus to the noble Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara:
"If a son or daughter of good family wishes to study the profound
Prajna-paramita, how is he to do so?"

The noble Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara replied to the venerable Sariputra:
"If a son or daughter wishes to study the profound Prajna-paramita, he
must think thus: Personality? What is personality? Is it an eternal
entity or is it made up of elements that pass away?

"Personality is made up of five grasping aggregates which are by nature
empty of any self-substance. Form, or matter, is emptiness; emptiness is
not different from form, nor is form different from emptiness; indeed,
emptiness is form. In like manner: sensation is emptiness; emptiness is
not different from sensation, nor is sensation different from emptiness;
indeed, emptiness

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

is sensation. In like manner: perception, discrimination and
consciousness are also emptiness.

"Thus, O Sariputra, all things having the character of emptiness, have
no beginning nor ending; they are neither faultless nor not faultless;
they are neither perfect nor imperfect. Therefore, in emptiness there is
no form, no sensation, no perception, no discrimination, no
consciousness. There is no eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no
sensitiveness to contact, no mind. There is no form, no sound, no smell,
no taste, no touch, no mental process, no object, no knowledge, no
ignorance. There is no destruction of objects, no cessation of
knowledge, no cessation of ignorance. There is no decay and no death,
nor is there any destruction of the notions of decay and death. There is
no Noble Fourfold Truth--no pain, no cause of pain, no cessation of
pain, nor any Noble Path to the cessation of pain. There is no knowledge
of Nirvana, there is no obtaining of Nirvana, there is no not-obtaining
of Nirvana.

"Why is there no such thing as the obtaining of Nirvana? Because Nirvana
is the realm of no-thing-ness. If the ego-soul of personality is an
eternal entity it cannot attain Nirvana. It is only because personality
is made up of elements and is, therefore, empty of an ego-soul, that it
may attain Nirvana. So long as man is approaching Ultimate Wisdom, he is
still dwelling in the realm of consciousness. If he is to realise
Nirvana, he must pass beyond the realm of consciousness. In highest
Samadhi when consciousness has been transcended, he has passed beyond
discrimination and knowledge, beyond any reach of change or fear. He is
already enjoying Nirvana.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

"The perfect understanding of this and the patient acceptance of it is
the Ultimate Wisdom that is Prajna-paramita. All the Buddhas of the
past, present and future, having attained highest Samadhi, awake to find
themselves realising this highest perfect Wisdom.

"Therefore, every one should seek self-realisation of Prajna-paramita,
the Truth of Perfect Wisdom, the unsurpassable Truth, the Truth that
ends all pain, the Truth that is forever True. O Prajna-paramita! O
Transcendent Truth that spans the troubled ocean of life-and-death,
safely carry all seekers to that other shore. Thus, O Sariputra, should
a Bodhisattva teach all seekers the profound Prajna-paramita."

When the Blessed One had risen from Samadhi, he gave approval to the
words of the noble Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, saying: "Well done! Well
done, Noble Son! So, indeed, must the study of the profound
Prajna-paramita be presented. As it has been described by thee, it is
approved by all the Tathagatas."

Thus spoke the Blessed One with joyful mind, and the noble Bodhisattva
Avalokitesvara and the venerable Sariputra and the whole company of
bhikshus praised the words of the Blessed One.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](bb25)
