[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb31)  [Next](bb33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

### Chapter VII

### Sudden Enlightenment and Gradual Attainment <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)

CONTEMPORANEOUS WITH the Patriarch when he was living at Po-lam
Monastery was Grand Master Shin-shau who was preaching in Yuk-chuen
Monastery of King-nam. At that time the two schools of Hui-neng in the
South and of Shin-shau in the North were both flourishing. As the two
schools were distinguished from each other by the names, Sudden, and
Gradual, some Buddhist scholars were troubled as to which school to
follow.

One day the Patriarch addressed his assembly as follows:--

"So far as the Dharma is concerned, there can be only one school. If a
distinction is made, it exists in

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

the fact that the founder of one school was a Northern man, and the
founder of the other was a Southern man. While there is only one system
of Dharma, some disciples realise it quicker than others but the reason
why the names, 'Sudden' and 'Gradual,' are given is because some
disciples are superior to others in their mental dispositions. So far as
the Dharma is concerned, the distinction of Sudden and Gradual does not
exist."

(Between the two leaders there was mutual respect but) the followers of
Shin-shau often criticised the Patriarch. They discredited him by saying
that he was illiterate and could not distinguish himself in any respect.
Shin-shau, on the other hand, admitted that he was inferior to the
Patriarch in one respect, namely, that Hui-neng thoroughly understood
the teachings of the Mahayana, even if he had attained that wisdom
without the aid of a teacher. "Moreover," he added, "my Master, the
Fifth Patriarch, would not have personally transmitted the robe and bowl
to him without good cause: I regret that, owing to the patronage of the

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Court, which I by no means deserve, I am unable
to travel far to receive instruction from him personally. You should go
to Tso-kai to consult him. Do not tarry."

One day, Shin-shau said to his disciple, Chi-shing, "You are clever and
witty; I wish you would go to Tso-kai and attend the lectures there. Try
your best to keep in mind what you hear, so that on your return you may
repeat it to me."

Acting on his teacher's instruction, Chi-shing arrived at Tso-kai.
Without saying anything about where he came from, he joined the company
attending the Patriarch's lectures. When the Patriarch came to address
the assembly, he said, "Some one has come here secretly to learn my
teaching and later to plagiarise it." Chi-shing at once came forward,
made obeisance, and told the Patriarch what his mission was.

"You come from Yuk-chuen Monastery, do you?" said the Patriarch. "Then
you must be a spy."

"No, I am not," replied Chi-shing. "Why not?" asked the Patriarch. "If I
had not told you, I would have been a spy," said Chi-shing. "Since I
have told you who I am, I am no spy."

"Tell me, how does your teacher instruct his disciples?" asked the
Patriarch.

"He often tells them to concentrate their minds in a meditation on
'purity'; to keep up the dhyana position constantly, and not to lie
down."

Said the Patriarch, "To concentrate the mind on a meditation on 'purity'
is an infirmity and is not Dhyana. To restrict oneself to the
cross-legged position all the time is [logically](errata.htm#17.md)
unprofitable. Listen to this stanza:--

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

"*A living man sits and does not lie down;  
But a dead man lies down and does not sit.  
On this physical body of ours, why should we impose the task of sitting
crosslegged*?"

\*        \*        \*

Making obeisance a second time, Chi-shing remarked, "Though I have
studied Buddhism for nine years under Grand Master Shin-shau, my mind
was not awakened for enlightenment, but as soon as you speak to me, my
mind is enlightened. As the question of continuous re-birth is an
important one, I wish you would take pity on me and give me instruction
as to that question."

The Patriarch said, "I understand that your Master gives his disciples
instruction as to 'disciplinary rules' (*sila*), meditation (*dhyana*),
and Wisdom (*Prajna*). Will you please, tell me how he defines these
terms?"

"According to his teaching," replied Chi-shing, "to refrain from all
evil action, is Sila; to practise whatever is good, is Prajna; and to
purify one's mind, is Dhyana. This is the way he teaches us. May I ask
what your system is?"

The Patriarch replied, "If I should tell you that I had a system of
Dhyana to transmit to others, I would be deceiving you. What I try to do
to my disciples, is to liberate them from their own bondage, by such
device as each case requires. To use a name, which after all is nothing
but a makeshift, it may be called 'Samadhi.' The way your Master teaches
Sila, Dhyana, Prajna, is wonderful; but my way is different."

"How can it be different, Sir, when there is only one form of Sila,
Dhyana and Prajna?"

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

"The teaching of your Master," replied the Patriarch, "is for the
guidance of the general followers of the Mahayana; my teaching is for
the more advanced followers. It is because some realise the Dharma
quicker and deeper than others, that there is a difference of
interpretation. Listen while I explain and see if you think my
instruction is the same as his. In expounding the Dharma, I do not
deviate from the authority of my intuitive mind. To do otherwise would
indicate that the expositor's Mind-essence was obscured, and that he was
competent to teach only the phenomenal side of the Dharma (but not its
essence). The true teaching of Sila, Dhyana and Prajna, should be based
on the principle that the function of all things derives its virtue from
its essence. Listen to this stanza:--

"*To free the mind from all improprieties is the Sila of Mind-essence;  
To free the mind from all perturbations is the Dhyana of Mind-essence.  
That which neither increases nor decreases is the 'diamond' of
Mind-essence.  
'Going' and 'coming' are only phases of Samadhi*."

Having heard this instruction, Chi-shing felt humiliated and thanked the
Patriarch for the instruction.

The Patriarch continued: "The teaching of your Master on Sila, Dhyana
and Prajna, is fitted for minds of wise men, it is true, but my teaching
is intended for minds of a more advanced type. He who has realised
Mind-essence, himself, may dispense with such doctrines as Bodhi,
Nirvana, and Knowledge of Emancipation.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It is only those who do not possess a single
system of Dhyana, who can formulate all systems of Dhyana; these who
understand what this means, may rightly use such terms as Buddhakaya,
Bodhi, Nirvana, Knowledge of Emancipation. To those who have realised
Mind-essence, it makes no difference whether they formulate all systems
of Dhyana, or dispense with all of them. (Because of this
non-attachment) they are at liberty to come or to go; they are free from
all obstacles and impediments. As circumstances arise, they take
appropriate action; they give suitable answers according to the varying
temperament of their questioner. They see with a comprehensive glance
that all 'Bodies of Transformation' are inseparable from Essence of
Mind. They attain liberation, psychic powers, and Samadhi, which enables
them to perform the arduous task of universal salvation as easily as if
they were only playing. Such are the men who have realised Mind-essence.

\*        \*        \*

"By what principle are we guided in dispensing with all systems of
Dhyana?" was Chi-shing's next question.

The Patriarch replied:--"When our Mind-essence is free from
improprieties, infatuations and perturbations; when we look inward from
each momentary sensation to another, with Prajna; and when we no longer
cherish attachment to objects, or to words, or to ideas; then are we
forever emancipated. Why should we formulate any system of Dhyana when
our goal may be reached no matter whether we turn to the right or to

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

the left? Since it is by our own effort that we realise Mind-essence,
and since the realisation and practise of Dhyana are both spontaneous
and instantaneous, the formulation of any system of Dhyana is
unnecessary. All Dharmas are intrinsically Nirvanic, how can there be
gradation in them?"

Chi-shing made obeisance and volunteered to be an
[attendant](errata.htm#18.md) of the Patriarch, in which capacity he served
faithfully.

\*        \*        \*

SINCE THE Two Dhyana Schools, that of Hui-neng in the South and
Shin-shau in the North, were flourishing at the same time, in spite of
the tolerant spirit shown by both Masters who hardly knew what egotism
was, there naturally developed a strong sectarian feeling among the
disciples. Calling their own Master, Shin-shau, the Sixth Patriarch on
no better authority than their own wishes, the followers of the Northern
School were jealous of the rightful owner of that title whose claim was
supported by the possession of the insignia, the robe etc., and was
generally acknowledged. (In order to get rid of the rightful Patriarch)
they sent a lay member of the order whose secular name was Chang
Hang-chong, a native of Kiang-si, and who as a young man had been fond
of adventure, to get rid of him.

With his psychic power of mind-reading, the Patriarch was able to know
of the plot. One evening Chang entered the Patriarch's room intending to
carry out his instructions. The Patriarch, after placing ten taels near
his side, bent his neck forward and waited the

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

blow. Chang made three attempts, but strange to say no wound was made.
Then the Patriarch spoke to him, saying,

"*A straight sword is not crooked;  
A crooked sword is not straight.  
I owe you money only, but life I do not owe you*."

Chang -was taken by surprise and, remorseful and penitent, he asked for
mercy and volunteered to join the order at once, but the Patriarch
handed him the money and said; "If my followers should learn of it, they
would harm you; you must not remain here. Some other time come to see me
in disguise and I will take good care of you." As directed, Chang ran
away that night and subsequently joined the order under another Master.
Upon being fully ordained, he proved himself to be a very diligent monk.

One day recollecting what the Patriarch had said, he made the long
journey to see him and to pay him homage. "Why have you waited so long?"
said the Patriarch, "I have been expecting you all the time."

Said Chang, "Since that night you so graciously pardoned my crime, I
have become a monk and have studied Buddhism diligently. I can only show
my gratitude adequately by spreading the Dharma for the deliverance of
all sentient beings." Then he asked a question as to the meaning of
"eternal and non-eternal," which the Patriarch answered and then said,
"You have now thoroughly realised Mind-essence; hereafter you may call
yourself, Chi-chai."

Chi-chai made obeisance and departed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[297:1](bb32.htm#fr_5.md) NOTE By EDITOR. When
Hui-neng, who afterward became the Sixth Patriarch, came to Wong-mui to
interview the Fifth Patriarch, he was a comparatively uneducated country
boy and not yet a member of the order of monks. He did not remain there
very long but before be left his insight into the Dharma had been
recognised by the Patriarch and he was initiated into the Patriarchate
and given the insignia of the robe and begging bowl. While he remained
at the Monastery he served as a lay-helper in the
[granary](errata.htm#16.md), hulling rice. At the same time he was there,
the Master (or Dean as we would call him) of the Monastery was
Shin-shau, a notably learned monk of the Dhyana School. After Hui-neng
left Ung-mui he lived in retirement for a number of years, but
Shin-shau, in disappointment at not receiving the appointment of Sixth
Patriarch, returned to his home in the North and founded his own School
which later, under Imperial patronage, came into great prominence. But
after the death of Shin-shau, the School steadily lost prestige and
later dropped out of <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> importance. But
the different principles of the two schools, "Sudden Enlightenment- of
the Sixth Patriarch's Southern School and "Gradual Attainment" of
Shin-shau's Northern School, have continued to divide Buddhism and do so
to-day. The principle in dispute is as to whether enlightenment comes as
a "gradual attainment" through study of the scriptures and the practice
of dhyana, or whether it comes suddenly in some ecstatic samadhi, or, as
the Japanese say, in some sudden and convincing and life-enhancing
"satori." It is not a question of quickness or slowness in arriving at
it: "gradual attainment" may arrive sooner than "sudden enlightenment."
It is the question whether enlightenment comes as the culmination of a
gradual process of mental growth, or whether it is a sudden "turning" at
the seat of consciousness from an habitual reliance on the thinking
faculty (a looking outward), to a new use of a higher intuitive faculty
(a looking inward).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Royal Patronage](bb33.md)
