[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sss02)  [Next](sss04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I. INTRODUCTION

THIS book deals with the magic of the Muslim Malays of the Crown Colony
of the Straits Settlements, comprising Singapore, Penang and Malacca; of
the Federated Malay States, Perak, Selangor, Negri Sembilan and Pahang;
of the Unfederated Malay States, Johore, Kedah, Kelantan and Trengganu;
and of Patani, a northern Malay State belonging to Siam.

The Malay Peninsula is the most southern extremity of the continent of
Asia. It has the region of Indo-China to the north. South lies the Malay
Archipelago. It stands midway between India and China. Nature has laid
it open to many influences, though students not presented with the
evidence of geography, anthropology and history are apt to speak as if
Malay magic were unique and indigenous.

The language belongs to the Malayo-Polynesian or Oceanic or Austronesian
family, which obtains from Formosa to New Zealand and from Madagascar to
Easter Island. To the eastern branch belong the languages of Samoa,
Tahiti and Tonga. To the western branch belong Malay, Malagasy, and
languages of the Philippines, Sumatra, Java, Borneo and Celebes. This
latter branch is termed Indonesian, rather unfortunately, since for
anthropologists the word defines a particular physical strain found in
the Bataks of Sumatra, the Dayaks of Borneo and the Torajas of Celebes.

The typical civilised Indonesian peoples, Malays and Javanese, are
variants of a Proto-Malay race with Indian, Arab and other foreign
admixtures. In that Proto-Malay race, whatever else may be its
components, there is a Mongoloid strain.

In the south of the Peninsula, the bullet-headed straight-haired
Proto-Malays are represented by jungle-tribes known generally as Jakun
and specifically as Biduanda in Negri Sembilan, Blanda in Selangor, and
Mantra In Malacca. The coastal tribes are termed Orang Laut, or "Men of
the Sea," and form a link between the Proto-Malays of the Peninsula and
those of the Riau Archipelago and Sumatra, their original home.

Another aboriginal forest-dweller is the wavyhaired long-headed Sakai,
supposed mainly on linguistic grounds to have come down from Indo-China
and on anthropological grounds to be related to the Veddas of Ceylon. A
branch of this tribe, the Besisi, have intermarried freely with the
Jakun.

Oldest of all Malaya's inhabitants are the Semang and Pangan of the
north, small dark frizzy-haired Negritos, thought to be related to the
Aetas of the Philippines and the Mineopies of the Andamans.

Already at the beginning of the Christian era Indian religions, the
caste system and government by rajahs had been introduced into Java and
into Sumatra, whence most of the Malays of the Peninsula came, and
Indian influence spread in a less degree throughout the Archipelago even
as far as the Philippines. The old Malay kingdom of Palembang in Sumatra
introduced Mahayana Buddhism into Java and had a vague suzerainty over
the Malay Peninsula for several centuries, until in the thirteenth the
modern Siamese gained control in the north and Islam a permanent hold in
the south. A Buddhist inscription from Province Wellesley opposite
Penang (in the southern Indian style of writing found In West Java)
dates back to 400 A.D. But in Malaya, as in Java, the religion of Siva
retained a footing until the advent of Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Gods, Spirits and Ghosts](sss04)
