[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sss08)  [Next](sss10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VII. THE MALAY SHAMAN'S SÉANCE

THE main tasks of the Siberian shaman are healing and divination. His
familiar spirit or spirits, possessing him their medium, descend at a
*séance* to cure the sick, avert evil, foretell the future or answer
enquiries. By auto-suggestion the shaman falls or pretends to fall into
a trance and is possessed by spirits who speak through his mouth. All
these are features of the Malay *séance*, which resembles very closely
that of the Mongol shaman even in details of ritual: the beating of a
tambourine, wild singing, the rustle and voices of invisible spirits,
the expulsion or sucking out of the spirit of disease, the medium on
return to consciousness oblivious of what has passed, the offerings made
to spirits.

Information about the ritual of the aboriginal shaman of Malaya is
scanty but accords generally, so far as it goes, with what might be
expected. He performs mostly inside a round hut or circle of some kind.
He wears on his head a wreath of leaves with a tuft, and he carries a
switch of leaves. Often his hut is darkened. Invocations are chanted to
the sound of bamboo stampers clashed on logs. One account states that
the shaman strokes the evil spirit out of a patient with his switch, and
that he shouts and shrieks to drive it into a cage or network of loops
to be imprisoned by his magic. Perhaps this is a vague description of
the frenzy of possession?

The Malay *séance* is used to cure sickness; to divine the whereabouts
of lost or stolen property; to discover if a princess shall bear a son
or what the future holds for a Mecca-bound pilgrim! There is a record of
a *séance* where earth spirits were entreated to allow a sacred
rhinoceros to be hunted. The object of the most famous *séance* in the
history of Perak remains obscure. Either it was to enquire from the
spirits of the State if a plot against the British Resident would
succeed or to ask their leave and help to take his life.

Sir Frank Swettenham has described how a spirit-raising *séance* was
conducted by a royal female shaman during the illness of a ruler of
Perak some thirty years ago. The magician, dressed like a man, sat with
veiled head before a taper, in her right hand a sheaf of grass cut
square at top and bottom. This sheaf she took convulsively. The taper
flared, a signal that the spirit invoked was entering the candle. The
magician, now supposed to be in a trance, bowed to the taper "and to
each male member of the reigning family present!" After many spirits had
been invoked, the sick raja was brought out and seated on a
sixteen-sided stand (an improvement on the double pentacle called
Solomon's seat) to await, with shrouded head and a square bunch of grass
in his hand, the advent of the spirits of the State. Conducted back to
bed, His Highness fell later into a swoon attributed to possession by
those spirits! At this royal *séance* the magician's daughter led an
orchestra of "five or six girls holding native drums, instruments with a
skin stretched over one side only" and beaten with the fingers.

At a humbler *séance* held in Perak there was only one musician, the
shaman's wife, a "wild-looking Moenad." Her husband held a bunch of
leaves in either hand. The musician beat a one-sided drum and screamed
out interminable chants. Her husband began to nod drowsily, sniffed at
his leaves, waved them over his head, struck them together, and became
possessed of the shaman's usual familiar, a tiger-spirit, as shown by
growls and sniffing and crawling under a mat. Between the incantations
he accepted a cigarette and talked to the patient's family, using,
however, an aboriginal Sakai dialect. Possessed again of the
tiger-spirit he executed weird dances and sprinkled the sufferer with
rice-paste. Finally his tiger-spirit identified as the cause of the
patient's illness a dumb vampire (*Langsuyar*), to be expelled neither
by invocations nor the sprinkling of ricepaste.

Another magician accompanied by a male tambourine-player then took his
place. He held convulsively a single sheaf of grass and became possessed
by four spirits in succession but to no purpose. Finally both magicians
waved all evil spirits away from the patient on to a miniature revolving
model of a mosque, and set it, filled with the flesh of a fowl and other
delicacies, adrift upon the river.

In an account of yet another *séance* in Selangor, where to cure an
ailment the magician became possessed by the tiger-spirit, it is said
that the ceremony usually took place on three nights and that the same
odd number of persons should be present each time. For the reception of
the spirit an artificial bouquet of flowers, doves and centipedes, all
made of palm-leaf, was prepared. After an invocation the magician bathed
himself in incense, suffered spasmodic convulsions, spoke a spirit
language, became possessed, sat with shrouded head, lit tapers on the
edges of three jars of water, and rubbed the patient with a bezoar
stone. Then donning a white coat and head-cloth, he fumigated a dagger,
dropped silver coins into the three jars, and gazed to see their
position under the three tapers, declaring that it indicated the gravity
of the patient's illness. Scattering handfuls of charmed rice round the
jars, he put into them improvised bouquets of areca-palm. blossom, and
plunged his dagger into each bouquet to dispel lurking spirits of evil.
Another sheaf of palm-blossom he anointed with oil and used for stroking
the patient from head to heel. Next he was possessed by the
tiger-spirit, scratched, growled and licked the naked body of the
patient. He drew blood from his own arm, with the point of his dagger
and fenced with his invisible spirit foe. Once more he stroked the
patient with the sheaf of blossom and with his hands. Again he stabbed
the bouquets, stroked the patient, and after lying still for an interval
recovered consciousness.

In Perak a *séance* is known as "possession by spirits": in Kelantan as
"the play of the fairy princess." This Kelantan ceremony is performed
for three or sometimes seven nights in succession. It is repeated after
a week or so if the sick person's condition improves. Besides the shaman
there are three musicians, one to strum on a three-stringed viol, one to
beat a brass bowl with pieces of bamboo, one a drummer. The shaman
recites a long invocation to the four archangels, the friends of the
Prophet, the seven miracle-workers, and the father of all genies,
explaining that not he but Luqman al-Hakim is offering them a little
rice and water and a quid of betel. Next the musician with the viol
chants a song with an orthodox introduction but ending with an
invocation to the spirits of the village, various nature-spirits, the
Spectre Huntsman and Siva, begging them to recall any of their followers
plaguing the sick man. The shaman shrouds and fumigates himself and
falls into a trance. The orchestra plays frantically. A chant, disguised
by the phrases of Muslim medico-religious lore, invites the spirit of
the fairy princess to enter the medium. The shaman nods and whirls his
head violently; his eyes are closed and he is possessed by spirit after
spirit until he has chosen the one he desires to retain. Gazing at the
flame of a candle he reports the cause of the patient's illness. He
sucks or pretends to suck the body of the sick man and starts another
chant full of pantheistic Muslim lore declaring that man's body is God's
house and no place for spirits of evil. This exorcism eventually
transfers the spirit from the patient into the shaman, who has to dispel
it thence with the help of one of his familiars.

Should the patient recover, a final *séance* takes place at which there
is a sacrificial offering. The patient is bathed in charmed water from
three jars and has three rings of thread drawn over him from head to
heel. "At Penpont, in Dumfriesshire, the emissary of a patient, when he
reached the (holy) well, I had to draw water in a vessel which was on no
account to touch the ground, to turn himself round with the sun, to
throw his offering to the spirit over his left shoulder, and to carry
the water without ever looking back to the sick person. All this was to
be done in absolute silence, and he was to salute no one by the way.'"
In Pahang when a Malay woman fetches water from the river for a sick
person's *séance*, she must let it trickle into her vessel slowly
without gurgling, she must cover the mouth of the full vessel with
leaves and she must not speak to any one while carrying it.

In Kelantan there are several milder forms of exorcism, practised by
traffickers with special spirits, such as the nature spirits of yellow
sunsets and the echo spirits. In one, where, however, there is no music
and recitations take the place of chants, the shaman becomes possessed
and waves over the sufferer a leather puppet figure of *Smar* from the
Javanese shadow-play! If recovery ensues, among the final sacrificial
offerings a model of a wayside resting-place is reserved with dainties
for Siva.

The *séance* to "revive" (*memuleh*) the Perak regalia has never been
described. The duties of the Sultan Muda or State magician were to be
chief of all magicians and to know their merits, to attend royalty in
sickness, to pay homage to the genies presiding over the destinies of
Perak, and to give annually a feast to the spirits inhabiting the
regalia. At the *séance* preceding this feast the palace would be full
of shrouded magicians, each invoking his or her familiar. The Sultan
Muda sat veiled, a bunch of grass in his hand, while the chief musician
called upon the genies in order of precedence to descend and bring their
thousand attendant spirits. "Come down to the gate of this world! Pass
in procession to the posy, your place to alight. In your might lies the
might of our Sultan. Come around, pass into the posy, your place to
alight, and enter your jewelled curtain." As each spirit entered the
posy, the chant ceased and the sound of the tambourines was stilled.

Meanwhile some humble musician would be crying on the
tiger-spirit:--"Warrior! Son of a warrior! Matchless in might! Come, my
lord! Come, my life! Descend into this posy, your alighting place, and
pass into your jewelled curtain. Come by the blessing of 'Ali, the
spirit who hangs at the door of the sky." And as the tiger-spirit came,
the village magician who had invoked him would turn about seven times
and leap and growl, as his familiar asked why he had been summoned. The
magician would answer:--"You have been invited because our lord has got
ready a hall and is inviting the Sultan of the Impalpable Air and all
his followers to a feast upon the morrow and he hopes that no harm may
befall them on the way." Speaking through the magician, the spirit
answers:--"It is well. I and my subjects can be present. The bad I will
not bring." So spirit after spirit was raised and invited until the
Sultan Muda gave the signal to retire.

The next morning the Sultan Muda, the Raja Kechil Muda and their
tambourine players went with rice-paste and turmeric and censers to
superintend the building of a nine-storeyed hall, surmounted by a model
of a fabulous bird, Jatayu (offspring of Vishnu's Garuda) that lives on
dew. It was adorned with palm-streamers from which hung woven boxes of
rice, cakes, sugar-cane and bananas: on the topmost tier was the severed
head of a pink buffalo, surrounded by water-vessels. An altar on sixteen
posts was erected with offerings for spirits not connected with the
destinies of the State. Two bamboo conches served to hold food for
hungry spirits of the dead (karamat). At dusk the Sultan Muda mounted
and waved from the nine-storeyed hall. The others waved beside the altar
and the conches. Then the Raja Kechil Muda fell into a trance and with
shouts ascended to the mat prepared for him. Twelve musicians beat
tambourines and chanted invocations to the genies to leave the pools and
plains of spirit-land and enter the jewelled curtains and posies
prepared for them. After a rest and refreshment the magicians renewed
their invocations. The tambourines and drums of their assistants were
answered by the thud of all the royal drums and the blare of the royal
trumpets. On the right of the presiding magicians sat virgin princesses
holding sacrificial offerings on their laps, on the left young unmarried
princes supporting the regalia. Then the two chief magicians did
obeisance to the regalia, offered delicacies to "the thousand gcnies"
and poured upon the royal drums and into the royal trumpets drink, which
vanished miraculously as though imbibed. Finally, towards dawn the
Sultan Muda and his magicians fetched the ruler of the State, and
bathing His Highness bathed in his sacred person the genies that
presided over the destinies of his kingdom.

In Kelantan also when a feast was prepared to propitiate the spirits of
a district or to banish evil spirits from the countryside a *séance*
formed part of the ritual.

Exactly how the spirits visit the medium is not expressly stated. They
enter the flame of candles and cause them to flicker. At the
installation of a Sultan of Perak the guardian genies of the State may
inhabit the State sword and make it press upon the ruler's shoulder. In
the regalia ritual they are invited to descend on posies (*jinjang
malai*), perhaps flowers stuck behind the ear of the magician, as the
yellow *chempaka* blossom is still stuck behind the ear of a ruler at
his installation. The convulsive shaking of the shaman's grass switch
may indicate that they enter there. Sweet jasmine attracts them. A Perak
chief, who knew how to make from the shroud and coffin of a murdered man
powder rendering spirits visible, enabled a friend at a *séance* to see
two women with streaming hair descend through the roof and alight on the
flower-vase, the artificial garden prepared for their advent!

All the evidence points to the make-believe of the Malay shaman's
trance. One magician possessed by a spirit remembers court etiquette
sufficiently to bow to members of the royal family, and falls down
before a dish-cover the sight of which was anathema to the spirit
possessing her. Another toothless shaman asked why the betel-nut has not
been pounded, as the genie possessing him is stricken with years. One
possessed by a female spirit impersonates a woman in his gait, and by
arranging his dress to suit the part is said to cause amusement to the
spectators. Another showed an anxious husband a hollow bamboo stopped up
at either end. "Therein he declared, recovered by his magic, was hair
and a fingernail of my wife, which some enemy had stolen. On no account
was the bamboo to be opened. But I was unbelieving, risked the harm
which old folks prophesied and broke the seals. Now my wife's hair was
fine as silk and this was as coarse as the hair of a horse's tail; my
wife's finger-nail was curved like the young moon and delicate as pearl,
and this nail was thick as the nail on a man's thumb. It is a pity the
white man has not made a law to clap such rogues in gaol, but they shall
be shut in Allah's gaol hereafter, which is much worse."

There are parallels to the indication by a familiar of this cause of a
disease, but the two related to me were both examples of a shaman's
roguery. As a rule the object of a *séance* for the sick is to expel or
coax an evil spirit out of the sufferer's body, sometimes into the
shaman's own but usually on to a receptacle containing food.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Shaman's Sacrifice](sss10)
