[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sss11)  [Next](sss13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# X. MAGICIAN AND MUSLIM

A rough granite monolith inscribed with Muslim laws in the Malay
language and Arabic lettering, recently discovered in Trengganu, is
evidence that Islam had reached the east coast of the Malay Peninsula as
early as the fourteenth century. At the beginning of the next century it
became the State religion of Malacca. Barbosa ascribed this change of
creed from Hinduism to the presence of many Indian Muslim traders at
that port. An Achinese account gives 1474 A.D. as the date of the
conversion of the first ruler of Kedah to embrace the religion of the
Arabian Prophet. The royal house of Malacca gave rulers to Johore,
Pahang and Perak, dominated Selangor and Negri Sembilan and so spread
the new faith throughout the Peninsula.

The early missionaries came from the Coromandel Coast and Malabar, and
therefore made the Malays Sunnis of the school of Shafe'i. Later arrived
missionaries from the Hadramaut. In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries Sayids of the great Hadramaut house, descendants of 'Alawi,
grandson of 'Isa al-Mohajir, gained enormous influence at the Perak
court, one of them marrying a sister of Perak's most famous ruler and
becoming the father of a Sultan of that State.

The Malays of the Peninsula have been Muslims for some five hundred
years. No zealots, they are orthodox and convinced believers. But in
their beliefs and their magic the influence of the early Indian
missionaries of their latest faith is marked.

There is a book called the *Crown of Kings*, of which several editions
have been printed in Egypt and at Mecca. It is on sale at most native
bookshops in the Peninsula. Its author was an Achinese, prominent in the
war against the Dutch, Shaikh 'Abbas, who died in 1895. The book is
especially interesting because, like "the majority of Muslim
philosophers and authors of bibliographical and encyclopaedic works,"
the compiler "keeping to the classification of the sciences given by the
Aristotelians, considers astrology as one of the seven or nine branches
of the natural sciences, placing it with medicine, physiognomy, alchemy,
the interpretation of dreams, and so on." The work is not free from
Malay and Indian influence. There are given, for example, five divisions
of a five-day cycle, presided over by Siva the Supreme Lord, Siva the
Destroyer, Sri, Brahma, and Vishnu! Still, the treatise is a fair
example of what Islam has taught the Malay to regard as science, and it
is, in effect, a repertory of his latest magical lore.

The author begins by saying that the science of astrology as first
taught by Enoch was simple, and became complex and difficult only at the
prayer of Jesus, whose whereabouts before His arrest by the Jews were
betrayed by astrological calculations. This part of the book quotes
among its authorities Abu Ma'shar, an Arab astrologer known to
Christendom in the Middle Ages as Albumasar, and Ja'far al-Sadik, the
sixth of the twelve Imams, reported by the Shilahs to have been the
author of a book of infallible astrological prognostications for the
information of the House of the Prophet. A manuscript work on
"Prognostications by Ja'far al-Sadik" came into my hands from Malacca,
and in Acheh and Java also fortune-tellers' manuals are ascribed to him.

Crude astrology divorced from all knowledge of astronomy enters largely
into the Muslim element in Malay magic. It determines lucky and unlucky
times for begetting children, fighting, house building and planting. At
the Perak court the moment propitious for the circumcision of a prince
is divined from pools of oil floating on water "in the shape of moon and
stars." There are charms that must be written only when the
constellation of the Scorpion is invisible. The meaning of a dream may
depend on the day of the week on which it came to the sleeper; the omen
to be drawn from an eclipse on the month and year of its occurrence.
Astrology is employed to trace a thief or recover stolen property, and
is part and parcel of most forms of divination. For example, there are
several ways of ascertaining how long one shall live, ways different
according to the month of the Muhammadan year. In the first month one
has to close one's eyes at midnight, recite "Say, 'God is One!'" ten
times, and then open one's eyes and gaze at the moon; if it looks black,
in that month one will die. In the fifth and sixth months one must gaze
not at the moon but at a lamp and that only on a Wednesday night. In the
seventh and eighth months one recites "Say, 'I seek refuge in the Lord
of the daybreak!'" seven times and gazes at water in a bowl; if it looks
red, in that month one will die. In the Fasting month one recites
"Praise be to God" nine times and gazes at the moon; if one's shadow is
there, in that month one will die. In the last two months of the year
the eyes have to be closed, the passage "Say, 'God is One!'" recited
thrice and the creed once, and one's gaze directed at a cloudless sky
either at dawn or at eve; if it looks red like blood, assuredly in that
month one will die.

All Malay treatises on divination from dreams bear an Arabic title and
are of Muslim origin. A popular poem on the subject begins by explaining
the omens to be drawn from dreaming that one sees Allah, meets an angel,
beholds the Throne of God or Paradise or the Razor Bridge across
hell-fire or the Guarded Tablet of Fate. Then it interprets the meaning
of dreams about the Four Friends of the Prophet, the Quran, Iblis, being
banished by a Shaikh, riding a camel, eating horse-flesh, seeing a date
tree or a fig tree! Needless to say, none of this theology, zoology and
botany is Malayan. Local fauna often takes the place of alien fauna in
native translations of Muslim manuals, but otherwise their contents are
foreign and it is futile to look for an indigenous theory of dreams
among Muslim Malays. All these dream manuals are divided into chapters
according to the class of object about which one dreams: men, beasts,
flora, clothes, birds, insects, countries and roads, stones, fruits,
musical instruments, traps for fish and game.

The *Crown of Kings* devotes several pages to the omens to be drawn from
involuntary convulsive movements of the left eyebrow, the right eyelid,
the left nostril, the upper lip, the shoulder-blades, the left
ring-finger, and every part of the body. When the Malacca hero, Hang
Tuah, was in Java, one day he donned his magic creese because an
involuntary twitch of his right shoulder led him to expect a brawl. But
few modern Malays heed these niceties or have read of them. Divination
by the values attached to the letters of men's names is best known from
a "Poem on Affinities" to determine if a marriage will be happy: the
*abjad* or alphabet of letters representing numerical values is
employed. This Malay poem has been translated into English. Divination
by possession is known to the Malays as to the Arabs, but belongs to the
primitive, impious, and decried practices of the shaman, who on demand
will use it even to foretell the outcome of a pilgrimage to Mecca!
Geomancy, or divination from sand, is mentioned in Malay literature
under its Arabic name, but is never practised by the Malays. Nor do they
observe the entrails of animals for omens.

Malay treatises enumerate many animals, pigs, the rhinoceros, wild dogs,
deer of all kinds, whose entrance into a garden forebodes calamity,
unless the evil portent is averted by the offering of prayers to the
Prophet and of cash, cloth, and a feast to the pious expert who recites
the prayers. Butterflies, bees, hawks, woodpeckers alighting on a roof,
frogs, monkeys, snakes, and geckoes invading house or garden, a tortoise
under the floor, fungus growing in a kitchen, coconuts two on a stem,
nests of wasps or mason-bees in one's clothes-all these are variously
portents of poverty, divorce, disease or death, which the recital of an
appropriate passage from the Quran can change into omens of riches,
health and happiness. When a mat belonging to the second Caliph of the
Abbaside dynasty was gnawed by a mouse, it was sent to a diviner who
foretold a quiet and prosperous reign for its owner. The Malay
manuscript from which the above list of portents is taken concludes with
a dissertation on the omens to be drawn from the gnawing by mice of mats
or pillows or of the neck, the right arm or the left arm, or the bottom
or side or back of a man's coat!

A Kelantan magician, whose lore was full of Muslim borrowings, claimed
that he could reflect genies on the finger nails of innocent little
boys. Sir Frank Swettenham met an Arab in Malaya who declared that he
could see a robbery re-enacted in the surface of water, but that first
of all he would see a little old genie by whose help the scene of the
crime would be reflected. The same writer saw a bowl of water, with a
cotton lid tied taut across it, used as a *planchette* to discover a
thief. A chapter of the Quran was read, two men supported the bowl by
the rim, and when at last a slip of paper containing the name of one of
the suspects was laid on the lid, the bowl began to revolve. (The author
explains that the bowl failed to respond to the first four names, that
the names were written in English characters unintelligible to the
Malays present and that the experiment succeeded twice!) Among the
regalia of the ruler of Negri Sembilan is a bowl and a hair. Divination
with this apparatus is done by Malays to discover a thief. The bowl is
divided by lines of Indian ink into eight compartments, each inscribed
with the name of the possible culprit. A blind man holds the hair, to
which a gold ring is tied above the centre of the bowl, and intones a
Muslim prayer, whereupon, if the name of the culprit is there, the ring
swings violently into the compartment containing it.

Arab diviners, the recitation of passages from the Quran, the
description of methods of divination in magico-religious tracts, the
observance of astrological times, all suggest that the forms of
divination popular with the modern Peninsular Malay are derived from
Muslim sources.

A notable contribution from Islam to Malaya was a new type of amulet.
The animist found a fetish in every object possessed of potent
soul-substance, stones from a water-fall, candle-nuts, cockle-shells,
the hardy grass (*Eleusine coracana*) that survives even on the trodden
path. A strange knot in a Malacca cane, a curious whorl on the wooden
sheath of a dagger, a mark on the damascene of a creese that no smith
designed to fashion, the rare celt, the Perak "ball of petrified dew,"
all these attracted his attention and awe and trust. The bezoar stone
secreted in fish or monkey or coconut he kept in rice-grain for fear
that it should vanish offended and an article of great medicinal value
be lost. Then, India introduced a fresh stock of charms. The tinsel
marriage crown protecting bride and groom, the thread tied round the
newly-wedded and on the wrist of a child, the incense burnt to scare
demons, the waving of charmed water over a married pair and over the
sick, and perhaps the rubbing of those in ghostly peril and the frail
and ill with yellow turmeric, red betel, and black ashes may be traced
to this source. Last of all, Islam trafficked in amulets inscribed with
magic squares, cabalistic letters, the signs of the planets and the
signs of the zodiac, the names of the angels and the Excellent Names of
Allah. The hexagonal star of Solomon's seal is used by Malays to cure
madness and possession by devil, familiar spirit, ghost or genie. In
Perak three such stars are drawn on paper that is steeped in water for
washing the face of one afflicted with dizziness. A magic square
scratched on leaf or paper and buried in the middle of a rice-field or
at its four corners will keep away rats and pests from the plants.
Arabic characters representing K, M, 7, D, 3, ALA if traced in oil on
the palm of the hand and furtively rubbed on one's face in the presence
of one of the opposite sex will attract that person's love. Another such
formula will bring the Perak fisherman a good catch. Yet another is hung
round the neck of an infant that refuses its mother's breast. One is
inscribed on lead and planted under the house-ladder of a woman one
loves illicitly. Another is put under a patient's pillow to induce
sleep. A text from the Quran is hung in a child's locket to save it from
convulsions or tied in a woman's waist-belt to save her from demons, or
fastened to an aching limb or written on paper to be dissolved in a
patient's drinking water. Printed or manuscript texts are pasted over
the door of house or room to scare evil spirits. There is a translation
by a Kelantan Malay of a treatise popular with Indian Sunnis, the
*Mujarrabati-i-Dirbi*, or "Prescriptions," which cites among its sources
works by al-Buni, a celebrated Arabian writer on the Cabbala,
divination, magic squares, and the virtues of the Basmala. The Basmala
is a name for the Arabic formula translated "In the Name of God, the
Merciful, the Compassionate." The Malay translation of the
"Prescriptions" relates as follows:--"When God sent down the Basmala the
hills shook. Its Arabic letters are nineteen, the number of the angels
in charge of hell; whosoever recites them shall not be damned. It was
the Basmala that set up Solomon's kingdom. Whoever writes down the
phrase six hundred times and wears it shall be honoured by men. Whoever
recites it seven hundred and eighty-six times for seven consecutive days
shall gain whatever he desires. Read fifty times over the face of a
tyrant it will bring him low. Written down sixty-one times and worn it
will make the barren fruitful. Written on tin and put in a fishing net
it will attract shoals from all the seas." Similar virtues attach to the
opening chapter of the Quran and many texts used by Muslims to ward off
physical and spiritual ills.

Incantations are frowned upon by strict theologians but, as we have
seen, they are the breath of the Malay magician's life. Recited for a
lawful object they do not strike the vulgar as unorthodox. Illicit
charms for the seduction of women the Malay has inherited from the
Hindu. And if there is reason to suspect the efficacy of his appeal to
"Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate" and to Muhammad to make a girl
yield to her lover, then "it is better if possible" to add a conclusion
patently impious:--

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!  
Friend of mine, Iblis! and all ye spirits and devils  
That love to trouble man!  
I ask you to go and enter the body of this girl,  
Burning her heart as this sand burns,  
Fired with love for me.  
Bring her to yield herself to me!  
By virtue of this rice and steam  
Place her here by my hearth  
Or else take ye heed!

In a charm against the Will o' the Wisp a Kelantan magician, with
pantheism perhaps unconscious, vaunts, "I am Iblis, the son of Pharaoh!
"

To destroy an enemy, there is prescribed in Malay versions of Muslim
treatises a world-wide method of sorcery. A cabalistic symbol is
inscribed on wax. The wax is moulded in the form of a man. Then the eyes
of the figure are pierced with a needle or its belly stabbed, while a
purely Arabic charm is recited to call down upon the victim the anger of
Allah! To rob an enemy of power to harm, it suffices to draw his
portrait in the dust of crossroads, grind one's heel on his navel, tread
on his pictured heart, beat the face with a stick, and recite a short
imprecation. Symbolic charms and Arabic formulae are also prescribed to
cause impotency. Every good Malay Muslim views with horror these black
practices and Satanic incantations.

The contribution of Islam to Malay magic is not interesting. Flotsam and
jetsam from the Talmud, the works of the Gnostics, the science of Indian
astrologers and the practices of Hindu sorcerers, it came to Malaya
third-hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Magician and Mystic](sss13)
