[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc05)  [Next](menc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 6

1\. Mencius said, 'He who, using force, makes a pretence to benevolence
is the leader of the princes. A leader of the princes requires a large
kingdom. He who, using virtue, practises benevolence is the sovereign of
the kingdom. To become the sovereign of the kingdom, a prince need not
wait for a large kingdom. T'ang did it with only seventy lî, and king
Wan with only a hundred.

2\. 'When one by force subdues men, they do not submit to him in heart.
They submit, because their strength is not adequate to resist. When one
subdues men by virtue, in their hearts' core they are pleased, and
sincerely submit, as was the case with the seventy disciples in their
submission to Confucius. What is said in the Book of Poetry,

> "From the west, from the east,  
> From the south, from the north,  
> There was not one who thought of refusing submission,"

is an illustration of this.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Benevolence brings glory to a prince, and the
opposite of it brings disgrace. For the princes of the present day to
hate disgrace and yet to live complacently doing what is not benevolent,
is like hating moisture and yet living in a low situation.

2\. 'If a prince hates disgrace, the best course for him to pursue, is
to esteem virtue and honour virtuous scholars, giving the worthiest
among them places of dignity, and the able offices of trust. When
throughout his kingdom there is leisure and rest from external troubles,
let him, taking advantage of such a season, clearly digest the
principles of his government with its legal sanctions, and then even
great kingdoms will be constrained to stand in awe of him.

3\. 'It is said in the Book of Poetry,

> "Before the heavens were dark w1th rain,  
> I gathered the bark from the roots of the mulberry trees,  
> And wove it closely to form the window and door of my nest;  
> Now, I thought, ye people below,  
> Perhaps ye will not dare to insult me."

Confucius said, "Did not he who made this ode understand the way of
governing?" If a prince is able rightly to govern his kingdom, who will
dare to insult him?

4\. 'But now the princes take advantage of the time when throughout
their kingdoms there is leisure and rest from external troubles, to
abandon themselves to pleasure and indolent indifference;-- they in fact
seek for calamities for themselves.

5\. 'Calamity and happiness in all cases are men's own seeking.

6\. 'This is illustrated by what is said in the Book of Poetry,--

> Be always studious to be in harmony with the ordinances of God,  
> So you will certainly get for yourself much happiness;"

and by the passage ofthe Tâi Chiah,-- "When Heaven sends down
calamities, it is still possible to escape from them; when we occasion
the calamities ourselves, it is not possible any longer to live."'

1\. Mencius said, 'If a ruler give honour to men of talents and virtue
and employ the able, so that offices shall all be filled by individuals
of distinction and mark;-- then all the scholars of the kingdom will be
pleased, and wish to stand in his court.

2\. 'If, in the market-place of his capital, he levy a ground-rent on
the shops but do not tax the goods, or enforce the proper regulations
without levying a ground-rent;-- then all the traders of the kingdom
will be pleased, and wish to store their goods in his market-place.

3\. 'If, at his frontier-passes, there be an inspection of persons, but
no taxes charged on goods or other articles, then all the travellers of
the kingdom will be pleased, and wish to make their tours on his roads.

4\. 'If he require that the husbandmen give their mutual aid to
cultivate the public feld, and exact no other taxes from them;-- then
all the husbandmen of the kingdom will be pleased, and wish to plough in
his fields.

5\. 'If from the occupiers of the shops in his market-place he do not
exact the fine of the individual idler, or of the hamlet's quota of
cloth, then all the people of the kingdom will be pleased, and wish to
come and be his people.

6\. 'If a ruler can truly practise these five things, then the people in
the neighbouring kingdoms will look up to him as a parent. From the
first birth of mankind till now, never has any one led children to
attack their parent, and succeeded in his design. Thus, such a ruler
will not have an enemy in all the kingdom, and he who has no enemy in
the kingdom is the minister of Heaven. Never has there been a ruler in
such a case who did not attain to the royal dignity.'

1\. Mencius said, 'All men have a mind which cannot bear to see the
sufferings of others.

2\. 'The ancient kings had this commiserating mind, and they, as a
matter of course, had likewise a commiserating government. When with a
commiserating mind was practised a commiserating government, to rule the
kingdom was as easy a matter as to make anything go round in the palm.

3\. 'When I say that all men have a mind which cannot bear to see the
sufferings of others, my meaning may be illustrated thus:-- even
now-a-days, if men suddenly see a child about to fall into a well, they
will without exception experience a feeling of alarm and distress. They
will feel so, not as a ground on which they may gain the favour of the
child's parents, nor as a ground on which they may seek the praise of
their neighbours and friends, nor from a dislike to the reputation of
having been unmoved by such a thing.

4\. 'From this case we may perceive that the feeling of commiseration is
essential to man, that the feeling of shame and dislike is essential to
man, that the feeling of modesty and complaisance is essential to man,
and that the feeling of approving and disapproving is essential to man.

5\. 'The feeling of commiseration is the principle of benevolence. The
feeling of shame and dislike is the principle of righteousness. The
feeling of modesty and complaisance is the principle of propriety. The
feeling of approving and disapproving is the principle of knowledge.

6\. 'Men have these four principles just as they have their four limbs.
When men, having these four principles, yet say of themselves that they
cannot develop them, they play the thief with themselves, and he who
says of his prince that he cannot develop them plays the thief with his
prince.

7\. 'Since all men have these four principles in themselves, let them
know to give them all their development and completion, and the issue
will be like that of fire which has begun to burn, or that of a spring
which has begun to find vent. Let them have their complete development,
and they will suffice to love and protect all within the four seas. Let
them be denied that development, and they will not suffice for a man to
serve his parents with.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Is the arrow-maker less benevolent than the maker of
armour of defence? And yet, the arrow-maker's only fear is lest men
should not be hurt, and the armour-maker's only fear is lest men should
be hurt. So it is with the priest and the coffin-maker. The choice of a
profession, therefore, is a thing in which great caution is required.

2\. 'Confucius said, "It is virtuous manners which constitute the
excellence of a neighbourhood. If a man, in selecting a residence, do
not fix on one where such prevail, how can he be wise?" Now, benevolence
is the most honourable dignity conferred by Heaven, and the quiet home
in which man should awell. Since no one can hinder us from being so, if
yet we are not benevolent;-- this is being not wise.

3\. 'From the want of benevolence and the want of wisdom will ensue the
entire absence of propriety and righteousness;-- he who is in such a
case must be the servant of other men. To be the servant of men and yet
ashamed of such servitude, is like a bowmaker's being ashamed to make
bows, or an arrow-maker's being ashamed to make arrows.

4\. 'If he be ashamed of his case, his best course is to practise
benevolence.

5\. 'The man who would be benevolent is like the archer. The archer
adjusts himself and then shoots. If he misses, he does not murmur
against those who surpass himself. He simply turns round and seeks the
cause of his failure in himself.'

1\. Mencius said, 'When any one told Tsze-lû that he had a fault, he
rejoiced.

2\. 'When Yü heard good words, he bowed to the speaker.

3\. 'The great Shun had a still greater delight in what was good. He
regarded virtue as the common property of himself and others, giving up
his own way to follow that of others, and delighting to learn from
others to practise what was good.

4\. 'From the time when he ploughed and sowed, exercised the potter's
art, and was a fisherman, to the time when he became emperor, he was
continually learning from others.

5\. 'To take example from others to practise virtue, is to help them in
the same practice. Therefore, there is no attribute of the superior man
greater than his helping men to practise virtue.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Po-î would not serve a prince whom he did not
approve, nor associate with a friend whom he did not esteem. He would
not stand in a bad prince's court, nor speak with a bad man. To stand in
a bad prince's court, or to speak with a bad man, would have been to him
the same as to sit with his court robes and court cap amid mire and
ashes. Pursuing the examination of his dislike to what was evil, we find
that he thought it necessary, if he happened to be standing with a
villager whose cap was not rightly adjusted, to leave him with a high
air, as if he were going to be defiled. Therefore, although some of the
princes made application to him with very proper messages, he would not
receive their gifts.-- He would not receive their gifts, counting it
inconsistent with his purity to go to them.

2\. 'Hûi of Liû-hsiâ was not ashamed to serve an impure prince, nor did
he think it low to be an inferior officer. When advanced to employment,
he did not conceal his virtue, but made it a point to carry out his
principles. When neglected and left without office, he did not murmur.
When straitened by poverty, he did not grieve. Accordingly, he had a
saying,"You are you, and I am I. Although you stand by my side with
breast and aims bare, or with your body naked, how can you defile me?"
Therefore, self-possessed, he companied with men indifferently, at the
same time not losing himself. When he wished to leave, if pressed to
remain in office, he would remain.-- He would remain in office, when
pressed to do so, not counting it required by his purity to go away.'

3\. Mencius said, 'Po-î was narrow-minded, and Hûi of Liû-hsiâ was
wanting in self-respect. The superior man will not manifest either
narrow-mindedness, or the want of self-respect.'
