[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 28

1\. Mencius said, 'For the mouth to desire sweet tastes, the eye to
desire beautiful colours, the ear to desire pleasant sounds, the nose to
desire fragrant odours, and the four limbs to desire ease and rest;--
these things are natural. But there is the appointment of Heaven in
connexion with them, and the superior man does not say of his pursuit of
them, "It is my nature."

2\. 'The exercise of love between father and son, the observance of
righteousness between sovereign and minister, the rules of ceremony
between guest and host, the display of knowledge in recognising the
talented, and the fulfilling the heavenly course by the sage;-- these
are the appointment of Heaven. But there is an adaptation of our nature
for them. The superior man does not say, in reference to them, "It is
the appointment of Heaven."'

1\. Hâo-shang Pû-hâi asked, saying, 'What sort of man is Yo-chang?'
Mencius replied, 'He is a good man, a real man.'

2\. 'What do you mean by "A good man," "A real man?"'

3\. The reply was, 'A man who commands our liking is what is called a
good man.

4\. 'He whose goodness is part of himself is what is called real man.

5\. 'He whose goodness has been filled up is what is called beautiful
man.

6\. He whose completed goodness is brightly displayed is what is called
a great man.

7\. 'When this great man exercises a transforming influence, he is what
is called a sage.

8\. 'When the sage is beyond our knowledge, he is what is called a
spirit-man.

9\. 'Yo-chang is between the two first characters, and below the four
last.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Those who are fleeing from the errors of Mo naturally
turn to Yang, and those who are fleeing from the errors of Yang
naturally turn to orthodoxy. When they so turn, they should at once and
simply be received.

2\. 'Those who nowadays dispute with the followers of Yang and Mo do so
as if they were pursuing a stray pig, the leg of which, after they have
got it to enter the pen, they proceed to tie.'

Mencius said, 'There are the exactions of hempen-cloth and silk, of
grain, and of personal service. The prince requires but one of these at
once, deferring the other two. If he require two of them at once, then
the people die of hunger. If he require the three at once, then fathers
and sons are separated.'

Mencius said, 'The precious things of a prince are three;-- the
territory, the people, the government and its business. If one value as
most precious pearls and jade, calamity is sure to befall him.'

Pan-ch'ang Kwo having obtained an official situation in Ch'î, Mencius
said, 'He is a dead man, that Pan-ch'ang Kwo!' Pan-chang Kwo being put
to death, the disciples asked, saying, 'How did you know, Master, that
he would meet with death?' Mencius replied, 'He was a man, who had a
little ability, but had not learned the great doctrines of the superior
man. He was just qualified to bring death upon himself, but for nothing
more.'

1\. When Mencius went to T'ang, he was lodged in the Upper palace. A
sandal in the process of making had been placed there in a window, and
when the keeper of the place came to look for it, he could not find it.

2\. On this, some one asked Mencius, saying, 'Is it thus that your
followers pilfer?' Mencius replied, 'Do you think that they came here to
pilfer the sandal?' The man said, 'I apprehend not. But you, Master,
having arranged to give lessons, do not go back to inquire into the
past, and you do not reject those who come to you. If they come with the
mind to learn, you receive them without any more ado.'

1\. Mencius said, 'All men have some things which they cannot bear;--
extend that feeling to what they can bear, and benevolence will be the
result. All men have some things which they will not do;-- extend that
feeling to the things which they do, and righteousness will be the
result.

2\. 'If a man can give full development to the feeling which makes him
shrink from injuring others, his benevolence will be more than can be
called into practice. If he can give full development to the feeling
which refuses to break through, or jump over, a wall, his righteousness
will be more than can be called into practice.

3\. 'If he can give full development to the real feeling of dislike with
which he receives the salutation, "Thou," "Thou," he will act
righteously in all places and circumstances.

4\. 'When a scholar speaks what he ought not to speak, by guile of
speech seeking to gain some end; and when he does not speak what he
ought to speak, by guile of silence seeking to gain some end;-- both
these cases are of a piece with breaking through a neighbour's wall.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Words which are simple, while their meaning is
far-reaching, are good words. Principles which, as held, are
compendious, while their application is extensive, are good principles.
The words of the superior man do not go below the girdle, but great
principles are contained in them.

2\. 'The principle which the superior man holds is that of personal
cultivation, but the kingdom is thereby tranquillized.

3\. 'The disease of men is this:-- that they neglect their own fields,
and go to weed the fields of others, and that what they require from
others is great, while what they lay upon themselves is light.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Yâo and Shun were what they were by nature; T'ang and
Wû were so by returning to natural virtue.

2\. 'When all the movements, in the countenance and every turn of the
body, are exactly what is proper, that shows the extreme degree of the
complete virtue. Weeping for the dead should be from real sorrow, and
not because of the living. The regular path of virtue is to be pursued
without any bend, and from no view to emolument. The words should all be
necessarily sincere, not with any desire to do what is right.

3\. 'The superior man performs the law of right, and thereby waits
simply for what has been appointed.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Those who give counsel to the great should despise
them, and not look at their pomp and display.

2\. 'Halls several times eight cubits high, with beams projecting
several cubits;-- these, if my wishes were to be realized, I would not
have. Food spread before me over ten cubits square, and attendants and
concubines to the amount of hundreds;-- these, though my wishes were
realized, I would not have. Pleasure and wine, and the dash of hunting,
with thousands of chariots following after me;-- these, though my wishes
were realized, I would not have. What they esteem are what I would have
nothing to do with; what I esteem are the rules of the ancients.-- Why
should I stand in awe of them?'

Mencius said, 'To nourish the mind there is nothing better than to make
the desires few. Here is a man whose desires are few:-- in some things
he may not be able to keep his heart, but they will be few. Here is a
man whose desires are many:-- in some things he may be able to keep his
heart, but they will be few.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Tsang Hsî was fond of sheep-dates, and his son, the
philosopher Tsang, could not bear to eat sheep-dates.'

2\. Kung-sun Ch'âu asked, saying, 'Which is best,-- minced meat and
broiled meat, or sheep-dates?' Mencius said, 'Mince and broiled meat, to
be sure.' Kung-sun Ch'âu went on, 'Then why did the philosopher Tsang
eat mince and broiled meat, and would not eat sheep-dates?' Mencius
answered, 'For mince and broiled meat there is a common liking, while
that for sheep-dates was peculiar. We avoid the name, but do not avoid
the surname. The surname is common; the name is peculiar.'

1\. Wan Chang asked, saying, 'Confucius, when he was in Ch'an, said:
"Let me return. The scholars of my school are ambitious, but hasty. They
are for advancing and seizing their object, but cannot forget their
early ways." Why did Confucius, when he was in Ch'an, think of the
ambitious scholars of Lû?'

2\. Mencius replied, 'Confucius not getting men pursuing the true
medium, to whom he might communicate his instructions, determined to
take the ardent and the cautiously-decided. The ardent would advance to
seize their object; the cautiously-decided would keep themselves from
certain things. It is not to be thought that Confucius did not wish to
get men pursuing the true medium, but being unable to assure himself of
finding such, he therefore thought of the next class.'

3\. 'I venture to ask what sort of men they were who could be styled
"The ambitious?"'

4\. 'Such,' replied Mencius, 'as Ch'in Chang, Tsang Hsî, and Mû P'ei,
were those whom Confucius styled "ambitious."'

5\. 'Why were they styled "ambitious?"'

6\. The reply was, 'Their aim led them to talk magniloquently, saying,
"The ancients!" "The ancients!" But their actions, where we fairly
compare them with their words, did not correspond with them.

7\. 'When he found also that he could not get such as were thus
ambitious, he wanted to get scholars who would consider anything impure
as beneath them. Those were the cautiously-decided, a class next to the
former.'

8\. Chang pursued his questioning, 'Confucius said, "They are only your
good careful people of the villages at whom I feel no indignation, when
they pass my door without entering my house. Your good careful people of
the villages are the thieves of virtue." What sort of people were they
who could be styled "Your good careful people of the villages?"'

9\. Mencius replied, 'They are those who say, "Why are they so
magniloquent? Their words have not respect to their actions and their
actions have not respect to their words, but they say, "The ancients!
The ancients! Why do they act so peculiarly, and are so cold and
distant? Born in this age, we should be of this age, to be good is all
that is needed." Eunuch-like, flattering their generation;-- such are
your good careful men of the villages.'

10\. Wan Chang said, 'Their whole village styles those men good and
careful. In all their conduct they are so. How was it that Confucius
considered them the thieves of virtue?'

11\. Mencius replied, 'If you would blame them, you find nothing to
allege. If you would criticise them, you have nothing to criticise. They
agree with the current customs. They consent with an impure age. Their
principles have a semblance of right-heartedness and truth. Their
conduct has a semblance of disinterestedness and purity. All men are
pleased with them, and they think themselves right, so that it is
impossible to proceed with them to the principles of Yâo and Shun. On
this account they are called "The thieves of virtue."

12\. 'Confucius said, "I hate a semblance which is not the reality. I
hate the darnel, lest it be confounded with the corn. I hate
glib-tonguedness, lest it be confounded with righteousness. I hate
sharpness of tongue, lest it be confounded with sincerity. I hate the
music of Chang, lest it be confounded with the true music. I hate the
reddish blue, lest it be confounded with vermilion. I hate your good
careful men of the villages, lest they be confounded with the truly
virtuous."

13\. 'The superior man seeks simply to bring back the unchanging
standard, and, that being correct, the masses are roused to virtue. When
they are so aroused, forthwith perversities and glossed wickedness
disappear.'

1\. Mencius said, 'From Yâo and Shun down to T'ang were 500 years and
more. As to Yu and Kâo Yâo, they saw those earliest sages, and so knew
their doctrines, while T'ang heard their doctrines as transmitted, and
so knew them.

2\. 'From T'ang to king Wan were 500 years and more. As to Î Yin, and
Lâi Chû, they saw T'ang and knew his doctrines, while king Wan heard
them as transmitted, and so knew them.

3\. 'From king Wan to Confucius were 500 years and more. As to T'âi-kung
Wang and San Î-shang, they saw Wan, and so knew his doctrines, while
Confucius heard them as transmitted, and so knew them.

4\. 'From Confucius downwards until now, there are only 100 years and
somewhat more. The distance in time from the sage is so far from being
remote, and so very near at hand was the sage's residence. In these
circumstances, is there no one to transmit his doctrines? Yea, is there
no one to do so?'
