[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc23)  [Next](menc25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 24

1\. Mencius said, 'The five chiefs of the princes were sinners against
the three kings. The princes of the present day are sinners against the
five chiefs. The Great officers of the present day are sinners against
the princes.

2\. 'The sovereign visited the princes, which was called "A tour of
Inspection." The princes attended at the court of the sovereign, which
was called "Giving a report of office." It was a custom in the spring to
examine the ploughing, and supply any deficiency of seed; and in autumn
to examine the reaping, and assist where there was a deficiency of the
crop. When the sovereign entered the boundaries of a State, if the new
ground was being reclaimed, and the old fields well cultivated; if the
old were nourished and the worthy honoured; and if men of distinguished
talents were placed in office: then the prince was rewarded,-- rewarded
with an addition to his territory. On the other hand, if, on entering a
State, the ground was found left wild or overrun with weeds; if the old
were neglected and the worthy unhonoured; and if the offices were filled
with hard taxgatherers: then the prince was reprimanded. If a prince
once omitted his attendance at court, he was punished by degradation of
rank; if he did so a second time, be was deprived of a portion of his
territory; if he did so a third time, the royal forces were set in
motion, and he was removed from his government. Thus the sovereign
commanded the punishment, but did not himself inflict it, while the
princes inflicted the punishment, but did not command it. The five
chiefs, however, dragged the princes to punish other princes, and hence
I say that they were sinners against the three kings.

3\. 'Of the five chiefs the most powerful was the duke Hwan. At the
assembly of the princes in K'wei-ch'iû, he bound the victim and placed
the writing upon it, but did not slay it to smear their mouths with the
blood. The first injunction in their agreement was,-- "Slay the
unfilial; change not the son who has been appointed heir; exalt not a
concubine to be the wife." The second was,-- "Honour the worthy, and
maintain the talented, to give distinction to the virtuous." The third
was,-- "Respect the old, and be kind to the young. Be not forgetful of
strangers and travellers." The fourth was, "Let not offices be
hereditary, nor let officers be pluralists. In the selection of officers
let the object be to get the proper men. Let not a ruler take it on
himself to put to death a Great officer." The fifth was,-- "Follow no
crooked policy in making embankments. Impose no restrictions on the sale
of grain. Let there be no promotions without first announcing them to
the sovereign." It was then said, "All we who have united in this
agreement shall hereafter maintain amicable relations." The princes of
the present day all violate these five prohibitions, and therefore I say
that the princes of the present day are sinners against the five chiefs.

4\. 'The crime of him who connives at, and aids, the wickedness of his
prince is small, but the crime of him who anticipates and excites that
wickedness is great. The officers of the present day all go to meet
their sovereigns' wickedness, and therefore I say that the Great
officers of the present day are sinners against the princes.'

1\. The prince of Lû wanted to make the minister Shan commander of his
army.

2\. Mencius said, 'To employ an uninstructed people in war may be said
to be destroying the people. A destroyer of the people would not have
been tolerated in the times of Yâo and Shun.

3\. 'Though by a single battle you should subdue Ch'î, and get
possession of Nan-yang, the thing ought not to be done.'

4\. Shan changed countenance, and said in displeasure, 'This is what I,
Kû-Lî, do not understand.'

5\. Mencius said, 'I will lay the case plainly before you. The territory
appropriated to the sovereign is 1,000 lî square. Without a thousand lî,
he would not have sufficient for his entertainment of the princes. The
territory appropriated to a Hâu is 100 lî square. Without 100 lî, he
would not have sufficient wherewith to observe the statutes kept in his
ancestral temple.

6\. 'When Châu-kung was invested with the principalily of Lû, it was a
hundred lî square. The territory was indeed enough, but it was not more
than 100 lî. When T'âi-kung was invested with the principality of Ch'î,
it was 100 lî square. The territory was indeed enough, but it was not
more than 100 lî.

7\. 'Now Lû is five times 100 lî square. If a true royal ruler were to
arise, whether do you think that Lû would be diminished or increased by
him?

8\. 'If it were merely taking the place from the one State to give it to
the other, a benevolent man would not do it;-- how much less will he do
so, when the end is to be sought by the slaughter of men!

9\. 'The way in which a superior man serves his prince contemplates
simply the leading him in the right path, and directing his mind to
benevolence.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Those who now-a-days serve their sovereigns say, "We
can for our sovereign enlarge the limits of the cultivated ground, and
fill his treasuries and arsenals." Such persons are now-a-days called
"Good ministers," but anciently they were called "Robbers of the
people." If a sovereign follows not the right way, nor has his mind bent
on benevolence, to seek to enrich him is to enrich a Chieh.

2\. 'Or they will say, "We can for our sovereign form alliances with
other States, so that our battles must be successful." Such persons are
now-a-days called "Good ministers," but anciently they were called
"Robbers of the people." If a sovereign follows not the right way, nor
has his mind directed to benevolence, to seek to enrich him is to enrich
a Chieh.

3\. 'Although a prince, pursuing the path of the present day, and not
changing its practices, were to have the throne given to him, he could
not retain it for a single morning.'

1\. Pâi Kwei said, 'I want to take a twentieth of the produce only as
the tax. What do you think of it?'

2\. Mencius said, 'Your way would be that of the Mo.

3\. 'In a country of ten thousand families, would it do to have only one
potter?' Kwei replied, 'No. The vessels would not be enough to use.'

4\. Mencius went on, 'In Mo all the five kinds of grain are not grown;
it only produces the millet. There are no fortified cities, no edifices,
no ancestral temples, no ceremonies of sacrifice; there are no princes
requiring presents and entertainments; there is no system of officers
with their various subordinates. On these accounts a tax of
one-twentieth of the produce is sufficient there.

5\. 'But now it is the Middle Kingdom that we live in. To banish the
relationships of men, and have no superior men;-- how can such a state
of things be thought of?

6\. 'With but few potters a kingdom cannot subsist;-- how much less can
it subsist without men of a higher rank than others?

7\. 'If we wish to make the taxation lighter than the system of Yâo and
Shun, we shall just have a great Mo and a small Mo. If we wish to make
it heavier, we shall just have the great Chieh and the small Chieh.'

1\. Pâi Kwei said, 'My management of the waters is superior to that of
Yü.'

2\. Mencius replied, 'You are wrong, Sir. Yü's regulation of the waters
was according to the laws of water.

3\. 'He therefore made the four seas their receptacle, while you make
the neighbouring States their receptacle.

4\. 'Water flowing out of its channels is called an inundation.
Inundating waters are a vast waste of water, and what a benevolent man
detests. You are wrong, my good Sir.'

Mencius said, 'If a scholar have not faith, how shall he take a firm
hold of things?'

1\. The prince of Lû wanting to commit the administration of his
government to the disciple Yo-chang, Mencius said, 'When I heard of it,
I was so glad that I could not sleep.'

2\. Kung-sun Ch'âu asked, 'Is Yo-chang a man of vigour?' and was
answered, 'No.' 'Is he wise in council?' 'No.' 'Is he possessed of much
information?' 'No.'

3\. 'What then made you so glad that you could not sleep?'

4\. 'He is a man who loves what is good.'

5\. 'Is the love of what is good sufficient?'

6\. 'The love of what is good is more than a sufficient qualification
for the government of the kingdom;-- how much more is it so for the
State of Lû!

7\. 'If a minister love what is good, all within the four seas will
count 1000 lî but a small distance, and will come and lay their good
thoughts before him.

8\. If he do not love what is good, men will say, "How self-conceited he
looks? He is sayinq to himself, I know it." The language and looks of
that self-conceit will keep men off at a distance of 1,000 lî. When good
men stop 1,000 lî off, calumniators, flatterers, and sycophants will
make their appearance. When a minister lives among calumniators,
flatterers, and sycophants, though he may wish the State to be well
governed, is it possible for it to be so?'

2\. 'If received with the utmost respect and all polite observances, and
they could say to themselves that the prince would carry their words
into practice, then they took office with him. Afterwards, although
there might be no remission in the polite demeanour of the prince, if
their words were not carried into practice, they would leave him.

3\. 'The second case was that in which, though the prince could not be
expected at once to carry their words into practice, yet being received
by him with the utmost respect, they took office with him. But
afterwards, if there was a remission in his polite demeanour, they would
leave him.

4\. 'The last case was that of the superior man who had nothing to eat,
either morning or evening, and was so famished that he could not move
out of his door. If the prince, on hearing of his state, said, "I must
fail in the great point,-- that of carrying his doctrines into practice,
neither am I able to follow his words, but I am ashamed to allow him to
die of want in my country;" the assistance offered in such a case might
be received, but not beyond what was sufficient to avert death.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Shun rose from among the channelled fields. Fû Yüeh
was called to office from the midst of his building frames; Chiâo-ko
from his fish and salt; Kwan Î-wû from the hands of his gaoler; Sun-shû
Âo from his hiding by the sea-shore; and Pâi-lî Hsî from the
market-place.

2\. 'Thus, when Heaven is about to confer a great office on any man, it
first exercises his mind with suffering, and his sinews and bones with
toil. It exposes his body to hunger, and subjects him to extreme
poverty. It confounds his undertakings. By all these methods it
stimulates his mind, hardens his nature, and supplies his
incompetencies.

3\. 'Men for the most part err, and are afterwards able to reform. They
are distressed in mind and perplexed in their thoughts, and then they
arise to vigorous reformation. When things have been evidenced in men's
looks, and set forth in their words, then they understand them.

4\. 'If a prince have not about his court families attached to the laws
and worthy counsellors, and if abroad there are not hostile States or
other external calamities, his kingdom will generally come to ruin.

5\. 'From these things we see how life springs from sorrow and calamity,
and death from ease and pleasure.'
