[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc25)  [Next](menc27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 26

1\. Mencius said, 'Confucius ascended the eastern hill, and Lû appeared
to him small. He ascended the T'âi mountain, and all beneath the heavens
appeared to him small. So he who has contemplated the sea, finds it
difficult to think anything of other waters, and he who has wandered in
the gate of the sage, finds it difficult to think anything of the words
of others.

2\. 'There is an art in the contemplation of water.-- It is necessary to
look at it as foaming in waves. The sun and moon being possessed of
brilliancy, their light admitted even through an orifice illuminates.

3\. 'Flowing water is a thing which does not proceed till it has filled
the hollows in its course. The student who has set his mind on the
doctrines of the sage, does not advance to them but by completing one
lesson after another.'

1\. Mencius said, 'He who rises at cock-crowing and addresses himself
earnestly to the practice of virtue, is a disciple of Shun.

2\. 'He who rises at cock-crowing, and addresses himself earnestly to
the pursuit of giin, is a disciple of Chih.

3\. 'If you want to know what separates Shun from Chih, it is simply
this,-- the interval between the thought of gain and the thought of
virtue.'

1\. Mencius said, 'The principle of the philosopher Yang was-- "Each one
for himself." Though he might have benefited the whole kingdom by
plucking out a single hair, he would not have done it.

2\. 'The philosopher Mo loves all equally. If by rubbing smooth his
whole body from the crown to the heel, he could have benefited the
kingdom, he would have done it.

3\. 'Tsze-mo holds a medium between these. By holding that medium, he is
nearer the right. But by holding it without leaving room for the
exigency of circumstances, it becomes like their holding their one
point.

4\. 'The reason why I hate that holding to one point is the injury it
does to the way of right principle. It takes up one point and disregards
a hundred others.'

1\. Mencius said, 'The hungry think any food sweet, and the thirsty
think the same of any drink, and thus they do not get the right taste of
what they eat and drink. The hunger and thirst, in fact, injure their
palate. And is it only the mouth and belly which are injured by hunger
and thirst? Men's minds are also injured by them.

2\. 'If a man can prevent the evils of hunger and thirst from being any
evils to his mind, he need not have any sorrow about not being equal to
other men.'

Mencius said, 'A man with definite aims to be accomplished may be
compared to one digging a well. To dig the well to a depth of
seventy-two cubits, and stop without reaching the spring, is after all
throwing away the well.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Benevolence and righteousness were natural to Yâo and
Shun. T'ang and Wû made them their own. The five chiefs of the princes
feigned them.

2\. 'Having borrowed them long and not returned them, how could it be
known they did not own them?'

1\. Kung-sun Ch'âu said, 'Î Yin said, "I cannot be near and see him so
disobedient to reason," and therewith he banished T'â-chiâ to T'ung. The
people were much pleased. When T'â-chiâ became virtuous, he brought him
back, and the people were again much pleased.

2\. 'When worthies are ministers, may they indeed banish their
sovereigns in this way when they are not virtuous?'

3\. Mencius replied, 'If they have the same purpose as Î Yin, they may.
If they have not the same purpose, it would be usurpation.'

Kung-sun Ch'âu said, 'It is said, in the Book of Poetry,

> "He will not eat the bread of idleness!"

How is it that we see superior men eating without labouring?' Mencius
replied, 'When a superior man resides in a country, if its sovereign
employ his counsels, he comes to tranquillity, wealth and glory. If the
young in it follow his instructions, they become filial, obedient to
their elders, true-hearted, and faithful. What greater example can there
be than this of not eating the bread of idleness?'

1\. The king's son, Tien, asked Mencius, saying, 'What is the business
of the unemployed scholar?'

2\. Mencius replied, 'To exalt his aim.'

3\. Tien asked again, 'What do you mean by exalting the aim?' The answer
was, 'Setting it simply on benevolence and righteousness. He thinks how
to put a single innocent person to death is contrary to benevolence; how
to take what one has not a right to is contrary to righteousness; that
one's dwelling should be benevolence; and one's path should be
righteousness. Where else should he dwell? What other path should he
pursue? When benevolence is the dwelling-place of the heart, and
righteousness the path of the life, the business of a great man is
complete.'

Mencius said, 'Supposing that the kingdom of Ch'î were offered, contrary
to righteousness, to Ch'an Chung, he would not receive it, and all
people believe in him, as a man of the highest worth. But this is only
the righteousness which declines a dish of rice or a plate of soup. A
man can have no greater crimes than to disown his parents and relatives,
and the relations of sovereign and minister, superiors and inferiors.
How can it be allowed to give a man credit for the great excellences
because he possesses a small one?'

1\. T'âo Ying asked, saying, 'Shun being sovereign, and Kâo-yâo chief
minister of justice, if Kû-sâu had murdered a man, what would have been
done in the case?'

2\. Mencius said, 'Kâo-yâo would simply have apprehended him.'

3\. 'But would not Shun have forbidden such a thing?'

4\. 'Indeed, how could Shun have forbidden it? Kâo-yâo had received the
law from a proper source.'

5\. 'In that case what would Shun have done?'

6\. 'Shun would have regarded abandoning the kingdom as throwing away a
worn-out sandal. He would privately have taken his father on his back,
and retired into concealment, living some where along the sea-coast.
There he would have been all his life, cheerful and happy, forgetting
the kingdom.'

1\. Mencius, going from Fan to Ch'î, saw the king of Ch'î's son at a
distance, and said with a deep sigh, 'One's position alters the air,
just as the nurture affects the body. Great is the influence of
position! Are we not all men's sons in this respect?'

2\. Mencius said, 'The residence, the carriages and horses, and the
dress of the king's son, are mostly the same as those of other men. That
he looks so is occasioned by his position. How much more should a
peculiar air distinguish him whose position is in the wide house of the
world!

3\. 'When the prince of Lû went to Sung, he called out at the T'ieh-châi
gate, and the keeper said, "This is not our prince. How is it that his
voice is so like that of our prince?" This was occasioned by nothing but
the correspondence of their positions.'

1\. Mencius said, 'To feed a scholar and not love him, is to treat him
as a pig. To love him and not respect him, is to keep him as a domestic
animal.

2\. 'Honouring and respecting are what exist before any offering of
gifts.

3\. 'If there be honouring and respecting without the reality of them, a
superior man may not be retained by such empty demonstrations.'

Mencius said, 'The bodily organs with their functions belong to our
Heaven-conferred nature. But a man must be a sage before he can satisfy
the design of his bodily organization.'

1\. The king Hsüan of Ch'î wanted to shorten the period of mourning.
Kung-sun Ch'âu said, 'To have one whole year's mourning is better than
doing away with it altogether.'

2\. Mencius said, 'That is just as if there were one twisting the arm of
his elder brother, and you were merely to say to him "Gently, gently, if
you please." Your only course should be to teach such an one filial
piety and fraternal duty.'

3\. At that time, the mother of one of the king's sons had died, and his
tutor asked for him that he might be allowed to observe a few months'
mourning. Kung-sun Ch'âu asked, 'What do you say of this?'

4\. Mencius replied, 'This is a case where the party wishes to complete
the whole period, but finds it impossible to do so. The addition of even
a single day is better than not mourning at all. I spoke of the case
where there was no hindrance, and the party neglected the thing itself.'

1\. Mencius said, 'There are five ways in which the superior man effects
his teaching.

2\. 'There are some on whom his influence descends like seasonable rain.

3\. 'There are some whose virtue he perfects, and some of whose talents
he assists the development.

4\. 'There are some whose inquiries he answers.

5\. 'There are some who privately cultivate and correct themselves.

6\. These five ways are the methods in which the superior man effects
his teaching.'

1\. Kung-sun Ch'âu said, 'Lofty are your principles and admirable, but
to learn them may well be likened to ascending the heavens,-- something
which cannot be reached. Why not adapt your teaching so as to cause
learners to consider them attainable, and so daily exert themselves!'

2\. Mencius said, 'A great artificer does not, for the sake of a stupid
workman, alter or do away with the marking-line. Î did not, for the sake
of a stupid archer, charge his rule for drawing the bow.

3\. 'The superior man draws the bow, but does not discharge the arrow,
having seemed to leap with it to the mark; and he there stands exactly
in the middle of the path. Those who are able, follow him.'

1\. Mencius said, 'When right principles prevail throughout the kingdom,
one's principles must appear along with one's person. When right
principles disappear from the kingdom, one's person must vanish along
with one's principles.

2\. 'I have not heard of one's principles being dependent for their
manifestation on other men.'

1\. The disciple Kung-tû said, 'When Kang of T'ang made his appearance
in your school, it seemed proper that a polite consideration should be
paid to him, and yet you did not answer him. Why was that?'

2\. Mencius replied, 'I do not answer him who questions me presuming on
his nobility, nor him who presumes on his talents, nor him who presumes
on his age, nor him who presumes on services performed to me, nor him
who presumes on old acquaintance. Two of those things were chargeable on
Kang of T'ang.'

1\. Mencius said, 'He who stops short where stopping is acknowledged to
be not allowable, will stop short in everything. He who behaves shabbily
to those whom he ought to treat well, will behave shabbily to all.

2\. 'He who advances with precipitation will retire with speed.'

Mencius said, 'In regard to inferior creatures, the superior man is kind
to them, but not loving. In regard to people generally, he is loving to
them, but not affectionate. He is affectionate to his parents, and
lovingly disposed to people generally. He is lovingly disposed to people
generally, and kind to creatures.'

1\. Mencius said, 'The wise embrace all knowledge, but they are most
earnest about what is of the greatest importance. The benevolent embrace
all in their love, but what they consider of the greatest importance is
to cultivate an earnest affection for the virtuous. Even the wisdom of
Yâo and Shun did not extend to everything, but they attended earnestly
to what was important. Their benevolence did not show itself in acts of
kindness to every man, but they earnestly cultivated an affection for
the virtuous.

2\. 'Not to be able to keep the three years' mourning, and to be very
particular about that of three months, or that of five months; to eat
immoderately and swill down the soup, and at the same time to inquire
about the precept not to tear the meat with the teeth;-- such things
show what I call an ignorance of what is most important.
