[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc04)  [Next](menc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 5

1\. Kung-sun Ch'âu asked Mencius, saying, 'Master, if you were to obtain
the ordering of the government in Ch'î, could you promise yourself to
accomplish anew such results as those realized by Kwan Chung and Yen?'

2\. Mencius said, 'You are indeed a true man of Ch'î. You know about
Kwan Chung and Yen, and nothing more,

3\. 'Some one asked Tsang Hsî, saying, "Sir, to which do you give the
superiority,-- to yourself or to Tsze-lû?" Tsang Hsî looked uneasy, and
said, "He was an object of veneration to my grandfather." "Then,"
pursued the other, "Do you give the superiority to yourself or to Kwan
Chung?" Tsang Hsî, flushed with anger and displeased, said, "How dare
you compare me with Kwan Chung? Considering how entirely Kwan Chung
possessed the confidence of his prince, how long he enjoyed the
direction of the government of the State, and how low, after all, was
what he accomplished,-- how is it that you liken me to him?"

4\. 'Thus,' concluded Mencius, 'Tsang Hsî would not play Kwan Chung, and
is it what you desire for me that I should do so?'

5\. Kung-sun Ch'âu said, 'Kwan Chung raised his prince to be the leader
of all the other princes, and Yen made his prince illustrious, and do
you still think it would not be enough for you to do what they did?'

6\. Mencius answered, 'To raise Ch'î to the royal dignity would be as
easy as it is to turn round the hand.'

7\. 'So!' returned the other. 'The perplexity of your disciple is hereby
very much increased. There was king Wan, moreover, with all the virtue
which belonged to him; and who did not die till he had reached a hundred
years:-- and still his influence had not penetrated throughout the
kingdom. It required king Wû and the duke of Châu to continue his
course, before that influence greatly prevailed. Now you say that the
royal dignity might be so easily obtained:-- is king Wan then not a
sufficient object for imitation?'

8\. Mencius said, 'How can king Wan be matched? From T'ang to Wû-ting
there had appeared six or seven worthy and sage sovereigns. The kingdom
had been attached to Yin for a long time, and this length of time made a
change difficult. Wû-ting had all the princes coming to his court, and
possessed the kingdom as if it had been a thing which he moved round in
his palm. Then, Châu was removed from Wû-ting by no great interval of
time. There were still remaining some of the ancient families and of the
old manners, of the influence also which had emanated from the earlier
sovereigns, and of their good government. Moreover, there were the
viscount of Wei and his second son, their Royal Highnesses Pî-kan and
the viscount of Ch'î, and Kâo-ko, all men of ability and virtue, who
gave their joint assistance to Châu in his government. In consequence of
these things, it took a long time for him to lose the throne. There was
not a foot of ground which he did not possess. There was not one of all
the people who was not his subject. So it was on his side, and king Wan
at his beginning had only a territory of one hundred square lî. On all
these accounts, it was difficult for him immediately to attain to the
royal dignity.

9\. 'The people of Ch'î have a saying-- "A man may have wisdom and
discernment, but that is not like embracing the favourable opportunity.
A man may have instruments of husbandry, but that is not like waiting
for the farming seasons." The present time is one in which the royal
dignity may be easily attained.

10\. 'In the flourishing periods of the Hsiâ, Yin, and Châu dynasties,
the royal domain did not exceed a thousand lî, and Ch'î embraces so much
territory. Cocks crow and dogs bark to one another, all the way to the
four borders of the State:-- so Ch'î possesses the people. No change is
needed for the enlarging of its territory: no change is needed for the
collecting of a population. If its ruler will put in practice a
benevolent government, no power will be able to prevent his becoming
sovereign.

11\. 'Moreover, never was there a time farther removed than the present
from the rise of a true sovereign: never was there a time when the
sufferings of the people from tyrannical government were more intense
than the present. The hungry readily partake of any food, and the
thirsty of any drink.'

12\. 'Confucius said, "The flowing progress of virtue is more rapid than
the transmission of royal orders by stages and couriers."

13\. 'At the present time, in a country of ten thousand chariots, let
benevolent government be put in practice, and the people will be
delighted with it, as if they were relieved from hanging by the heels.
With half the merit of the ancients, double their achievements is sure
to be realized. It is only at this time that such could be the case.'

1\. Kung-sun Ch'âu asked Mencius, saying, 'Master, if you were to be
appointed a high noble and the prime minister of Ch'î, so as to be able
to carry your principles into practice, though you should thereupon
raise the ruler to the headship of all the other princes, or even to the
royal dignity, it would not be to be wondered at.-- In such a position
would your mind be perturbed or not?' Mencius replied, 'No. At forty, I
attained to an unperturbed mind.'

2\. Ch'âu said, 'Since it is so with you, my Master, you are far beyond
Mang Pan.' 'The mere attainment,' said Mencius, 'is not difficult. The
scholar Kâo had attained to an unperturbed mind at an earlier period of
life than I did.'

3\. Ch'âu asked, 'Is there any way to an unperturbed mind?' The answer
was, 'Yes.

4\. 'Pî-kung Yû had this way of nourishing his valour:-- He did not
flinch from any strokes at his body. He did not turn his eyes aside from
any thrusts at them. He considered that the slightest push from any one
was the same as if he were beaten before the crowds in the market-place,
and that what he would not receive from a common man in his loose large
garments of hair, neither should he receive from a prince of ten
thousand chariots. He viewed stabbing a prince of ten thousand chariots
just as stabbing a fellow dressed in cloth of hair. He feared not any of
all the princes. A bad word addressed to him be always returned.

5\. 'Mang Shih-shê had this way of nourishing his valour:-- He said, "I
look upon not conquering and conquering in the same way. To measure the
enemy and then advance; to calculate the chances of victory and then
engage:-- this is to stand in awe of the opposing force. How can I make
certain of conquering? I can only rise superior to all fear."

6\. 'Mang Shih-shê resembled the philosopher Tsang. Pî-kung Yû resembled
Tsze-hsiâ. I do not know to the valour of which of the two the
superiority should be ascribed, but yet Mang Shih-shê attended to what
was of the greater importance.

7\. 'Formerly, the philosopher Tsang said to Tsze-hsiang, "Do you love
valour? I heard an account of great valour from the Master. It speaks
thus:-- 'If, on self-examination, I find that I am not upright, shall I
not be in fear even of a poor man in his loose garments of hair-cloth?
If, on self-examination, I find that I am upright, I will go forward
against thousands and tens of thousands.'"

8\. Yet, what Mang Shih-shê maintained, being merely his physical
energy, was after all inferior to what the philosopher Tsang maintained,
which was indeed of the most importance.'

9\. Kung-sun Ch'âu said, 'May I venture to ask an explanation from you,
Master, of how you maintain an unperturbed mind, and how the philosopher
Kâo does the same?' Mencius answered,'Kâo says,-- "What is not attained
in words is not to be sought for in the mind; what produces
dissatisfaction in the mind, is not to be helped by passion-effort."
This last,-- when there is unrest in the mind, not to seek for relief
from passion-effort, may be conceded. But not to seek in the mind for
what is not attained in words cannot be conceded. The will is the leader
of the passion-nature. The passion-nature pervades and animates the
body. The will is first and chief, and the passion-nature is subordinate
to it. Therefore I say,-- Maintain firm the will, and do no violence to
the passion-nature.'

10\. Ch'âu observed, 'Since you say-- "The will is chief, and the
passion-nature is subordinate," how do you also say, "Maintain firm the
will, and do no violence to the passion-nature?"' Mencius replied, 'When
it is the will alone which is active, it moves the passion-nature. When
it is the passion-nature alone which is active, it moves the will. For
instance now, in the case of a man falling or running, that is from the
passion-nature, and yet it moves the mind.'

11\. 'I venture to ask,' said Ch'âu again, 'wherein you, Master, surpass
Kâo.' Mencius told him, 'I understand words. I am skilful in nourishing
my vast, flowing passion-nature.'

12\. Ch'âu pursued, 'I venture to ask what you mean by your vast,
flowing passion-nature!' The reply was, 'It is difficult to describe it.

13\. 'This is the passion-nature:-- It is exceedingly great, and
exceedingly strong. Being nourished by rectitude, and sustaining no
injury, it fills up all between heaven and earth.

14\. 'This is the passion-nature:-- It is the mate and assistant of
righteousness and reason. Without it, man is in a state of starvation.

15\. 'It is produced by the accumulation of righteous deeds; it is not
to be obtained by incidental acts of righteousness. If the mind does not
feel complacency in the conduct, the nature becomes starved. I therefore
said, "Kâo has never understood righteousness, because he makes it
something external."

16\. 'There must be the constant practice of this righteousness, but
without the object of thereby nourishing the passion-nature. Let not the
mind forget its work, but let there be no assisting the growth of that
nature. Let us not be like the man of Sung. There was a man of Sung, who
was grieved that his growing corn was not longer, and so he pulled it
up. Having done this, he returned home, looking very stupid, and said to
his people, "I am tired to-day. I have been helping the corn to grow
long." His son ran to look at it, and found the corn all withered. There
are few in the world, who do not deal with their passion-nature, as if
they were assisting the corn to grow long. Some indeed consider it of no
benefit to them, and let it alone:-- they do not weed their corn. They
who assist it to grow long, pull out their corn. What they do is not
only of no benefit to the nature, but it also injures it.'

17\. Kung-sun Ch'âu further asked, 'What do you mean by saying that you
understand whatever words you hear?' Mencius replied, 'When words are
one-sided, I know how the mind of the speaker is clouded over. When
words are extravagant, I know how the mind is fallen and sunk. When
words are all-depraved, I know how the mind has departed from principle.
When words are evasive, I know how the mind is at its wit's end. These
evils growing in the mind, do injury to government, and, displayed in th
government, are hurtful to the conduct of affairs. When a Sage shall
again arise, he will certainly follow my words.'

18\. On this Ch'âu observed, 'Tsâi Wo and Tsze-kung were skilful in
speaking. Zan Niû, the disciple Min, and Yen Yüan, while their words
were good, were distinguished for their virtuous conduct. Confucius
united the qualities of the disciples in himself, but still he said, "In
the matter of speeches, I am not competent."-- Then, Master, have you
attained to be a Sage?'

19\. Mencius said, 'Oh! what words are these? Formerly Tsze-kung asked
Confucius, saying, "Master, are you a Sage?" Confucius answered him, "A
Sage is what I cannot rise to. I learn without satiety, and teach
without being tired." Tsze-kung said, "You learn without satiety:-- that
shows your wisdom. You teach without being tired:-- that shows your
benevolence. Benevolent and wise:-- Master, you ARE a Sage." Now, since
Confucius would not allow himself to be regarded as a Sage, what words
were those?'

20\. Ch'âu said, 'Formerly, I once heard this:-- Tsze-hsiâ, Tsze-yû, and
Tsze-chang had each one member of the Sage. Zan Niû, the disciple Min,
and Yen Yüan had all the members, but in small proportions. I venture to
ask,-- With which of these are you pleased to rank yourself?'

21\. Mencius replied, 'Let us drop speaking about these, if you please.'

22\. Ch'âu then asked, 'What do you say of Po-î and Î Yin?' 'Their ways
were different from mine,' said Mencius. 'Not to serve a prince whom he
did not esteem, nor command a people whom he did not approve; in a time
of good government to take office, and on the occurrence of confusion to
retire:-- this was the way of Po-î. To say-- "Whom may I not serve? My
serving him makes him my ruler. What people may I not command? My
commanding them makes them my people." In a time of good government to
take office, and when disorder prevailed, also to take office:-- that
was the way of Î Yin. When it was proper to go into office, then to go
into it; when it was proper to keep retired from office, then to keep
retired from it; when it was proper to continue in it long, then to
continue in it long - when it was proper to withdraw from it quickly,
then to withdraw quickly:-- that was the way of Confucius. These were
all sages of antiquity, and I have not attained to do what they did. But
what I wish to do is to learn to be like Confucius.'

23\. Ch'âu said, 'Comparing Po-î and Î Yin with Confucius, are they to
be placed in the same rank?' Mencius replied, 'No. Since there were
living men until now, there never was another Confucius.'

24\. Ch'âu said, 'Then, did they have any points of agreement with him?'
The reply was,-- 'Yes. If they had been sovereigns over a hundred lî of
territory, they would, all of them, have brought all the princes to
attend in their court, and have obtained the throne. And none of them,
in order to obtain the throne, would have committed one act of
unrighteousness, or put to death one innocent person. In those things
they agreed with him.'

25\. Ch'âu said, 'I venture to ask wherein he differed from them.'
Mencius replied, 'Tsâi Wo, Tsze-kung, and Yû Zo had wisdom sufficient to
know the sage. Even had they been ranking themselves low, they would not
have demeaned themselves to flatter their favourite.

26\. 'Now, Tsâi Wo said, "According to my view of our Master, he was far
superior to Yâo and Shun."

27\. 'Tsze-kung said, "By viewing the ceremonial ordinances of a prince,
we know the character of his government. By hearing his music, we know
the character of his virtue. After the lapse of a hundred ages I can
arrange, according to their merits, the kings of a hundred ages;-- not
one of them can escape me. From the birth of mankind till now, there has
never been another like our Master."

28\. 'Yû Zo said, "Is it only among men that it is so? There is the
Ch'î-lin among quadrupeds, the Fang-hwang among birds, the T'âi mountain
among mounds and ant-hills, and rivers and seas among rain-pools. Though
different in degree, they are the same in kind. So the sages among
mankind are also the same in kind. But they stand out from their
fellows, and rise above the level, and from the birth of mankind till
now, there never has been one so complete as Confucius."'
