[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc08)  [Next](menc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 9

1\. When the prince, afterwards duke Wan of T'ang, had to go to Ch'û, he
went by way of Sung, and visited Mencius.

2\. Mencius discoursed to him how the nature of man is good, and when
speaking, always made laudatory reference to Yâo and Shun.

3\. When the prince was returning from Ch'û, he again visited Mencius.
Mencius said to him, 'Prince, do you doubt my words? The path is one,
and only one.

4\. 'Ch'ang Chi'en said to duke King of Ch'î, "They were men. I am a
man. Why should I stand in awe of them?" Yen Yüan said, "What kind of
man was Shun? What kind of man am I? He who exerts himself will also
become such as he was." Kung-Ming Î said, "King Wan is my teacher. How
should the duke of Châu deceive me by those words?"

5\. 'Now, T'ang, taking its length with its breadth, will amount, I
suppose, to fifty lî. It is small, but still sufficient to make a good
State. It is said in the Book of History, "If medicine do not raise a
commotion in the patient, his disease will not be cured by it."'

1\. When the duke Ting of T'ang died, the prince said to Yen Yû,
'Formerly, Mencius spoke with me in Sung, and in my mind I have never
forgotten his words. Now, alas! this great duty to my father devolves
upon me; I wish to send you to ask the advice of Mencius, and then to
proceed to its various services'

2\. Zan Yû accordingly proceeded to Tsâu, and consulted Mencius. Mencius
said, 'Is this not good? In discharging the funeral duties to parents,
men indeed feel constrained to do their utmost. The philosopher Tsang
said, "When parents are alive, they should be served according to
propriety; when they are dead, they should be buried according to
propriety; and they should be sacrificed to according to propriety:--
this may be called filial piety." The ceremonies to be observed by the
princes I have not learned, but I have heard these points:-- that the
three years' mourning, the garment of coarse cloth with its lower edge
even, and the eating of congee, were equally prescribed by the three
dynasties, and binding on all, from the sovereign to the mass of the
people.'

3\. Zan Yû reported the execution of his commission, and the prince
determined that the three years' mourning should be observed. His aged
relatives, and the body of the officers, did not wish that it should be
so, and said, 'The former princes of Lû, that kingdom which we honour,
have, none of them, observed this practice, neither have any of our own
former princes observed it. For you to act contrary to their example is
not proper. Moreover, the History says,-- "In the observances of
mourning and sacrifice, ancestors are to be followed," meaning that they
received those things from a proper source to hand them down.'

4\. The prince said again to Zan Yû, 'Hitherto, I have not given myself
to the pursuit of learning, but have found my pleasure in horsemanship
and sword-exercise, and now I don't come up to the wishes of my aged
relatives and the officers. I am afraid I may not be able to discharge
my duty in the great business that I have entered on; do you again
consult Mencius for me.' On this, Zan Yû went again to Tsâu, and
consulted Mencius. Mencius said, 'It is so, but he may not seek a remedy
in others, but only in himself. Confucius said, "When a prince dies, his
successor entrusts the administration to the prime minister. He sips the
congee. His face is of a deep black. He approaches the place of
mourning, and weeps. Of all the officers and inferior ministers there is
not one who will presume not to join in the lamentation, he setting them
this example. What the superior loves, his inferiors will be found to
love exceedingly. The relation between superiors and inferiors is like
that between the wind and grass. The grass must bend when the wind blows
upon it." The business depends on the prince.'

5\. Zan Yû returned with this answer to his commission, and the prince
said, 'It is so. The matter does indeed depend on me.' So for five
months he dwelt in the shed, without issuing an order or a caution. All
the officers and his relatives said, 'He may be said to understand the
ceremonies.' When the time of interment arrived, they came from all
quarters of the State to witness it. Those who had come from other
States to condole with him, were greatly pleased with the deep dejection
of his countenance and the mournfulness of his wailing and weeping.

1\. The duke Wan of T'ang asked Mencius about the proper way of
governing a kingdom.

2\. Mencius said, 'The business of the people may not be remissly
attended to. It is said in the Book of Poetry,

> "In the day-light go and gather the grass,  
> And at night twist your ropes;  
> Then get up quickly on the roofs;--  
> Soon must we begin sowing again the grain."

3\. 'The way of the people is this:-- If they have a certain livelihood,
they will have a fixed heart; if they have not a certain livelihood,
they have not a fixed heart. If they have not a fixed heart, there is
nothing which they will not do in the way of self-abandonment, of moral
deflection, of depravity, and of wild license. When they have thus been
involved in crime, to follow them up and punish them:-- this is to
entrap the people. How can such a thing as entrapping the people be done
under the rule of a benevolent man?

4\. 'Therefore, a ruler who is endowed with talents and virtue will be
gravely complaisant and economical, showing a respectful politeness to
his ministers, and taking from the people only in accordance with
regulated limits.

5\. 'Yang Hû said, "He who seeks to be rich will not be benevolent. He
who wishes to be benevolent will not be rich."

6\. 'The sovereign of the Hsiâ dynasty enacted the fifty mâu allotment,
and the payment of a tax. The founder of the Yin enacted the seventy mâu
allotment, and the system of mutual aid. The founder of the Châu enacted
the hundred mâu allotment, and the share system. In reality, what was
paid in all these was a tithe. The share system means mutual division.
The aid system means mutual dependence.

7\. 'Lung said, "For regulating the lands, there is no better system
than that of mutual aid, and none which is not better than that of
taxing. By the tax system, the regular amount was fixed by taking the
average of several years. In good years, when the grain lies about in
abundance, much might be taken without its being oppressive, and the
actual exaction would be small. But in bad years, the produce being not
sufficient to repay the manuring of the fields, this system still
requires the taking of the full amount. When the parent of the people
causes the people to wear looks of distress, and, after the whole year's
toil, yet not to be able to nourish their parents, so that they proceed
to borrowing to increase their means, till the old people and children
are found lying in the ditches and water-channels:-- where, in such a
case, is his parental relation to the people?"

8\. 'As to the system of hereditary salaries, that is already observed
in T'ang.

9\. 'It is said in the Book of Poetry,

> "May the rain come down on our public field, And then upon our private
> fields!"

It is only in the system of mutual aid that there is a public field, and
from this passage we perceive that even in the Châu dynasty this system
has been recognised.

10\. 'Establish hsiang, hsü, hsio, and hsiâo,-- all those educational
institutions,-- for the instruction of the people. The name hsiang
indicates nourishing as its object; hsiâo, indicates teaching; and hsü
indicates archery. By the Hsiâ dynasty the name hsiâo was used; by the
Yin, that of hsü; and by the Châu, that of hsiang. As to the hsio, they
belonged to the three dynasties, and by that name. The object of them
all is to illustrate the human relations. When those are thus
illustrated by superiors, kindly feeling will prevail among the inferior
people below.

11\. 'Should a real sovereign arise, he will certainly come and take an
example from you; and thus you will be the teacher of the true
sovereign.

12\. 'It is said in the Book of Poetry,

> Although Châu. was an old country,  
> It received a new destiny."

That is said with reference to king Wan. Do you practise those things
with vigour, and you also will by them make new your kingdom.'

13\. The duke afterwards sent Pî Chan to consult Mencius about the
nine-squares system of dividing the land. Mencius said to him, 'Since
your prince, wishing to put in practice a benevolent government, has
made choice of you and put you into this employment, you must exert
yourself to the utmost. Now, the first thing towards a benevolent
government must be to lay down the boundaries. If the boundaries be not
defined correctly, the division of the land into squares will not be
equal, and the produce available for salaries will not be evenly
distributed. On this account, oppressive rulers and impure ministers are
sure to neglect this defining of the boundaries. When the boundaries
have been defined correctly, the division of the fields and the
regulation of allowances may be determined by you, sitting at your ease.

14\. 'Although the territory of T'Ang is narrow and small, yet there
must be in it men of a superior grade, and there must be in it
country-men. If there were not men of a superior grade, there would be
none to rule the country-men. If there were not country-men, there would
be none to support the men of superior grade.

15\. 'I would ask you, in the remoter districts, observing the
nine-squares division, to reserve one division to be cultivated on the
system of mutual aid, and in the more central parts of the kingdom, to
make the people pay for themselves a tenth part of their produce.

16\. 'From the highest officers down to the lowest, each one must have
his holy field, consisting of fifty mâu.

17\. 'Let the supernumerary males have their twenty-five mâu.

18\. 'On occasions of death, or removal from one dwelling to another,
there will be no quitting the district. In the fields of a district,
those who belong to the same nine squares render all friendly offices to
one another in their going out and coming in, aid one another in keeping
watch and ward, and sustain one another in sickness. Thus the people are
brought to live in affection and harmony.

19\. 'A square lî covers nine squares of land, which nine squares
contain nine hundred mâu. The central square is the public field, and
eight families, each having its private hundred mâu, cultivate in common
the public field. And not till the public work is finished, may they
presume to attend to their private affairs. This is the way by which the
country-men are distinguished from those of a superior grade.

20\. 'Those are the great outlines of the system. Happily to modify and
adapt it depends on the prince and you.'
