[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc18)  [Next](menc20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 19

1\. Mencius said, 'Po-î would not allow his eyes to look on a bad sight,
nor his ears to listen to a bad sound. He would not serve a prince whom
he did not approve, nor command a people whom he did not esteem. In a
time of good government he took office, and on the occurrence of
confusion he retired. He could not bear to dwell either in a court from
which a lawless government emanated, or among lawless people. He
considered his being in the same place with a villager, as if he were to
sit amid mud and coals with his court robes and court cap. In the time
of Châu he dwelt on the shores of the North sea, waiting the
purification of the kingdom. Therefore when men now hear the character
of Po-î, the corrupt become pure, and the weak acquire determination.

2\. 'Î Yin said, "Whom may I not serve? My serving him makes him my
sovereign. What people may I not command? My commanding them makes them
my people." In a time of good government he took office, and when
confusion prevailed, he also took office. He said, "Heaven's plan in the
production of mankind is this:-- that they who are first informed should
instruct those who are later in being informed, and they who first
apprehend principles should instruct those who are slower in doing so. I
am the one of Heaven's people who has first apprehended;-- I will take
these principles and instruct the people in them." He thought that among
all the people of the kingdom, even the common men and women, if there
were any who did not share in the enjoyment of such benefits as Yâo and
Shun conferred, it was as if he himself pushed them into a ditch;-- for
he took upon himself the heavy charge of the kingdom.

3\. 'Hûi of Liû-hsiâ was not ashamed to serve an impure prince, nor did
he think it low to be an inferior officer. When advanced to employment,
he did not conceal his virtue, but made it a point to carry out his
principles. When dismissed and left without office, he did not murmur.
When straitened by poverty, he did not grieve. When thrown into the
company of village people, he was quite at ease and could not bear to
leave them. He had a saying, "You are you, and I am I. Although you
stand by my side with breast and arms bare, or with your body naked, how
can you defile me?" Therefore when men now hear the character of Hûi of
Liü-hsiâ, the mean become generous, and the niggardly become liberal.

4\. 'When Confucius was leaving Ch'î, he strained off with his hand the
water in which his rice was being rinsed, took the rice, and went away.
When he left Lû, he said, "I will set out by-and-by:"-- it was right he
should leave the country of his parents in this way. When it was proper
to go away quickly, he did so; when it was proper to delay, he did so;
when it was proper to keep in retirement, he did so; when it was proper
to go into office, he did so:-- this was Confucius.'

5\. Mencius said,'Po-î among the sages was the pure one; Î Yin was the
one most inclined to take office; Hûi of Liû-hsiâ was the accommodating
one; and Confucius was the timeous one.

6\. 'In Confucius we have what is called a complete concert. A complete
concert is when the large bell proclaims the commencement of the music,
and the ringing stone proclaims its close. The metal sound commences the
blended harmony of all the instruments, and the winding up with the
stone terminates that blended harmony. The commencing that harmony is
the work of wisdom. The terminating it is the work of sageness.

7\. 'As a comparison for wisdom, we may liken it to skill, and as a
comparison for sageness, we may liken it to strength;-- as in the case
of shooting at a mark a hundred paces distant. That you reach it is
owing to your strength, but that you hit the mark is not owing to your
strength.'

1\. Pêi-kung Î asked Mencius, saying, 'What was the arrangement of
dignities and emoluments determined by the House of Châu?'

2\. Mencius replied, 'The particulars of that arrangement cannot be
learned, for the princes, disliking them as injurious to themselves,
have all made away with the records of them. Still I have learned the
general outline of them.

3\. 'The S<span class="small01">ON OF</span> H<span
class="small01">EAVEN </span> constituted one dignity; the <span
class="small01">KUNG</span> one; the <span class="small01">HÂU</span>
one; the <span class="small01">PÂI</span> one; and the <span
class="small01">TSZE</span> and the <span class="small01">NAN</span>
each one of equal rank:-- altogether making five degrees of rank. The
<span class="small01">RULER</span> again constituted one dignity; the
<span class="small01">CHIEF MINISTER</span> one; the <span
class="small01">GREAT OFFICERS</span> one; the <span
class="small01">SCHOLARS OF THE FIRST CLASS</span> one; <span
class="small01">THOSE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS</span> one; and <span
class="small01">THOSE OF THE LOWEST CLASS</span> one:-- altogether
making six degrees of dignity.

4\. 'To the Son of Heaven there was allotted a territory of a thousand
lî square. A Kung and a Hâu had each a hundred lî square. A Pâi had
seventy lî, and a Tsze and a Nan had each fifty lî. The assignments
altogether were of four amounts. Where the territory did not amount to
fiftylî, the chief could not have access himself to the Son of Heaven.
His land was attached to some Hâu-ship, and was called a <span
class="small01">FÛ-YUNG</span>.

5\. 'The Chief ministers of the Son of Heaven received an amount of
territory equal to that of a Hâu; a Great officer received as much as a
Pâi; and a scholar of the first class as much as a Tsze or a Nan.

6\. 'In a great State, where the territory was a hundred lî square, the
ruler had ten times as much income as his Chief ministers; a Chief
minister four times as much as a Great officer; a Great officer twice as
much as a scholar of the first class; a scholar of the first class twice
as much as one of the middle; a scholar of the middle class twice as
much as one of the lowest; the scholars of the lowest class, and such of
the common people as were employed about the government offices, had for
their emolument as much as was equal to what they would have made by
tilling the fields.

7\. 'In a State of the next order, where the territory was seventy lî
square, the ruler had ten times as much revenue as his Chief minister; a
Chief minister three times as much as a Great officer; a Great officer
twice as much as a scholar of the first class; a scholar of the first
class twice as much as one of the middle; a scholar of the middle class
twice as much as one of the lowest; the scholars of the lowest class,
and such of the common people as were employed about the government
offices, had for their emolument as much as was equal to what they would
have made by tilling the fields.

8\. 'In a small State, where the territory was fifty lî square, the
ruler had ten times as much revenue as his Chief minister; a Chief
minister had twice as much as a Great officer; a Great officer twice as
much as a scholar of the highest class; a scholar of the highest class
twice as much as one of the middle; a scholar of the middle class twice
as much as one of the lowest; scholars of the lowest class, and such of
the common people as were employed about the government offices, had the
same emolument;-- as much, namely, as was equal to what they would have
made by tilling the fields.

9\. 'As to those who tilled the fields, each husbandman received a
hundred mâu. When those mâu were manured, the best husbandmen of the
highest class supported nine individuals, and those ranking next to them
supported eight. The best husbandmen of the second class supported seven
individuals, and those ranking next to them supported six; while
husbandmen of the lowest class only supported five. The salaries of the
common people who were employed about the government offices were
regulated according to these differences.'

1\. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, 'I venture to ask the principles of
friendship.' Mencius replied, 'Friendship should be maintained without
any presumption on the ground of one's superior age, or station, or the
circumstances of his relatives. Friendship with a man is friendship with
his virtue, and does not admit of assumptions of superiority.

2\. 'There was Mang Hsien, chief of a family of a hundred chariots. He
had five friends, namely, Yo-chang Chiû, Mû Chung, and three others
whose names I have forgotten. With those five men Hsien maintained a
friendship, because they thought nothing about his family. If they had
thought about his family, he would not have maintained his friendship
with them.

3\. 'Not only has the chief of a family of a hundred chariots acted
thus. The same thing was exemplified by the sovereign of a small State.
The duke Hûi of Pî said, "I treat Tsze-sze as my Teacher, and Yen Pan as
my Friend. As to Wang Shun and Ch'ang Hsî, they serve me."

4\. 'Not only has the sovereign of a small State acted thus. The same
thing has been exemplified by the sovereign of a large State. There was
the duke P'ing of Tsin with Hâi T'ang:-- when T'ang told him to come
into his house, he came; when he told him to be seated, he sat; when he
told him to eat, he ate. There might only be coarse rice and soup of
vegetables, but he always ate his fill, not daring to do otherwise.
Here, however, he stopped, and went no farther. He did not call him to
share any of Heaven's places, or to govern any of Heaven's offices, or
to partake of any of Heaven's emoluments. His conduct was but a
scholar's honouring virtue and talents, not the honouring them proper to
a king or a duke.

5\. 'Shun went up to court and saw the sovereign, who lodged him as his
son-in-law in the second palace. The sovereign also enjoyed there Shun's
hospitality. Alternately he was host and guest. Here was the sovereign
maintaining friendship with a private man.

6\. Respect shown by inferiors to superiors is called giving to the
noble the observance due to rank. Respect shown by superiors to
inferiors is called giving honour to talents and virtue. The rightness
in each case is the same.'

1\. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, 'I venture to ask what feeling of
the mind is expressed in the presents of friendship?' Mencius replied,
'The feeling of respect.'

2\. 'How is it,' pursued Chang, 'that the declining a present is
accounted disrespectful?' The answer was, 'When one of honourable rank
presents a gift, to say in the mind, "Was the way in which he got this
righteous or not? I must know this before I can receive it;"-- this is
deemed disrespectful, and therefore presents are not declined.'

3\. Wan Chang asked again, 'When one does not take on him in so many
express words to refuse the gift, but having declined it in his heart,
saying, "It was taken by him unrighteously from the people," and then
assigns some other reason for not receiving it;-- is not this a proper
course?' Mencius said, 'When the donor offers it on a ground of reason,
and his manner of doing so is according to propriety;-- in such a case
Confucius would have received it.'

4\. Wan Chang said, 'Here now is one who stops and robs people outside
the gates of the city. He offers his gift on a ground of reason, and
does so in a manner according to propriety;-- would the reception of it
so acquired by robbery be proper?' Mencius replied, 'It would not be
proper. in "The Announcement to Kang" it is said, "When men kill others,
and roll over their bodies to take their property, being reckless and
fearless of death, among all the people there are none but detest
them:"-- thus, such characters are to be put to death, without waiting
to give them warning. Yin received this rule from Hsiâ and Châu received
it from Yin. It cannot be questioned, and to the present day is clearly
acknowledged. How can the grift of a robber be received?'

5\. Chang said, 'The princes of the present day take from their people
just as a robber despoils his victim. Yet if they put a good face of
propriety on their gifts, then the superior man receives them. I venture
to ask how you explain this.' Mencius answered, 'Do you think that, if
there should arise a truly royal sovereign, he would collect the princes
of the present day, and put them all to death? Or would he admonish
them, and then, on their not changing their ways, put them to death?
Indeed, to call every one who takes what does not properly belong to him
a robber, is pushing a point of resemblance to the utmost, and insisting
on the most refined idea of righteousness. When Confucius was in office
in Lû, the people struggled together for the game taken in hunting, and
he also did the same. If that struggling for the captured game was
proper, how much more may the gifts of the princes be received!'

6\. Chang urged, 'Then are we to suppose that when Confucius held
office, it was not with the view to carry his doctrines into practice?'
'It was with that view,' Mencius replied, and Chang rejoined, 'If the
practice of his doctrines was his business, what had he to do with that
struggling for the captured game?' Mencius said, 'Confucius first
rectified his vessels of sacrifice according to the registers, and did
not fill them so rectified with food gathered from every quarter.' 'But
why did he not go away?' He wished to make a trial of carrying his
doctrines into practice. When that trial was sufficient to show that
they could be practised and they were still not practised, then he went
away, and thus it was that he never completed in any State a residence
of three years.

7\. 'Confucius took office when he saw that the practice of his
doctrines was likely; he took office when his reception was proper; he
took office when he was supported by the State. In the case of his
relation to Chî Hwan, he took office, seeing that the practice of his
doctrines was likely. With the duke Ling of Wei he took office, because
his reception was proper. With the duke Hsiâo of Wei he took office,
because he was maintained by the State.'
