<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tawo09)  [Next](tawo11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T8B0/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tales of Wonder*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1916\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f08"></span>

The Loot of Loma

Coming back laden with the loot of Loma, the four tall men looked
earnestly to the right; to the left they durst not, for the precipice
there that had been with them so long went sickly down on to a bank of
clouds, and how much further below that only their fears could say.

Loma lay smoking, a city of ruin, behind them, all its defenders dead;
there was no one left to pursue them, and yet their Indian instincts
told them that all was scarcely well. They had gone three days along
that narrow ledge: mountain quite smooth, incredible, above them, and
precipice as smooth and as far below. It was chilly there in the
mountains; at night a stream or a wind in the gloom of the chasm below
them went like a whisper; the stillness of all things else began to wear
the nerve—an enemy's howl would have braced them; they began to wish
their perilous path were wider, they began to wish that they had not
sacked Loma.

Had that path been any wider the sacking of Loma must indeed have been
harder for them, for the citizens must have fortified the city but that
the awful narrowness of that ten-league pass of the hills had made their
crag-surrounded city secure. And at last an Indian had said, "Come, let
us sack it." Grimly they laughed in the wigwams. Only the eagles, they
said, had ever seen it, its hoard of emeralds and its golden gods; and
one had said he would reach it, and they answered, "Only the eagles."

It was Laughing Face who said it, and who gathered thirty braves and led
them into Loma with their tomahawks and their bows; there were only four
left now, but they had the loot of Loma on a mule. They had four golden
gods, a hundred emeralds, fifty-two rubies, a large silver gong, two
sticks of malachite with amethyst handles for holding incense at
religious feasts, four beakers one foot high, each carved from a
rose-quartz crystal; a little coffer carved out of two diamonds, and
(had they but known it) the written curse of a priest. It was written on
parchment in an unknown tongue, and had been slipped in with the loot by
a dying hand.

From either end of that narrow, terrible ledge the third night was
closing in; it was dropping down on them from the heights of the
mountain and slipping up to them out of the abyss, the third night since
Loma blazed and they had left it. Three more days of tramping should
bring them in triumph home, and yet their instincts said that all was
scarcely well. We who sit at home and draw the blinds and shut the
shutters as soon as night appears, who gather round the fire when the
wind is wild, who pray at regular seasons and in familiar shrines, know
little of the demoniac look of night when it is filled with curses of
false, infuriated gods. Such a night was this. Though in the heights the
fleecy clouds were idle, yet the wind was stirring mournfully in the
abyss and moaning as it stirred, unhappily at first and full of sorrow;
but as day turned away from that awful path a very definite menace
entered its voice which fast grew louder and louder, and night came on
with a long howl. Shadows repeatedly passed over the stars, and then a
mist fell swiftly, as though there were something suddenly to be done
and utterly to be hidden, as in very truth there was.

And in the chill of that mist the four tall men prayed to their totems,
the whimsical wooden figures that stood so far away, watching the
pleasant wigwams; the firelight even now would be dancing over their
faces, while there would come to their ears delectable tales of war.
They halted upon the pass and prayed, and waited for any sign. For a
man's totem may be in the likeness perhaps of an otter, and a man may
pray, and if his totem be placable and watching over his man a noise may
be heard at once like the noise that the otter makes, though it be but a
stone that falls on another stone; and the noise is a sign. The four
men's totems that stood so far away were in the likeness of the coney,
the bear, the heron, and the lizard. They waited, and no sign came. With
all the noises of the wind in the abyss, no noise was like the thump
that the coney makes, nor the bear's growl, nor the heron's screech, nor
the rustle of the lizard in the reeds.

It seemed that the wind was saying something over and over again, and
that that thing was evil. They prayed again to their totems, and no sign
came. And then they knew that there was some power that night that was
prevailing against the pleasant carvings on painted poles of wood with
the firelight on their faces so far away. Now it was clear that the wind
was saying something, some very, very dreadful thing in a tongue that
they did not know. They listened, but they could not tell what it said.
Nobody could have said from seeing their faces how much the four tall
men desired the wigwams again, desired the camp-fire and the tales of
war and the benignant totems that listened and smiled in the dusk:
nobody could have seen how well they knew that this was no common night
or wholesome mist.

When at last no answer came nor any sign from their totems, they pulled
out of the bag those golden gods that Loma gave not up except in flames
and when all her men were dead. They had large ruby eyes and emerald
tongues. They set them down upon that mountain pass, the cross-legged
idols with their emerald tongues; and having placed between them a few
decent yards, as it seemed meet there should be between gods and men,
they bowed them down and prayed in their desperate straits in that dank,
ominous night to the gods they had wronged, for it seemed that there was
a vengeance upon the hills and that they would scarce escape, as the
wind knew well. And the gods laughed, all four, and wagged their emerald
tongues; the Indians saw them, though the night had fallen and though
the mist was low. The four tall men leaped up at once from their knees
and would have left the gods upon the pass but that they feared some
hunter of their tribe might one day find them and say of Laughing Face,
"He fled and left behind his golden gods," and sell the gold and come
with his wealth to the wigwams and be greater than Laughing Face and his
three men. And then they would have cast the gods away, down the abyss,
with their eyes and their emerald tongues, but they knew that enough
already they had wronged Loma's gods, and feared that vengeance enough
was waiting them on the hills. So they packed them back in the bag on
the frightened mule, the bag that held the curse they knew nothing of,
and so pushed on into the menacing night. Till midnight they plodded on
and would not sleep; grimmer and grimmer grew the look of the night, and
the wind more full of meaning, and the mule knew and trembled, and it
seemed that the wind knew, too, as did the instincts of those four tall
men, though they could not reason it out, try how they would.

And though the squaws waited long where the pass winds out of the
mountains, near where the wigwams are upon the plains, the wigwams and
the totems and the fire, and though they watched by day, and for many
nights uttered familiar calls, still did they never see those four tall
men emerge out of the mountains any more, even though they prayed to
their totems upon their painted poles; but the curse in the mystical
writing that they had unknown in their bag worked there on that lonely
pass six leagues from the ruins of Loma, and nobody can tell us what it
was.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Secret of the Sea](tawo11)

</div>
