<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tawo05)  [Next](tawo07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T8B0/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tales of Wonder*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1916\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f04"></span>

Why the Milkman Shudders When He Perceives the Dawn

In the Hall of the Ancient Company of Milkmen round the great fireplace
at the end, when the winter logs are burning and all the craft are
assembled they tell to-day, as their grandfathers told before them, why
the milkman shudders when he perceives the dawn.

When dawn comes creeping over the edges of hills, peers through the
tree-trunks making wonderful shadows, touches the tops of tall columns
of smoke going up from awakening cottages in the valleys, and breaks all
golden over Kentish fields, when going on tip-toe thence it comes to the
walls of London and slips all shyly up those gloomy streets the milkman
perceives it and shudders.

A man may be a Milkman's Working Apprentice, may know what borax is and
how to mix it, yet not for that is the story told to him. There are five
men alone that tell that story, five men appointed by the Master of the
Company, by whom each place is filled as it falls vacant, and if you do
not hear it from one of them you hear the story from no one and so can
never know why the milkman shudders when he perceives the dawn.

It is the way of one of these five men, greybeards all and milkmen from
infancy, to rub his hands by the fire when the great logs burn, and to
settle himself more easily in his chair, perhaps to sip some drink far
other than milk, then to look round to see that none are there to whom
it would not be fitting the tale should be told and, looking from face
to face and seeing none but the men of the Ancient Company, and
questioning mutely the rest of the five with his eyes, if some of the
five be there, and receiving their permission, to cough and to tell the
tale. And a great hush falls in the Hall of the Ancient Company, and
something about the shape of the roof and the rafters makes the tale
resonant all down the hall so that the youngest hears it far away from
the fire and knows, and dreams of the day when perhaps he will tell
himself why the milkman shudders when he perceives the dawn.

Not as one tells some casual fact is it told, nor is it commented on
from man to man, but it is told by that great fire only and when the
occasion and the stillness of the room and the merit of the wine and the
profit of all seem to warrant it in the opinion of the five deputed men:
then does one of them tell it, as I have said, not heralded by any
master of ceremonies but as though it arose out of the warmth of the
fire before which his knotted hands would chance to be; not a thing
learned by rote, but told differently by each teller, and differently
according to his mood, yet never has one of them dared to alter its
salient points, there is none so base among the Company of Milkmen. The
Company of Powderers for the Face know of this story and have envied it,
the Worthy Company of Chin-Barbers, and the Company of Whiskerers; but
none have heard it in the Milkmen's Hall, through whose wall no rumour
of the secret goes, and though they have invented tales of their own
Antiquity mocks them.

This mellow story was ripe with honourable years when milkmen wore
beaver hats, its origin was still mysterious when smocks were the vogue,
men asked one another when Stuarts were on the throne (and only the
Ancient Company knew the answer) why the milkman shudders when he
perceives the dawn. It is all for envy of this tale's reputation that
the Company of Powderers for the Face have invented the tale that they
too tell of an evening, "Why the Dog Barks when he hears the step of the
Baker"; and because probably all men know that tale the Company of the
Powderers for the Face have dared to consider it famous. Yet it lacks
mystery and is not ancient, is not fortified with classical allusion,
has no secret lore, is common to all who care for an idle tale, and
shares with "The Wars of the Elves," the Calf-butcher's tale, and "The
Story of the Unicorn and the Rose," which is the tale of the Company of
Horse-drivers, their obvious inferiority.

But unlike all these tales so new to time, and many another that the
last two centuries tell, the tale that the milkmen tell ripples wisely
on, so full of quotation from the profoundest writers, so full of
recondite allusion, so deeply tinged with all the wisdom of man and
instructive with the experience of all times that they that hear it in
the Milkmen's Hall as they interpret allusion after allusion and trace
obscure quotation lose idle curiosity and forget to question why the
milkman shudders when he perceives the dawn.

You also, O my reader, give not yourself up to curiosity. Consider of
how many it is the bane. Would you to gratify this tear away the mystery
from the Milkmen's Hall and wrong the Ancient Company of Milkmen? Would
they if all the world knew it and it became a common thing to tell that
tale any more that they have told for the last four hundred years?
Rather a silence would settle upon their hall and a universal regret for
the ancient tale and the ancient winter evenings. And though curiosity
were a proper consideration yet even then this is not the proper place
nor this the proper occasion for the Tale. For the proper place is only
the Milkmen's Hall and the proper occasion only when logs burn well and
when wine has been deeply drunken, then when the candles were burning
well in long rows down to the dimness, down to the darkness and mystery
that lie at the end of the hall, then were you one of the Company, and
were I one of the five, would I rise from my seat by the fireside and
tell you with all the embellishments that it has gleaned from the ages
that story that is the heirloom of the milkmen. And the long candles
would burn lower and lower and gutter and gutter away till they
liquefied in their sockets, and draughts would blow from the shadowy end
of the hall stronger and stronger till the shadows came after them, and
still I would hold you with that treasured story, not by any wit of mine
but all for the sake of its glamour and the times out of which it came;
one by one the candles would flare and die and, when all were gone, by
the light of ominous sparks when each milkman's face looks fearful to
his fellow, you would know, as now you cannot, why the milkman shudders
when he perceives the dawn.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bad Old Woman in Black](tawo07)

</div>
