<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tawo02)  [Next](tawo04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T8B0/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Tales of Wonder*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1916\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f01"></span>

A Tale of London

"Come," said the Sultan to his hasheesh-eater in the very furthest lands
that know Bagdad, "dream to me now of London."

And the hasheesh-eater made a low obeisance and seated himself
cross-legged upon a purple cushion broidered with golden poppies, on the
floor, beside an ivory bowl where the hasheesh was, and having eaten
liberally of the hasheesh blinked seven times and spoke thus:

"O Friend of God, know then that London is the desiderate town even of
all Earth's cities. Its houses are of ebony and cedar which they roof
with thin copper plates that the hand of Time turns green. They have
golden balconies in which amethysts are where they sit and watch the
sunset. Musicians in the gloaming steal softly along the ways; unheard
their feet fall on the white sea-sand with which those ways are strewn,
and in the darkness suddenly they play on dulcimers and instruments with
strings. Then are there murmurs in the balconies praising their skill,
then are there bracelets cast down to them for reward and golden
necklaces and even pearls.

"Indeed but the city is fair; there is by the sandy ways a paving all
alabaster, and the lanterns along it are of chrysoprase, all night long
they shine green, but of amethyst are the lanterns of the balconies.

"As the musicians go along the ways dancers gather about them and dance
upon the alabaster pavings, for joy and not for hire. Sometimes a window
opens far up in an ebony palace and a wreath is cast down to a dancer or
orchids showered upon them.

"Indeed of many cities have I dreamt but of none fairer, through many
marble metropolitan gates hasheesh has led me, but London is its secret,
the last gate of all; the ivory bowl has nothing more to show. And
indeed even now the imps that crawl behind me and that will not let me
be are plucking me by the elbow and bidding my spirit return, for well
they know that I have seen too much. 'No, not London,' they say; and
therefore I will speak of some other city, a city of some less
mysterious land, and anger not the imps with forbidden things. I will
speak of Persepolis or famous Thebes."

A shade of annoyance crossed the Sultan's face, a look of thunder that
you had scarcely seen, but in those lands they watched his visage well,
and though his spirit was wandering far away and his eyes were bleared
with hasheesh yet that storyteller there and then perceived the look
that was death, and sent his spirit back at once to London as a man runs
into his house when the thunder comes.

"And therefore," he continued, "in the desiderate city, in London, all
their camels are pure white. Remarkable is the swiftness of their
horses, that draw their chariots that are of ivory along those sandy
ways and that are of surpassing lightness, they have little bells of
silver upon their horses' heads. O Friend of God, if you perceived their
merchants! The glory of their dresses in the noonday! They are no less
gorgeous than those butterflies that float about their streets. They
have overcloaks of green and vestments of azure, huge purple flowers
blaze on their overcloaks, the work of cunning needles, the centres of
the flowers are of gold and the petals of purple. All their hats are
black—" ("No, no," said the Sultan)—"but irises are set about the brims,
and green plumes float above the crowns of them.

"They have a river that is named the Thames, on it their ships go up
with violet sails bringing incense for the braziers that perfume the
streets, new songs exchanged for gold with alien tribes, raw silver for
the statues of their heroes, gold to make balconies where the women sit,
great sapphires to reward their poets with, the secrets of old cities
and strange lands, the earning of the dwellers in far isles, emeralds,
diamonds, and the hoards of the sea. And whenever a ship comes into port
and furls its violet sails and the news spreads through London that she
has come, then all the merchants go down to the river to barter, and all
day long the chariots whirl through the streets, and the sound of their
going is a mighty roar all day until evening, their roar is even like—"

"Not so," said the Sultan.

"Truth is not hidden from the Friend of God," replied the
hasheesh-eater, "I have erred being drunken with the hasheesh, for in
the desiderate city, even in London, so thick upon the ways is the white
sea-sand with which the city glimmers that no sound comes from the path
of the charioteers, but they go softly like a light sea-wind." ("It is
well," said the Sultan.) "They go softly down to the port where the
vessels are, and the merchandise in from the sea, amongst the wonders
that the sailors show, on land by the high ships, and softly they go
though swiftly at evening back to their homes.

"O would that the Munificent, the Illustrious, the Friend of God, had
even seen these things, had seen the jewellers with their empty baskets,
bargaining there by the ships, when the barrels of emeralds came up from
the hold. Or would that he had seen the fountains there in silver basins
in the midst of the ways. I have seen small spires upon their ebony
houses and the spires were all of gold, birds strutted there upon the
copper roofs from golden spire to spire that have no equal for splendour
in all the woods of the world. And over London the desiderate city the
sky is so deep a blue that by this alone the traveller may know where he
has come, and may end his fortunate journey. Nor yet for any colour of
the sky is there too great heat in London, for along its ways a wind
blows always from the South gently and cools the city.

"Such, O Friend of God, is indeed the city of London, lying very far off
on the yonder side of Bagdad, without a peer for beauty or excellence of
its ways among the towns of the earth or cities of song; and even so, as
I have told, its fortunate citizens dwell, with their hearts ever
devising beautiful things and from the beauty of their own fair work
that is more abundant around them every year, receiving new inspirations
to work things more beautiful yet."

"And is their government good?" the Sultan said.

"It is most good," said the hasheesh-eater, and fell backwards upon the
floor.

He lay thus and was silent. And when the Sultan perceived he would speak
no more that night he smiled and lightly applauded.

And there was envy in that palace, in lands beyond Bagdad, of all that
dwell in London.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirteen at Table](tawo04.md)

</div>
