<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tawo19)  [Next](tawo21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T8B0/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tales of Wonder*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1916\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f18"></span>

The Exiles Club

It was an evening party; and something someone had said to me had
started me talking about a subject that to me is full of fascination,
the subject of old religions, forsaken gods. The truth (for all
religions have some of it), the wisdom, the beauty, of the religions of
countries to which I travel have not the same appeal for me; for one
only notices in them their tyranny and intolerance and the abject
servitude that they claim from thought; but when a dynasty has been
dethroned in heaven and goes forgotten and outcast even among men, one's
eyes no longer dazzled by its power find something very wistful in the
faces of fallen gods suppliant to be remembered, something almost
tearfully beautiful, like a long warm summer twilight fading gently away
after some day memorable in the story of earthly wars. Between what
Zeus, for instance, has been once and the half-remembered tale he is
today there lies a space so great that there is no change of fortune
known to man whereby we may measure the height down which he has fallen.
And it is the same with many another god at whom once the ages trembled
and the twentieth century treats as an old wives' tale. The fortitude
that such a fall demands is surely more than human.

Some such things as these I was saying, and being upon a subject that
much attracts me I possibly spoke too loudly, certainly I was not aware
that standing close behind me was no less a person than the ex-King of
Eritivaria, the thirty islands of the East, or I would have moderated my
voice and moved away a little to give him more room. I was not aware of
his presence until his satellite, one who had fallen with him into exile
but still revolved about him, told me that his master desired to know
me; and so to my surprise I was presented though neither of them even
knew my name. And that was how I came to be invited by the ex-King to
dine at his club.

At the time I could only account for his wishing to know me by supposing
that he found in his own exiled condition some likeness to the fallen
fortunes of the gods of whom I talked unwitting of his presence; but now
I know that it was not of himself he was thinking when he asked me to
dine at that club.

The club would have been the most imposing building in any street in
London, but in that obscure mean quarter of London in which they had
built it it appeared unduly enormous. Lifting right up above those
grotesque houses and built in that Greek style that we call Georgian,
there was something Olympian about it. To my host an unfashionable
street could have meant nothing, through all his youth wherever he had
gone had become fashionable the moment he went there; words like the
East End could have had no meaning to him.

Whoever built that house had enormous wealth and cared nothing for
fashion, perhaps despised it. As I stood gazing at the magnificent upper
windows draped with great curtains, indistinct in the evening, on which
huge shadows flickered my host attracted my attention from the doorway,
and so I went in and met for the second time the ex-King of Eritivaria.

In front of us a stairway of rare marble led upwards, he took me through
a side-door and downstairs and we came to a banqueting-hall of great
magnificence. A long table ran up the middle of it, laid for quite
twenty people, and I noticed the peculiarity that instead of chairs
there were thrones for everyone except me, who was the only guest and
for whom there was an ordinary chair. My host explained to me when we
all sat down that everyone who belonged to that club was by rights a
king.

In fact none was permitted, he told me, to belong to the club until his
claim to a kingdom made out in writing had been examined and allowed by
those whose duty it was. The whim of a populace or the candidate's own
misrule were never considered by the investigators, nothing counted with
them but heredity and lawful descent from kings, all else was ignored.
At that table there were those who had once reigned themselves, others
lawfully claimed descent from kings that the world had forgotten, the
kingdoms claimed by some had even changed their names. Hatzgurh, the
mountain kingdom, is almost regarded as mythical.

I have seldom seen greater splendour than that long hall provided below
the level of the street. No doubt by day it was a little sombre, as all
basements are, but at night with its great crystal chandeliers, and the
glitter of heirlooms that had gone into exile, it surpassed the
splendour of palaces that have only one king. They had come to London
suddenly most of those kings, or their fathers before them, or
forefathers; some had come away from their kingdoms by night, in a light
sleigh, flogging the horses, or had galloped clear with morning over the
border, some had trudged roads for days from their capital in disguise,
yet many had had time just as they left to snatch up some small thing
without price in markets, for the sake of old times as they said, but
quite as much, I thought, with an eye to the future. And there these
treasures glittered on that long table in the banqueting-hall of the
basement of that strange club. Merely to see them was much, but to hear
their story that their owners told was to go back in fancy to epic times
on the romantic border of fable and fact, where the heroes of history
fought with the gods of myth. The famous silver horses of Gilgianza were
there climbing their sheer mountain, which they did by miraculous means
before the time of the Goths. It was not a large piece of silver but its
workmanship outrivalled the skill of the bees.

A yellow Emperor had brought out of the East a piece of that
incomparable porcelain that had made his dynasty famous though all their
deeds are forgotten, it had the exact shade of the right purple.

And there was a little golden statuette of a dragon stealing a diamond
from a lady, the dragon had the diamond in his claws, large and of the
first water. There had been a kingdom whose whole constitution and
history were founded on the legend, from which alone its kings had
claimed their right to the scepter, that a dragon stole a diamond from a
lady. When its last king left that country, because his favorite general
used a peculiar formation under the fire of artillery, he brought with
him the little ancient image that no longer proved him a king outside
that singular club.

There was the pair of amethyst cups of the turbaned King of Foo, the one
that he drank from himself, and the one that he gave to his enemies, eye
could not tell which was which.

All these things the ex-King of Eritivaria showed me, telling me a
marvelous tale of each; of his own he had brought nothing, except the
mascot that used once to sit on the top of the water tube of his
favorite motor.

I have not outlined a tenth of the splendour of that table, I had meant
to come again and examine each piece of plate and make notes of its
history; had I known that this was the last time I should wish to enter
that club I should have looked at its treasures more attentively, but
now as the wine went round and the exiles began to talk I took my eyes
from the table and listened to strange tales of their former state.

He that has seen better times has usually a poor tale to tell, some mean
and trivial thing has been his undoing, but they that dined in that
basement had mostly fallen like oaks on nights of abnormal tempest, had
fallen mightily and shaken a nation. Those who had not been kings
themselves, but claimed through an exiled ancestor, had stories to tell
of even grander disaster, history seeming to have mellowed their
dynasty's fate as moss grows over an oak a great while fallen. There
were no jealousies there as so often there are among kings, rivalry must
have ceased with the loss of their navies and armies, and they showed no
bitterness against those that had turned them out, one speaking of the
error of his Prime Minister by which he had lost his throne as "poor old
Friedrich's Heaven-sent gift of tactlessness."

They gossiped pleasantly of many things, the tittle-tattle we all had to
know when we were learning history, and many a wonderful story I might
have heard, many a side light on mysterious wars had I not made use of
one unfortunate word. That word was "upstairs."

The ex-King of Eritivaria having pointed out to me those unparalleled
heirlooms to which I have alluded, and many more besides, hospitably
asked me if there was anything else that I would care to see, he meant
the pieces of plate that they had in the cupboards, the curiously graven
swords of other princes, historic jewels, legendary seals, but I who had
had a glimpse of their marvelous staircase, whose balustrade I believed
to be solid gold and wondering why in such a stately house they chose to
dine in the basement, mentioned the word "upstairs." A profound hush
came down on the whole assembly, the hush that might greet levity in a
cathedral.

"Upstairs!" he gasped. "We cannot go upstairs."

I perceived that what I had said was an ill-chosen thing. I tried to
excuse myself but knew not how.

"Of course," I muttered, "members may not take guests upstairs."

"Members!" he said to me. "We are not the members!"

There was such reproof in his voice that I said no more, I looked at him
questioningly, perhaps my lips moved, I may have said "What are you?" A
great surprise had come on me at their attitude.

"We are the waiters," he said.

That I could not have known, here at last was honest ignorance that I
had no need to be ashamed of, the very opulence of their table denied
it.

"Then who are the members?" I asked.

Such a hush fell at that question, such a hush of genuine awe, that all
of a sudden a wild thought entered my head, a thought strange and
fantastic and terrible. I gripped my host by the wrist and hushed my
voice.

"Are they too exiles?" I asked.

Twice as he looked in my face he gravely nodded his head.

I left that club very swiftly indeed, never to see it again, scarcely
pausing to say farewell to those menial kings, and as I left the door a
great window opened far up at the top of the house and a flash of
lightning streamed from it and killed a dog.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Three Infernal Jokes](tawo21)

</div>
