[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pte04)  [Next](pte06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142863326X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays*, tr. by Charles William King,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

###### ON THE

### CESSATION OF ORACLES.

#### I.

<span class="smallcaps">Some</span> eagles, or swans, as the legend
goes, my Terentius Priscus, starting from the opposite extremities of
the earth, met together on the same point at Pythò, around what is now
called the "Omphalos:" and in later times Epimenides of Phæstos, putting
questions concerning this legend before the god of the place, and having
received an unintelligible and ambiguous response, declared that:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"There is no umbril of the land or sea:  
 God only knows, man knows not, if there be."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> With good cause,
therefore, did the god repulse him when he was testing the ancient
story, like some old painting, by the touch.

II\. Shortly before the Pythian games held under Callistratus, there
happened to be two holy men, met together from the opposite limits of
the world at Delphi, visiting me. They were Demetrius the
grammarian, <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md) returning home to Tarsus
out of Britain, and Cleombrotus the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lacedemonian,
after long wandering in Egypt, and up and down the region of the
Troglodytes, and after voyaging beyond the Red Sea—not for the purpose
of trading, but as being a person fond of seeing and fond of learning,
having sufficient wealth, and not esteeming it a matter of importance to
have *more* than sufficient, he employed his leisure for such purposes,
and was collecting information as the materials for philosophy that had,
as he himself expressed it, *Theology* for its end. Having lately been
to the temple of Ammon, he evidently had not been greatly struck with
the other things there, but with respect to the *unextinguishable Lamp*
he relates a story well deserving of attention, told him by the priests;
namely, that every year it consumes less oil, and that they took this
for a proof of the inequality \[diminution\] of the years always making
the last one shorter than that preceding it; for it was to be expected
that with a shorter time the consumption of oil would be less also.

III\. When the rest of the company expressed our astonishment, and
Demetrius had remarked "that it was ridiculous to draw such important
inferences from trifling facts; which was not, as Alcæus hath it,
'painting the lion from his talon,' but the measuring <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md) the heavens and universe with a wick and a
lamp, and utterly upsetting all mathematicks." Cleombrotus answered,
"Those people make no such attempt to upset that science: only they will
not concede the point of accuracy to the mathematicians, considering
that the calculation of time is more likely to deceive *them* in the
case of movements and revolutions

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

so far remote, than they themselves can be mistaken in the quantity of
oil, which they continually observe and watch, on account of the
singularity of the fact. And not to allow, my Demetrius, that small
things are indications of great, has often been an obstacle to
knowledge; for in that case the result will be that we shall deprive
ourselves of the demonstrations of many facts, and of the prognosticks
of many others. And yet it is no insignificant thing-which is proved to
us, namely that people in the Heroic Age used to smooth their persons
with a razor, when we find Homer mentioning a *razor;* and again,
lending on usury, for he speaks of a 'debt accumulating, neither a
recent one, nor yet a small one,' as though this signified the growth of
the obligation. Again, when he styles Night ('rapid' or 'pointed'), you
ought to be glad to lay hold upon this epithet, and say this very thing
implies the shadow of the earth to be *conical* out of spherical. The
medical art, too, foretells a sickly summer from the multitude of
spiders, <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md) and from the Spring
fig-leaves, when they grow like a crow's foot—facts omitted by none of
those that pretend small things to be the signs of great ones. And who
will have the impudence to measure the magnitude of the Sun against a
pitcher and a cup of water; <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53.md) or that
this square here, which makes what is called an *acute* angle with the
plane, should be the measurement of the altitude by which the …  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[3](#fn_54.md) always visible from the horizon is
elevated from the poles—for this fact was to be learnt from means like
these.

"This was the story told by the oracle-interpreters of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the place; wherefore those persons (the objectors) must make some other
reply to them, when they, judging according to the rule of their
fathers, pronounce that the sun's appointed course is no longer passable
by that luminary."

IV\. Ammonius the philosopher, who was present, exclaimed, "This remark
applies not to the sun alone, but to all the visible heavens; for it
follows as a matter of course that his revolution from one tropic to the
other is thereby contracted, and does not continue to be so large a part
of the horizon as the mathematicians say; but grows less, continually
suffering contraction from south to north: whilst our summer is shorter,
and the temperature colder, because he turns his course within (short
of) his proper limits, and touches wider parallels of latitude in the
tropical signs. Besides, the gnomons at Syene are proved to be no longer
without casting shadow at the summer solstice; and several of the fixed
stars have passed out of sight, whilst some touch, and are confounded
with each other, from the failure of the space between. And if you
should pretend that whilst all the rest remain as they were, only the
sun grows irregular in his motions, you <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) will neither be able to assign the cause
that accelerates his course alone out of so vast a number of others; and
you will at once throw into confusion the greatest part of astronomical
facts, those connected with the moon utterly, so that there will be no
need of measurement of oil in order to prove the discrepancy: for the
eclipses will convict him of too frequently casting a shadow on the
moon; and the moon also with her shadow … each other, so there is little
need to expose the falsity of the assertion at greater length." "But
yet," replied Cleombrotus, "I saw the measure of oil also; for they
showed me many curiosities;

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

and the annual quantity fell short of the most ancient by not a little."
But Ammonius, taking him up, said:—"Then this fact has escaped the
notice of all the other people amongst whom ever-burning fires are kept
up, and maintained for a term of years, so to speak, without limit? And
if one should assume that the story is true, were it not better to
suspect the existence of some coolness or moisture in the air, by which
the flame is deadened, and naturally does not take hold of or consume so
much nutriment; or, on the other hand, to assign heat and dryness as the
cause. For I have long ago heard say respecting fire, that it burns
better in winter through compulsion, because it is contracted and
condensed in itself by the cold, whereas during hot weather, it grows
weak, and becomes dull and relaxed: and if it be kindled in the sunshine
it works worse, and lays hold of the fuel lazily, and consumes it more
slowly. But, above all, one may ascribe the cause to the oil itself,
since it is not unlikely that in old times it was less nutritious, and
more watery, because of its coming from a young tree; but afterwards
when ripened to perfection, and condensed, with an equal quantity it
possesses more strength, and gives better nourishment to the flame—that
is, if we needs must save their theory for the priests of Ammon, however
absurd and unnatural it may appear."

V. Now Ammonius having finished, "Tell us rather," said I, "my dear
Cleombrotus, something about the oracle: for great was the ancient fame
of the religion there—but nowadays it appears to have withered away."
But as Cleombrotus made no reply, and kept his eyes fixed on the ground,
Demetrius put in:—"There is no need to inquire about this matter, or to
discuss the decay of the oracle, but rather, as we see the extinction of
them all in general, except one or two, to consider this subject—for
what reason they have so decayed. For what need is there

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

to cite other instances, when Bœotia, herself, that was so celebrated
for oracles in former times, has now failed utterly like the
water-springs, and a great drought of prophesy hath overspread the land;
for in no other place, save at Lebadeia does Bœotia, afford means to
draw from the oracular fount: as for the rest, either silence or utter
desolation has taken possession of them, and yet, at the time of the
Persian War, that of Amphiaraus was in no less repute than the one at
Lebadeia, and \[Mardonius\], as was natural, consulted both. And the
prophet of the oracle there uttered in the Æolic language a response to
the envoys of the foreigners, so that none of the holy men present
understood what he was saying: because barbarians have no partnership in
inspiration—neither is it granted unto them to receive a language that
subserves what is ordained. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) And the
slave who was sent to the temple of Amphiaraus dreamed in the usual
sleep, <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57.md) that a minister of the god
appeared, and at first drove him away by word of mouth alone, on the
score that the deity was not at home, but afterwards pushed him out with
his hands, but when he persisted in staying, the minister took up a
good-sized stone, and knocked him on the head; and these things were, as
it were the counterparts of what came to pass, for Mardonius was beaten
not by a *king*, but by the guardian and ministers of a king, who was
general of the Greeks, and was hit by a stone, and fell, in the same way
as the Lydian fancied he was struck in his sleep. At that time, too, the
oracle at Tagyrae was in a flourishing condition, at which place the
legend goes that the god (Apollo) was born; and of two brooks that flow
past, the one is called the Palm, the other the Olive-tree to this day:
and in the Persian War, Echecrates

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

being prophet there, the god predicted victory and successive war to the
Greeks. And it is said than during the Peloponnesian War an oracle from
Delphi was brought to the Delians, who had been expelled from their
native island, bidding them look out for the place where Apollo was
born, and to perform certain sacrifices there. And when they had offered
these sacrifices, and were disputing whether the god was born not
amongst themselves, but in some other place, the Pythia gave an
additional response that a *crow* would tell them the spot. They went
off therefore and arrived at Chaeronea, where they heard their landlady
talking with some guests that were going to Tagyrae, about the oracles;
and when the guests, as they were departing, saluted and addressed their
hostess by the name she was called, namely *Coronè*, the Delians
understood the meaning of the response, offered sacrifice, and obtained
permission to return home after no long time. There have also been
manifestations of the divine will at these same oracles more recent than
the above-named events, but now they are completely come to an end, so
that it were worth one's while to inquire at the Pythian oracle
respecting the cause of the change."

VI\. And now, walking forward from the Temple, we arrived at the doors
of the Hall of the Cnidians; and having passed within, we perceived the
friends to whom we were going, sitting down and waiting for us. There
was silence on the part of the others, on account of the hour, for they
were either engaged in anointing themselves, or else in looking at the
wrestlers: then Demetrius said with a smile: "Shall I be wrong, or shall
I speak truth? You appear to me to be attending to a spectacle not worth
your trouble, for I see you seated very listlessly, and with an idle air
upon your countenances." Then Heraclitus of Megara, taking him up,
replied: "Yes, for we are not seeking after the solution of the problem

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

why the verb should lose one of its two lambdas in the future tense, or
from what word in the positive the comparative χεῖρον and βελτιον, or
the superlatives χείριστον and βέλτιστον are derived; for these and such
like questions, perhaps, do contract and consolidate the face. Other
subjects you will find people inquiring into and discussing, with their
eyebrows in their proper places, and looking untroubled, and not
terrific, and not quarrelling with all present." "Admit us, therefore,"
replied Demetrius, and "in company with us follow up the question which
has just occurred to us, as being one proper for the place, and, on
account of the god, a matter of interest to all, and consider in what
way you shall not have to contract your brows in discussing the same."

VII\. As soon therefore as we had joined company and sat down amongst
them, and he had laid the question before us, then Didymus the Cynic, by
surname Planetiades, jumped up, and striking on the ground two or three
times with his staff, <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) cried out,
"Ho, ho! A difficult problem, truly, one demanding much investigation,
is what you are come to bring us: for it were a wonder, when so much
wickedness is spread abroad, if not merely Modesty and Shame (as Hesiod
said of old) should have abandoned mankind, but if the divine Providence
should not have packed up its oracles out of every quarter, and taken
its departure! On the contrary, I propose to you to inquire how it was
that oracles did not come to an end long ago, and why Hercules did not
for a second time (or else some other of the gods), steal away the
Tripod, all bewrayed as it was with filthy and impious questions that
people propound to the deity; while some make trial of his cleverness,
as though he were a sophist, and others tease him with questions about
treasure-troves, successions to property, and illegal marriages: so that

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pythagoras is most
signally confuted in saying that men are then at their best when they
are going to worship the gods: in such a way, those very thoughts and
passions of the soul, which it were but decent to disclaim and to hide,
if one's elder should be present, these same thoughts do they carry
naked and fully exposed, into the presence of the gods." And while he
was still intending to speak, Heracleon caught hold of his cloak; I too,
being about the most intimate with him of all the company, said: "Stop,
my dear Planetiades, from provoking the god, for he is irritable and not
good-tempered, for 'he has been blamed for having been angry with
mortals,' as old Pindar hath it; and whether he is the Sun, or the lord
and father of the Sun, and placed at the farthest side of the visible
creation—it is not likely he deems unworthy of his voice men as they now
are; to whom he is the source of life, of nutrition, of being, and of
thought, nor at the same time that Providence, who like a benevolent and
kind mother makes and keeps aright every thing for our benefit, should
be revengeful in the matter of oracles alone, and take the benefit away
from us, after having given it at first—just as though the greatest part
of mankind were not evil in more respects than now at the very time when
the oracles were established in many places. Come hither, pray, sit down
again, and after making a 'Pythian truce' with Vice, which you are wont
ever to chastise with your speech, assist us in seeking for some other
cause of the aforesaid cessation of oracles; but keep the god in good
humour, and exempt from blame." <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) By
saying this I effected thus much—that Planetiades walked out through the
folding-doors without saying a word.

VIII\. There was a silence for a short time, when Ammonius addressing
himself to me said, "Take heed, Lamprias, to what we are doing, and look
carefully to the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

argument, as to how we drop the god out of the case. For he that
supposes the extinct oracles to have *failed* from some other reason
otherwise than the will of the gods incurs the suspicion of believing
that they did not *arise*, nor bad their being through the agency of the
gods, but through some third means, since there is no greater and
stronger power to take away and extinguish prophecy, it being an
operation of the deity. The argument of Planetiades does not satisfy me
for many reasons, especially for the inconsistency which he imputes to
the god in his, at some places, turning his back upon Vice, and denying
it admission to his presence, whilst in other places he admits her, just
as though some king or tyrant should shut out the wicked at one door,
but admit them at the other and do business with them. But as for the
cause—the greatest, satisfactory, nowhere extravagant, everywhere
sufficient, reason, and above all others suitable to the character of
the gods, is if one should assume *this* for the final cause, and say
that in the general depopulation which the former factions and wars have
brought about over nearly all the world, *Greece* has had the largest
share, so that she, taken altogether, can hardly raise three thousand
fighting men, the same number that the single town of Megara sent to
Plateae, and that the fact, therefore, that many oracles of the gods are
become extinct is nothing else than a proof of the desolation of Greece.
I would grant him the credit of exactly hitting the mark. For what use
would be an oracle in Tegyrae, as there formerly was, or at Ptoum, where
now it would take you a good part of a day to meet a man keeping of
sheep! For certainly the latter place, though the most ancient in point
of time, and the most celebrated by fame, according to report has now
been long deserted and unapproachable in consequence of a terrible
animal, a dragon that haunts it, which they improperly assume as the
*cause*, though it is the converse, for it is the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

*desertion* that brought the creature thither, and not the creature has
caused the desertion of the place. For at what time, as it so pleased
God, Greece was strong in cities, and the place <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) was thronged with people, they used to
employ two prophetesses, sitting in turn, whilst a third was appointed
as assistant to them. At present, there is a single prophetess, and we
do not grumble, for she is amply sufficient for those that want her
services. We ought not therefore to make the god in fault, for the
oracular power <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) that still exists and
survives is sufficient for all requirements, and sends away everyone
satisfied in what they demand. Just as Agamemnon employed nine criers
and yet hardly kept the assembly in order, by reason of its greatness,
whereas you will see here in a few days’ time a single voice, in the
theatre, making itself audible to all; in the same way, in those times,
did the oracular power use more voices to speak to more people. But, on
the contrary, one would be surprised at the god's suffering prophecy to
run to waste, like so much water, or else to echo to the voices of
shepherds and their flocks in the loneliness, after the manner of the
rocks."

IX\. When Ammonius had said this, and I remained silent, Cleombrotus
addressing me, observed: "You have already conceded the point, that the
god did both establish and *abolish* these oracles here." "Not so," I
replied, "I assert that no oracle or place of prophecy is abolished
through the fault of the god, but as with many other things that she
makes and provides for us, Nature produces a wasting away and a
deprivation, or to put it better, Matter being itself a *deprivation*,
reverts to itself, and dissolves

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

what was made by the Better Cause; and thus obscurations and extinctions
of oracular powers are brought about, inasmuch as God giveth many good
things to men, but not one that is everlasting, so that 'the things of
the gods do die, but not God,' as Sophocles hath it. Their *essence* and
their *operation*, such as be knowing in Nature and in Matter ought to
investigate, their *final cause* being, as is right, reserved for God.
For it is silly, and very childish to suppose that the god, like the
ventriloquist spirits formerly called 'Eurycles' now 'Pythons,' enters
into the bodies of the prophets and makes proclamation, employing their
mouths and voices in the way of instruments; for in mixing Himself up
with human means, He does not respect His own majesty, neither does He
maintain His dignity, nor the superiority of His being."

X. Then Cleombrotus: "You say right; but since the assuming and defining
*how* and *how for* we must employ the idea of a providence, is a
difficult thing, whilst some make out the Deity to be simply the author
of nothing at all, others, of all things universally, they miss what is
reasonable and proper. Now, they say well who say that Plato having
discovered the element that is the *subject* of the existing qualities
(to which element they nowadays give the name of Matter, or Nature), has
delivered philosophers from many and great difficulties. But to me those
men appear to have solved more and greater difficulties who have made
out a family of *Dæmons*, intermediate between gods and men, and after a
certain fashion bringing together and uniting in one the society of
both; whether this doctrine belong to the Magi and the followers of
Zoroaster, or is a Thracian one coming from Orpheus, or Egyptian, or
Phrygian, as we may infer from the rites which point in either
direction, for we perceive many things belonging to death, and of
lugubrious sort in the orgies done and the ceremonies performed of the
Greeks. Homer appears to have

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

used both names indifferently, in some places calling the gods 'dæmons;'
Hesiod, however, was the first clearly and distinctly to make four
species of rational beings—gods, then dæmons 'numerous and beneficent,'
then heroes, lastly men, the demigods being ranged in the class of
heroes. Others make out a change in the bodies equally with the souls,
in the same way as water is seen to be produced from earth, air from
water, fire from air, in consequence of the essence tending upwards, so
from men to heroes, from heroes to dæmons, souls of the better kind go
through a transition. Of dæmons, some few in long process of time,
having been thoroughly purified by means of virtue, become partakers of
divinity; whilst with others it comes to pass that they do not contain
themselves, but becoming relaxed and dissolved again into mortal bodies,
they receive au existence without light and without form, like an
exhalation. But Hesiod is of opinion that after certain periods of time
dæmons themselves have an end, for he says, speaking in the person of
the Naiad and even obscurely defining the period:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Nine generations lives the noisy Crow  
 Of lusty men: four times the crow the Stag.  
 Three stags outlives the Raven: but the Phoenix  
 Nine times the raven: ten phenices we  
 The long-haired Nymphs, daughters of mighty Jove.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This space is
calculated at a vast extent of time by people incorrectly understanding
the word 'generation' (for it really means a *year*), so that they make
the total duration of the life of dæmons to be nine thousand seven
hundred and twenty years. Most mathematicians assign them a shorter
duration, none a longer. Pindar hath said in verse, 'Nymphs that have
allotted them a term of life equal to a tree's;' for which cause, too,
people call them 'Hamadryads;'" and whilst he was still speaking,
Demetrius interrupting him said, "How do you mean, Cleombrotus,

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

that 'a generation of man' means a year, for such a period is neither
that of a life that is 'young,' or that is 'old,' as some people read
the passage? But those who read 'young,' reckon the generation at
*thirty* years, according to Heraclitus, in which space of time, he who
has begotten furnishes that which has sprung from himself *capable* of
propagation in its own turn; whilst they who read 'old' in the place of
'young,' assign one hundred and eight years to a generation, on the
ground that fifty and four years are the mark of the middle of human
life, being a number made up out of unity, the two first even numbers,
two squares, and two cubes, <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) which
calculations Plato too has accepted in his 'Generation of Souls.' But
the whole story of Hesiod's seems to have an obscure allusion to the
general conflagration, when it is natural to suppose that together with
all things *moist* the Nymphs shall come to an end:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Who haunt the beauteous groves,  
 The river-fountains and the grassy meads.'"</span>

</div>

XII\. "I hear," replied Cleombrotus, "the same story from many people,
and I behold the Stoical 'general conflagration,' as it devours the
verses of Heraclitus and of Orpheus, at the same time attacking the
lines of Hesiod: but I do not put up with talk about the destruction of
the universe, and as for things impossible, particularly stories about
the Crow and the Deer.…… <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) For the
*year* <span id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64.md) does

not supply all at once within itself (its course) every thing that the
seasons bring forth, and the earth produces, neither is it called a
"generation" according to the rule

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

with mankind. For you admit, I suppose, that Hesiod calls a man's
lifetime a 'generation,' is it not so?" Demetrius assented. "But this
also is evident," Cleombrotus went on, "that both the measure and the
things measured are called by the same names: for example, the pint, the
quart, the cask, the butt, according to which rule therefore, *Unity*,
which is the smallest measure and beginning of all number, we call
'number.' In the same manner, the year by which first we measure the
life of man, the poet has styled 'a generation,' as synonymous with the
thing measured. For what those philosophers take for their numbers in
this calculation have nothing in them, as numbers, of what is considered
striking and conspicuous, whereas he has got his nine thousand seven
hundred and twenty by the product of the four numbers following, unity
being made successively four times four, these being four times squared
produce the sum specified. But on these points it is not necessary for
us to argue with Demetrius, for if the time be more or if it be less, if
it be fixed or if it be indefinite, in which the soul of a dæmon comes
to an end, and the life of a hero also, the thing at which he is aiming
will be proved for him all the same, and by testimony the most clear and
ancient, namely, that beings exist, as it were, in the intermediate
place between gods and men, that are susceptible of mortal vicissitudes
and of involuntary changes, whom it is right for us, according to the
law of our fathers, to regard as and name 'dæmons,' and to hold in
reverence.

XIII\. "As an illustration of the subject, Xenocrates the friend of
Plato, has taken the different kinds of Triangles, comparing the
*equilateral* to the divine, the *scalene* to the mortal, the
*isosceles* to the nature of dæmons. For the first is equal every way,
the second unequal every way, the third equal in one way, unequal in
another, just as the being of dæmons, which has in it mortal passions
and divine power.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And nature has
produced sensible images and visible likenesses of the gods in the sun
and stars, of men in flashes of light, comets, and falling meteors, as
Euripides hath said in his verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'The man erst sturdy, like some falling star  
 Is clean gone out, leaving his breath in air.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But as a mixed
body, and truly a copy of a dæmon, she (Nature) exhibits to us the moon,
through her resembling the revolution (cycles) of the class, and her
being subject to visible decrements, augmentations, and changes; from
seeing which, some have called her an 'earthy star,' some a 'heavenly
earth,' others the 'province of Hecate,' who is at once celestial and
infernal. For just as if one should take away the Air, and withdraw that
which is between the earth and moon, he would destroy the unity and the
connexion of the universe, because a void and disunited space would be
made in the middle; similarly they who do not admit the existence of the
order of dæmons, necessarily make gods and men out as having no
intercourse and no compact with each other, by taking away the
'interpreting and communicating being,' as Plato calls it; or else they
force us to mix up and huddle all things together by making the Deity
enter into human passions and affairs, and drawing him down to our
wants, just as the Thessalian women are said to do the moon. But the
craft of the latter received confirmation amongst women, when Aglaonice,
daughter of Hegetor, as they tell, being one skilled in astrology, did
always, during an eclipse of the moon, pretend to use enchantment and
draw her down. Let us, then, neither listen to people saying that
oracles are not divinely inspired, or that certain ceremonies and wild
rites are unheeded by the gods; nor, on the other hand, let us imagine
that the Deity goes up and down, and is present at, and assists in,
things of the sort; but as is right and proper,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

let us assign these operations to *agents*, or as it were, servants and
clerks of the gods, and believe in dæmons, presiding over the performers
in the divine rites and mysteries, whilst others go about as punishers
of the proud and mighty sinners: some of them Hesiod has styled, very
solemnly,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Of wealth the pure and sanctified bestowers,  
 Whose royal privilege is this to do,'</span>

</div>

as though doing good were part of the kingly office. For in dæmons, as
in men, there are degrees of virtue; some having but a feeble and
obscure trace, as it were a remnant, of the part subject to passion and
destitute of reason, whilst others have in them a large and scarcely
extinguishable portion of the same, the vestiges and symbols of which
ceremonies, sacrifices, and legends do in many places preserve and lock
up interspersed amongst their own proceedings."

XIV\. "Now with respect to matters belonging to the Mysteries, in which
one can obtain the plainest manifestations, and hints of the truth
respecting dæmons, 'let a bridle be set upon my tongue,' as Herodotus
hath it; but as for festivals and sacrifices, as well as inauspicious
and mourning days, upon which the eating of raw flesh, and the tearing
to pieces of victims, as also fastings and beatings of the breast are in
use, and again in many places, abusive language at the sacrifices and
other mad doings attended with tumult and head-tossing, all which I
should say they perform for the sake of no one of the gods, but for the
purpose of turning away wicked spirits, as being actions propitiatory
and soothing to the same. And the human sacrifices offered of old, it is
not credible that it was the *gods* who demanded and accepted them;
neither would kings and chiefs have vainly submitted to give up their
own children, to cut off their hair as a preliminary, and to

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

slaughter them, but that they were averting and satiating the rage of
certain malignant and hardly pacified evil genii, and satisfying of some
the furious and imperious lusts, that were neither able nor willing to
have intercourse with *living* bodies, and by the *instruments* of
bodies. But like as Hercules besieged Oechalia for the sake of a maid,
so do powerful and impetuous dæmons, when craving for a human soul yet
enveloped in a body, and unable to have intercourse with it by the
organs of the body, bring upon cities pestilences and barrenness of the
earth, and stir up wars and seditions until they get and obtain what
they lust after. Some people, on the contrary (as I observed when
spending a considerable time in Crete), celebrate an absurd festival, in
which they exhibit the headless figure of a man, and say that this was
Molos, father of Meriones, who, lying with a nymph against her will,
found himself without his head.

XV\. And again, all the stories they tell and sing of in legends and
hymns, here the rapes, there the wanderings, the hidings, and
banishments, and servitudes, are not of the gods, but are the sufferings
and vicissitudes of dæmons, converted into legends on account of the
superiority and power of these beings, and neither has Æschylus
said, <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Apollo pure, from heaven a banished god;'</span>

</div>

nor the Admetus of Sophocles,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'My consort made him labour at the mill.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the farthest
of all from the truth wander the theologians of Delphi, in believing
that the battle took place there between the god and serpent for
possession of the Oracle; and in allowing historians and poets to tell
the tale, when contending for the prize in the theatres, as though
purposely bearing witness against their own proceedings at the most
sacred rites. But when Philip (for

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the historian was present) expressed his surprise at this statement, and
inquired upon what deities <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) he
supposed the actors in the theatre declaimed? 'upon those,' replied he,
'that belong to this Oracle, into whose mysteries the city lately
initiated all the Greeks dwelling beyond Pylæ, and marched out as far as
Tempe. For the nest of faggots that is built up here around the
threshing floor every tenth year is not a memorial of the subterraneous
lurking hole of the Serpent, but of the habitation of some tyrant or
king. The procession also made to it in silence along the road called
'Doloneia,' in which they conduct, with lighted torches and in a zigzag
course (ἀίολα), the virgin with both parents living, and having set fire
to the nest, and overturning the table, they fly without looking back,
through the gates of the Temple; and finally, the wanderings up and
down, and the servitude of the boy, as also the rites of purification at
Tempe, all raise a suspicion of some great crime or atrocity thereby
implied. For it is utterly ridiculous to suppose, my good friend, that
Apollo after slaying the reptile, fled away to the other end of Greece,
seeking after purification, and caused a few pitchers to be poured over
him, and did all the other things people do when they wish to propitiate
and end the wrath of the dæmons whom they call 'Alastors' and 'avengers
of blood,' as if they were following up the recollections of some never
to-be-forgotten and antique atrocities. As for the tale I have heard
long ago about the 'Flight,' and the 'Change of place,' it is terribly
absurd and marvellous, but if it contains some portion of truth, let us
not think it was something trifling and commonplace that was done with
respect to the Oracle in those ancient times. But that I may not appear
to be as Empedocles says, 'to be fitting <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md)

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

the heads of one set of fables to another set, and not to follow one
path in my discourse,' permit me to put the proper end to the first
discussion, for now we are arrived at it; and let me be bold enough to
say, as many have already done, that together with the extinction of the
dæmons appointed to preside over oracles and places of prophecy, this
sort of thing does likewise come to an end, and '' lose their force when
the spirits aforesaid either flee from or change the place, and then,
after a long interval, when they return, the places give out a sound
like organs when those that play thereon are present and stand over
them."

XVI\. When Cleombrotus had finished thus, Heracleon said: "There is no
one present of such as be profane, uninitiated, and holding opinions
about the gods, uncongenial with your own; but yet, my dear Philip, we
must take heed to ourselves, lest we unconsciously assume absurd, and
very extravagant hypotheses to support the argument." "Well said,"
replied Philip, "but, what is it in the opinions expressed by
Cleombrotus, that particularly displeases you?" "The remark," replied
Heracleon, "that it is not the gods (whom it is right to relieve—keep
distinct—from matters pertaining to earth), but dæmons subserving to
them, seems to me a reasonable postulate enough; but to take these
dæmons, all but bodily, out of the verses of Empedocles, and impute to
these some dæmons’ sins committed, calamities endured, wanderings
imposed by heaven, and finally to suppose in their case *deaths*, as if
they were mere men, seems to me too bold and uncivilized a theory."
Hereupon, Cleombrotus inquired of Philip, who and whence the young man
was that had just spoken, and having learnt his name and country
answered: "We do not, Heracleon, conceal from ourselves that we are
fallen into a strange line of argument; but in the case of great
subjects, it is not possible, without making use of great assumptions,
to arrive at au end consistent with our

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

expectation. But you yourself do not perceive that you are retracting
what you concede, for you allow there *are* dæmons; but by your claiming
that there are none bad, nor yet subject to mortality, you no longer
keep your *dæmons;* for in what respect do they differ from *gods*, if
in regard to *essence* they possess immortality, and in regard to
*virtue*, freedom from passion and immunity from sin."

XVII\. Thereupon, whilst Heracleon was considering something with
himself in silence, Cleombrotus continued, "Nay, but not only Empedocles
has bequeathed to us evil dæmons that be evil by nature, but Plato, too,
has done the same, as well as Xenocrates and Chrysippus; besides,
Democritus, when he prays that 'he may meet with auspicious *idola*'
(apparitions), shows plainly that he knows of others that have morose
and mischievous dispositions and inclinations. But with respect to the
*mortality* of beings of the kind, I have heard a tale from a man who is
neither a fool nor an idle talker—from that Æmilian the rhetorician,
whom some of you know well; Epitherses was his father, a townsman of
mine, and a teacher of grammar. This man (the latter) said, that once
upon a time he made a voyage to Italy, and embarked on board a ship
conveying merchandise and several passengers. When it was now evening,
off the Echinad Islands, the wind dropped, and the ship, carried by the
current, was come near Paxi; most of the passengers were awake, and many
were still drinking, after having had supper. All of a sudden, a voice
was heard from the Isle of Paxi, of some one calling 'Thamus' with so
loud a cry as to fill them with amazement. This Thamus was an Egyptian
pilot, known by name to many of those on board. Called twice, he kept
silence; but on the third summons he replied to the caller, and the
latter, raising yet higher his voice, said, 'When thou comest over
against Palodes, announce that the great Pan is dead.' All, upon hearing
this, said Epitherses,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

were filled with consternation, and debated with themselves whether it
were better to do as ordered, or not to make themselves too busy, and to
let it alone. So Thamus decided that if there should be a wind he would
sail past and hold his tongue; but should there fall a calm and smooth
sea off the island, he would proclaim what he had heard. When,
therefore, they were come over against Palodes, there being neither wind
nor swell of sea, Thamus, looking out from the stern, called out to the
land what he had heard, namely, 'That the great Pan is dead:' and hardly
had he finished speaking than there was a mighty cry, not of one, but of
many voices mingled together in wondrous manner. And inasmuch as many
persons were then present, the story got spread about in Rome, and
Thamus was sent for by Tiberius Cæsar; and Tiberius gave so much
credence to the tale that he made inquiry and research concerning this
Pan; and that the learned men about him, who were numerous, conjectured
he was the one that was born from Hermes and Penelope."

Now, Philip found amongst those present witnesses to the truth of the
story, who had heard it from the aged Æmilian.

XVIII\. Demetrius said, that of the islands lying round Britain, there
were many desert, and scattered about, some of which were named after
dæmons and heroes; and that he, for the purpose of inquiry and
investigation, sailed, by the *emperor's order*, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md) to that which lay nearest of the desert
isles, which had but a few inhabitants, and those *religious* men, and
held sacred by the Britons. Just after his landing,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

there occurred a great tumult in the air, and many meteors, and blasts
of wind burst down, and whirlwinds descended. But when it was calm
again, the islanders said, that the extinction had taken place of some
one of the superior powers, for as (said they) a lamp when burning does
no harm, but being put out is noxious to many people, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md) in like manner great souls, when first
kindled, are benignant and harmless, whilst their going out and
dissolution, often, as in the present case, stirs up stormy winds, and
aërial tumults; nay, often infects the air with pestilential tendencies.
In that region also, they said, Saturn was confined in one of the
islands by Briareus, and lay asleep; for that his slumber had been
artfully produced in order to chain him, and round about him were many
dæmons for his guards and servants."

XIX\. Then Cleombrotus, taking him up, said: "I, too, have something of
the same sort to narrate, and it suffices for the supposition, that
there is nothing that is contrary to, or prevents these things being so
constituted. And yet the Stoics, we know, hold the same opinion that you
mention, not only as regards the dæmons, but also of the gods, so
numerous as they be; they keep One as the Eternal and Incorruptible, but
believe that the others are both born and die. As for the jeers and
scoffs of the Epicureans, we must by no means be afraid of *them*, for
such (weapons) they employ against Divine Providence, also making it out
to be a fable. But we say their own *ignorance* is a fable that has,
amongst so many worlds, not one that is guided by Divine order, but all
of them spontaneously created and put together. But if we must laugh in
matter of philosophy, we ought to laugh at their *spectra*, which, being
both dumb, blind, and lifeless, *where do they remain* <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70.md) during infinite periods of time? making
their appearance,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

and roaming about everywhere—*spectra* thrown off, partly from persons
yet living, partly from those long ago reduced to ashes, or mouldered
into dust, whilst their inventors drag bubbles and shadows into the
domains of Natural History, and go into a rage <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md) if any one says there *are* dæmons, not
only by nature, but by report, and that they possess the power of
preserving themselves and lasting for an immense time."

XX\. After these things had been said, Ammonius went on: "Theophrastus
seems to me to have given sentence rightly, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72.md) for what objection is there to accepting a
sentiment at once noble and in the highest degree philosophical.
Rejecting as it does many of things possible, yet not capable of being
proved, it ignores them entirely; and being accepted as a rule, will
involve many consequences, both impossible and without any shadow of
reality. The only thing, however, that I have heard Epicureans advancing
against the daemons introduced by Empedocles—'that it is not conceivable
that being wicked and liable to error, they should be at the same time
happy and long-lived, inasmuch as wickedness involves the idea of
blindness, and a liability to fall into things destructive'—is a silly
argument. For, according to this way of reasoning, Epicurus is made out
worse than Hippias the sophist, and Metrodorus than Alexis the comedian,
for the latter lived twice as long as Metrodorus, and the former above
one-third longer than Epicurus. Besides, we say that virtue is a strong
and vice a weak thing, not in reference to any durability or dissolution
of body; for amongst animals we observe many that be dull and stupid,
and again,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

others that be lascivious and untameable, live longer lives than the
intelligent and sagacious kinds. Hence, they do not well to make God's
eternity result from the guarding against and repulsion of the causes of
destruction; because the freedom from passion and from corruptibility
must necessarily exist in the nature of the Blessed One, and stand in
need of no exertion on his part. But, perhaps, to talk of people behind
their backs is not very polite; and therefore Cleombrotus, who lately
dropped the word about the 'flight and migration of dæmons,' has a right
to resume the subject."

XXI\. Then Cleombrotus: "I shall be surprised if it does not strike you
as even stranger than what has already been advanced by me; and yet it
appears to be connected with Natural History, and Plato even has allowed
its possibility—not that he has stated it directly, but from a vague
supposition, and throwing out an enigmatical hint in a cautious
manner—but, nevertheless, a great outcry was made against it by the
other philosophers, and seeing that a bowl of mingled fables and facts
is set before us, and, possibly, some one amongst our kinder listeners,
as though he had met with foreign coins, will put these same stories to
the touchstone. I do not scruple to present you with the narrative of a
man, a barbarian, whom I hardly found out after long wanderings, and
paying heavily for information, who made his appearance once every year
among the tribes living round the Red Sea, and spent the rest of his
time in company with the pastoral nymphs, and with the dæmons, as he
asserted, and with whom I obtained a conference and friendly reception.
He was the handsomest of all men to look at, lived ever free from all
disease, eating once a month the fruit of a certain herb that was like a
drug <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) and bitter to taste. He
understood

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

several languages, but to me he chiefly spake Doric, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) not far removed from poetry. Whilst he was
speaking, perfume filled the air, from his mouth sending forth the
sweetest smell. His other learning and recollections continued with him
the whole time; but as regards *prophecy* he was inspired but for one
day in each year, at which time he went down to the sea and delivered
his predictions, and nobles and secretaries of different princes flocked
to hear him, and then sailed away. His inspiration he ascribed to
dæmons. He talked with much pleasure about Delphi; as for the things
related concerning Dodona, and the rites performed there he was ignorant
of none; he said they all were the mighty workings of dæmons, and the
same respecting the Python, and that the slayer of the Python did not
suffer an exile of nine years, or to the distance of Tempe; but that
being expelled thence he went into another world, and there abode for
the revolutions of nine *Great Years*, until at length having become
pure, and really 'bright' (φοῖβος) he returned, and received possession
of the Oracle, which had in the meanwhile been taken care of by Themis.
Of the same nature was the story of Typhon; and the affair of the Titans
was only the fights of dæmons against dæmons, succeeded by the fleeing
away of the vanquished; or else the punishment taken by a god upon such
as had offended in the same way that Typhon is said to have sinned
against Osiris, and Saturn against Uranus; of both of whom the honours
have consequently become tarnished; or else these legends refer to such
as have completely migrated to another world; since I learn that the
Solymi, neighbours of the Lyceans, pay the highest honours to
Saturn; <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md) but

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

when, after killing their chiefs, Arsilas, Dryos, and Trosobeos, he fled
away, and migrated somewhere or other, (for I cannot tell you this), he
is neglected, and the Lycians call Arsilas and his companions
hard-hearted gods, and utter solemn imprecations upon this crime, both
in public and in private. Many like instances to these you can extract
out of religious legends. And if we designate dæmons by the customary
names of the gods, there is nothing to be surprised at in our so doing
(said the stranger), since to whatever god each dæmon is assigned, and
from whom he derives his power and privileges, after this one he is wont
to be called. For amongst ourselves one man is 'Diius,' another
'Athenæus,' another 'Apollonius' or 'Dionysius' or 'Hermæus,' but only
some few are by accident properly so entitled, the most part have taken
possession of the names of gods far from appropriately, in fact quite
the reverse."

XXII\. And when Cleombrotus had done speaking, his story appeared to all
a strange one. But on Heracleon's asking whereabouts in Plato these
things are to be found, and in what way *he* had afforded a foundation
for the argument, Cleombrotus replied: "You do well to remind me; for
Plato from the first acknowledged the plurality of worlds, but with
respect to their precise number he remained in doubt: and though as far
as *five* he conceded the probability, to humour such as supposed one
world for each element—yet he confined *himself* to a single one. And
this appears to be peculiar to Plato, for the others were terribly
alarmed at the notion of a plurality, as though when they did not limit
the number to *one*, but went farther, an indefinite and perplexing
infinity would take them up." "But," said I, "did the stranger decide
about the plurality of worlds in the same way as does Plato, at what
time you were in his company, <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md) or did
you

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

fail to put the question to him?" "I was not likely," replied
Cleombrotus, "not to be an inquisitive and glad hearer of his opinion
upon this subject, above all others, when he gave me the occasion, and
showed himself so well disposed. He told me, in fact, that there were
neither an infinite number of worlds, nor a single one, nor yet five,
but one hundred and eighty-three, arranged in the form of a triangle,
each side of which contains sixty worlds. Of the remaining three, one is
placed at each angle; and those in line touch each other, revolving
gently as if in a dance. The area within this triangle is the common
hearth of them all, and is named the 'Plain of Truth,' in which the
reason, the forms, and the pattern of all things that have been, and
that shall be, are stored up not to be disturbed; and as eternity dwells
around them, from thence Time, like a stream from a fountain, flows down
upon the worlds. The sight and contemplation of these things is
vouchsafed to the souls of men, once in every ten thousand years: that
is, if they shall have lived a virtuous life. The best of our initiatory
rites here below are the dreamy shadow of that spectacle, and of that
rite; and the words used therein are ingeniously devised for the purpose
of reminding us of the beauties of that place—or else are used to no
purpose at all. <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) All this did I hear
him reciting exactly as though he were so doing at some ceremony, or
rite of initiation, without offering any evidence or proof of his
statements."

XXIII\. Then I, addressing Demetrius, said: "How do the words of the
suitors run, when they are wondering at Ulysses whilst handling the
bow?" and when Demetrius had repeated them, <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md) I continued: "The very same thing

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

it occurs to me to say with respect to this stranger. Supposing he were
really some seeker after, and pillager of creeds and legends of all
sorts; one much versed in books of religion; no foreigner at all, but a
Greek by birth, and well-stocked with Grecian learning? The *number* of
his worlds betrays him, *that* being neither Egyptian nor Indian, but
Dorian, and coming out of Sicily, and the property of a man of Himera,
by name Petron. The treatise of that philosopher I have not read, nor
indeed know whether it be still extant. But Hippys of Rhegium, whom
Phaneas of Eresos quotes, bears witness that this notion and tale
belongs to Petron, that is, about there being one hundred and
eighty-three worlds, all touching one another in a row; but what this
'touching one another in a row' means, he neither explains, nor adduces
anything plausible in its support." Demetrius taking me up replied:
"What plausible argument can be found in matters of the sort, where not
even Plato would say anything reasonable or probable when he commenced
the subject." Then Heracleon: "But again, we hear you grammarians
referring your notions to Homer, as though he divided the Universe into
Five Worlds; viz., Heaven, Water, Air, Earth, Olympus: of which, two he
leaves in common; Earth, belonging to all that is below; Olympus to all
that is above; and the three in the middle are assigned unto the three
gods. In this way, then, Plato appears to connect the first and most
beautiful forms and patterns of bodies with the divisions of the
Universe, and calls them Five Worlds—viz., that of Earth, that of Water.
that of Air, that of Fire, and last, that which envelopes them
all—namely, that of the Twelve-sided figure, which is widely diffused
and versatile, <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) by which supposition,
forsooth, he has invented a figure the most appropriate and

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

congenial to the revolutions and the movements of souls." Thereupon
Demetrius: "Why do we meddle with Homer in the present case? we have had
quite enough of fables. But Plato is very far from calling the five
varieties of the universe Five Worlds—in which he is at war with those
that suppose an infinity of Worlds: in fact he says thus much—"that he
is of opinion this world is One, the sole production of God, and
satisfying Him; being generated whole, perfect, and self-sufficient out
of the entire Bodily element." Whence one may well be surprised how he,
after having told the truth, has furnished others with the grounds of a
notion equally improbable and irrational. For the very fact of not
retaining one *single* world involves somehow the hypothesis of the
*Infinity* of worlds; whilst to make them a definite number, just so
many, neither more nor less than *Five*, is exceedingly strange, and
remote from all probability—unless you have anything to say to the
contrary," he added, looking at me. "It seems then, replied I, "that so
we have thrown aside the question about Oracles as entirely concluded,
and are taking up another quite as extensive." "Not throwing aside the
former question," answered Demetrius, "but not passing over the present
one that equally claims our attention, for we will not dwell upon it,
but only sketch it out sufficiently to examine its probability, and then
pass on to the original subject of discussion."

XXIV\. "In the first place then (said I) the objections to supposing an
infinity of worlds do not preclude our supposing there is more than
*one*, for it is possible for prophecy and foreknowledge to exist in
several worlds at once, and Chance comes into the question very
slightly; whilst the greatest part of, and those the most important
things, are susceptible of birth and of change, neither of which does
infinity by its nature admit of. In the next place, it is more
consistent with reason to suppose the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

world neither to be the sole production of God, nor yet an empty one.
For as He is perfectly good, and in no one virtue wanting, least of all
in what concerns justice and love (for these are the most beautiful of
virtues and the best befitting the Godhead), and as God has nothing in
vain, or not to be put to use, then consequently must exist other Powers
and worlds outside of this, to whom he extends his communicative
virtues. For it is not upon Himself, nor upon a portion of Himself, that
the exercise of His justice, of his benevolence, or of his goodness, is
directed, but upon others; wherefore it is not probable that He is
without a friend, and without a neighbour, nor that this world tosses
about unsocially in a void infinity; since we observe that Nature also
envelopes things one by one, as it were in vessels, or in the shells of
seeds. For there is nothing in the number of things that be, neither is
there a Common Reason, (or what receives such designation,) that is not
of its own nature something acting in common with something else. Now
the world is not predicated as 'common,' but it effects whatever it is
capable of, through difference between individual parts; having itself
been created such as it is, homogeneous and of one species. And if in
Nature *a single man*, or a *single* horse has not been produced, nor
yet a *single* star, god, or dæmon—what objection is there to Nature's
containing more worlds than One? For he that says there is a single
earth overlooks what is self-evident—the circumstance of similar parts;
for we divide the Earth into parts of the same name, and the Sea in like
manner, whereas a part of the world is not a world, for the world is
made up out of different parts.

XXV\. "And again, the thing that some people especially fear, and
therefore use up the whole of Matter upon a single world, in order that
nothing may be left outside and either by its impact or its concussions
may disturb the constitution

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of *this*—there is no good cause for such apprehension. For if there be
a plurality of worlds, and each one has individually had allotted to it
an existence <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) and materials
possessing both measure and limitation, there is nothing left irregular
or disorderly, like a superfluity, to dash against it from external
space. For the Reason presiding over each world, being master of the
accumulated Matter, will allow nothing out of course or running wild, to
impinge upon another; nor yet any such accident from another world upon
itself, by reason that Nature does not admit of an unlimited and
infinite plurality, nor yet an irrational and irregular movement. And
even if any emanation is carried from one set down to another, it must
be congenial, agreeable, and mixing with them all in amicable fashion,
like the rays and union of the several stars: whilst they must be
delighted themselves in benevolently contemplating each other; whilst to
numerous and good deities presiding over each, they afford the means of
intercourse and hospitality. Nothing of all this is impossible, or
romantic, or inconceivable, unless in truth some people will regard it
with suspicion, after Aristotle's fashion, because it involves the idea
of *natural causes*. For as he says: 'In the case of bodies, when each
one has its own place, it is a necessary consequence that the Earth
tends from all parts towards the centre, and the Water in the same way,
because by its weight it sinks under the lighter particles.' If, then,
there be several worlds, it will come to pass that the Earth will be
placed frequently above the Fire and the Air, and as frequently below
them; and Water and Air will be similarly treated; in some positions
they will be in their natural places, in others in unnatural, which
supposition being impossible (as he believes) there must be neither two
nor several worlds,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

but this single One, composed out of all existence, and filled according
to Nature, as is best suited to the varieties of bodies going to its
composition.

XXVI\. "But this theory, too, is advanced more as a matter of
probability than of certainty. View the matter," said I, "my dear
Demetrius, in this manner: of bodies, some have a motion towards the
centre, and downwards, as Aristotle says, some from the centre and
upwards, others round the centre and in a circle; at what point does he
assume his *centre?* Not certainly in the vacuum, for there is no
*vacuum* according to him; for where a vacuum is, it admits of no middle
point, neither does it of first or last, for these are *limits*, but the
*infinite* is also *unlimited*. And if anyone should endeavour to prove
that it is set in motion by Reason, although it be infinite, what is the
difference in the movements of solid bodies, as compared with this? For
neither does any force of the bodies exist in the vacuum, nor do the
bodies possess any predisposition or property that tends towards the
centre, and converges towards this point from every quarter. But yet it
is impossible to conceive \[the tendency\] of bodies inanimate towards a
place incorporeal, and unaffected by them; nor how a forward motion by
them is produced, or a preponderating influence exerted by the other.
The alternative then remains, that 'centre' is used not in the sense of
*locality*, but of *body*. For as this world possesses a single unity
and constitution, made up out of many and dissimilar bodies, these
differences necessarily produce the motions of the several parts towards
each other; since it is evident that the several parts when rearranged
in their essences, will at the same time change their places also; since
their repulsion from the centre will distribute in a circle the matter
that raises itself upwards; whereas their mixing together and
condensations press the same matter down, and impel it together towards
the centre.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

XXVII\. "Upon which subjects it is not necessary to expend more words;
for if one should assume that the Creator is the author of these
liabilities and changes, this cause will confine each world within
itself; for each world contains an earth and a sea; each, also,
possesses a centre and properties and changeabilities of component
parts, and a nature, and a power that keeps in place and preserves each
one. For that which is external—whether it be nothing at all, or whether
it be an unlimited vacuum—does not afford a centre, as already stated.
And if there be several worlds, in each one there exists a centre of its
own; so that there is a movement of some bodies towards it, of others
from it, and of others around it, in what manner they themselves
determine. But he who demands that in the case of *several* centres,
weights should tend down to a *single* centre only, differs not at all
from one that should demand that in the case of several men their blood
should all flow together in a single vein from all parts; and that the
brains of all should be enveloped in one and the same membrane, because
he thinks it hard that of things corporeal and physical the solid parts
should not occupy one and the same place, and the liquid parts another!
For the latter would be absurd in his conception; and equally so the man
who makes a fuss if things collectively employ their own parts, which
have their natural position and order inherent in each of them; for it
were utterly absurd should any one assert that there is a world <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) … containing in itself the moon, just as
though a man should carry his brain in his heels and his heart in his
temples. But that in supposing several worlds distinct from each other,
you define and divide their parts in conformity with the whole, this is
not an absurdity: for in each of

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

them the earth, the sea, the sky, will remain, after its nature, in its
fitting place; also, each one of the worlds has its *above*, its
*below*, its roundabout centre, not with reference to any other world,
or to what is external, but contained in itself, and with reference to
itself.

XXVIII\. "The case they put of 'the stone outside of the world,' does
not easily present an idea either of immobility or of motion; for how
will it remain motionless, being possessed of weight, or how will it
move towards the world, like other weights, if it neither is a part
thereof, nor yet constitutionally subordinate to its nature? And as for
that (nature) which is presented, and contained within *another* world,
there were no need to discuss, how it is that it does not pass over
netherwards, detaching itself from the mass by reason of its
weight,—when we consider the nature and tension of the bonds whereby
each of the parts is kept together. Since, if we admit the ideas of
*above* and *below*, not with reference to the world itself, but as
*external* to it, we fall into the same difficulties with Epicurus, when
he makes all his 'atoms' move towards the place under his feet, just as
though the vacuum had any feet at all, or infinity allowed one to
conceive the ideas of *above* and *below* within itself. For which
reason we have cause to wonder at Chrysippus, or rather, indeed, to be
at a loss to know what possessed him when he supposed that the world is
fixed in the centre, and that its essence having taken possession of
this middle place from all eternity, has principally worked it up for
the object of stability, and as it were, for incorruptibility. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82.md) For this very thing he asserts in his
Fourth Book 'Upon Possibilities,' where he is dreaming absurdly about a
centre of infinity,' and still more preposterously ascribing the
efficient cause of the perpetuity of the world to the 'centre that has
no beginning'—

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and this, too, when he has declared in other places, and frequently
also, 'that existence is both regulated and kept together by motions
either tending towards the centre thereof, or away from the centre.'

XXIX\. "And again, who will be frightened by the objections of the
stoics, when they ask how will a single Fate and a single Providence
stand, or bow will there not be several Jupiters and several Joves if
there be a plurality of worlds? <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md) In
the first place, then, if the notion of there being several Jupiters and
Joves be absurd, surely those ideas of their own are much more absurd:
for suns, and moons, and Apollos, and Dianas, and Neptunes they suppose
in infinite numbers in their infinite revolutions of worlds. Secondly,
what absolute necessity is there for there being several Jupiters, if
there be a 'plurality of worlds; and not <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84.md) one Ruler and Director of the Whole to
each—a God possessing Reason and Intelligence, in the same way as He
that is with us, entitled Lord and Father of all?' Or what objection is
there to all these worlds being subject to the Fate and the Providence
of Jupiter, and that He should superintend and direct them in turn,
implanting in each and every one of them, final causes, and germs, and
reasons of all things that come to pass therein? For, is not one body
here below often made up out of several separate bodies—for example, a
popular assembly, an army, a chorus—to each individual of whom belongs
the faculty of living, of thinking, and of learning, as Chrysippus
believes; whilst that in the whole universe the worlds, whether fifty or
one hundred in number, should obey or follow a single Reason, and be
administered under one

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

government, is a thing impossible! But yet such a constitution as this
is exactly adapted to the Divine character. For we ought not to imagine
gods like queen-bees, never stirring from home, nor yet imprison them by
fencing them round with matter, or rather fencing them in *along* with
matter, as people do when they make out the gods to be *influences of
the atmosphere;* and when they invent powers of Water and of Fire mixed
up in the substance, and beget them along with the world; and, again,
burn them up along with it, as not being removable or free agents, like
charioteers, or pilots: but just as images are nailed up and soldered
down in spite of themselves, so do they make them out locked up in the
corporeal nature, and riveted down thereto, partners with it even so far
as its entire destruction and transformation.

XXX\. "But that opinion, I think, is the more respectable and dignified,
namely, that the gods, being immortal and independent, in the same way
as the Tyndaridae come to the aid of tempest-tossed mariners, and calm
the sea in spite of itself and the swift blasts of the winds, not that
they themselves go on board the ship, or are partakers in the peril, but
show themselves up aloft, and save it from destruction—by like manner
that the world is put under gods, a different one to each, who are
attracted by the pleasure of the spectacle, and assist Nature in the
direction of them respectively. For Homer's Jove turns his eyes, no very
great distance, from Troy to the parts of Thrace and the wandering
tribes around the Danube; but the True One enjoys beautiful and
congenial changes of sights <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md) in
numerous worlds; He does not behold an infinite vacuum, nor contemplates
Himself in solitary grandeur (as some do hold) and nothing else besides;
but looks down upon the many operations of gods and men, the motions and
courses of the stars, as they run in their

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

appointed cycles. For the Godhead is no enemy to changes—on the
contrary, He delighteth greatly therein, to judge from the alternations
and revolutions of the visible phenomena of the heavens. Now, Infinity
is entirely without judgment, and without reasoning; far from admitting
the idea of God, it presents in every direction the operations of
accident and self-will. But in a definite host and number of worlds,
Superintendence and Providence of that which has invested itself with
one body, and has been bound close to that one, and which transforms and
models the same in infinite ways, strikes me at least as presenting no
very unseemly or hardly conceivable idea."

XXXI\. Having spoken thus much I stopped; but Philip, after a short
interval, replied: "Whether the truth about these matters be so, or of a
different sort, I will not take upon myself to decide. But if we remove
the Deity out of a *single* world, <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md)
why do we suppose Him the Creator of *five* only; and what is the
argument for this restriction in their number—a thing, I ween, I should
be better pleased to learn than what was the meaning of the dedication
of the golden E in this temple? <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87.md) for
it (the number) clearly is neither triangular nor square, nor perfect
nor cubical, or presenting any other curiosity of the sort for such as
love and admire speculations of that kind; and the getting at it from
the number of the Elements, which I myself lately hinted at, is in every
way beset with difficulties, and holds out no gleam of any probability
to draw us on to assert that it is likely when five bodies with equal
angles, equal sides, and containing equal areas, are generated in
matter, as a thing of course just so many worlds must result from them."

XXXII\. "And in fact," replied I, "Theodorus of Soli;

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

seems to me to have followed out the subject in the right way, when he
is explaining the 'Mathematics' of Plato: he argues in this way: 'The
pyramid, eight-sided figure, twenty-sided, and twelve-sided, which Plato
proposes, are indeed beautiful things for the symmetry of proportions
and equality; neither is it left in the power of Nature to produce,
compose, or fit together any other figure better than, or equal to them.
At any rate, all of then have not got one and the same constitution,
neither have they a similar origin, for the most slender and simplest
figure of all is the Pyramid; the greatest, and made up of the most
parts, is the twelve-sided; of the remaining two, the twenty-sided is
twice as great as the eight-sided figure in the number of the triangles
it contains. Consequently, it is impossible they derive their origin
from one and the same matter; for the small and thin and more simple in
construction must necessarily be the first to obey whatever puts in
motion and moulds the matter, and be perfected, and get the start of the
more solid and more composite bodies, amongst which, displaying also a
more laborious construction, is the eight-sided one. It follows from
this, that the only first form is the Pyramid, but none of the rest,
inasmuch as they are inferior to it in the nature of their generation.'
There is, therefore, a remedy for this difficulty—that is, the division
and separation of matter into Five worlds—one where to place the Pyramid
(for *that* Plato assumes for the first), another for the Octohedron, a
third for the Eicosihedron. The rest will derive their generation from
the pre-existent element in each, according to the correspondence of
their particles, there being a transition of all into all, as Plato
himself hints, as he is going through nearly all the particulars: but we
prefer to prove the thing expeditiously. Since Air, when Fire is
extinguished, retires, and when rarefied again gives out Fire from
itself, we must look for the cause of these

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

properties and vicissitudes in each element. The element of Fire is the
Pyramid, <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) made up out of the
four-and-twenty primitive triangles; that of Air is the Octohedron, made
up out of eight-and-forty of the same. One element, therefore, of Air
results from two of Fire, mixed together and united; that of Air being
analysed is divided into two components of Fire, but being condensed and
compressed into itself it goes off into the form of water. So that in
all cases, the pre-existent thing readily supplies an origin from chance
to the others; and not merely is there one First element, but since a
different one possesses in a different system an initiative influence,
provocative to generation, the identity of name is maintained by the
whole."

XXXIII\. Then Ammonius: "This theory has indeed been worked out by
Theodorus with equal courage and perseverance: yet I should not be
surprised if he will be discovered to employ assumptions that are
subversive of each other. For he assumes that the combination did not
take place with all the five at once, but that the most subtile, and
what was put together with the least amount of labour, presented itself
first for birth. Next, he lays down as a necessary consequence of this,
and not as contradicting it, that matter did *not* provide all things
with the more subtile and simple principle; but that, in some cases, the
weighty and composite elements were the first to come forward in the
birth out of matter. Besides this, after five primitive substances have
been assumed, and on the strength of this assumption, the worlds being
declared to be of that same number, he employs the argument of
probability with reference to *four* only of them, and withdraws the
Cube, as is done in the game of counters, because it is not disposed by
its nature to change into

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

them, nor yet to allow them to change into itself—because, truly, all
triangles are not of the same nature, for in the former figures the
half-triangle in all is supposed empty; whereas in the latter the
isosceles triangle, being peculiar to this figure alone, makes no
inclination, or unifying conjunction with that empty space. If,
therefore, there being five worlds and five bodies (elements), that part
has the precedence of birth in which the Cube was first generated, there
will be nothing left for the rest; because there is nothing of theirs
into which the Cube is naturally disposed to change. And I say nothing
about the circumstance that they make the element of the so-called
Dodecahedron to be something else, and not the Scalene triangle out of
which Plato composes his Pyramid, Octohedron, and Eicosihedron. "For
that very reason," added Ammonius laughing, "you must either solve these
questions; or else advance something of your own with respect to the
common difficulty."

XXXIV\. Then I: "I have nothing to say that is more plausible, at least
at the moment, but still it is better to submit to an examination of
one's own opinion, than that of another's. I therefore say again, as I
said at starting, that if we suppose the existence of two Natures,—the
one Sensible in birth and destruction, subject to change and to be moved
in different directions; the other Intelligible, ever remaining the same
in the same course—it is strange that the Intelligible part should be
divided and have variety in itself, and that we should be angry and
scold if one does not leave the corporeal and passive part be one,
concordant with and converging towards its own self, but divide and
disperse the same. For things permanent and divine must surely cling
faster to themselves, and shrink as far as possible from all severance
and separation of parts, but even with these the power of the one laying
hold of something greater than itself, produces in things

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

intelligible, the dissimilarities that exist as to *cause* and *form*,
of the divisions in locality; whence Plato, in opposition to such as
make out the All to be One, declares *that which is* to be both the Same
and Different, and over all, Motion and Rest. There being then these
five figures, it were to be wondered at, if of the five corporeal
elements <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) each one had been produced
as a copy and image of each quality—not, indeed, pure and unmixed, but
participating as far as possible in each power each in its turn. For the
Cube is palpably the proper emblem of Rest; on account of the security
and firmness of the superficies: and of the Pyramid everybody will
recognize the fiery and movable character in the slenderness of its
sides, and the acuteness of its angles; the nature of the dodecahedron,
being comprehensive of the other figures, may be supposed an image of
'That which is' with reference to the corporeal part: whilst of the
remaining two, the Eicosihedron has got for its share the figure of the
'Different,' and the Octahedron the figure of the 'Same.' On this
account, he has represented in one form *Air*, which holds together all
existence; and on the other side, *Water*, which turns into the most
numerous kinds of qualities by reason of its intermixture. If,
therefore, Nature demands an equilibrium in all things, it is probable
that the worlds are neither more nor less than their patterns, in order
that each may have for each a rule of government and of power, just as
it has got in the constitutions of bodies? <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90.md)

XXXV\. "Not but that these several divisions are a consolation to him
that wonders why we divide the Nature existing in births and changes,
into so great a number of

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

species. Examine the case attentively in company with me: and observe
how that of the highest Powers (I mean the One, and the undefined Two)
that which is the element of all deformity and disorder is denominated
'infinity,' whereas the nature of the One that limits and checks <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md) the empty, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92.md) undefined, irrational nature of infinity,
renders it capable of form, and will produce it in some way or another
obedient to, and susceptible of the consequent division into categories
as regards the objects of intellect, and the Principles themselves make
their first appearance with reference to Number: or rather Number is by
no manner of means *plurality*, unless considered as a form of Matter,
that arises out of the unlimited nature of the Infinite, and is
subdivided in one place into more, in another, into fewer parts: for
then each of the pluralities becomes Number, when it is defined by the
One. But if the One be removed: then again the unlimited Two will
confuse and make the All inharmonious, unlimited, and immeasurable. For
since "Species" is not a doing away with Matter, but only a *form* and
*ordering* of the subject-matter, it is a necessary consequence that
both the Principles also should exist in Number, out of which Principles
spring the greatest difference and inequality. For the undefined
Principle is creator of the even; the better Principle of the *odd*
numbers. The first of the even numbers is the Two, the first of the odd
the Three, from the addition of which springs the Five—a number by
composition common to both, but by its power, odd. For it was a
necessary consequence of the intelligible and the Corporeal being
measured out into several parts, by reason of the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

necessity implanted in their nature for variance, that neither the first
should be even, nor the first odd but the third, made up out of them, so
that it springs from both Principles—from that which creates the even,
and that which creates the odd; since it was not possible for the one to
be separated from the other, for either of them has the nature and power
of a Principle, and when both are doubled, the Better One prevailed over
the indefiniteness that divided the Corporeal part, and stood still, and
because Matter was cut asunder between the two, this Principle placed
the unit in the middle, and did not allow the Universe to be distributed
into two parts, but the result was a plurality of worlds by means of the
variance and the difference of the indefinite part. This plurality was
rendered an uneven number by the power of the latter and of the Definite
part, but such unevenness it was not allowed to overpass because the
Better principle possesses a more extensive nature. For if the One were
unmixed and pure, Matter would not have admitted of any separation at
all; but since it is parted by the loosening property of the Two, it has
admitted of dissection and division into parts; and stood still at this
point, the even number being overpowered by the uneven.

XXXVI\. "For this reason it was the custom with the ancients to call
reckoning 'counting by fives;' and I am of opinion that 'all things'
(πάντα) were so named from 'five' (πέντε) by analogy; because, forsooth,
the Five was made up out of the first numbers: for the other numbers
when multiplied with others produce a number different from themselves;
whereas the Five, if it be taken an even number of times, makes the Ten
perfect; and if taken an uneven number of times, it reproduces itself.
But if, for the reason that the Five was composed out of the two first
squares, namely, *Unity* and *Four*, for it is the first that being of
equal value with the two preceding it composes

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the most beautiful of right-angled triangles; and it first produces the
sesquilateral proportion. All this, perhaps, has not much to do with the
subject before us; but the other is more so, viz., what is by its own
nature the division of number; and the fact that Nature does divide most
things of the sort in this manner. Also in ourselves are *five* senses,
and members of the soul—the physical, the sensitive, the appetitive, the
irascible, and the rational; and *five* fingers of each hand; and the
most fecundating semen is divided into *five* parts; for no woman is
recorded to have brought forth more than five children at the same
birth. Also the Egyptians fable that Rhea brought forth *five* gods,
thus hinting at the creation of the five worlds out of one matter; and
in the universe the earth's circumference has five zones; and the sky is
divided into five cycles—two arctic, two tropic, and the equinoctial in
the middle; five also have beers made the revolutions of the planets,
for the Sun, Mercury, and Jupiter, keep in the same course. Harmonious
also is the constitution of the world, in exactly the same manner as all
musical composition amongst ourselves is divided into the arrangement of
the five tetrachords,—the highest, the middle, the united, the
separated, and the bass. Tunes also have five *in*tervals—*diesis*,
semi*tone*, tone, tone and a half, double tone. Thus doth Nature appear
to take more delight in making all things run in *fives*, than she does
in making them spherical—as Aristotle used to say.

XXXVII\. "Why, then (somebody may ask), did Plato refer the number of
the Five Worlds to the five geometrical figures, by saying 'that the
Deity employed the *fifth constitution* upon the Universe, when he
mapped out that universe'—and then by suggesting that question about the
number of worlds, as to whether it is in reality proper to hold that
they be one or five, he evidently thinks that the notion arises from
that circumstance. If, then, we must

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

bring forward *probability* as an argument against that notion of his—if
you reflect that of the differences of those bodies and figures the
necessary consequence is a habit of variation, as he himself teaches
when he is proving that whatever is subdivided, or composite, does,
along with the alteration of the essence, also change the form. For if
Fire be produced from Air, in consequence of the Octahedron being
dissolved, and split up into pyramids; <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) or on the contrary, Air out of Fire, when
it is driven together and compressed into the Octahedron—it is not
possible for it to remain where it was at first, but it flies and is
borne along into another place, forcing its way and struggling with all
that oppose and check its course. But the case is better illustrated by
a comparison: those using the various instruments for the winnowing of
wheat observe that the elements shaking the material, and that are
shaken by the same, always approach like to like into another position …
until the whole is put in order. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94.md) In
the same way, Matter being then in that condition in which it is
probable the universe would be, where the Deity is absent, the first
five Qualities, having tendencies of their own, were carried asunder;
not entirely so, however, nor were they clearly separated, for the
reason that when all things were mixed up together, those that were
overpowered followed the stronger, in spite of their natural tendency.
For which reason, in fact, they (these five Qualities) produced portions
and intervals in like number for the different species of bodies that
moved asunder in

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

different directions—one, not of pure *Fire*, but of fiery nature;
another, not of unmixed *Æther*, but æthereal; another, not of *Earth*
pure and simple, but earthy; and above all, *Air* associated with
*Water*, because, as already mentioned, it had gone off impregnated with
elements of different sorts. <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95.md) For it
was not the Deity who parted and distributed the Essence, but after it
had separated itself and was moving asunder in such varieties of
disorder, He took it in hand, arranged and fitted it together, by the
rule of analogy and the golden mean: in the next place, He having set
Reason, like a deputy and guard in each province, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96.md) He created as many worlds as are the kinds
of the primal substances. Let thus much be conceded in Plato's favour,
for Ammonius's sake; but for my part I will not affirm positively
respecting the number of worlds, that they are exactly so many as this;
but yet I consider the opinion that has been advanced of their being
more than one, not indeed infinite, but limited in number, to be more
agreeable to analogy than any of the rest; when I consider the natural
tendency to dispersion and subdivision of Matter, whilst it is not
suffered by Reason to move in one direction only, nor yet in an infinite
number of ways. But here, if anywhere, let us remember the Academy, and
divest ourselves of too much confidence, and reserve *certainty*, as in
a slippery place, for the argument about their infinity." <span
id="fr_97"></span>[3](#fn_97.md)

XXXVIII\. On my saying this, Demetrius replied: "Rightly does Lamprias
advise, for—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'The gods in *form* are many, not in
*thought*,'</span>

</div>

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

as Euripides says: but they trip us up in facts, when we are so bold as
to give our opinions on such great matters, as though we knew all about
them: but we must bring back the discussion, as the same person says, to
the original subject. For the assertion that the Oracles are lying idle
and dumb, because the dæmons have migrated or deceased, just as workmen
leave their tools, starts another yet more important inquiry into the
*cause* and *power*, whereby they render prophets and prophetesses
possessed with inspiration, and capable of seeing visions. For it is not
possible to lay the blame on their desertion as the cause why the
Oracles are dumb, without first explaining in what way the dæmons, when
they *do* preside at them, and are present, render these same Oracles
active and able to speak." Ammonius, taking up the word: "Do you think,
then, that the dæmons are anything else but spirits that go up and down,
as Hesiod says, 'clothed in mist?' For it seems to me that whatever
difference one man exhibits, as compared with another who is acting
either tragedy or comedy, just the same difference will a spirit that
has taken possession of the body exhibit with respect to ordinary
life. <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) It is, therefore, neither
absurd nor strange if spirits encountering spirits do create in them
visions of the Future; just as we ourselves signify to each other, not
by voice alone, but also by writing; nay, often also by a touch, or by a
look, many things of what has happened, and also tell beforehand many of
what are about to happen by the same means. And if you, my
Ammonius, <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99.md) say nothing to the
contrary, for a rumour lately reached us of your having talked at length
on the subject with your hosts at Lebadia, nothing of which did our
informant exactly remember."

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Do not wonder at
it," answered I; "for many doings and occupations intervening, in
consequence of there being an oracle and a sacrifice going on, rendered
our discourses desultory, and full of interruptions." "But now," replied
Ammonius, "you have got hearers quite at liberty, and anxious partly to
inquire, partly to learn, all cavilling and contradiction being put out
of the way, and full indulgence and freedom, as you see, granted to the
discussion."

XXXIX\. When all the rest joined in this demand, I, after a short pause,
continued: "In truth, Ammonius, by an odd coincidence, ’twas yourself
that supplied the starting-point and introduction to those discourses of
mine. For whether dæmons be spirits separated from the body, or never
united to one, according to you and the divine Hesiod, being

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Pure dwellers upon earth, keepers of
mortals,'</span>

</div>

why shall we deprive souls in the body of that power by which the dæmons
are naturally enabled to foreknow and foretell future events? For that
any new power or faculty is superadded to souls after they have left the
body, which they did not previously possess, is by no means probable:
but that they possess, indeed, those powers originally, but have them in
inferior degree, whilst united with the body, some being imperceptible
and latent, others feeble and obscure, in a similar way to things seen
through a mist, or in moving water, inactive, and slow, and standing in
need of much curing, and recovery of what is their own, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) and removal and clearing away of what
obscures them—all this is probable enough. For just as the Sun doth not
*become* bright, when he bursts through the clouds, but *is* so
perpetually, yet he appears to us, when in a mist, dull and obscure, in
like manner the soul doth not *acquire* the prophetic power, when it
passes out of the body, as out of a

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

cloud, but possesses it even now, though it is dimmed by its mixture and
confusion with the body. We ought not to wonder or disbelieve this, when
we observe, if nothing else, the faculty of the Soul which is the
converse of Foreknowledge, that is what we call the *Memory:* how great
an operation doth it perform in preserving and storing up things gone
by, or rather, things that are! For of things past, none is or subsists,
but all things are born and die together—both actions, and words, and
passions—whilst Time, like a mighty river, sweeps them by, one by one;
but this faculty of the Soul, laying hold upon them, I know not how,
invests things not present with visible form and existence! For, truly,
the oracle given to the Thessalians respecting Anna, promises

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'To the deaf hearing, to the blind their
sight.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the Memory is
to us the hearing of deaf actions, and the seeing of blind. No wonder,
then, as I have said, if that which holds tight the things that be no
more, should anticipate many of those that do not yet exist; for these
belong more peculiarly to it, and for these it has a natural sympathy,
inasmuch as it stretches itself out, and pushes forward towards the
Future, but disengages itself from things that be past and come to an
end, except so far as the remembering of them goes.

XL\. "Souls therefore possessing this faculty inherent in their nature,
though obscured, and hardly showing itself, do nevertheless put forth
blossom, and recover this power—in dreams often, on the point of
death, <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md) some few—either that the
body becomes purified, or assumes a new temperament on these
occasions, <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102.md) or else that the
reasoning and thinking parts of the soul are unbound and released

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

from the irrational and visionary condition of the Present, and turn
towards the Future. For it is not so, as Euripides says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"He's the best prophet that can guess the
best,'</span>

</div>

but such a one is a man that has his wits about him, and follows the
intelligent part of his soul as it guides him on his way, with a show of
probability. For the prophetic part, like a tablet unwritten on, <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md) senseless, and indefinite of itself, but
capable of receiving visionary impressions and forebodings, grasps the
Future without any consideration, at the moment when it is first
departing out of the Present. It makes the same escape from the Present
by means of the temperament and condition of the body when in a state of
change, which we call *inspiration*. Now the body doth frequently of its
own accord acquire this predisposition; and the earth sends forth
springs of water productive of various effects upon mankind—some being
productive of delirium, and disease, and death; and others that are
good, benignant, and salubrious, as they prove by experience to such as
frequent them. But the prophetic stream or blast is the most godlike and
most holy, whether it be taken in with the air or drawn from the liquid
fountain; for when it unites itself with the body it engenders in the
soul a temperament altogether unusual and strange, the peculiar nature
of which it is difficult to explain clearly, although history in many
places affords us means for a conjecture. That by means of its heat and
diffusion it opens certain passages suited to admit impressions of the
Future is probable enough, just as when wine gets up into the head it
brings about other effects, and unlocks words stored up in memory and
forgotten. Also the Bacchic frenzy and madness itself possesses much of
the prophetic spirit, when the soul, becoming

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

heated and full of fire, shakes off the caution that human prudence lays
upon it, and thereby frequently turns aside and puts out the fire of
inspiration.

XLI\. "At the same time one may, not without reason, suppose that
dryness coming on together with heat, subtilizes the spirit, and renders
it more ethereal and pure: because the soul itself is *dry*, according
to Heraclitus. For moisture not only dulls the sight and hearing, but
when it touches mirrors takes away from them reflection (μίχος); and the
brightness and the light descend from the air. On the other hand, again,
that through a certain sudden cooling and condensation of spirit, as is
the case in the tempering of iron, that the prophetic portion of the
soul is both augmented and rendered keener, is a thing by no means
impossible. And again, just as tin being melted together with it
constringes and solidifies copper, naturally soft and porous, and
renders it brighter and cleaner, in like manner the prophetic vapour, it
is not improbable, having a certain sympathy and affinity to the soul,
fills up the soft parts thereof, and cements and keeps them together.
For different substances are congenial and have affinity to others, just
as bean-flour is supposed to assist the dye of the murex, and
natron <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md) that of the kermes, when
mixed therewith: 'some of the blue crocus is mingled with flax,' and as
Empedocles hath said. But with respect to the Cydnus, and the
consecrated sword of Apollo at Tarsus, we have heard you, Demetrius,
telling how that only the Cydnus cleanses that steel, and no other river
cleanses that sword. At Olympia also, the ashes for the Altar <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105.md) they knead up, and bring to consistency,
by pouring over them water out of the Alpheus, but if they wet these
same ashes with any

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

other water they are not able to solidify and cement the ashes.

XLII\. "It is therefore not to be wondered at if, although Earth sends
up numerous streams, these \[at Delphi\] alone should dispose the soul
to ecstasy, and to conceive visions of future events. And the voice of
Fame likewise indisputably tallies with my argument, for the story goes
that the power residing in the place first became manifest after a
certain shepherd had accidentally tumbled into the well, and afterwards
began to utter words that were inspired, which his neighbours at first
laughed at, but when many things the fellow had foretold actually came
about, then they were filled with wonder. And the best historians of
Delphi keep up the memory of his name, and call him Coretas. But it
seems to me that the soul acquires this tendency and inclination to
dissolve into the prophetic spirit, for the same reason as the sight
does with respect to the light, because the latter has a natural
sympathy for it. For though the eye possesses the power of vision, there
is no employment of it without the light; similarly the prophetic
faculty of the soul, like the eye, stands in need of something of its
own nature to assist in grasping objects, and to sharpen its force. For
which cause, most of the ancients supposed Apollo to be the same with
the Sun, and they that understood and admired the beautiful and
ingenious comparison, guessed that what body is to soul, sight to mind,
light to truth—the same is the Sun to the nature of Apollo; his
offspring, and his child, perpetually born of 'Him that is,' perpetually
reflecting <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) the author of its
being; for it kindles, promotes, and stimulates the power of vision of
the sense, just as he does the prophetic faculty of the soul.

XLIII\. "Those, however, that supposed him one and the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

same god with the Sun, did with good reason dedicate the Oracle to
Apollo and the Earth conjointly: for they believed that the Sun
generated in the Earth the disposition and temperament out of which she
sends forth the prophetic vapour. Earth herself, 'sure foundation of all
things,' as Hesiod with far more sagacity than our philosophers hath
called her, we hold to be everlasting and imperishable: <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107.md) but of the powers belonging to her, it
is probable that in one place deceases happen, in another new births;
elsewhere, migrations and influxes from different quarters, and that
such revolutions come round no less frequently in the whole course of
time, as we may conjecture from natural phenomena. For in the case of
lakes, rivers, and yet more, of hot springs, there have occurred in some
places failures, and wastings away, and in others, as it were, a flight
and, self-interment: and on the other hand, their re-appearance in the
same places as before, or their welling forth in the same neighbourhood.
Also of mines, entire failures have happened in recent times, as for
instance of the silver mines in Attica, and of the copper ore in Eubœa,
out of which the *cold-hammered* <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108.md)
sword-blades used to be wrought, as Æschylus says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Taking his self-sharpened Eubean blade;'</span>

</div>

and in the case of the quarry at Carystus, ’tis no long time since it
ceased to produce soft and thread-like veins of stone: <span
id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_109.md) for I believe some of you have seen
towels and

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

nets, and hair-cauls made thereof, which would not burn, but as many as
became dirty from use, they threw into the fire, and got them back again
bright and transparent; but now it has disappeared and scarcely fibres
or hairs, as it were, of the substance, run about in the mines.

XLIV\. "And of all these effects the followers of Aristotle make out the
Exhalation to be the author in the interior of the earth. Simultaneously
with which exhalation it is a necessary consequence that effects of the
kind must come to an end, change their places, and on the other hand be
revivified once more. In fact, we must hold the same opinion with
respect to oracular inspirations, inasmuch as they have not an
everlasting, or undecaying power, but one that is subject to
vicissitudes. For it is probable that excessive rains extinguish these
exhalations; or that by the falling of thunder-bolts they are destroyed;
or, above all, when the earth is affected by a trembling, and suffers
settlements and jumbling together of her parts, in her inmost depths,
that the said exhalations shift their place, or are put out entirely,
just as in this place they say it \[the oracular power\] did not
continue after the great earthquake, which also overthrew the whole
city. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110.md) And at Orchomenos they
relate that a pestilence prevailing, many people perished, and the
Oracle of Tiresias came to an end altogether, and remains idle and
silent to this day. And if the same fate has befallen those in Cilicia,
as we hear is the case, nobody will give us more authentic news of it
than yourself, Demetrius."

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

XLV\. Then Demetrius: "I know not the present state of things: for, as
you [are](errata.htm#1.md) aware, I have now been away from home a very
long time. But when I was there the Oracle of Mopsus still flourished,
as well as that of Amphilochus. But I have a very wonderful event to
tell, which happened during my visit to the Oracle of Mopsus. The
governor of Cilicia, being sceptical in religious matters, disbelieving
them, I fancy, out of wantonness, <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md)
for he was an extremely insolent and wicked man, and had about him a set
of Epicureans who after their fine fashion and their 'natural science'
principles, made sport of all things of the kind, as they themselves
openly profess; he sent his freedman, furnishing him as a spy going into
the enemy's camp, with a sealed letter, in which the inquiry was
written, nobody knowing the contents. The fellow therefore having passed
the night, as is the rule, within the sanctuary, and having slept there,
related to us next morning the following dream. He dreamed that a man of
handsome appearance stood over him and shouted 'A black one!' and
nothing more, but immediately retired. This seemed to us absurd, and
occasioned great perplexity; the governor, however, was astounded at it,
and making a gesture of adoration and opening the letter, showed written
therein the question: Whether shall I sacrifice to thee a white or a
black bull? so that the Epicureans were put to the rout, and he himself
performed the sacrifice, and ever after held Mopsus in respect." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112.md)

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

XLVI\. Demetrius having spoken thus much, ceased: but I, wishing to
place, as it were, a crowning stone on the discussion, turned my eyes
upon Philip and Ammonius, who were sitting together: they seemed to me
to be wanting to say something, but they checked themselves again. At
last Ammonius: "Philip has got something to say about the story just
told, for he believes, as do many others, and I myself, that Apollo is
no other god, but the same with the Sun: but my difficulty is a greater
one, and concerning greater matters. At first, we went aside, I know not
how, in the discussion, and transferred with all due respect the
oracular office from the gods to the dæmons; but now we seem to me to be
pushing these latter gentlemen themselves from thence, out of the oracle
and off the Tripod; when we resolve the final cause of prophecy, or
rather its very essence and power, into blasts and vapours and
exhalations. For the above mentioned 'temperatures' and beatings' and
'temperings,' the more they draw away our belief from the interposition
of the Deity, suggest such an idea of the Final Cause as Euripides makes
his Cyclops entertain:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'For will she, null she, dame Necessity  
  Makes the grass grow, that feeds my sheep so fat.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Except that *he*
says he does not sacrifice to the gods but to himself and 'his belly,
that greatest of deities,' whereas we both offer sacrifice and make
prayers at the Oracles, for what purpose, pray, if it is only winds that
excite the prophetic power in them; or else sonic kind of temperature of
the air or wind, that sets the same in motion? and what is the meaning
of the presentation of the victims, and the fact of them not being
acceptable unless the beast become all of a tremble from the top of the
brow downwards, and stagger, when the libation is poured upon it. For it
is not sufficient that it shake its head, as in the case of all

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

other sacrifices, but the motion and quivering must spread over al\] its
limbs, accompanied with a tremulous sound; for whenever this does not
take place, they say the Oracle is not at work, and do not bring in the
Pythoness. And yet, if they supposed the chief cause to have nothing to
do with either god or dæmon, it would be reasonable for them to act and
to think in this way: but according to your notions, it is not
reasonable; for the exhalation, whether the victim do tremble or not,
being there permanently will produce the inspiration, and that not
merely in the Pythoness, but in any ordinary person. For which reason it
is absurd to employ one woman only for the purpose of the Oracles, and
to give leer trouble by keeping her all her life through, chaste and
pure. For that Coretos, who, the Delphians say, first gave notice of the
property residing in the place by tumbling into it, did not, I fancy,
differ in any way from the other goatherds and shepherds—that is,
indeed, if this be not an allegory, or an empty fiction, as I myself
esteem it. But when I reflect of what great service to the Greeks this
Oracle hath been the author, both in wars and in the founding of cities,
also on occasions of pestilence and seasons of barrenness, I think it
hard to assign both the discovery and the final cause not to God and to
Providence, but to accident and natural means. On these points," added
he, "my dear Lamprias, I wish to discourse—will you have patience with
me?" <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md) "Yes, certainly," replied
Philip, "and so will all of those present—for the subject interests the
whole of us."

XLVII\. Then I in reply to him: "It has not only angered, but filled me
with confusion, that I should be thought by you, and so numerous and
respectable a company as you

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

are, to have (in spite of my years), <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md) made out a fine story by plausible
arguments, in order to destroy or upset any of the sound and religious
notions entertained with respect to the Deity. I will therefore make my
defence against the charge, and bring forward Plato for a witness and
advocate in my cause; since that philosopher has censured Anaxagoras of
old, seeing that he went too much into natural causes, and was always
tracing out and hunting after what was necessarily accomplished by the
properties of bodies, so that he neglected the higher causes, final and
efficient, of the effect and of the agent. He (Plato) was the first, or
did the most, of the philosophers, to investigate both points, assigning
to the Deity the origin of the things that are constituted according to
reason; without, however, depriving Matter of the efficient causes
necessary for that which is done; for he discerned that all the world of
sense was regularly arranged, but was not unmixed or pure, but receives
its origin from Matter impregnated by Reason. And consider in the case
of artificers: for example here at hand, the celebrated base and stand
for the vase which Herodotus calls the 'Crater holder,' <span
id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_115.md) that has for natural efficient causes
fire and iron, and above all the tempering of the metal by means of fire
and water, without which there was no means for the work to be done. But
the yet more valid cause that set these two in motion, and kept them
incessantly at work, did Art and Reason furnish

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

to the undertaking, and again the creator and artist of these pictures
and figures around us, <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md) has
inscribed himself 'Polygnotus of Thasos, son of Aglaophon, has painted
the sacking of the citadel of Ilium'—as he is seen to have
written. <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117.md) But without the aid of
paints ground up together and dissolved into each other, there was no
possibility for this work to have got its arrangement and visible form.
Does then the person who wishes to trace out the material cause, by
inquiring and explaining what effects and changes ochre produces when
mixed with Sinope, or Melean white with lamp-black <span
id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_118.md)—does he thereby detract from the fame of
Polygnotus? And he that tells about the hardening and the softening of
iron, how that when deprived of rigidity by means of fire it spreads
itself and yields to those who are beating it out, and bringing it into
form, and having been thrown into pure water, by reason of the
tenderness and liquidity produced on it by the fire, it becomes
impregnated with cold, and acquires the elasticity and the density that
Homer calls 'the strength of iron'—does he the less on that score wholly
reserve to the artificer the cause of the production of the work? I,
truly, do not think so. Again, there are some who investigate the
properties of remedial agents, and yet do not subvert the science of
medicine. In the same way, certainly, when Plato makes out that we see
by means of the light resident in the eye being mingled with the light
of the Sun, and that we hear by means of the repercussion of the air,
does not disprove that we were born capable of seeing and of hearing by
design and by providence.

XLVIII\. "And universally, as I say, existence having two

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

efficient causes, the very ancient theologians and poets chose to pay
attention only to the higher one of the two, applying to all subjects in
common that invocation:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Jove first, Jove last, all things spring out of
Jove,'</span>

</div>

for they had not yet got as far as 'necessary' and physical causes.' But
the more modern, and those styling themselves 'natural philosophers,' on
the contrary, stray away from the superior cause, and place the whole
theory of sensation in elements, conditions of elements, collisions, and
interminglings of bodies. For which cause the reasoning on both sides is
deficient in an essential part, for the one set ignore or omit the agent
and the author; the others, the means, and the materials. Now he who was
the first to handle both these points in a lucid manner, and who took
into the account besides Him that makes according to Reason, and puts
into motion, the necessarily subject and passive element, will clear us
also of all suspicion and blame. For we do not make prophecy to be
without God and without Reason, by assigning to it the human soul for
the *material*, but the inspiring breath or exhalation, for the
*instrument* as it were, or the thing that makes it give out a sound.
For in the first place it is Earth that breeds these exhalations, but He
who imparts to Earth the faculty for tempering and for changing, namely,
the Sun, is, according to the belief of our fathers, a god to *us*. In
the next place, as we have dæmons, as it were, for presidents,
ministers, and guardians, of this said natural constitution, who
occasionally let it down, like a musical instrument, and again tighten
it up, by diminishing its over-great ecstatic and maddening property,
and tempering the excitement so as to be unproductive of pain or injury
to such as experience it—we must not be thought to be doing anything
unreasonable or impossible.

XLIX\. "For when we offer the preliminary sacrifice, and

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

put garlands and pour libations upon the victim, we are not doing
anything opposed to this view of the matter. For the priests and holy
men say that they offer up the victim, pour the libation, and observe
its movement and trembling for no other purpose than to discover whether
the god is then performing his functions, <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) because it is necessary that the thing
to be sacrificed should be perfect both in body and soul, unblemished,
and uncorrupted. Indications of this in the case of the *body*, it is
not very difficult to discover; but the *soul* they test by putting upon
the bulls barley-meal, and upon the he-goats vetches: for the beast that
eats not thereof they judge not to be sound. For the she-goat cold water
is the test—because the animal is not of a nature insensible to such
sprinkling, and not disposed to tremble at it. But whether it be certain
that the quivering of the victim be a sign of its being lawful to
consult the Oracle, and its not quivering of the reverse, I do not
perceive what objection results therefrom against my argument, because
every power acts better or worse according to the season ordained for it
by Nature; consequently when the season varies, it is but reasonable the
Deity should give us warning of the fact.

L. As for the Exhalation <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120.md) itself, I
do not think it is constantly in the same condition, but that it is
liable to fallings off, and on the other hand, to augmentations of
force: and for the fact which I adduce as proof, I have the testimony of
many visitors, and of all the people that

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

minister to the Oracle. For the hall in which they make those who
consult the god sit down, is filled, not frequently nor regularly, but
at uncertain intervals, with a sweet smell, and a breath, like the most
delicious and costly perfumes, in consequence of the sanctuary sending
forth vapours as from a fountain: <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md)
for it is probable that it is excited from time to time, either by heat,
or some accidental compression. But if this does not seem to you
credible, at least you will allow that the Pythoness herself has the
part of her soul which is affected by the exhalation in different states
and dispositions at different times, and does not always preserve the
same temperament like an unchangeable harmony. For many infirmities and
disturbances, to her own knowledge, and many more that be unperceived,
seize upon her body, and pervade her soul, filled with which it is
better she should not enter there; neither ought they (the priests) in
that state to present her to the god when she is not perfectly pure,
just as though she were some musical instrument, well finished indeed,
and well sounding, but yet liable to be affected, and to get out of
tune. For neither does wine always produce intoxication in the same
manner, nor the fife, excitement, but at one time the same persons rave
and rage more, at another time less, as the temperament in them varies.
But especially does the imaginative part of the soul show itself to be
mastered by the body, and to sympathize with its changes; as is apparent
in the case of dreams. For sometimes we are involved in numerous and
infinitely varied visions, whilst at other times, on the contrary, we
have complete freedom and peace from anything of the sort, and we know
that Cleon here, one of the people from

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Daulia, declares
that in all the many years he has lived, he has never had a single
dream. And of those of former times the same thing is told respecting
Thrasymedes the Herman. The cause is the temperament of the body: for
that of the atrabilious is very subject to dreams, and to visions, even
though dreaming true seems to be their especial privilege: because
turning themselves in their fancies to many things at many times, like
those shooting often, they *sometimes* hit the mark.

LI\. "When, therefore, the prophetic and imaginative faculty is in a
state that harmonizes with the assimilation of the vapour, like that of
a medicine, inspiration must necessarily follow; just as, that not being
the case, it must either not take place at all, or else be delirious,
not genuine, and full of confusion—as we know happened in the case of
the Pythoness lately deceased. For consulters of the Oracle having
arrived from abroad, <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md) the victim is
said to have withstood the preliminary agitations without feeling, and
without motion; and when the priests in their zeal substituted others,
and still persevered, with difficulty did it become tremulous <span
id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123.md) and staggering about, to give the
necessary sign. What, pray, happened with respect to the Pythoness? She
descended into the place of the Oracle against her will, and in a bad
humour; and directly upon the very first answers, she manifested by the
harsh sound of her voice that she was not repeating <span
id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_124.md) the dictation of the god: like to a ship
drifting before the gale, she was filled with an incoherent and evil
inspiration. At last being completely driven out of her senses, and
rushing

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

with a shriek to the entrance, she threw herself on the ground; so that
not only the consulters took to flight in terror, but even the
interpreter <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125.md) Nicander, and such of
the holy men as were present. After a little while, however, they went
in again, and picked her up—she was insane, and only survived for a few
days. <span id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126.md) This is the reason why they
keep the body of the Pythoness pure from all sexual intercourse, and her
life clear from all mixture and contact with and conversation of
strangers: and also before consultation, observe the above-mentioned
signs: for they believe that it is clearly understood by the god whether
she has the proper frame of body and disposition, so as to receive the
inspiration without injury. For the power of the vapour does not affect
all persons indiscriminately, nor yet the same persons always in the
sane way, but as above said, it supplies an incentive and cause to such
as be suitably disposed to feel it, and undergo the change. The power is
in reality due to a god, and to a daemon, yet it is not exempt from
cessation, imperishable, undecaying, or capable of lasting to all
eternity of time—by which all things between Earth and Moon are worn
out, according to our theory. Some there be who hold that even things
*above* that sphere do not hold out to all eternity

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

and infinity, but are subject to violent revolutions and renewals.

LII\. "These subjects I exhort both you and myself to examine
frequently; inasmuch as they present many holds for objections, and
grounds for the opposite opinion; which time does not allow us to
enumerate at length. So they must lie over, as also the question Philip
raised about the Sun and Apollo."

<span id="img_13700"></span> ![\[Apollo before the Delphic
Tripod.&lt;br&gt; (once owned by Lorenzo de’ Medici)\]](img/13700.jpg.md)  
\[Apollo before the Delphic Tripod.  
(once owned by Lorenzo de’ Medici)\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[72:1](pte05.htm#fr_50.md) Of whom a most
interesting memorial is still extant in the Museum at York, a little
bronze tablet inscribed with the letters, ΘΕΟΙΣ ΤΟΙΣ ΤΟΥ ΗΓΗΜΟΝΙΚΟΥ
ΠΡΑΙΤΩΡΙΟΥ ΣΚΡΙΒΑ ΔΗΜΗΤΡΙΟΣ, a dedication tallying with the epithet
"holy" here given to him. He was, <span id="page_73">p. 73</span>
probably, a *scriba quæstorius*, "treasury clerk," like Horace, and had
been employed in the finance department in the government office at
Eboracum, the headquarters for the Northern province. A second tablet
bears, ΩΚΕΑΛΝΩΙ ΚΑΙ ΤΗΘΥΙ ΔΗΜΗΤΡΙΟΣ.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[73:1](pte05.htm#fr_51.md) μεϑίσταντες in text
(perhaps μετρήσαντες), which, if correct, must mean "setting aside."

<span id="fn_52"></span>[74:1](pte05.htm#fr_52.md) Conversely, a remarkable
absence of house-flies has been noticed here in the summers followed by
cholera.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[74:2](pte05.htm#fr_53.md) Astronomers made their
observations upon the sun's disk reflected on the surface of water, as
Pliny notices in speaking of the heliotrope stone.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[74:3](pte05.htm#fr_54.md) The name is lost; as
Reiske thinks, probably Ursa Major.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[75:1](pte05.htm#fr_55.md) "They" in text, which
changes the person very awkwardly.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[77:1](pte05.htm#fr_56.md) *i.e.* declares the will
of Fate.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[77:2](pte05.htm#fr_57.md) The answers were
communicated in dreams to the inquirers sleeping inside the Temple.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[79:1](pte05.htm#fr_58.md) The regular badge of his
sect.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[80:1](pte05.htm#fr_59.md) Or perhaps "refraining
from abusive language."

<span id="fn_60"></span>[82:1](pte05.htm#fr_60.md) Should read "*this*
place," Delphi, the scene of the dialogue.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[82:2](pte05.htm#fr_61.md) *i.e.* the intoxicating
exhalation from the Delphic Cave was as powerful as formerly—an
important notice, as refuting the story that it had been blocked up and
destroyed by order of Nero, when Apollo rebuked him for his matricide.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[85:1](pte05.htm#fr_62.md) 1 + 2 + 4 + 4 + 9 + 8 +
27 = 55, not 54; but this is near enough for the argument.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[85:2](pte05.htm#fr_63.md) This passage is
hopelessly corrupt, but seems to have implied that one story was as
ridiculous as the other.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[85:3](pte05.htm#fr_64.md) Referring to Lamprias'
explanation of Hesiod's "generation" by "year."

<span id="fn_65"></span>[89:1](pte05.htm#fr_65.md) Of the real Apollo, that
is.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[90:1](pte05.htm#fr_66.md) The *real* object of
their verses and declamations was not the *god*, but the *genii* who
haunted Delphi.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[90:2](pte05.htm#fr_67.md) προσάπτων in text, must
be προσάπτειν.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[93:1](pte05.htm#fr_68.md) This emperor must be
Trajan, as Demetrius was just returned from Britain at the time of the
dialogue. The island, as lying nearest to the coast, must have been
Anglesey, the focus of Druidism. If Æmilian was an "old man" when he
told the story just quoted, and his father had flourished under
Tiberius. this dialogue comes down to the end of the first century.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[94:1](pte05.htm#fr_69.md) Lucretius mentions that
the fumes of a smouldering lamp-wick produce apoplexy—which is still the
popular belief in Italy.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[94:2](pte05.htm#fr_70.md) ποι μένουσιν must be
corrupt, as a plural following a neuter noun—<span id="page_95">p.
95</span> ποιμαίνουσιν is clearly the original reading, and gives the
funny image of these philosophers driving about "their flocks of
spectra."

<span id="fn_71"></span>[95:1](pte05.htm#fr_71.md) δυσκολαίνοντας must be
δυσκολαίνοντες, and still referring to the Epicureans.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[95:2](pte05.htm#fr_72.md) Upon the theory of the
Epicureans; which he goes on to quote.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[96:1](pte05.htm#fr_73.md) The chewing of betel-nut
may be at the bottom of this story, and the man a Buddhist hermit.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[97:1](pte05.htm#fr_74.md) The popular dialect at
Alexandria, which was peopled by emigrants from Sicily: the source
whence a Hindoo would naturally get his smattering of Greek.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[97:2](pte05.htm#fr_75.md) An obscure allusion to
the Jews, who claim Saturn for their star.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[98:1](pte05.htm#fr_76.md) ὅθεν εὖ ἐγγύου in text,
must be ὅτε συνεγένον.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[99:1](pte05.htm#fr_77.md) According to this
explanation, the Mysteries taught the theory of the creation, and of the
government and laws of the universe: a doctrine clearly set forth in
Julian's "Mother of the Gods."

<span id="fn_78"></span>[99:2](pte05.htm#fr_78.md) "Perhaps he makes bows
or perhaps he steals."

<span id="fn_79"></span>[100:1](pte05.htm#fr_79.md) Julian's πεμπτὸν,
εἱλικτὸν σῶμα: the Quintessence of the later Aristotelians.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[103:1](pte05.htm#fr_80.md) The dative of these
words must be corrupt, read them in the accusative.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[105:1](pte05.htm#fr_81.md) Something is wanting
here; but what follows shows it to have been an hypothesis of the
existence of several worlds depending upon some common and superior
body.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[106:1](pte05.htm#fr_82.md) *i.e.* the chief end at
which the Essence has been working from all eternity is the stability
and incorruptibility of the world.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[107:1](pte05.htm#fr_83.md) The same difficulty has
perplexed modern divines, substituting the technical terms "sin" and
"atonement" for "Fate" and "Providence."

<span id="fn_84"></span>[107:2](pte05.htm#fr_84.md) καθ᾽ ἕκαστον, an
evident allusion to the Supreme and Nameless Deity, then recognized as
supreme above all the gods of the old mythology.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[108:1](pte05.htm#fr_85.md) *i.e.* beautiful,
congenial, ever-changing spectacles.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[109:1](pte05.htm#fr_86.md) *i.e.* no longer
confine him to the creation of one world.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[109:2](pte05.htm#fr_87.md) The symbol ϵ, dedicated
in gold by Livia Augusta, to replace the ancient one in wood presented
by Pittacus.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[111:1](pte05.htm#fr_88.md) A Brahminical notion:
Siva, god of Fire, being expressed by the Pyramid; Vishnu, of Water, by
the same inverted.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[113:1](pte05.htm#fr_89.md) *i.e.*, the five
geometrical bodies are respectively images of the five predicates of the
Deity, as defined by Plato.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[113:2](pte05.htm#fr_90.md) From this Platonic
theory the Kabalists got the notion of their Four Worlds, the models,
"Ideas," of which were furnished by the Ten Sephiroth, the Attributes of
Jehovah.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[114:1](pte05.htm#fr_91.md) 'The checking and
limitation of this ἀπειρία plays the chief part in Julian's "Hymn to the
Mother of the Gods;" and he makes it to be typified by the mutilation of
Atys.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[114:2](pte05.htm#fr_92.md) στενήν, certainly an
error for κενην, which the sense absolutely demands.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[117:1](pte05.htm#fr_93.md) The pyramid being
equivalent to Fire, when a figure composed of pyramids is taken to
pieces Fire must necessarily be produced. Again, if these pyramids be
put together into the figure of the Octahedron, which is the equivalent
of air, air must be the result.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[117:2](pte05.htm#fr_94.md) The whole of this
paragraph has fallen into inextricable confusion; but the sense is that
in the winnowing of corn, the different parts, such as the chaff and the
grains, when put into violent motion, have a natural tendency to collect
like with like.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[118:1](pte05.htm#fr_95.md) φύλλων ἀναπεπεπλησμένον
in text must be read ὑλῶν ἀναπεπλησ μένον.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[118:2](pte05.htm#fr_96.md) Hence the Alexandrian
school got the doctrine of the Logos acting as the deputy of the Supreme
Deity.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[118:3](pte05.htm#fr_97.md) The *infinity* of the
number of worlds may be denied with *certainty;* but the actual number
must ever be a matter of dispute.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[119:1](pte05.htm#fr_98.md) There is the same
difference between a man possessed by a Spirit and ordinary men, as
there is between a tragedian or comedian when acting and other people.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[119:2](pte05.htm#fr_99.md) A mistake for
"Lamprias," who replies in the next sentence.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[120:1](pte05.htm#fr_100.md) Their proper
faculties.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[121:1](pte05.htm#fr_101.md) τελετὰς for τελευτὰς,
beyond all doubt.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[121:2](pte05.htm#fr_102.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"The soul's poor cottage, battered and decayed,  
 Lets in new light thro' chinks that Time hath made."

</div>

<span id="fn_103"></span>[122:1](pte05.htm#fr_103.md) "A blank sheet of
paper."

<span id="fn_104"></span>[123:1](pte05.htm#fr_104.md) Native carbonate of
soda, got from the Natron Lakes, near Cairo: the ancient substitute for
soap.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[123:2](pte05.htm#fr_105.md) This Altar was an
immense heap of the ashes produced by the sacrifices from time
immemorial; as Pausanias describes the same.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[124:1](pte05.htm#fr_106.md) αποφαινοντες makes no
sense; it must be ἀποφαίνοντα, referring to ἡ?'λιον.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[125:1](pte05.htm#fr_107.md) Julian, who evidently
had studied this tract, uses the very same expression in his above
quoted Hymn.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[125:2](pte05.htm#fr_108.md) Like the spear-heads
and chisels of the ancient miners on Lake Superior, hammered out of the
pure metal, without the use of fire, and yet of the most extraordinary
temper: cutting the ore better than steel tools. Also the "cobre dos
labradores" in Nicaragua, fit for use as it comes from the mine (Dan.
Wilson: Boyle).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[125:3](pte05.htm#fr_109.md) A valuable notice of
the origin of the asbestos cloth, specimens of which are still found in
Roman tombs. Carystus supplied the Cipolline <span id="page_126">p.
126</span> marble, largely employed at Rome at the time of this
Dialogue. The pillars of the portico of the Temple of Faustina,
immensely large, are made of it.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[126:1](pte05.htm#fr_110.md) This curious passage
is unluckily so corrupt that the meaning can only be guessed from the
context, παραμένειν τὰ περὶ τὸν μέγαν σεισμον must certainly be read
ὥσπερ ἐγένετο περὶ τ.μ.σ. The cessation of the Delphic Oracle, was,
however, only for a time.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[127:1](pte05.htm#fr_111.md) δἰ ἀσθένειαν ἀπιστίας
must be δί ἂσέλγειαν ἀπιστήσας, or perhaps ἀσέβειαν. "Epicureans,
Atheists, and Christians," are classed together in the proclamation of
the oracle-monger, Alexander of Abonetichos, as persons to be chased
from the temple.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[127:2](pte05.htm#fr_112.md) Alexander the
Prophet, by taking a cast in plaster of the seals of such letters of
inquiry, was able to open them, learn the contents, frame his responses
accordingly, reseal the letters, and return to the bringers with seal
unbroken. Mopsus, doubtless, was acquainted with the same device to
promote his "clairvoyance."

<span id="fn_113"></span>[129:1](pte05.htm#fr_113.md) περιμένοις must be
περιμενεῖς.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[130:1](pte05.htm#fr_114.md) One of the few
indications of a date to be found in these Moralia, as showing they were
written in Plutarch's old age.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[130:2](pte05.htm#fr_115.md) Dedicated by
Alyattes, father of Crœsus, and regarded as a miracle of art, being made
of wrought iron, and all the parts *welded* together, not fastened by
rivets. At the time of its making, the sixth century before our era
(Alyattes B.C. 560), wrought iron was hardly known in Greece. Herodotus
says the maker, Glaucus of Chios, first invented the welding of iron.
The stand supported a great crater of silver, but *this* would not have
escaped the melting-pot of Philomelus, or of Sylla after him.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[131:1](pte05.htm#fr_116.md) The celebrated fresco
of the "Fall of Troy," painted on the walls of the Lesche.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[131:2](pte05.htm#fr_117.md) *Aliter*, as you may
see he has written.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[131:3](pte05.htm#fr_118.md) The only colours used
by the early painters were yellow, red, white and black.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[133:1](pte05.htm#fr_119.md) θεμιστεύειν, Themis
having been first owner of the Oracle.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[133:2](pte05.htm#fr_120.md) An instance of a
similar πνεῦμα issuing from the earth is to be found at Gradovo, capital
of Montenegro; where, within the monastery court, there issues from a
chasm in the rock a strong and icy wind, coldest in the summer heats.
This too produces inspiration, though indirectly, for the monks make use
of it to cool their wine and beer. Nevertheless, the fact of its being
enclosed within the sacred walls, proves that a character of sanctity
was attached to it at the time of the conversion of the mountaineers
("Montenegro," by R. C. S.).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[134:1](pte05.htm#fr_121.md) An important fact, as
showing that the emission of some intoxicating gas from the depths of
the cavern was by no means a fable. The so-called "laughing gas," which
produces immediate intoxication, has the smell of bitter almonds.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[135:1](pte05.htm#fr_122.md) From some Roman
official, high in power, as may be inferred from the zeal of the priests
in not keeping the envoys waiting for a more auspicious day.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[135:2](pte05.htm#fr_123.md) ὕπομβρον for
ὑπύτρομον.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[135:3](pte05.htm#fr_124.md) ἀναφερειν must apply
to what she *ought* to have heard the dweller in the cave respond. Some
words that followed are lost.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[136:1](pte05.htm#fr_125.md) The προφήτης must be
rendered "interpreter," his business being to put into an intelligible
form the incoherent utterances of the intoxicated woman. Such an officer
was a necessary appendage to every Oracle, wherever established. At the
Temple of Dens Nodens, in Lydney Park, Gloucestershire, Victorinus calls
himself "Interpres Latine," not because the god was drunk like the
Pythia, but because, as a local deity, he could only speak Welsh. This
building was of the time of the Flavian family.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[136:2](pte05.htm#fr_126.md) The particulars just
given prove the unfortunate Pythia died from a violent fit of delirium
tremens, produced by the unusual strength of the nitrous gas she had
inspired. But this was a rare exception, the gaseous intoxication as a
rule being harmless, and not preventing her sisters from attaining to
great age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Pythian Responses](pte06.md)
