[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pte03)  [Next](pte05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142863326X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays*, tr. by Charles William King,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PLUTARCH'S MORALS.

## THEOSOPHICAL ESSAYS.

### ON ISIS AND OSIRIS.

#### I.

<span class="smallcaps">All</span> good things, O Clea, it behoves
persons that have sense to solicit from the gods. But more especially
now that we are in quest of the knowledge of themselves (so far as such
knowledge is attainable by man), do we pray to obtain the same from them
with their own consent: inasmuch as there is nothing more important for
a man to receive, or more noble for a god to grant, than Truth. For all
other things which people require, the Deity who gives them doth not
possess, nor use for his own purposes. For the Godhead is not blessed by
reason of his silver and gold, nor yet almighty through his thunders and
lightnings, but on account of knowledge and intelligence, and this is
the finest thing of all that Homer hath said, when he pronounced
concerning the gods:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Both have one source, and both one country bore,  
 But Jove was first born, and his *knowledge* more."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He has represented
the sovereignty of Jupiter as more majestic on account of his knowledge
and wisdom, being at the same time the more ancient of the two. And I am
of opinion that the happiness of the eternal life which is the attribute
of God consists in his not being ignorant of

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

future events, in virtue of his knowledge, for if the knowing and
understanding of events were taken away, then immortality becomes not
*life* but *duration*.

II\. On this account a desire for religious knowledge is an aiming at
Truth, particularly that relating to the gods—a pursuit containing both
in the acquisition and in the search a reception, as it were, of things
sacred—an occupation more pious than any observation of abstinence, or
religious service: but particularly well-pleasing to this goddess who is
the special object of *thy* devotion; for she is both wise, and a lover
of wisdom; as her name appears to denote that, more than any other,
*knowing* and *knowledge* belong to her. For "Isis" is a Greek word, and
so is "Typhon," her enemy, for he is "puffed up" by want of knowledge
and falsehood, and tears to pieces, and puts out of sight, the sacred
word which the goddess again gathers up and puts together, and gives
into the charge of those initiated into the religion; whilst by means of
a perpetually sober life, by abstinence from many kinds of food and from
venery, she checks intemperance and love of pleasure, accustoming people
to endure her service with bowels not enervated by luxury, but hardy and
vigorous; the object of all which is the *knowledge* of the First, the
Supreme, and the Intelligible; whom the goddess exhorts von to seek
after, for he is both by her side, and united with her. The very name of
her Temple clearly promises both the communication and the understanding
of *That which is*—for it is called the "Ision," <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) inasmuch as *That which is* shall be known
if we enter with intelligence and piously into the sacred rites of the
goddess.

III\. Besides this, many have made her out to be daughter of Hermes;
many others, of Prometheus: of whom the latter they hold to be the
inventor of wisdom and fore-knowledge; Hermes, of grammar and of music.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For which reason,
of the Muses at Hermopolis they call the foremost one "Isis," and
"Justice-Wisdom," as hath been stated; and they show the divine
mysteries to such as be truly and rightfully styled "carriers of sacred
things," and "wearers of sacred robes": these are they that carry in the
soul, as it were in a copper, the sacred story respecting the gods that
cleanses the recipient from all superstition, and magical follies: and
who *wrap* themselves up, sometimes in things black and dusky, at other
times bright and conspicuous—darkly showing forth the same notions as
regards opinion of the gods as are expressed with respect to the sacred
vestment. For which reason, the circumstance that the votaries of Isis,
upon their death, are clothed with these robes, is a symbol that they go
into the next world carrying with them this *Word*, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) and nothing else. For it is not, Clea, the
wearing of beards and the dressing in long gowns that makes people
philosophers; neither does the *linen surplice* and *shaven crown* make
votaries of Isis, but the real Isiacist is he that is competent to
investigate by the aid of the Word, the symbolism, and the ceremonies
connected with these deities (after he has been lawfully empowered so to
do); and who meditates upon the Truth which is involved in them.

IV\. For it is a fact that most people do not understand that most
general, and insignificant circumstance, for what reason the priests cut
off their hair, and wear linen robes: some do not trouble themselves at
all to know the cause for these two rules, whilst others say that they
abstain from the use of wool, as they do from the flesh, out of
veneration for the *sheep;* that they shave the head in token of their
mourning (for Osiris), and that they wear linen on account of the colour
the flax in blossom displays, which resembles the smiling atmosphere
encompassing

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the earth. But the real cause is the same for all, because (as Plato
observes), it is not lawful for one not pure to handle what is pure. Now
no superfluity of nutrition or excrement is either chaste or pure. Now
it is out of such superfluity that wool and hair, and down, and the
nails, spring and grow. For it were absurd that people should divest
themselves of their own hair, shaving the body very smoothly, during the
fasts, and yet should envelope themselves in the hair of beasts, and we
ought to suppose that when Hesiod says:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Nor from the five-branched thing, on holy day,  
 Cut with the steel the dry from green away,"</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He teaches that
people ought to make themselves clear from such things beforehand, and
so keep the festival, not in the middle of the religious services to
occupy themselves with the cleaning and the removal of excrementitious
things. Again, the flax springs out of what is immortal, the earth, and
produces an edible fruit, and furnishes a smooth and cleanly clothing,
that does not weigh one down with the covering, and well-suited also to
any season, and is least of all others apt to breed lice, as they say,
concerning all which points there is another legend.

V. The priests so greatly dislike the nature of excrementitious things,
that they not only reject most kinds of pulse, and the flesh of sheep
and swine, as producing much superfluity of nutriment, but during the
fasts they even banish all salt from their meals, assigning many other
reasons for so doing, and particularly that salt makes people more fond
of drinking and of eating, by sharpening the appetite: for to consider,
as Aristagoras pretends, that salt is not pure because multitudes of
little insects are caught and die in it as it is congealing, is mere
folly. They are said also to give the Apis drink out of a well of his
own, but to keep

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

him away from the Nile; not that they hold the Nile water to be polluted
by reason of the crocodiles, as some think, for nothing is so venerated
by Egyptians as the Nile, but because drinking the water of the Nile is
supposed above all other to fatten, and produce corpulence; for they do
not wish to have the Apis in such condition, nor themselves either, but
to render their bodies active and lightly moved by their souls, and not
to weigh down and crush the divine part by the mortal ones growing
strong and preponderating.

VI\. As for *wine*, they that serve the god at Heliopolis, do not
usually carry it into the temple, for the reason that it is not decent
to drink when the Lord and King of day is looking on. The others use it
indeed, but sparingly, and keep many fasts where wine is forbidden;
during which they spend their time in arguing, learning, and seeking
things pertaining to religion: but the kings used to drink a measured
quantity, prescribed by the sacred books (as Hecataeus relates in his
History), although they were also priests. They began to drink from the
reign of Psammetichus, for before him they drank no wine, neither did
they make libation of it as a thing acceptable to the gods, but as the
blood of the gods’ greatest enemies, out of whom they believe it sprung
when they were fallen, and mingled with the earth, for which reason the
being drunk makes men out of their senses and furious, inasmuch as they
are then possessed by the authors of the blood. This story Eudoxus tells
us in the second book of his "Travels," is so related by the priests.

VII\. As to sea fish, all do not abstain from every sort, but from some
kinds only, as for instance, the natives of Oxyrynchites abstain from
all that are caught with a hook; for worshipping as they do the fish
called *oxyrynchus*, they are afraid that the hook may not be unpolluted
in consequence of an oxyrynchus having been caught by the same.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Syennites
abstain from eating the *phagrus;* for that fish is thought to make its
appearance together with the swelling of the Nile, and to announce its
rise to rejoicing people, showing itself as a self-sent herald. But the
priests abstain from all fish alike, and when on the first day of the
ninth month the Egyptians feast each one on broiled fish before his
house door, the priests do not taste thereof, but burn fish to ashes in
front of their own doors, assigning two reasons for this usage; the one
of which being religious and important, and connected with the pious
inquiry concerning Osiris and Typhon, I will take up again further on;
the other, an obvious and ready explanation, making out fish to be an
unnecessary and over-luxurious article of diet, agrees with Homer who
represents neither the luxurious Phaeaceans, nor the Ithacans, although
islanders; as making use of fish, nor yet the shipmates of Ulysses on so
long a voyage and out at sea, before they were reduced to the extreme of
want. And in fine, they (the priests) hold the sea to proceed from
*fire*, and as distinct from all else; neither a part nor an element of
nature but something of a different sort, both destructive and the
occasion of disease.

VIII\. For nothing that is irrational or fabulous, or springing out of
superstition (as some suppose), has been established in the religious
rites but what has partly moral and salutary reasons, partly others not
devoid of ingenuity in their bearings upon history and physics. For
example, take the *garlic* (for the fable that Dictys, foster father of
Isis, fell into the river and was lost as he was laying hold of some
garlic is improbable to the last degree), but the priests entertain
religious scruples about it and avoid and dislike the garlic, because
this is the only plant that naturally grows and flourishes while the
moon is on the wane; and it is suitable neither for persons keeping
fast, nor holding festival, because it makes the one thirsty,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the other to shed tears when they eat thereof. In the same way they hold
the *swine* to be an unholy animal because it seems to copulate most of
all when the moon is on the wane, and of those who drink its milk, the
bodies break out into leprosies and itchey eruptions; for the legend
which they repeat over it, when they sacrifice (once for all) and eat a
swine at the new moon, namely, that Typhon was pursuing a swine by the
light of the full moon, and so found the wooden coffer, in which lay the
body of Osiris and scattered the pieces, is not accepted by all; for
they hold this, like many other things, to belong to false traditions.
But they say that those of old were so hostile to luxury, extravagance,
and delicate living, that they relate there was a column set up in the
Temple of Thebes containing a curse engraved thereon against King
Mnevis, the first that drew away the Egyptians from their old way of
living without voyaging, without money, and of primitive simplicity. It
is further said that Technatis, father of Banchoreus, once when marching
towards Arabia, when his table-service was behindhand, dined upon what
food was procurable and afterwards slept soundly upon a mattress, and
thus became enamoured of simple fare; and in consequence of this,
uttered a curse upon Mnevis, and with the approval of the priests, set
up a pillar publishing the anathema.

IX\. For the kings used to be elected out of either the sacerdotal or
the military class, the latter enjoying dignity and honour on account of
valour, the former on account of wisdom; but he that was elected out of
the military class immediately became one of the priests, and was
initiated into their wisdom, which was for the most part shrouded in
fables and stories giving obscure indications and glimpses of the truth,
as indeed they themselves half acknowledge by kindly setting up the
*Sphinxes* in front of their temples, as though their religious teaching
contained wisdom hidden

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

in enigmas. And the shrine of Minerva at Sais (whom they consider the
same with Isis) bears this inscription, "I am all that hath been, and
is, and shall be; and my veil no mortal has hitherto raised."
Furthermore, as most people believe that the proper name of Jupiter
amongst the Egyptians is "Ammies" (which we corruptly call "Ammon").
Manetho the Sebennyte is of opinion that the "hidden" and "hiding" is
expressed by this word. Hecataeus of Abdera says that the Egyptians use
this word to one another, when they are calling anyone to them; for the
word is one of calling to, for which reason the Supreme God (whom they
consider the same with the *All*) they invoke as being *hidden* and
*invisible*, and exhort him to make himself visible and apparent, and
therefore call him "Amun": so great therefore was the piety of the
Egyptians in their teaching respecting the gods.

X. The wisest of the Greeks bear testimony to this, such as Solon,
Thales, Plato, Eudoxus, Pythagoras (some say Lycurgus also), by their
travelling into Egypt and conversing with the priests. Eudoxus, for
example, they say, received lessons from Chonupheus of Memphis; Solon,
from Sonchis of Sais; Pythagoras from Oenuphis of Heliopolis; and he
being probably the most admired of these visitors, and himself admiring
the people, copied their symbolical and mysterious style, and wrapped up
his doctrines in enigmas; for the most part of the Pythagorean precepts
do not fall short of the so-called hieroglyphic writings in obscurity;
such, for instance, as, "Not to eat off a chair;" "Not to sit down upon
a corn-measure;" "Not to plant a palm-tree;" "Not to stir the fire with
a sword in the house." And I myself think that the fact that the men (of
his sect) call the unit "Apollo," the two "Diana," the seven, "Minerva;"
and "Neptune" the first Cube; is analogous to the things set up upon the
temples, and in truth to those done and painted there. For the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

king and lord, Osiris, they represent by an *eye* and a *sceptre*, and
some even interpret the name as "Many-eyed," the "os" signifying *many*,
and the "iri," *eye*, in the Egyptian language: and Heaven, as being
exempt from old age by reason of its eternity, by a *heart* with an
altar of incense placed below it. And in Thebes there were dedicated
statues of Judges wanting the hands: whilst that of the chief-judge had
also the eyes closed, showing that Justice is above bribes, and not to
be moved by prayer. The Military class had the *beetle* for device on
signet, for the beetle is never female, but all are males, and they
breed by depositing their seed \[in balls of dung\]; since they make
these balls, not so much to provide material for food, as a place for
propagation of their kind.

XI\. When therefore you shall hear the fables the Egyptians tell about
the gods—their wanderings, cutting to pieces, and many such like mishaps
you ought to bear in mind what has been above stated, and not to suppose
that any of them happened or was done in the manner related. For they do
not really call the *dog* "Hermes," but the animal's watchfulness,
sleeplessness, and sagacity (for by knowledge and absence of knowledge
it distinguishes between friend and foe, as Plato says) make it
appropriate to the most sagacious of the gods: neither do they suppose
that the sun rises as a new born child out of a lotus, but it is in this
way they picture the rising of the sun, enigmatically expressing that
the solar fire is derived from *moisture*. For that most savage and
terrible King of the Persians, Ochus—who put many to death, and finally
butchered Apis and dined upon him along with his friends—they styled
"The Sword," and still call him by that name in the list of kings; that
is not actually describing his person, but likening the hardness and
wickedness of his disposition to an instrument of slaughter. In the same
way must you hear the stories about the gods, and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

receive them from such as interpret mythology, in a reverent and
philosophic spirit, both performing constantly and observing the
established rites of the worship, and believing that no sacrifice nor
act is more well pleasing to the gods, than is the holding the true
faith with respect to them, so will you escape an evil no less great
than Atheism, namely, *Superstition*.

XII\. The following myth is related in the briefest terms possible,
divested of everything unnecessary and superfluous. They tell that the
sun having discovered Rhea secretly copulating with Saturn, laid a curse
upon her, that she should not bring forth a child in either month or
year: that Hermes being in love with the goddess copulated with her; and
afterwards playing at counters with the Moon and winning from her the
seventieth part of each one of her lights, out of the whole composed
five days, the which he added to the three hundred and sixty, which days
now the Egyptians call "additional," and keep as the birthdays of the
gods; that on the first of these was born Osiris, and that, a voice
issued forth with him in the birth, that "the Lord of all is entering
into light." But some relate that a certain Pamyle, when drawing water
out of the Temple of Jupiter at Thebes, heard a voice ordering her to
proclaim with a loud cry, "A great king, beneficent Osiris, is born,"
and for this cause she nursed Osiris, when Saturn put him into her
hands; and also the festival "Pamylia," is celebrated in his honour,
resembling in character the phallic processions. On the second was born
Aroeris, whom some call Apollo, some the elder Horus. On the third
Typhon, neither in due time, nor in the right place, but, breaking
through with a blow, he leaped out through his mother's side. On the
fourth was Isis born, in very wet places. On the fifth was Nephthys, the
same as the "End," and "Venus," whom some call Victory. They say that
Osiris was begotten by the Sun, as also

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Aroeris, by Hermes
Isis, by Saturn Typhon and Nephthys; that Osiris and Isis fell in love
with each other and copulated under the cloak of darkness in the womb;
some say that in this manner was Aroeris begotten, and therefore is
called by Egyptians, the elder Horus, by the Greeks, Apollo.

XIII\. That when Osiris reigned over the Egyptians he made them reform
their destitute and bestial mode of living, showing them the art of
cultivation, and giving them laws, and teaching them how to worship the
gods. Afterwards he travelled over the whole earth, civilizing it; far
from requiring arms, he tamed mankind through persuasion and reasoning
joined with song of all kinds and music which he brought over; wherefore
he is held by the Greeks to be the same with Bacchus. That Typhon,
during his absence, did not rebel, because Isis was on her guard, and
able to keep watch upon him vigorously; but after Osiris returned Typhon
laid a plot against him, having taken seventy and two men into the
conspiracy, and having for helper a queen coming out of Ethiopia, whom
they call Asò. That she secretly measured the body of Osiris, and made
to the size a handsome and highly ornamented coffer which he carried
into the banqueting room. And as they were all delighted with its
appearance and admired it; Typhon promised in sport that whoever should
lie down within it, and should exactly fit, he would make him a present
of the chest; and after the others had tried, one by one, and nobody
fitted it; then Osiris got in, and laid himself down, thereupon the
conspirators running up shut down the lid, and fastened it with
spike-nails from the outside, and poured melted lead over them, and so
carried it out to the River, and let it go down down the Tanaite branch
into the sea: which branch on that account is hateful, and unlucky for
Egyptians to name. These things are said to have been done on the 17th
day of the month

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Athor, when the
sun is passing through the Scorpion, Osiris then being in the eight and
twentieth year of his reign. Some have it that he had *lived*, not
*reigned*, such a time.

XIV\. The first to discover the mischief were the Pans and Satyrs
inhabiting the country round Chemmis and to give intelligence <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) about what had happened, whence the sudden
terrors and fears of the multitude are to the present day called
"panics." Isis on the news, sheared off one of her tresses, and put on a
mourning robe, whence the city, even to the present day has the name of
"Copto" (*I beat the breast*); but others think the name signifies
bereavement, from "coptein" "to deprive." As she wandered about
everywhere, not knowing what to do, she met no one without speaking to
him, nay, even when she fell in with little children, she inquired of
them about the coffer; these last chanced to have seen it, and told her
the branch of the River through which Typhon's accomplices had let the
chest drift into the sea. From this circumstance the Egyptians believe
that little children possess the faculty of prophesy, and that
especially the future is fore-shown by their cries when they are playing
in the temple courts, and calling out whatever it may be. And having
discovered that he (Typhon) had fallen in love and copulated with his
sister, in ignorance, as Osiris had done with herself, and seeing the
proof thereof in the garland of melilote flower which he had left behind
him with Nephthys, she sought for the infant (for she had brought it
forth at once, through her fear of Typhon), she found it at last with
trouble and difficulty, through dogs guiding her to the place. This
infant Isis nursed, and he grew up her guard and minister, being
denominated *Anubis;* and said to watch for the gods just as dogs do for
men.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

XV\. Proceeding thence, she learnt by inquiry that the chest had been
washed up by the sea at a place called Byblus, and that the surf had
gently laid it under an *Erica* tree. This *Erica*, a most lovely plant,
growing up very large in a very short time had enfolded, embraced, and
concealed the coffer within itself. The king of the place being
astonished at the size of the plant, and having cut away the clump that
concealed the coffer from sight, set the latter up as a pillar to
support his roof. They tell how Isis having learnt all this by the
divine breath of fame, came to Byblus, and sitting down by the side of a
spring all dejected and weeping spoke not a word to any other persons,
but saluted and made friends of the maid servants of the queen, by
dressing their hair for them, and infusing into their bodies a wonderful
perfume out of herself; when the queen saw her maids again, she fell a
longing to see the stranger, whose hair and whose body breathed of
ambrosial perfume; and so she was sent for, becoming intimate with the
queen, was made nurse of her infant. The king's name they say was
Malacander, herself some call Astarte, others Sooses, others Neinanoë,
who is the same with the Greek Athenais.

XVI\. Isis is said to have suckled the child by putting, instead of her
nipple, her finger into his mouth, and by night she singed away the
mortal parts of his body. She turned herself into a swallow and flew
around the pillar until the queen watched her, and cried out when she
saw her child all on fire, and so took away the boy's immortality. Then
the goddess, manifesting herself, asked .or the pillar of the roof, and
having removed it with the greatest ease, she cut away the Erica that
surrounded it. This plant she wrapped up in a linen cloth, pouring
perfume over it, and gave it in charge to the king; and to this day the
people of Byblus venerate the wood, which is preserved in the temple of
Isis. The coffin she clasped in

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

her arms, and wailed so loud that the younger of the king's sons died of
fright at it, the elder she took with her and putting the coffer on
board a ship, put to sea; but when the river Phaedrus sent forth too
rough a gale, she grew wrath, and dried up the stream.

XVII\. As soon as ever she obtained privacy, and was left by herself,
having opened the coffer and laid her face upon the face of the corpse,
she wailed and wept; but when the little boy observed this, and came up
quietly from behind to spy, she perceived him, and turning round gave
him a dreadful look in her rage, the child could not stand the fright,
and died. Some say it was not so, but in the manner just stated he
tumbled (in his fright) into the sea, but that he receives honours for
the sake of the goddess, for the Maneros, whom the Egyptians sing about
at their feasts, is this child. Others say that the boy is called
Palaestinos, or Pelusios, and that the city was named after him, having
been founded by the goddess. The Maneros that is sung about, they
relate, first invented music. But some pretend "Maneros" is not the name
[of](errata.htm#0.md) a person, but an expression suited to people drinking
and keeping holiday and signifying "May things of the sort come with
good luck," for that the Egyptians exclaim this, each time, upon the
Maneros being uttered; just as, indeed, the exhibition of a dead man in
his coffin carried round at feasts is not a reminder of the mourning for
Osiris, as some interpret it, but merely intended <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) to warn one to make use of the present and
enjoy it, as very soon they themselves shall be as he, which is why they
bring it in to the feast.

XVIII\. But when Isis had gone to see her son Horus (who was at nurse in
the city Butò), and had put the coffer away, Typhon being out a hunting
by moonlight came upon it, and recognising the corpse, tore it into
*fourteen* pieces,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and scattered them abroad. Isis having heard of this, sought after the
fragments, passing over the swamps in a papyrus boat; for which cause
such as sail in papyrus boats are never injured by the crocodiles,
because they either fear or respect the goddess, from this circumstance
there are many places called "Tombs of Osiris" all over Egypt, because
she, whenever she came upon a fragment of the body, there celebrated a
funeral. Some deny this, but say that she made images and gave them to
the several cities, giving them as the actual body, in order that they
may receive honours from those sailing past, and that if Typhon should
get the better of Horus, when searching for the real tomb he may be
baffled, from many being so called and pointed out. Of the members of
Osiris the only one Isis was unable to find was the genital member, for
it had been thrown at first into the River, and lepidotus, phagrus, and
oxyrynchus had fed upon it, which kinds of fish the natives scruple to
eat above all others, and that Isis in its stead made a model and
consecrated it, namely the *phallus*, in honour whereof the Egyptians
hold a festival.

XIX: Afterwards Osiris came from the shades to Horus, and trained and
exercised him for war, and then asked him "What he thought the finest
thing possible?" and when he replied "to avenge one's father and mother
when ill treated;" he asked him secondly "what he considered the most
useful animal to people going to battle?" and when Horus answered, "the
horse," Osiris wondered at it and was puzzled why he said the *horse*
instead of the *lion*. But when Horus explained that the lion indeed was
serviceable to one standing in need of aid, but the horse can both save
him that flees and also destroy the enemy: Osiris on hearing this was
rejoiced at the supposition that Horus had provided himself with horses.
And as numbers came over from time to time to the side of Horus,
Typhon's concubine, Thucris by name, came also, and a serpent pursuing

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

her was cut to pieces by the friends of Horus; and now in memory of this
event, they throw down a *rope* in the midst of all, and chop it to
pieces. The battle lasted for many days, and Horus vanquished, but Isis
having received from him Typhon in chains, did not destroy, but on the
contrary unbound and let him go free. This Horus did not endure with
patience, but he laid hands on his mother, and pushed the crown off her
head; whereupon Hermes placed a bull's skull upon her instead of helmet.
And when Typhon brought a charge of illegitimacy against Horus, Hermes
acting as his counsel, Horus was pronounced legitimate by the gods.
After this Typhon was beaten in two other battles; and Isis conceived by
Osiris copulating with her after death, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) and brought forth the prematurely born, and
weak in his lower limbs, Harpocrates.

XX\. These are pretty nearly the heads of the legend, the most
blasphemous parts being omitted; for example, about the dismemberment of
Horus, and the decapitation of Isis, because if these things people
believe and say concerning blessed and incorruptible natures (by whose
medium the idea of the deity is mainly conceived) as having been really
done, and really having happened to them—then, as Æschylus hath it:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"We must spit at the tale, and rinse the
mouth:"</span>

</div>

and there is no more need of talking to you, in fact, you are yourself
disgusted at people holding such absurd and uncivilized notions
respecting the gods. Are not these things exactly like the fine-spun
fables and empty tales that poets and story tellers, like spiders, breed
out of themselves, without foundation from first to last, and weave and
spread them out? Nevertheless, this history

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

contains certain questions, and descriptions of real events; and in the
same way as mathematicians say that the rainbow is the image of the sun,
variously coloured through the reflection of the image upon the cloud,
so the legend before us is a kind of reflection of a history reflecting
the true meaning upon other things; as is shown forth by the sacrifices
containing a representation of mourning and sadness; as also by the
ground plan of the temples, in some parts spreading out into colonnades,
and courts open to the sky and lightsome, in others having under ground
hidden and dark galleries (like that at Thebes), and halls as well; and
above all, by the belief of the Osiris worshippers, where his body is
said to be deposited in several places at once. Abydos, perhaps, or the
little town Memphis, they say, is celebrated for possessing the only
true body: and that at Abydos are buried the rich and noble of the
Egyptians, ambitious to share the burial place of Osiris’ body, whilst
in Memphis is kept the Apis, the "Image of the soul of Osiris," where
his body also is said to lie.

XXI\. That city's name also some interpret as "Harbour of good things,"
others as "Tomb of Osiris;" but the "Nisbitane" placed close to the
gates, is universally shunned and unapproachable, not even a bird
perches upon it, nor a fish comes up to it; but at a particular season
the priests cross over, and offer burnt offerings, and crown the
monument which is overshadowed with the shrub called "methides," and
exceeding in size any olive tree. But Eudoxus states that though there
are many so-called Tombs in Egypt, yet that the true monument was
erected at Busiris, for that *that* was the birthplace of Osiris; for
thy; name "Taphosiris" requires no explanation since the name itself
means "Tomb of Osiris." I approve of the *chopping of wood*, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) the *cutting down of flax*, the *pouring
out* 

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

*of libation*, inasmuch as the generality of mystic rites are
interspersed with these ceremonies, and not only the priests of *this*,
but also of the other gods (that is of all that are not unborn and
incorruptible) assert that their *bodies* are deposited with them, and
are taken care of after their decease, but that their souls shine in
heaven as stars; and that of Isis so called by the Greeks the
*Dog-star*, but by the Egyptians *Sothis;* that of Horus, *Orion*, that
of Typhon, the *Bear*, and towards the keep of the sacred animals, all
the rest of Egypt pay an assessment, but the inhabitants of the Thebaid
alone refuse to pay, because they do not hold with *mortal* deities; but
with them whom they themselves call "Kneph," who is unborn and
incorruptible.

XXII\. Since many places of the sort are called and shown as divine
Tombs, those who suppose them to be in reality those of kings and
tyrants (who by reason of their extraordinary merit, or power, had
arrogated honours to themselves by the fame of their superhuman nature,
and had afterwards shared the common lot), whose terrible or mighty
deeds or fates are thus commemorated, such persons find a very easy
evasion of the legend, and shift its indecency from the gods upon *men;*
and they obtain support from the religious rites. For the Egyptians
relate that Hermes had one arm bent so that it could not be
straightened, that Typhon was red in complexion, Horus white, and that
Osiris was black skinned—just as so many men born in the course of
nature. Besides, they call a general "Osiris," and a pilot "Canopus"
(after whom the star is named); also that the ship which the Greeks call
the Argo, was the representation of the bark of Osiris, made a
constellation of in his honour; and it moves along at no great distance
from Orion anti the Dog-star, of which the Egyptians hold the one to be
sacred to Horus, the other to Isis.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

XXIII\. I am afraid that this is "moving things that ought not to be
moved, and making war not only upon antiquity" (as Simonides hath it),
but upon many tribes and families of man, possessed with veneration for
these particular deities, when people let nothing alone, but transfer
these great names from the heavens to the earth, and do their best to
eradicate and destroy (or nearly so) the respect and faith implanted in
men from their infancy, and opening a wide door to the atheistical
sort, <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) and also to him that *humanizes*
the gods, and giving a splendid opportunity to the deceptions of
Evemerus, the Messenian, who, by composing treatises upon his false and
unfounded mythology, disseminated atheism all over the world, reducing
all deities alike to the names of generals, admirals, and kings,
pretended to have flourished in old times; transcribing all this
forsooth from the inscriptions in letters of gold set up at Panchon
which said inscriptions no foreigner nor Greek, save Evemerus alone, as
it seems, has met with, when he made his voyage to the Panchoans and
Triphyllans, people that never were, nor are, in any part of the globe.

XXIV\. And yet great exploits are sung amongst Assyrians, namely those
of Semiramis, and great in Egypt those of Sesostris; the Phrygians even
to this day call splendid exploits "Manic," on account of Manis, one of
their ancient kings, having been good and powerful amongst them, whom
some also call "Masdes." <span id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7.md) Cyrus led the
Persians, Alexander the Macedonians, conquering as they went, to all but
the utmost limits of the world; they nevertheless have the name and the
memory of good kings (not of gods); and if some few, puffed up with
vanity, as Plato says, "with souls inflamed by youth and ignorance,"

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

have out of insolence assumed the style of gods, and the dedication of
temples in their honour, yet their glory has flourished but a brief
space, and thereafter they incurred the charge of vanity and arrogance,
coupled with that of impiety and transgression of law:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Raised up like smoke, they quickly fell to
earth:"</span>

</div>

And now like fugitives that can be arrested, they are dragged out from
their temples and altars, they keep nothing but their names and tombs.
On which account, Antigonus the Elder, when a certain Hermodatus, in his
verses, compared him to the Sun, and styled him a god, replied, "The
carrier of my night-stool has not so good an opinion of me"; and with
reason did Lysippus, the sculptor, censure Apelles, the painter, because
in painting Alexander's portrait he had put a thunderbolt into his hand,
whereas he himself had put a spear, the glory of which no time shall
efface, inasmuch as it is genuine and appropriate.

XXV\. Do they, therefore, better, who believe the legends told about
Typhon, Osiris, and Isis, not to refer to either gods or men, but to
certain *great Powers* (dæmons), whom Plato, Pythagoras, Xenocrates, and
Chrysippus (following the ancient theologians) assert to have been
created far stronger than men, and greatly surpassing our nature in
power, but yet having the divine part not entirely unmixed nor
unalloyed, but combined with the nature of the soul and the senses of
the body, susceptible of pleasure and pain, and all other emotions the
result of these, that by their vicissitudes disturb, some in a greater,
others in a less degree; for, in that case, as amongst men, so amongst
dæmons, exist degrees of virtue and of vice. For the deeds of the Giants
and Titans, sung of by the Greeks, certain atrocious actions of Saturn,
the pitched battle between Python and Apollo, the flight of Bacchus, the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

wanderings of Ceres do not fall short in absurdity of the legends about
Osiris and Typhon, and the others that one may hear told by mythologists
to any amount—all the things that are shrouded in mystic ceremonies, and
are presented by rites, being kept secret and out of sight from the
vulgar, and have a shape similar to those mentioned of the Egyptians.

XXV\. We also hear Homer perpetually styling the surpassingly good,
"godlike," and "equal to gods," and—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">… "having from gods their sense:"</span>

</div>

whereas he applies the epithet derived from dæmons indifferently to good
and bad:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Approach *Dæmonian;* wherefore fearest thou so—The
Argives?"</span>

</div>

And again—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When like a dæmon the fourth time he charged:"  
"O *dæmon-like!* what harm hath Priam done thee,  
Or Priam's race, that thus thou aye should strive  
The beauteous town of Troy from earth to raze?"</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As though the
dæmons had a *mixed* and *inconsistent* nature and disposition. For
which reason Plato attributes to the Olympian gods all things ingenious
and extraordinary; but the opposite of these to dæmons; and Xenocrates
thinks that the unlucky days of the month, and whatever festivals are
accompanied with *stripes* and *blows*, *abusive or obscene language*,
have nothing to do with honouring the gods or good dæmons: but that
there are certain Powers of Nature existing in the circumambient air,
great and strong indeed, but malignant and ill-tempered, who take
delight in such things, and if they obtain them, betake themselves to
nothing worse. But the good ones, on the contrary, Hesiod styles "pure
dæmons," and "guardians of men";—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Givers of wealth; and with such royal
power."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Plato terms
this species "Hermeneutic" and "Dæmonean," a middle class between gods
and men, conveying up thither vows and prayers from mankind, and
bringing down from thence to earth prophesies and gifts of things good.
Empedocles even asserts that dæmons suffer punishment for their sins
both of commission and omission:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Celestial wrath pursues them down to sea;  
 Sea spits them out on earth: earth to the rays  
 Of Sol unweared: he to the eddying air  
 Sends back the culprits; each receives in turn,  
 And all alike reject the hateful crew:"</span>

</div>

until having been thus *chastened* and *purified*, they obtain once more
their natural place and position.

XXVII\. Akin to these and suchlike stories are, they say, the legends
told concerning Typhon; how that he committed dreadful crimes out of
envy and spite, and by throwing all things into confusion he filled with
evils all the land and sea as well, and finally was punished for it. But
the avenger of Osiris, his Sister and Wife, who extinguished and put a
stop to the madness and fury of Typhon; did not forget the contests and
struggles she had gone through, nor yet her own wanderings, nor did she
suffer oblivion and silence to envelope <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) her many deeds of wisdom, many feats of
courage, but by intermingling with the most sacred ceremonies, images,
hints, and representations of her sufferings of yore, she consecrated at
one and the same time, both lessons of piety and consolation in
suffering for men and women when overtaken by misfortune. And she,
together with Osiris, having been translated from the rank of good
dæmons up to that of gods, by means of their virtue (as later was done
with Hercules and Bacchus) receive, not inappropriately, the united
honours of gods and of dæmons everywhere, both in the regions

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

above earth, and in those under ground, possessing the supreme power,
for they say that *Serapis* is no other than Pluto, and Isis Proserpine,
as Archemoros of Euboea has asserted; as also Heraclitus of Pontas, when
he supposes the Oracle at Canopas to belong to Pluto.

XXVIII\. Ptolemy Soter beheld in a dream the Colossus of Pluto at
Sinope, (though he had not before known nor seen what it was in
appearance,) ordering him to bring it as soon as possible to Alexandria;
and when he was ignorant and at a loss as to where the statue then
stood, and was relating the vision to his friends, there was found a
man, a great traveller, by name Sosibius, that declared he had seen at
Sinope just such a Colossus as the king had dreamt he saw. He therefore
despatched Soteles and Dionysius, who after much time and with
difficulty (not, however, without divine aid) *stole* and brought away
the statue. And when it was brought and seen, then Timotheus, the
interpreter, and Manetho, the Sebennite, and their fellows,
*conjecturing* that it was a figure of Pluto (drawing this conclusion
from the Cerberus and the Serpent), *made Ptolemy believe* that it is of
no other god, but of Serapis, for it did not come bearing such a name
from the other place, but *after* it had been brought to Alexandria, it
got the name that Pluto bears amongst the Egyptians, namely, *Serapis*.
And seeing that Heraclitus, the natural philosopher, asserts that "Hades
and Dionysos are the same person, when they are infuriated and rave,"
they (the Egyptians) slip unconsciously into the same belief. For such
as explain that *Hades* means the *Body*, because the Soul is as it were
out of its senses, and drunken, <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) when
confined therein, such people are too far fetched in their
interpretation. It is better, therefore, to connect Osiris with Bacchus,
and Serapis with Osiris, for

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the latter obtained this appellation after he had changed his
nature, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) inasmuch as Serapis is
common <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md) to all, in the same way as
such as have partaken of the sacred rites know that Osiris is.

XXIX\. For it is not worth while paying any attention to the Phrygian
sacred books, wherein it is said that Serapis <span
id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12.md) was the daughter of Hercules, and Typhon,
son of Isaicus, son of…, nor yet to avoid treating Phylarchus with
contempt for saying that Bacchus first brought two oxen out of India to
Egypt; the name of one of which was *Apis*, of the other *Osiris*. For
Serapis is the name of Him who puts in order the universe (πᾶν), joined
to "sairein" which some say means "to beautify and arrange." <span
id="fr_13"></span>[4](#fn_13.md) For these remarks of Phylarchus are
absurd; yet far more absurd the opinion of such as say Serapis is no god
at all, but the coffin of Apis is so called: <span
id="fr_14"></span>[5](#fn_14.md) (they also talk of certain brazen doors at
Memphis, named the "Doors of Oblivion and Wailing," which when they bury
Apis utter a deep and harsh sound, for which reason \[we are forbidden\]
to touch any sounding vessel of brass.) More endurable is the
explanation of such as derive it from "stimulating (σεύεσθαι) the motion
of the universe. But the most part of the priests say that "Osiris" and
"Apis" are united into the same word, for they explain and inform us
that we ought to consider the Apis as a beautiful *image* of the soul of
Osiris. But for my part, if the name of Serapis is really Egyptian, and
I think it signifies Cheerfulness and Rejoicing, founding my conjecture
on the fact that the Egyptians call the festival of Rejoicing,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Sai rei," in fact
Plato says that Hades <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) is so named as
the "Son of Respectfulness," and a god benevolent to such as dwell with
him; and amongst the Egyptians many other of the names (of gods) are
significant words; also that subterraneous place whither they believe
the souls go after death, they call "Amenthen," the name signifying
"that which gives and takes," But whether this be one of the names
carried out of Greece in ancient times, and brought back again, we will
consider further on; at present it is our business to go through the
remaining parts of this belief.

XXX\. Osiris and Isis passed from the rank of good dæmons to that of
deities; but the power of Typhon although dimmed and crushed, and still,
as it were, in the last agony and convulsions, they nevertheless
propitiate and soothe by means of certain sacrifices: but occasionally
they humiliate and insult him at certain festivals, when they abuse red
haired men and tumble an ass down a precipice; for example this is done
by the people of Memphis, because Typhon was red haired, and like an ass
in complexion. The people of Busiris and Lycopolis do not use trumpets
at all because they make a sound like the ass: and altogether, they
regard the ass as an unclean and dæmon-like animal on account of his
resemblance to that personage: they make cakes also at the sacrifice of
the month Paÿni and of Phaophi, and print upon them for device an ass
tied. And at the sacrifice to the Sun, they enjoin those that worship
this god, not to wear upon the person ornaments of gold, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16.md) nor to give food to an ass. The
Pythagoreans, too, prove that they regard Typhon as a dæmonic Power, for
they say in perfect measure that Typhon was born on the fifty-sixth; and
again that the

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (figure) of the
*Triangle* belongs to Pluto, Bacchus and Mars; that of the *Tetragon* to
Rhea, Venus, Ceres, Vesta, and Juno; that of the *Dodecagon* to Jove;
but that of the Fifty-six sided figure to Typhon—as Eudoxus hath
related.

XXXI\. The Egyptians, believing that Typhon was born with red hair,
dedicate to sacrifice the red coloured oxen, and make the scrutiny so
close that if the beast should have even a single black or white hair,
they consider it unfit for sacrifice; because such beast, offered for
sacrifice, is not acceptable to the gods, but the contrary (as is)
whatsoever has received the souls of unholy and unjust men, that have
migrated into other bodies. For which reason they heap curses on the
head of the victim, cut it off, and formerly used to throw it into the
River, but nowadays they sell it to foreigners. But the ox intended for
sacrifice, those of the priests entitled "Sealers" used to seal: the
signet bearing (as Castor relates) an engraving of a man forced down on
his knees, with hands twisted round upon his back, having a sword placed
against his throat. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) The ass has got
the credit of this resemblance \[to Typhon\] as they think, on account
of his stupidity and unruliness, as well as his colour; for which reason
as they detest Ochus especially of the Persian Kings, as sacrilegious
and polluted, they surnamed him "the Ass," and he replying, "The Ass
shall feast upon your Bull," he slaughtered the Apis, as Dinon tells us.
But those who say that Typhon made his flight out of the battle during
seven days upon an ass; and after escaping begot Hierosolymus and
Judæus—these are discovered by that very fact to be lugging the Jewish
history into the legend.

XXXII\. These things, then, afford grounds for the explanations above
advanced. Let us start afresh, and consider the most straightforward
expositions; that is to say, those who are reputed to treat the subject
in a more philosophic

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

manner. These are such as pretend, like the Greeks, that Saturn
symbolizes *Time*, Juno the *Air*, the birth of Vulcan, the change of
Air into *Fire;* and similarly amongst the Egyptians, that Osiris is the
*Nile*, copulating with Isis the *Earth;* Typhon, the *Sea*, into which
the Nile flowing vanishes and is dispersed, except as much part as the
earth has taken from him and received, and becomes productive thereby.
There is, too, a religious lament made over Saturn, and it laments "him
that is born in the *left* region, and that dies in the *right*." For
the Egyptians hold that the Eastern parts are the *face* of the World,
the Northern its right hand, the Southern its left. The Nile, therefore,
flowing from the North, and in the South swallowed up by the sea, is as
reasonably said to have his birth in the left hand region, and his death
in the right. On which account the priests abominate the sea, and call
salt "the foam of Typhon," and it is one of their prohibitions, "Not to
put salt upon the table," and they do not speak to mariners, nor make
use of the sea, and they keep the ox away from the sea, and from this
cause principally do they reject fish, and write up "Hate fish." At any
rate, at Sais, in the forecourt of the temple of Minerva, there was
sculptured a child, an old man, after this a hawk, next, a fish, and at
the end of all, a river-horse, and it signifies symbolically, "O ye that
are coming into life, and ye that are going out of it \[The Deity abhors
impudence\] <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) … for the reason \[they
put the\] old man .. . By the hawk they mean *God*, by the fish,
*hatred*, on account of the sea, as has been above stated; by the river
horse, *impudence*, for that beast is reported to kill its sire, and
copulates forcibly with its dam: and the saying of the Pythagoreans that
the sea is Saturn's tears, seed, may seem to imply the impurity and
unsociable nature of the same element.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

XXXIII\. Let these stories then be told by foreigners, since they offer
an explanation within everybody's reach; but the more learned among the
priests do not only call the Nile, "Osiris," and the sea, "Typhon," but
give the name of Osiris generally to every Principle and Power
productive of *moisture;* regarding this as the cause of generation and
the essence of seed. "Typhon" they call everything *dry*, *fiery*,
*dessicative*, and *antagonistic to moisture;* for which reason as they
believe him to have been red skinned and yellowish in person, they do
not very willingly meet, or converse with pleasure with people having
such a complexion; on the other hand they fable that Osiris was
black-coloured because all water blackens earth, clouds, and garments,
when mingled therewith; and in young people the presence of moisture
renders the hair black, whereas greyness is, as it were, a *growing
pale*, that by reason of dessication, comes upon them who are past their
prime. The Spring too is flourishing, generative, and agreeable; but
Autumn through the deficiency of moisture is both injurious to plants,
and pestilential to animals. And the Ox that is kept at Heliopolis,
which they call Mnevis (sacred to Osiris, and which some believe to be
the sire of the Apis) <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) is black, and
receives secondary honours to those paid to Apis. Besides, Egypt which
is of a black soil to the highest degree, as well as the black part of
the eye, they call "Chemia," <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md) and
compare it to a *heart*, for it is hot and moist, and is chiefly
inclosed and annexed to the southern parts of the habitable world, in
the same manner as the heart is in the left hand parts of man.

XXXIV\. The Sun and the Moon they symbolize as

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

using not chariots but boats for vehicles in performing their courses,
expressing allegorically their nourishment and origin from moisture: and
they think that Homer, like Thales, had learnt from the Egyptians to lay
down that Water was the beginning and origin of all things, for that his
ocean is Osiris, and his Tethys Isis, as nursing, and helping to breed
up all things. For the Greeks call the emission of seed ἀπουσία, and
copulation συνουσία; and ὑιὸς from ὕδωρ and ὗσαι, and Bacchus they
entitle "γυς," as being lord of the moist principle, he being no other
than Osiris, in fact Hellenicus has put down that he heard Osiris called
*Ysiris* by the priests; and he persists in so denominating that god,
probably on account of his nature, and his invention.

XXXV\. That indeed he is the same with Bacchus, who is more fitted to
know than yourself, Clea, you who have headed the Bacchanals at Delphi,
and have been initiated into the rites of Osiris, ever since your
childhood? But if for the sake of other people we must produce
testimony, let us put on one side the things not to be revealed; but the
ceremonies the priests perform in public when they are conveying the
body on a raft, at the burial of the Apis, differ in nothing from the
Bacchanalea; for they tie fawn-skins about them, and carry thyrsi, and
make shoutings and motions like those possessed with the divine frenzy
in honour of Bacchus; for which cause many of the Greeks represent
Dionysos in the form of a *Bull* in his images; and the women of the
Eleians when praying, exhort the "god with the bull's foot," to come to
them. The Argives too have a Bacchus by title the "Bull-born;" and they
call him up out of water by the sound of trumpets, casting into the deep
pool as offerings to the "Pylaochus." The trumpets they conceal within
the thyrsi as Socrates has described it in his treatise on Rituals. The
Titanic also and Nyctelean rites are of the same kind with

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the fabled tearing to pieces of the body of Osiris, his re-turnings to
life, and his new births; and, similarly, the stories about his burials.
For the Egyptians, as already stated, show Tombs of Osiris in many
places; and the Delphians believe that the relics of Bacchus are
deposited with themselves by the side of the Oracle: <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) and their "Holy Ones" offer a secret
sacrifice in the Temple of Apollo at what time the Bacchantes waken up
"Him of the winnowing fan." And that the Greeks hold Bacchus for lord
and leader not only of the wine but of the whole element of Moisture,
Pindar is sufficient testimony where he says, "May Bacchus that
rejoiceth greatly in trees and pastures, augment the pure light of
Autumn," for which reason it is forbidden to those that worship Osiris
to destroy any cultivated tree, or to stop up any spring of water.

XXXVI\. For not the Nile only, but all moisture in general they call the
"Issue of Osiris," and the water vase always leads the procession of the
priests in honour of the god, and by the figure of a fig-leaf they
represent a king, and the Southern quarter of the world; and the
*fig-leaf* is interpreted as the *watering* and *stimulation* of all
things, and it is supposed to resemble in its shape the organ of
generation. And when they celebrate (as already stated) the feast of
Pamylia, which is a phallic one, they expose and carry about an image of
which the genital member is thrice the natural size; for the god is the
Final Cause, and every Final Cause multiplied by generation a function,
that which proceeds from itself: and for "often" we are accustomed to
say "thrice," for example "thrice-happy," and—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Three times as many chains, without an end."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Unless perhaps,
this triplication of the member was understood by the ancients in its
strict sense; inasmuch as the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

moist Principle being the Final Cause and origin of all things, has
produced from the beginning the three first elements, Earth, Air, Fire.
For the tale that is tacked on to the myth, how that Typhon threw away
the genital member of Osiris into the River, and that Isis could not
find it, but deposited and prepared a model of the same, ordaining that
people should honour it and carry the phallus about—all this permits us
to infer that the generative and seminal power of the god had first for
materials *moisture*, and by means of moisture was mixed up with the
things fitted by Nature to participate in birth. There is another legend
of the Egyptians that Apopis, being brother of the Sun, made war upon
Jupiter, and that Jupiter adopted for son Osiris who had assisted him,
and had brought the war to an end along with him, and surnamed him
Bacchus. Of this legend the fabulous character can be shown to contain a
touch of truth as regards natural history. For the Egyptians give the
name of Jupiter to the *breath*, <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) to
which everything dry and fiery is antagonistic. This latter element is
not the Sun, but has a certain affinity to the Sun; now moisture
quenching the excess of dryness, augments and strengthens the
exhalations by means of which the wind is nourished and made vigorous.

XXXVII\. And, moreover, the Greeks consecrate the ivy to Bacchus, and
amongst the Egyptians it is called "Kenosiris," the name signifying (as
they say) the "plant of Osiris"—Ariston, therefore, who wrote the
"Colonies of the Athenians," met with an epistle of Alexarchus (a writer
without any knowledge of the subject) in which it is related that
Bacchus, being son of Isis, was not called "Osiris" by the Egyptians,
but "Arsaphes" (in his First Book), this name signifying *manliness*.
Hermæus, too, declares the same thing in his First Book "Upon the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egyptians," for he
says that Osiris" interpreted is "weighty." I pass by Mnaseas who
identifies with Epaphus both Bacchus, Osiris, and Serapis; I also pass
over Anticlidas who, says that Isis was daughter of Prometheus, and
consort of Bacchus—for the above-stated peculiarities in the sacrifices
and ceremonies carry with them proof more convincing than any testimony.

XXXVIII\. Of the stars, they hold Sirius to be Isis’ *Water-carrier*,
they honour the Lion, and decorate the gateways of temples with gaping
lions’ heads, because the Nile swells:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When first the Sun doth with the Lion join."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And as they hold
and believe the Nile the issue of Osiris, so do they regard the earth as
the body of Isis: not indeed the whole earth but just as much as the
Nile inundates, fecundating and mingling with it; for from the union
they beget Horus. Horus is that which preserves and nourishes all thing,
namely the Seasons and the regulator of the circumambient air; and they
tell that he was nursed by Leto in the marshes round Buto, because the
watery and thoroughly soaked earth chiefly *nurses* the exhalations that
quench and relax the dryness and drought of the air. "Nephthys" they
call the remotest parts and boundaries of the land, and those contiguous
to the sea; for which reason they style Nephthys the "end," and say that
she is the consort of Typhon. And when the Nile rising beyond the usual
height, and growing great, approaches on the opposite side towards the
extremities of the country, they call this the copulation of Osiris with
Nephthys, which is betrayed by the springing up of plants; amongst which
is the melilote, by which flowers having fallen off and been left behind
(by Osiris) Typhon made the discovery of the injury done to his bed:
from which same copulation

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Isis indeed
conceived Horus legitimately, but Nephthys had Anubis, a bastard.
However, in the "Successions of the Kings" they record that Nephthys,
being married to Typhon, was at first barren, and if they tell this not
of a woman, but of a goddess, they express enigmatically that the entire
extent of the country was unproductive, and bore no crops from
barrenness.

XXXIX\. The conspiracy and tyranny of Typhon means the power of drought
getting the better of, and destroying the moisture that both generates
and augments the Nile: and his helper, the Queen of the Ethiopians,
signifies the south winds from Ethiopia; for when these prevail over the
Etesian winds (which drive the clouds towards Ethiopia), and hinder them
from dissolving into rains and swelling the Nile, then does Typhon take
possession and burn; and at that time he has completely mastered the
Nile, which through weakness is contracted and shrunk up within itself;
and drives it out, hollow and humble, into the sea: for the shutting up
of Osiris in the coffer probably means nothing else than the concealment
and disappearance of the water: for which reason they say that Osiris
vanished in the month Athyr, at which time, the Etesian winds having
entirely ceased, the Nile recedes, and the country is laid bare, and
night lengthening, darkness is increased, and the power of light wastes
away and is subdued, and the priests also perform other dismal rites,
and cover a gilt ox with a black veil of linen; and so exhibit it in
mourning for the goddess (for they consider the ox as the animated image
of Osiris) for four consecutive days, beginning with the seventeenth.
For the things mourned for are four in number: first, the Nile failing
and shrinking; secondly, the Northerly breezes entirely extinguished
through the Southerly getting the upper hand; thirdly, the day growing
shorter than the night; and in addition to all this, the exposure of the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

land, coupled with the stripping of the trees, which cast their leaves
at that very time. But on the nineteenth at night they go down to the
sea, and the "Dressers" and priests bring out the sacred coffer
containing a little golden ark, into which they take and pour water from
the river, and a shout is raised by the assistants, as though Osiris had
been found: next, they knead garden earth with this water, and mingling
therewith frankincense and precious spices, they model a little image in
the shape of the Moon, and this they robe and decorate, expressing
thereby that they hold these deities to be the Principles of Earth and
Water.

XL\. But when Isis has recovered Osiris, and is making Horus grow,
strengthened by means of exhalations clouds and mists, Typhon has been
conquered indeed, but not destroyed, because the goddess of the Earth
hath not suffered the Principle opposed to moisture to be entirely
exterminated, but she lowered and slackened the same, wishing that the
mixture might still continue: inasmuch as it was not possible for the
world to be complete if the fiery principle failed and were
exterminated, and if all this is not told in so many words, yet one may
not reasonably regret the story that Typhon of old conquered the party
of Osiris. For Egypt was once sea; for which cause many places in the
mines and in the mountains are found to contain shells to the present
day; and all springs, and wells, whereof there are many, have their
water brackish and bitter; as though being a stale remnant of the former
sea which had collected there. But in time, Osiris got the better of
Typhon; that is a good season of rains having cone on the Nile drove off
the sea, and brought to light the flat ground, and filled up the same
with its alluvial deposits: a thing that has for it the testimony of our
senses: for we see even now that through the River's perpetually
bringing down fresh mud, and adding on the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

land, the deep water gradually recedes, and the sea runs back, in
consequence of the bottom rising up through the alluvial deposit: and
the Pharos which Homer knew as distant a day's sail from Egypt, is new a
part thereof: not that the island itself has grown larger, or come
nearer, but because the sea has retreated through the river's forming
and making the mainland to grow. This however is of the same kind with
the theological theories of the Stoics, for they too say that the
generative and nutritive spirit is Bacchus; the impulsive and
separative, Hercules; the receptive, Ammon; Ceres and Proserpine, that
which pervades the earth and her fruits; and Neptune that pervading the
sea.

XLI\. But such as mix with these physical doctrines others derived from
astrology and the mathematics, think that Typhon signifies the solar
world, and Osiris the Lunar: for that the moon having her light of a
fertilising and more watery nature is favourable to the breeding of
animals and the growing of plants: but that the sun is ordained with his
unmitigated light to heat and parch up things that grow up and flourish,
and to render the great part of the earth utterly uninhabitable through
his blazing, and also to get the better of the Moon herself. For which
reason the Egyptians always call Typhon "Seth," <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) which signifies *that which tyrannises*,
and which *forcibly constrains*, and they fable that Hercules resides in
the Sun, and travels about with him, but Hermes does the same with the
Moon; for the effects of the Moon resemble the actions of reason, and
those dictated by wisdom; whereas those of the Sun are like strokes
brought to pass through violence and force, and the Stoics say that the
Sun is set on fire, and derives his nutriment from the sea, whereas to
the Moon the fountain

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and lacustrine waters send up a sweet and gentle exhalation.

XLII\. On the seventeenth day of the month took place, as the Egyptians
fable, the death of Osiris, on which day the full Moon being completed
becomes most conspicuous: on which account the Pythagoreans call that
day "Antiphraxis," (*precaution*); and generally abominate that
particular number, for sixteen being a square number and eighteen having
sides of unequal length which alone of the integral numbers have the
peculiarity of possessing external measurements equal to the areas
contained by them, <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md) the seventeen
intruding hedges off and disjoins them from one another, and distracts
the proportion of one to eight, because it is itself cut up into unequal
parts. The number of years that some say Osiris lived, others that he
reigned, was eight-and-twenty: for just so many are the lights of the
moon, and for so many days doth she revolve about her circle. By the
wood they cut down at the so-called burials of Osiris, and construct
therewith a crescent-shaped coffer, they signify that the Moon when she
approaches the Sun, becomes crescent-shaped and hides herself: and the
tearing up of Osiris into fourteen parts they interpret of the days
during which the luminary wanes after full moon, until the new moon, and
the day when she first appears after escaping the brightness of, and
passing by the Sun, they style "Imperfect Good"; for Osiris is a doer of
good, and his name signifies many things, but especially, as they say,
"the power that is active and beneficial"; and the other name of Osiris,
namely, "Ompis" means, according to Hermaeus, by interpretation
"Benefactor."

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

XLIII\. For they are of opinion that to the lights of the Moon the
risings of the Nile bear a certain analogy: for the greatest rising,
that about Elephantine, is of eight-and-twenty cubits, the same in
number as the lights and measures of her monthly revolutions, the
lowest, around Mendes and Xois, is of six cubits, analogous to her
half-quartering; and the mean, that round Memphis, when it is of the
regular height, is fourteen cubits, corresponding to the full moon.
Apis, they say, is the animated image of Osiris, and he is conceived
when a generative light falls strongly from the Moon, and touches a cow
that is in heat; for which cause many of the decorations of Apis
resemble the appearances of the Moon; for he blackens over his shining
parts with dusky robes, because it is on the new moon of the month
Phamenath that they hold the festival, called by them "the Entrance of
Osiris into the Moon"; being the commencement of spring. Thus they place
the power of Osiris within the Moon, and say that Isis, being cause of
his birth is also his consort. On this account they call the Moon the
Mother of Saturn, and hold that she is of hermaphrodite nature, for she
is filled and impregnated by the Sun, and again she emits and
disseminates in the air generative principles: for that she doth not
always express the mischief wrought by Typhon; but being after conquered
by the birth, and bound thereby, she nevertheless emerges again and
fights her way through to Horus: this latter is the universe surrounding
the earth, which is not entirely exempt either from generation or
destruction.

XLIV\. Some make an allegory out of the rule of the eclipses, for the
Moon is eclipsed at her full, when the Sun holds the station opposite to
her when she falls into the shadow of the earth, in the same way as they
tell Osiris did into the coffer; and she herself, upon the thirtieth
conceals and puts out of sight, yet does not altogether destroy,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

the Sun, as neither did Isis Typhon. And when Nephthys conceives Anubis,
Isis adopts him, for Nephthys signifies what is under the earth and
invisible; Isis, what is above ground and visible; and the circle
touching these, called the *Horizon*, and common to both, has been named
Anubis, and is figured as a dog; for the dog has the use of his sight
both by night and by day; and Anubis appears to have the same office
with the Egyptians that Hermes has with the Greeks, being both infernal
and celestial. Some, however, think that Anubis signifies *Time*,
wherefore as he brings forth all things *out* of himself, and conceives
all things *within* himself, he gets the title of Dog. Besides, the
votaries of Anubis celebrate a certain mystery, <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) and in old times the dog enjoyed the
highest honours in Egypt. But when Cambyses had slain the apis and cast
him out, nothing approached, or tasted of the carcase, except the dog,
so he lost his place of the first, and the most honoured of all the
other animals. And there are some that think he is the shadow of the
earth into which the Moon passes when she is eclipsed, and they call him
Typhon.

XLV\. From all which, it is not unreasonable to conclude that no one
singly says what is right, and that all collectively do so; for it is
neither *drought*, nor *wind*, nor the *sea*, nor *darkness*, but
generally every hurtful and mischievous part that earth contains, which
belongs to Typhon. For we must not place the principles of the all in
lifeless bodies, as do Democritus and Epicurus: nor yet assume as
modeller of untreated matter, one Reason and one Providence, like the
Stoics, that prevails over and subdues all things: for it is impossible
that anything at all, whether bad or good, should exist, where God is
cause of nothing. For the harmony of the universe is reciprocal, like
that

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of a lyre or bow, according to Heraclitus, and according to Euripides:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Evil and good cannot occur apart;  
 There is a mixture to make all go well."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Consequently this
is a most ancient notion, that comes down from theologians and lawgivers
to poets and philosophers, which has its origin unattributed, but the
belief therein strong and not to be effaced, not consisting in words and
reports, but in ceremonies and sacrifices, of Barbarians and Greeks
alike, and diffused in many places, that neither is the Universe without
mind, without reason, and without guidance, and tossed about at random,
nor yet is there One Reason that rules and directs all things as it
were, by a rudder and by guiding reins, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) but that there are many such directors,
and made up out of good and bad; or rather, to speak generally, inasmuch
as Nature produces nothing unmixed here below, it is not one Dispenser
that like a retail dealer mixes together things for us out of two
vessels and distributes the same, <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27.md)
but it is from *two opposite Principles* and *two antagonistic Powers;*
the one guiding us to the right hand and along the straight road, the
other upsetting and rebuffing us, that Life becomes of a mixed nature;
and also the Universe (if not the whole, yet that which surrounds Earth,
and lies below the Moon), is made inconsistent with itself, and variable
and susceptible of frequent changes. For if nothing can happen without
cause, and good cannot furnish cause for evil, it follows that the
nature of Evil, as of Good, must have an origin and principle of its
own.

XLVI\. And this is the opinion of most men, and those

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the wisest, for they believe, some that there are Two Gods, as it were
of opposite trades—one the creator of good, the other of bad things;
others call the better one "God," the other "Dæmon," as did Zoroaster
the Magian, who, they record, lived 5,000 years before the Trojan War.
He therefore calls the former "Oromazes," the latter "Arimanios;" and
furthermore explains that of all the objects of sense, the one most
resembles *Light*, the other *Darkness*, and *Ignorance;* and that
Mithras is between the two, for which reason the Persians call Mithras
the "Mediator," and he \[Zoroaster\] taught them to offer sacrifice of
vows and thanksgiving to the one, of deprecation and mourning to the
other. For they bruise a certain herb called "omoine" in a mortar and
invoke Hades and Darkness, and mixing it with the blood of a wolf they
have sacrificed, they carry away and throw it into a place where the Sun
never comes, for of plants they believe some to belong to the good God,
others to the evil Dæmon; and similarly of animals, dogs, birds, and
land hedgehogs belong to the Good, but to the Bad One water rats, for
which reason they hold happy men that have killed the greatest number of
such things.

XLVII\. They too, nevertheless, tell many fabulous stories concerning
their gods—for example, the following: that Oromazes sprang out of the
purest Light, but Arimanios out of Darkness; they wage war upon each
other. Oromazes created six gods, the first of Goodwill, the second of
Truth, the third of Order, of the rest one of Wisdom, one of Wealth, one
of Pleasure in things beautiful. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) The
other God created, as it were, opponents to these deities, equal in
number. Then Oromazes, having augmented himself threefold, severed from
the Sun as much space as the Sun is distant from Earth, and adorned the
heavens with stars; and one star he appointed before all for guard

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

and look out, namely Sirius. And having created four-and-twenty other
gods, he shut them up in an egg; but those made by Arimanios, being as
many as they, pierced the egg that had been laid, and so the bad things
were mixed up with the good. But a time appointed by fate is coming, in
which Arimanios having brought on famine and pestilence must needs be
destroyed by the same and utterly vanish; when the earth becoming plain
and level there shall be one life and one government of men, all happy
and of one language. Theopompus says that, according to the Magi, one of
the Gods shall conquer, the other be conquered, alternately for 3,000
years; for another 3,000 years they shall fight, war, and undo one the
works of the other; but in the end Hades shall fail, and men shall be
happy, neither requiring food nor constructing shelter: whilst the God
who hath contrived all this is quiet and resting himself for a time, for
that God may well slumber, but not long, like as a man reposing for a
moderate space. The religious system of the Magi is of the aforesaid
character.

XLVIII\. The Chaldeans hold that the gods belong to the planets, of whom
two they call "doers of good," two "makers of evil;" the other three
they describe as intermediate and neutral. But the notions of the Greeks
are, I suppose, plain enough to every one, for they make the good part
that of the Olympian Jove, that of the hostile deity they give to Hades;
and they fable that *Harmony* was the child of Venus and Mars, of whom
the one is cruel and quarrelsome, the other gentle, and presiding over
birth. Consider too the philosophers that side with them, for Heraclitus
directly calls Mars, father, lord, and ruler of all things; and says
that Homer, when he prays that

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Perish Contention, both from gods and men,"</span>

</div>

forgets that he is cursing the origin of all things, inasmuch

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

as they derive their origin from contention and antipathy, and the Sun
will not overpass his appointed limits, otherwise:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The avenging tongue of Law would find him
out,"</span>

</div>

and Empedocles calls the Beneficent Principle "Love" and "Friendship,"
and frequently too, Harmony, "with glowing face," but the Evil Principle
he styles

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Contentiousness accurst, and blood-stained
War."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now the
Pythagoreans characterize these Principles by several names: the Good
One, as the "One," the "Definite," the "Abiding," the "Straight," the
"Exceeding," the "Square," the "Equal," the "Right-handed," the
"Bright;" the Bad One as the "Two," the "Indefinite," the "Unstable,"
the "Crooked," the "Sufficient," the "Unequally-sided" (parallelogram),
the "Unequal," the "Left-handed," the "Dark"—inasmuch as these are
supposed the final causes of existence—Anaxagoras defines them as
"Mind," and the "Infinite;" Aristotle, the one as "Form," the other as
"Deprival." Plato, as it were mystifying and veiling the matter,
denominates in many places one of the opposing Principles as "The Same;"
the second, as "The Other;" but in his "Laws," being now grown older, he
no longer speaks in riddles and symbolically, but names them directly.
"Not by one soul," says he, "was the universe set in motion, but by
several, perhaps, at all events, by not less than *Two;* whereof the one
is beneficent, the other antagonistic to this, and the creator of
opposite effects: and there is room for a *Third Principle* to exist,
one intermediate between the Two, which is neither destitute of soul,
nor of reason, nor of impulse from within (as some suppose), but
subordinate to those Two Principles, ever seeking after the Better One,
and desiring and following after it," as the part of the treatise

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

which follows will show, for he adopts into this system chiefly the
religious notions of the Egyptians.

XLIX\. For the origin and constitution of this world are mixed, being
formed out of opposite principles—not, however, of equal force with each
other, but the superiority belonging to the Better One. But it is
impossible that the Bad One should be entirely destroyed, as it is
largely implanted in the body, largely in the soul of the all, and
always contending against the Better One. Now in the soul, *Mind*, and
*Reason*, the best masters and guides, are *Osiris;* but in Earth and
Water, Winds and Stars, that which is ordered, permanent, and healthy,
in seasons, temperament, and revolutions, are the issue of *Osiris*, and
the *image* of him made visible. But Typhon is the part of the soul that
is subject to the passions, Titan-like, unreasonable, and impulsive; but
of the body (he is) the part that is unsound, subject to disease, and
liable to disturbance by bad seasons and inclement weather, by the
concealments of the Sun, and the disappearances of the Moon—such as
deviations from its course, vanishings, and whirlwinds. And the name
"Seth," by which they call Typhon, proves this; for it signifies "That
which tyrannizes and constrains by force," it likewise signifies a
"return," and again an "overleaping." Bebaeon, again, some say, was one
of the companions of Typhon, whilst Manethos asserts that Typhon was
called "Bebon," and that the name signifies a "holding back," and
"hindrance,"—implying that the power of Typhon stands in the way of
things going on regularly and towards their proper end.

L. For which reason, they give him for attribute the most stupid of all
tame animals, namely, the *ass;* and of the wild, the most savage,
namely, the *crocodile* and the *hippopotamus*. With respect to the ass
we have already explained the meaning, but at Hermopolis they show as a
figure of Typhon a hippopotamus, upon which stands a

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

hawk fighting with a serpent; by the hippopotamus signifying Typhon, by
the hawk *power* and virtue, \[or *sovereignty*,\] which Typhon
frequently gains by force, and never ceases <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) to be disturbed by his own wickedness, and
to disturb others; for which cause when they sacrifice on the 7th of the
month Sybi (which they call "The Coming of Isis out of Phœnicia") they
stamp upon the consecrated cakes the figure of a hippopotamus bound. In
the city Apollinopolis, it is the custom that every one must by all
means eat a bit of crocodile \[once a year\]. And on one day they catch
and kill as many crocodiles as they can, and lay them out in front of
the temple, saying that Typhon ran away from Horus changing himself into
a crocodile,—thus making out all animals, plants, and feelings, that are
noxious and bad, to be the productive parts and instigations of Typhon.

LI\. Osiris, on the contrary, they represent by an *eye* and a
*sceptre*, whereof the one signifies *foresight*, the other *power;* in
the same way as Homer by calling Jupiter, who governs and reigns over
all, by the titles "Supreme" and "Knowing," probably indicates by the
"Supreme" his *power*, by the "Knowing" his *good counsel* and
*intelligence*. They frequently represent this god by the figure of a
hawk, for that bird excels all in acuteness of sight and swiftness of
flying; and by nature digests its food most rapidly of all. The bird is
also said, when corpses are lying about unburied, to hover over them,
and drop earth upon their eyes. And when in order to drink it descends
upon the river, it sets its wings upright, and having drank bends them
back again; by which it is evident that it protects itself, and escapes
from the crocodile, for if it should be swallowed up, the wing remains
as it stood, fixed upright. <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30.md) In many
places also, they exhibit a statue of Osiris in the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

human shape, erecting the genitals, on account of his generative and
nutritive character, whilst the flame-coloured robe investing his
images, is \[put\] because they regard the Sun as the *body* of the Good
Principle, the *visible* form of the *Intelligible* Being. Hence we
ought to pay no attention to such as assign to Typhon the sphere of the
Sun—he that has nothing bright, nor salutary, neither order, nor power
of generating, nor motion regulated by measure and reason; but all the
opposite qualities belong to him. For drought which destroys many
things, both of animals and vegetables, must not be put down as the
effect of the Sun, but of the winds and waters in earth and air not
being seasonably mingled together, when the Principle of disorderly and
unregulated force has got loose and has extinguished the exhalations.

LII\. In the sacred hymns to Osiris they invoke "Him that is carried
within the arms of the Sun," and on the 30th day of the mouth Emphi they
celebrate "the Birthday of the Eyes of Horus," when the Sun and the Moon
are come into one straight line, inasmuch as they consider not the Moon
alone, but the Sun also as the *eye* and the light of Horus. And on the
8th day from the end of the month Phaophi they celebrate that of "The
Sun's walking-stick," after the autumnal equinox, signifying that he
requires as it were a support, and strengthening, as he grows weak both
in heat and light, and moves away from us, bending down, and crooked.
And again upon the eve of the winter solstice they carry the Cow seven
times around the temple; and this circular procession is named the
"Seeking for Osiris," as though the goddess were longing for the winter
rays from the Sun; and they walk round so many times, because he
completes his journey from the winter solstice to the summer solstice in
the *seventh* month. And on the 4th day from the beginning of the month
it is said that Horus, son of Isis, was the first that offered
sacrifice,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

as it is written in what are entitled "The Birthdays of Horus," and in
fact they on each day burn incense to the Sun of three different sorts,
namely, resin at his rising, myrrh at noontide, that which is called
"kyphi," at his setting, of which the signification that each bears I
will explain further on; and by means of all these they believe they
propitiate and worship the Sun. And what need is there to bring together
many things to the same effect? There are some that assert point-blank
that Osiris is the Sun, and is named Sirius by the Greeks (for amongst
the Egyptians the prefixing of the article has caused the name to be
mistaken <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31).md), and make out Isis to be
no other than the Moon; and one particular of her images, those figured
with horns, are (say they) imitations of the crescent; whilst by those
covered with black they interpret her wanings, and envelopment in
darkness, during which she longs for, and follows after the Sun: for
which reason they invoke the Moon for aid in *love affairs;* and Isis,
says Eudoxus, presides over amours. These stories, indeed, have a
certain share of plausibility, but as for those that make out Typhon to
be the Sun, these are not even to be listened to. Let us, however, now
resume our proper theme.

LIII\. For Isis is the *Female Principle of Nature*, and that which is
capable of receiving all generation, in virtue of which she is styled by
Plato, "Nurse," and "All-receiving," but by the generality, "The one of
numberless names;" because she is converted by the *Logos* (Reason)
into, and receives, all appearances and forms. But she has, implanted in
her nature, the love for the First and Supreme of all, the which is
identical with the Good, and this she longs after and continually
pursues: whereas the part that belongs to the Bad One she flees from and
repels,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

though she is the *field* and *material* for them both; of herself
always inclining towards the Better One, and permitting it to generate
and discharge into herself emissions and likenesses, wherewith she
rejoices and is glad to be impregnated, and to be filled with births—for
birth is an image of existence in Matter, and that which is *born* is a
copy of that which *is*.

LIV\. From all this, they do not absurdly to fable that the soul of
Osiris is eternal and incorruptible, but that his body Typhon did tear
to pieces and put out of sight; and Isis wandered about, sought for it,
and joined it together again; for that which is, the Intelligible and
the Good, is above all change or corruption, but the Sensible and
Corporeal models certain images after His likeness, and borrows certain
rational principles, forms, and resemblances, which, like
seal-impressions in wax, do not last for ever, but the disorderly and
turbulent Principle, driven down hither from above, seizes upon
them—that Principle which is at war with the Horus whom Isis bore, who
is the Sensible image of the Intelligible World. For this reason he
(Horus) is related to have had a charge of illegitimacy brought against
him by Typhon, because he is not pure and without alloy like his father
the Word (Reason), (who exists by himself free from admixture and from
passion), but is bastardized by Matter, on account of his bodily part.
Nevertheless he gains his cause through Hermes, that is the Word
(Reason), bearing witness and proving how that Nature changing her from
after the model of the Intelligible, produces the World. For the birth
of Apollo that came to pass between Isis and Osiris, whilst the (twin)
gods as yet lay within the womb of Rhea, darkly expresses that this
world first became visible, and that Matter, being proved to be
incomplete in itself, was *perfected* by the Word (Reason), and thus
produced the first birth. On which account they tell that this god was
*lame* and lying

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

in *darkness*, and they name him the "Elder Horus;" for the world did
not exist, but an image as it were, a spectre of the world that was to
be.

LV\. Now this Horus is well-defined, and complete, he has not destroyed
Typhon utterly, but stripped him of his activity and strength: for which
reason they say the statue of Horus at Coptos grasps in his one hand the
genitals of Typhon, and they fable that Hermes cut out the sinews of
Typhon, and used them for lyre strings, thereby meaning that the Word
brought the all into harmony, made it concordant out of discordant
parts, and did not destroy its destructive principle, but merely
ham-strung it. Hence, this principle is weak and inoperative here below,
mingling itself and clinging close to such members as are subject to
corruption and to change, it is the creator of earthquakes and tremors
in the ground, of droughts in the air, and strange blasts; and, again,
of whirlwinds and lightnings. and it infects waters and winds with
pestilences, and rears up and tosses itself as far as the Moon,
oftentimes checking and darkening her lustre, as the Egyptians believe.
And they tell that Typhon at one time hit Horus; at another struck out
his eye and swallowed it up, and then gave it back to the Sun;
signifying by *blow* the monthly waning of the Moon, by *blinding*, her
eclipse, which the Sun remedies, when he again reflects himself upon
her, after she has passed through the shadow of the earth.

LVI\. Now the better and more divine Nature is made up of *Three*—the
Intelligible, Matter, and that formed out of these two, which the Greeks
denominate *World*. Plato calls the Intelligible "Idea," "Model,"
"Father," and Matter he terms "Mother," "Nurse," the seat and receptacle
of generation; and that which results from both he is accustomed to
denominate "Issue," and "Birth," and we may conjecture that the
Egyptians \[reverence\] the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

most beautiful kind of triangle, <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)
because they liken it to the nature of the universe, and Plato seems to
employ this figure in his "Republic," when drawing up his Marriage
scheme. The triangle, too, has this property—*three* the right angle,
and *four* the base, and *five* the hypothenuse, being of equal value
with the lines containing it. We must therefore compare the line forming
the right angle to the *male*, the base to the *female*, the hypothenuse
to the *child* of the two; and the one to be Osiris, as the Final Cause;
the other, Isis as the recipient; the third, Horus as the result; for as
to the *Three*, the first, it is uneven and perfect; for the *Four*, a
square with a perfect side, is the produce of the *Two:* as for the
*Five*, it partly resembles the father, partly the mother, being made up
of the three and the two; also the All derives its name from the Five
(πάντα, πέντε) and to reckon is called "counting by fives," for the
number Five produces when squared the same number as that of the letters
of the Egyptian alphabet, and also the number of years that Apis lived.
Horus they are accustomed to style "Kaimis," that is "He that is seen,"
for the world is an object of sense, and visible to the eye; and Isis is
sometimes styled "Mouth," sometimes "Athyri" and "Methyer;" by the first
of these names they signify "Mother," by the second "The worldly house
of Horus" (in the same way as Plato has the "Seat" and "Receptacle of
generation"); the third title is a compound from "full" and "cause,"
because Matter is *full* of the world; and is made up of that which is
good, pure, and well arranged.

LVII\. Hesiod too may be thought, when he makes the first elements of
Creation to be Chaos, Earth, Tartarus, Love, to assume no other first
Principles than those aforesaid. Let us therefore distribute his names
and assign them thus: to Isis that of *Earth*, to Osiris that of *Love*,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

to Typhon that of *Tartarus*, for his Chaos seems to imply a certain
*place* or *basis* for the Universe; and the case, somehow or other,
recalls that fable of Plato's which Socrates has related in the
"Symposean" concerning the birth of Love, how that Poverty, being
desirous of having children, laid herself down by the side of Wealth as
he was asleep, and, conceiving by him, brought forth Love, who is small
and of every shape, inasmuch as he is the offspring of a father that is
good, wise, and competent for all things, but of a mother that cannot
help herself, destitute, and through her need is always attaching
herself to someone else and suing to someone else. For his "Wealth" is
no other than the Primal Lover, Projector, Finisher, and All-sufficient;
and by "Poverty" he means Matter, which is by itself in need of the Good
One, is impregnated by him, is ever craving and ever receiving, whilst
he that springs from the two (the *World*, or *Horus*), is neither
eternal, nor free from passions, nor incorruptible, yet being ever
re-born, contrives by means of the changes and revolutions of the
passions to continue always young and never to be destroyed.

LVIII\. For we must make use of myths, not entirely as \[real\]
histories, but taking out of them that which is to the purpose, and is
in the form of a similitude. When, therefore, we speak of *Matter*, we
must not borrow our notions from certain philosophers, and think of it
as a body without soul, uncreative, idle, and inactive of itself, for we
call oil the material of perfume, and gold of an ornament, though they
are not devoid of every quality by themselves: and the soul itself and
intellect of man we hand over to Reason to beautify and to regulate, as
being the *material* of knowledge and virtue: and the mind some have
made out to be the region of Ideas, and a thing modelled after the
Intelligible world: and some are of opinion that the seed of generation
is not a power nor final cause, but only

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

the *material* and *instrument* of generation. These \[theorists\] we
ought to follow, and conceive this goddess as having part in the Primal
God, and ever joined with him out of love for the goodness and beauty
that surround him, yet is never satiated; but like as we say that a man
who is obedient to law and what is just, is *enamoured* of justice, and
a virtuous woman that has a husband and lives with him, always *desires*
him, so we must conceive this goddess as always craving after the Good
One, though she be ever in his presence, and is ever being filled with
the most powerful and purest influences.

LIX\. But where Typhon intrudes, laying hold of the extremities, in this
case, where she appears to be of sad countenance, and is said to mourn
and be seeking after certain scattered members of Osiris, and to robe
the same, \[she is\] receiving into her lap and concealing the things
that were destroyed, in the same way as she again brings to light the
things that are born, and sends them forth out of herself. For the
things that be in the heavens and the stars, the reasons, forms, and
emissions of the God are unchangeable, whereas those disseminated
through the things subject to passion, namely, in earth, sea,
vegetables, animals, are interchangeable, perishable, and *buried:* and
again afterwards come to light once more, and are made visible by their
births: for which reason the fable tells that Nephthys was the wife of
Typhon, but that Osiris lay with her by stealth; because the extreme
parts of Matter (which parts they denominate "Nephthys" and "End") are
chiefly possessed by the destructive Power, whereas the generative and
life-giving Principle distributes amongst them but a weak and dull seed,
and which is destroyed by Typhon, except what little Isis takes up and
saves and nourishes, and unites together, for on the whole this world is
*more good than bad*, as Plato suspected, as well as Aristotle.

LX\. For the generative and conservative Principle of

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nature is set in
motion against him (Typhon) for the purpose of *Being*, whilst the
determinating and corrupting part is moved by him for the purpose of
*not being*. Hence they name the former Isis, from its being "sent out"
(ἴεσϑαι), and travelling, with knowledge, as being a "motion endued with
soul," and intelligence, since her Name is not a foreign word; for just
as all gods have a common designation derived from "Visible" and
"Running" (θεοὶ from θεατὸς and θέειν), so this goddess do we call Isis,
and the Egyptians also Isis, from the word signifying "knowledge" and
"Motion" at the same time. And thus Plato says that the ancients
signified "Holy One" (ὁσία) by calling her "Isia," and similarly
"Intelligence" and "Perception," as being a *current* and *movement*
impulse of the mind that longs for an object and is carried onwards; and
that they placed understanding (τὸ συνίεναι) and, generally, goodness
and virtue in the things that *flow* and that *run;* as on the other
hand that thing is reviled by the opposite names, the which, according
to its nature, is au impediment, binds down, holds back, and hinders
from *rushing after* and *going*, for we denominate it "badness,"
"inability," "cowardice," "pain."

LXI\. Now "Osiris" has got his name compounded out of the words ἵσιος
and ἱερὸς: for he is the common *Word* (Reason) of the things in heaven,
and of those in hell, of which the former the ancients were wont to term
ἱερὰ, the latter ὅσια. And he that reveals the things of heaven, the
<span class="smallcaps">Word</span> of those that move above, is named
"Anubis," sometimes "Hermanubis," <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)
the former as belonging to those above, the latter as belonging to those
below; for which reason people sacrifice to the one a *white* cock, to
the other a *saffron-coloured* <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34.md) one;
for they believe the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

former character of the god to be unmixed and public, the latter
composite and multifarious. You must not be surprised at this derivation
of names from the Greek, for there are an infinite number of other words
that went into exile along with those that emigrated <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) from Greece, but remain in use and sojourn
as foreigners amongst other nations; for adopting some of which certain
people censure poetry as talking barbarously; those writers, \[critics\]
I mean, who tern things of the kind "dialects" (γλώσσαι). And in what
are named "the Books of Hermes," they relate that it is written
concerning the Sacred Names, that the Power appointed to preside over
the circuit of the Sun, Horus, the Greeks call Apollo; and that which
presides over the Wind some call Osiris, some Sarapis, others Sothi, in
the Egyptian language. The last word signifies "pregnancy," and "to
conceive;" hence, through a corruption of the word, the star is called
the Dog <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md) in Greek, which they
consider an attribute of Isis. But we ought by no means to dispute about
*names*, not but that we might have reclaimed from the Egyptians their
name of "Sarapis" rather than that of Osiris, the former being a foreign
and the latter a Greek word; but we hold them both as belonging to one
God and to one Power.

LXII\. The Egyptian usage is cognate to the aforesaid, for they often
designate Isis by the name of *Athene*, which expresses the same
meaning, "I have proceeded out of myself," and is expressive of
self-communicated motion. But Typhon, as above stated, is called *Seth*,
*Bebon*, and *Syn*—these names being meant to declare a certain forcible
and impeding check, opposition, and turning upside down. Besides, they
call a loadstone "Bone of Osiris," but iron "of Typhon" (as Manetho
relates), for just as the iron is

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

often, like something alive, attracted to and following after the
loadstone, but often turns away and is repelled from it in the opposite
direction, in like manner the salutary good and rational motion of the
world often attracts by persuasion, draws to itself, and renders more
gentle that harsh and Typhonian force; and again, when it has been
driven back into itself, it upsets the latter, and plunges it once more
into helplessness. Besides, with respect to Jupiter, Eudoxus relates
that the Egyptians have a legend that in consequence of his legs having
grown into one, he was unable to walk, and out of shame remained in
solitude, but that Isis, having cut asunder and separated these parts of
his body, rendered his walking powers sound footed. Through these things
also does Fable hint, that the Mind and Word of God, which had walked in
the Invisible and the Hidden, carne out into Knowledge by means of
Motion.

LXIII\. The *Sistrum* too shows that the things that *are* must be
*shaken*, and never *cease from motion*, but be as it were aroused and
stirred up when they slumber and are slothful, for they pretend they
drive off and repulse <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) Typhon with
the sistra, showing that when Corruption has tied fast and brought it to
a standstill, Generation again unlooses and restores Nature by means of
Motion. And as the sistrum is circular in the upper part, the arch
contains the four things that are shaken, because the part of the
universe that is born and perishes, is surrounded by the Lunar sphere,
but all things are set in motion and changed within it by means of the
four elements, Fire, Earth, Water, Air. And on the arch of the sistrum,
at the top, they figure a *Cat* having a human face \[sphinx\], and on
the lower part, below the things that are shaken, sometimes a head of
Isis, sometimes of Nephthys, symbolizing by these heads *Generation* and
*End* 

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (for these are the
Changes and Motions of the elements), and by the Cat, the Moon, on
account of the pied colour, <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md)
nocturnal habits, and fecundity of the animal, for it is said to bring
forth one, and then two, then three, then four, up to five at a birth,
and always adds by one up to seven \[to her litter\], so that in all it
produces eight-and-twenty young, the which are equal in number to the
illuminations of the Moon. This, however, may be somewhat fabulous, but
the pupils in its eyes appear to grow full and dilate themselves at the
full of the moon, but become thin and dull during the wane of that
luminary; and by the human head of the Cat they express the
*intelligence* and *rationality* of the changes connected with the Moon.

LXIV\. And to speak comprehensively, neither Water, nor Sun, nor Earth,
nor Rain, is it correct to regard as Osiris or Isis; nor on the other
hand, Drought, or Sea, or Fire, as Typhon; but simply whatever in these
elements is either excessive or disordered in its changes, or
deficiencies, to assign this to Typhon: whilst all that is well-ordered,
good, and beneficial, we must regard as the *work* indeed of Isis, but
as the *image*, *imitation*, and *Reason* of Osiris. If so we worship
and honour them, we shall not go wrong. Nay more, we shall make Eudoxus
cease from disbelieving, and being perplexed, wherefore the
superintendence of love-affairs is not given to Ceres, but to Isis; and
why Bacchus is not empowered to *raise* the Nile or to rule over the
Shades;—for by one common rule we hold that these two deities are
ordained to preside over the whole empire of the Good; and that all
whatever exists in Nature beautiful and good, exists through their
means; the one supplying the final causes, the other receiving them, and
continuing permanent.

LXV\. In this way we shall also meet those common

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and trivial stories of people whether to identify the legends concerning
these deities with the seasonable changes of the atmosphere, or with the
growth, sowings, and ploughings of the grain; and who say that Osiris is
then buried when the sown grain is hidden in the ground, and that he
comes to life and shows himself again when there is a beginning of
sprouting; wherefore Isis perceiving that she is pregnant, ties an
*amulet round her neck* on the 6th of the first quarter of the month
Phaophi, and that Harpocrates is born about the winter solstice,
unfinished and infant-like in the plants that flower early and spring up
early, for which reason they offer to him first fruits of growing
lentiles, and they celebrate her being brought to bed after the vernal
equinox. For when they hear all this, people are satisfied and believe
it; drawing as they do conviction from home, from things at hand, and
with which they are familiar.

LXVI\. And it is no great harm if in the first place they make the gods
our common property, and not the exclusive possession of the Egyptians;
instead of by confining these names to the Nile alone, and the region
the Nile waters, or by talking of marshes, lotus-flowers, and
god-making, thereby deprive the rest of mankind of deities of the
highest order nothing to do with either—who have neither Nile, Butos, or
Memphis. But Isis, and the gods connected with her, all men have and
know—some of them indeed they have, not long ago, learnt to call by
names brought from Egypt; but of each one they knew and reverenced the
power from time immemorial. And secondly, and what is more important—let
them take good heed, and fear lest they unwittingly degrade and resolve
divine beings into winds and currents and sowings and ploughings, and
affections of the earth, and changes of seasons; like as those who say
that Bacchus is *wine*, Vulcan *flame;* and, as Cleanthes somewhere or
other says,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

that Proserpine means the air that that Proserpine means the air that
pervades the crops, and is slaughtered; and as a poet has it:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"What time the youths cut Ceres, limb from
limb."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For these persons
differ in no respect from such as should consider sails, cables, and
anchor as a pilot, or yarn and thread as a weaver; or a jug and basin as
a potter, or else honeyed potions and gruel as a physician.

LXVII\. But those theorists engender horrible and impious notions, who
apply the names of deities to natural productions and to things that be
without sense, without life, and necessarily consumed by men in want of
and making use of them. For these things themselves it is impossible to
conceive as gods (for we cannot conceive God as an inanimate thing,
subject to man), but from these productions we have drawn the inference
that they who created them, and bestow, and dispense them to us
constantly and sufficiently, are gods—not different gods amongst
different people, nor Barbarian or Grecian, of the South or of the
North—but like as the Sun, Moon, Sky, Earth, Sea, are the common
property of all men, but yet are called by different names by different
nations; in the same manner, as one reason regulates all things, and one
Providence directs, and subordinate Powers are appointed over all
things, yet different honours and titles are by custom assigned to them
amongst different peoples: and these have established, and do employ,
*symbols*, some obscure, some more intelligible, in order to lead the
understanding into things divine. And this not without danger: for some
having entirely missed their meaning, have slid into *superstition;*
whilst others shunning every superstition like a quagmire, have
unknowingly fallen into *Atheism* <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) as
down a precipice.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

LXVIII\. For which cause it is especially fitting in this case that we
borrow from Philosophy *Reason* for our guide, and so consider each
particular of the things told and done: in order that we may not, as
Theodorus expresses it, "when he offers words with his right hand some
of his hearers take them with their left;" in the sane way we should go
wrong by taking in a different sense what the laws have ordained well
concerning sacrifices and festivals. For that we ought to construe all
things according to their sense, we may learn from these people
themselves of whom we are treating: for on the nineteenth day of the
first month they hold a festival to Hermes, and eat honey and figs,
repeating "A sweet thing is the Truth;" and again the charm which Isis
hangs about her neck is interpreted as "<span class="smallcaps">A True
Voice</span>:" <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) and Harpocrates we
must not regard as an incomplete and infant god, or some sort of pulse,
but as presiding over and correcting men's notions of the deities, when
as yet new, incomplete, and inarticulate; for which reason he has his
finger laid upon his mouth in token of reticence and silence. And in the
month Mesori, they serve up pulse, repeating "The Tongue is Fortune, the
Tongue is a deity," and of all the plants growing in Egypt they say the
Persea is the most sacred to the gods, because its fruit resembles a
*heart*, and its leaf a *tongue*. For of all that man possesses by
nature nothing is more divine than speech, especially that which
concerns the gods; nor has anything greater weight towards his
happiness: wherefore I enjoin <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md) upon
him that goes down here <span id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42.md) to consult

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the oracle "to think religiously, to speak auspiciously:" but most
people act ridiculously, when in the processions and festivals they bid
us speak auspiciously, whilst they both speak and think most
blasphemously about the gods themselves.

LXIX\. In what manner therefore must we conduct those melancholy,
laughterless, and mournful sacrifices, if it is neither right to omit
what is established by custom, nor yet to adulterate our notions about
the gods, and disorder them with absurd fancies? For amongst the Greeks
also many things are done (and at the same time of year too) resembling
the Egyptian ceremonies: for at Athens the women fast at the
Thesmophoria, seated on the ground; and the Bœotians "move the house of
Achæa," naming the festival "Epachthe;" as though Ceres were in mourning
on account of the descent of her daughter into the shades. Moreover,
this month coincides with the rising of the Pleiads, which the Egyptians
call Athor, the Athenians Pyanepsion, and the Bœotians Damatrios; the
Western nations <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) also, as Theopompus
relates, consider and call the winter Saturn, the summer Venus, and the
spring Proserpine; and believe that all things come out of Saturn <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) and Venus. But the Phrygians believing
that God sleeps by winter, but wakes up in spring, at the one time hold
with revelry the feasts of his "Going to bed," at the other those of his
"Getting up:" whilst the Paphlagonians say He is bound down and
imprisoned by winter, but loosened, and set in motion by spring.

LXX\. The time of year too suggests a suspicion that the mourning takes
place upon the burial of the corn;

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

which corn, indeed, those of old time did not regard as *gods*, but as
*gifts* of the gods, both great and indispensable to the not living
savagely and like the beasts: and at what season they saw the fruits of
the trees vanishing entirely, and failing them, whilst those they
themselves had sown as yet sparingly and clumsily, scraping away the
soil with their hands, and covering them over again, so depositing them
with the uncertainty of their reappearing and arriving at maturity—they
used to do many things like to those that *bury* and that *mourn:*—and
then, just as we say that one that buys the *works* of Plato, buys
*Plato;* and he acts *Menander* that represents Menander's *plays*, so
did they not scruple to call by the names of the gods the gifts and
creations of the gods; doing them honour and reverence by use: whilst
those who came after, receiving these names without understanding, and
ignorantly transferring to the gods the vicissitudes of the seed corn,
and not merely calling, but believing the appearances and concealments
of the necessaries of life, "births" and "destructions" of gods, filled
their heads with absurd, wicked and confused ideas.

LXXI\. And yet people, having in view the absurdity of the
contradiction, like Xenophanes of Colophon, and those following him, who
said "that the Egyptians, if they believe in gods, do not *mourn* for
them, and if they mourn for them do not *believe* in them;" but that it
was ridiculous to lament and in the same breath to pray for the seed
corn to show itself again, and ripen itself, in order that it may be
again consumed and mourned for. But such is not really the case; for
they mourn for the seed corn, but pray to the gods, the givers and
authors of the same, to make more anew and cause it to spring up in the
place of that which has perished. Whence there is a very good maxim
amongst philosophers, "that they who learn

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

not how rightly to understand *names* make a bad use of *things;*" just
as those Greeks that have not learnt or accustomed themselves to call
the brazen, painted, and marble images, not *ornaments* and *honours* of
gods, but *actual gods*, in the next place do not scruple to say that
Lachares stripped Minerva bare; that Dionysius cropped an Apollo that
wore curls of gold; that the Capitoline Jupiter was burnt and perished
in the Civil Wars. Let them learn therefore that they are led astray,
and imbibe false notions, modelled upon the *names*. This is especially
the case of the Egyptians with respect to the animals to which honours
are paid; whereas the Greeks in this particular, at all events, both
speak and believe correctly, saying that the dove is the sacred animal
of Venus, the dragon <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) of Minerva, the
raven of Apollo, the dog of Diana (as Euripides hath it—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thou wilt be a dog, torch-bearing Dian's
pet").</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the most part
of the Egyptians, by worshipping the sacred animals, and treating them
as gods, have not only covered their rites with ridicule and mockery;
although this is the least evil resulting from their simplicity; for a
horrible belief grows up that gives over the weak-minded and innocent to
superstition pure and unmitigated, whilst the acuter and bolder sort it
leads into atheistical and bestial incredulity: hence it is not out of
place to discuss the subject in the way that seems most appropriate to
treat it.

LXXII\. The notion that the gods changed themselves into these animals
out of fear of Typhon, as it were hiding themselves in the bodies of
ibises, dogs, and hawks, exceeds in absurdity every kind of jugglery and
fabulous tale. Also the notion that the *new births* of the souls of the
deceased, so many as continue to exist, is merely the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

being born again under these shapes, is equally incredible. And of such
as attempt to assign some political cause for these legends, some
pretend that Osiris upon his great expedition divided his forces into
several parts ("companies" and "ranks" the Greeks call them), and gave
them badges of the figures of animals, each of which became sacred and
venerated by the family of those banded under it. Others, that the
succeeding kings, for the sake of striking terror unto their
adversaries, used to make their appearance in the battles wearing the
heads of wild beasts made of gold and silver: but one of these clever
and ingenious monarchs, they tell, observing that the Egyptians were
naturally fickle and disposed to change and innovation, because they
were easily cajoled, whilst from their numbers they possessed
irresistible and ungovernable strength in unanimity and joint action—on
that account taught them an everlasting superstition in the sowing of
the ground, as a pretext for unceasing dissension among themselves. For,
inasmuch as the beasts, different kinds of which he ordered different
tribes to honour and worship, behave with illwill and hostility towards
each other, and are respectively inclined by nature to live upon
different sorts of food, each party, in defending their own animals and
being indignant when they suffered harm, should unwittingly be involved
and compromised in quarrels against each other through the enmities
between the different beasts. For even at the present day the people of
Lycopolis are the only Egyptians that eat the sheep, because the Wolf,
whom they worship, does the same; and the Oxyrynchites on one day, when
the people of Cynopolis (Dog-Town) were eating the fish called
Oxyrynchus, collected dogs and sacrificed and eat them as victims; and
from this occasion setting to war, they handled each other roughly, and
afterwards being punished for it by the Romans, were equally
ill-treated.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

LXXIII\. And as many pretend that the soul of Typhon himself is divided
amongst these animals, the fable may be thought to express enigmatically
that every irrational and bestial nature belongs to the share of the
Evil Spirit: and that people in order to propitiate and soothe Him,
treat these animals well, and do them worship: and if a long and severe
drought should come on, inducing to an extraordinary degree either
pestilential diseases, or other strange and inexplicable calamities,
then some of these honoured animals do the priests lead out in darkness,
quietly and in silence, and at first they threaten and scare away the
creature; but if it remains fixed, <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)
then they consecrate and sacrifice it, as though this were some kind of
punishment for its deity, or else a great mean of purification in the
greatest emergencies. For in the city Idisthyas they used to burn men
alive, as Manetho relates, calling them "Typhonians," and by tossing
their ashes in a winnowing-fan made away with and scattered the same.
This, however, was done publickly, every year, in the Dogdays, whereas
the sacrificings of the worshipped animals are *secret*, taking place at
irregular times according to the emergency, and are unknown to the
commonalty, except at what time the animals receive burial, when the
priests produce some of the other animals, and in the presence of all
throw them along with the rest into the grave; thinking to retaliate
upon Typhon's conduct and to prevent what he delights in. For the apis,
along with a few others, is reputed sacred to Osiris, and if this
explanation be true, I am of opinion it indicates what we are in search
of in the case of the animals that are acknowledged and have joint
honours with him, for instance, the ibis, the hawk, the baboon, and the
apis himself; for so do they call the goat, that is, at Mendes.

LXXIV\. There remains the *utilitarian* and *symbolical* part of the
question, where some of these figures partake

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of one quality, some of the other, many of both combined. The ox, the
sheep, the ichneumon, it is evident they venerated on account of their
usefulness to man, just as the Lemnians do the larks that seek out and
break the eggs of the locusts; and the Thessalians the storks, because
when their land bred many snakes the birds made their appearance, and
destroyed them all; wherefore they made a law that whosoever killed a
stork should be banished the country. The asp, weasel, beetle, because
they discerned in them certain faint reflexions of the power of the
gods, like that of the sun in raindrops. And of the weasel many hold and
say that as it is impregnated through the ear, and brings forth its
young through the mouth, it is a similitude of the generation of Reason;
whilst the beetle has no female, all being males, and discharge their
semen into the material they have rolled into balls, which they roll
along, pushing it with their feet as they walk in the opposite
direction, in the same manner as the sun seems to surround the heavens
backwards, whilst he himself is travelling from west to east. The asp as
being immortal and capable of motion without limbs, with equal facility
and suppleness, they likened to a star.

LXXV\. Not even the crocodile receives honours that are devoid of any
plausible reason, for it is said to have been made an emblem of the
Deity, as being the sole animal destitute of a tongue. For the Divine
Reason stands not in need of voice, but walking along a silent path and
rule, guides mortal affairs according to justice; and the crocodile
alone, of things living in liquid, veils its eyes with a thin
transparent membrane which it draws down from the upper lid, so as to
see without being seen, which is the attribute of the Supreme Deity; and
wherever in the ground the female may have laid her eggs, that place
they know is beyond reach of the rising of the Nile, because she cannot
lay eggs in the wet, and yet is afraid to lay them at

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

a distance from the water; so exactly do they foresee the future that
they make use of the advancing river as they are bringing forth and
hatching, and yet keep the eggs dry and free from damp, for they lay
sixty and hatched them in as many days, and so many years live those
that live longest, the which number is the first measure to the
phenomena in the heavens. Again, as regards the animals
worshipped—concerning the dog we have already spoken, but the ibis,
besides destroying the venomous reptiles, first taught men the use of
medicinal purging, when they observed the bird using clysters and
getting cleared out by herself. Those of the priests that be most
observant of rules, when they sanctify themselves use for the water of
purification that out of which an ibis has drunk, because it neither
drinks unwholesome or poisoned water, and does not even go near it,
whilst by the relative position of its legs to each other (and the
beak), it forms an equilateral triangle; besides, the variation and
mixture of the black feathers with the white resembles the figure of the
half moon.

LXXVI\. We ought not to wonder at the Egyptians being so pleased with
these imperfect resemblances; the Greeks too, in their painted and in
their sculptured images of the gods, have employed many things of the
same kind; for example, in Crete there was a statue of Jupiter, which
had no ears, because it behoves the Ruler and Lord of gods to hearken
unto no one; at the side of his Minerva, Phidias has placed the serpent;
at the side of the Venus at Elis, the tortoise, implying that virgins
stand in need of watching after, but home-keeping and silence are
suitable to married women; and Neptune's trident is an emblem of the
third place which the sea occupies, assigned to it after sky and air, on
which account Amphi*trite* and the *Tri*tons have been so named \[as
derived from τριτὸς\]. The Pythagoreans have even adorned numbers and
geometrical figures with the appellations of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the gods; for the equilateral triangle they have named Minerva, "born
out of the head," and "Tritogeneia," because it is described by three
lines drawn from the angles: Unity they call *Apollo;* and by a
plausible pretext, when the unit is doubled, the Two they name *strife*
and *audacity:* but the Three they call *justice*, for it seems that
wronging and being wronged exists by means of deficiency and excess, but
what is just stands in the middle by reason of *equality:* and what is
called the Four (the six and thirty), was their mightiest oath, as has
been commonly reported; and the *world* <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) has been so denominated because it was
completed by the four first elements, and the four superfluous qualities
being joined together into One. If, therefore, the most illustrious
philosophers when they discerned an emblem of the Divinity even in
lifeless and incorporeal things did not think right to neglect or slight
any of them, still less, I fancy, did they do so, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48.md) when they discerned moral qualities in
natural objects endowed with sense, possessing life, passions, and
tempers.

LXXVII\. We must therefore put up with, not indeed their paying honours
to these creatures, but their discerning through their medium (as in
clearer mirrors) the work of Nature; and conceiving rightly that which
is Divine as being the *instrument* and *act* of the God who ordereth
all things. And it is right that nothing without a soul be held superior
to that with a soul, or that which is without sense to what possesses
sense, not even though one should bring together all the gold and
emeralds that are in the world (for Divinity does not reside in uses,
forms, and polish), but those things hold a place lower in estimation
than the dead, whatever neither have participated, nor by their nature
can participate in life; whereas that Nature which lives and sees, and
has the final cause of motive

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

from within itself, as also the knowledge both of what is its own and
that of others, and besides, hath derived an influence and a portion
from the Wisdom by which the universe (according to Heraclitus) is
governed. For which reason, the Deity is not worse shadowed forth in
these things, than in artistic works in bronze, which, while equally
susceptible of decay and defilement, are by their nature devoid of
perception and understanding. As regards the worshipped animals,
therefore, this explanation I approve of the most of all those offered.

LXXVIII\. Now to treat of the vestments of Isis, differing in their
colours (for her power relates to Matter, as it turns itself into and
embraces all things—light, darkness, day, night, life, death, beginning,
end), whereas that of Osiris has no shadow nor variation but one,
simple, the image of light; for pure is the Final Cause, and free from
mixture the Primal and Intelligible. Wherefore, when they have once for
all taken off that (vestment) they put it away, and preserve it out of
sight and untouched. Whereas those of Isis they use on many occasions,
because the objects of sense, being obvious and in constant use, present
many *unfoldings* and exhibitions of themselves, as they succeed one
after the other, whereas the conception of the Intelligible, the
Unmixed, and the Holy, shines through at once, like a flash of
lightning, touches the soul, and allows itself to be seen. For which
reason Plato and Aristotle termed this part of philosophy "Speculative,"
because they passed over in reasoning these apparent, heterogeneous, and
multiform ideas, and soar up towards the Primal, the Simple, and the
Everlasting, and when they touch in any way the clear truth concerning
these matters they think that philosophy is complete, and has gained its
end.

LXXIX\. And what the present priests of these days darkly reveal, making
scruples about it, and disguising it

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

with caution, namely, that this deity presides over and is king of the
dead (being no other than the Hades and Pluto amongst the Greeks)—since
it is not known in what sense the doctrine is true, disturbs the minds
of the vulgar, when they have the idea that the sacred and truly holy
Osiris dwells *in* the earth, and *under* the earth, where are hidden
the corpses of such as seem to have come to an end. But He Himself
dwells at the greatest distance from the earth, being unmixed,
undefiled, and pure from all nature admitting of corruption and of
death; but the souls of men here below, enveloped in bodies and
passions, have no participation in the Deity, except as far as lies in
grasping Him by conception, like an indistinct dream, by means of
philosophy; but where they are set free and migrate to the Formless,
Invisible, Impassive, and Good, then this God becomes leader and king
over them, whilst they hang, as it were, upon him, and contemplate
without ever being satiated, and long for that Beauty which can neither
be spoken nor described—for which the old legend makes Isis desire, seek
after, and dwell with, and fills things here below, whatever partake of
birth, with all things beautiful and good. Such notions as these, then,
have a sense best befitting the idea of the deity.

LXXX\. And if I must speak of the kinds of Incense offered or their
respective days (as I promised), let the reader before all things bear
in mind that men have always felt the greatest anxiety about practices
connected with health, especially as to religious ceremonies,
purifications, and ways of living; this being done no less on account of
religion than of health, because they did not consider it fitting to
worship with festering or sickly bodies or souls, that which is pure,
entirely exempt from decay, and free from pollution. And inasmuch as the
air of which we make the most use and have most to do with, does not
always keep the same constitution, but at night is condensed

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

and weighs down the body, and disposes the soul to gloom and
thoughtfulness, becoming, as it were, misty and heavy, therefore as soon
as they get up they burn for incense *Resin*, thereby rectifying and
purifying the air by its virtue, and blowing away the corrupted
exhalation naturally given forth by the body, because this perfume
possesses a strong and penetrating quality; and again at midday,
perceiving that the sun draws strongly out of the earth a heavy
exhalation, and mixes it with the air, they burn *Myrrh*, because its
hot nature dissolves and disperses the turbid and muddy element in the
surrounding air; in fact, physicians think they counteract pestilential
diseases by making a great blaze, on the supposition that it subtilizes
the air. It subtilizes it better, if they burn woods of a dry nature,
such as of cypress, juniper, and pine. Acron, therefore, the physician
at Athens during the Great Plague, is said to have gained credit by
ordering fires to be burnt by the side of the sick, for he benefited
them not a little thereby. And Aristotle asserts that the sweet smelling
exhalations of perfumes, flowers, and meadows, conduce no less to health
than to enjoyment, because by their warmth and subtileness, they spread
themselves through the brain, which is by nature cold and in a state of
congelation, and if amongst the Egyptians they call myrrh "Bal," and
this word interpreted signifies pretty nearly "sweeping out of
evacuations," the name furnishes some evidence to my explanation of the
reason for which it is used.

LXXXI\. The κυφὶ is composed of sixteen ingredients: honey, wine,
raisins, sweet-rush, resin, myrrh, frankincense, *seselis*, and besides,
of calamus, asphalt, *thryon*, dock, and besides these of both
*arceuthids* (one of which is called the greater, the other the less),
and cardamums, and orris-root. These are compounded not at random, but
sacred books are read aloud to the perfume-makers, whilst

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

they are mixing the ingredients. And as for their number, if it
certainly looks like a square made out of a square, and alone containing
the equal number an equal number of times, and to bring its external
measurement exactly equal to the area, this accidental circumstance must
by no means be said to contribute nothing to this effect: but the
majority of the ingredients possessing aromatical properties, send out a
sweet breath and salubrious exhalation, whereby, when the air is changed
and the body excited in the proper manner, they are <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) themselves lulled to sleep, and have a
seductive tendency; whilst the troublesomeness and tension of our daily
anxieties they loosen and untie, like so many knots; and the imaginative
and prophetic part of dreams, they brighten up and render more clear,
like as it were a mirror, to no less degree than do the tunes on the
lyre which the Pythagoreans used to play before going to sleep; thus
charming down and doctoring the irrational and passionate portion of the
soul. For things smelt at often call back the failing sense, often on
the other hand blunt and stupify the same; their evaporations diffusing
themselves through the body by reason of their subtilty in the same way
as some physicians say that sleep is produced when the exhalations from
the food taken, creeping gently, and as it were feeling their way around
the inward parts, cause a kind of tickling. The κυφὶ they use both as a
drink and as a composition \[pastile\]; for taken in drink, it is
thought to purge the intestines, having the property of loosening the
bowels.

LXXXII\. And apart from these considerations, resin is the work of the
Sun; whilst the shrubs drop their tears of myrrh under the influence of
the Moon: whereas the κυφὶ is compounded of those things that delight
most in eight, inasmuch as they are made by Nature to be

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

nourished by cold airs, shade, dews, and moisture: because the light of
day is one and unmixed (for Pindar says, "the Sun rushes through empty
rather"), whereas the night air is a compound and medley of many lights
and properties; as it were, of seeds showered down from every star into
one place. With good cause then do the first-named perfumes, as being
simple and deriving their origin from the Sun, exhibit their virtues by
day, whereas the last-mentioned do so when night begins to set in.

<span id="img_07100"></span> ![ISIS.](img/07100.jpg.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](pte04.htm#fr_0.md) "The entering-place," as if
derived from the Greek.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](pte04.htm#fr_1.md) The revealed Truth.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[12:1](pte04.htm#fr_2.md) λόγον ἐμβαλόντων, looks
like a false reading for φόβον: "spreading the alarm."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[14:1](pte04.htm#fr_3.md) οἰομένους in text makes no
sense, perhaps οῖον μόνον.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[16:1](pte04.htm#fr_4.md) Alluding to the incident
of the opening of his coffer, and explaining the sad fate of the too
inquisitive little boy.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[17:1](pte04.htm#fr_5.md) Probably explaining the
trunk, with lopped off branches, so frequently figured on the Gnostic
stones.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[19:1](pte04.htm#fr_6.md) An evident allusion to the
Christians.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[19:2](pte04.htm#fr_7.md) The common title of the
Sassanean kings was "Masdesin," "servant of Ormuzd;" and the same
probably was a title of this Manis.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[22:1](pte04.htm#fr_8.md) ὑπολάβουσα, which makes no
sense, add ν and it agrees with ἀμνηστίαν.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[23:1](pte04.htm#fr_9.md) The doctrine of the
Alexandrian Platonists, as is fully set forth by Macrobius in his
description of the descent of the Soul.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[24:1](pte04.htm#fr_10.md) The name being
compounded of *Osiris* and *Apis*, expresses that his soul, after death,
had passed unto the sacred bull.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[24:2](pte04.htm#fr_11.md) Probably meaning,
universal god, not a mere local Egyptian divinity.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[24:3](pte04.htm#fr_12.md) χαρωπὼς in text.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[24:4](pte04.htm#fr_13.md) This preposterous
etymology is evidently that of Phylarchus.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[24:5](pte04.htm#fr_14.md) σορὸς Ἄπιδος.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[25:1](pte04.htm#fr_15.md) Ἅδης = Αἰδο̃υς ὑιὸς.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[25:2](pte04.htm#fr_16.md) Hence the Mohammedan
rule of taking off all gold ornaments before saying prayers.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[26:1](pte04.htm#fr_17.md) Showing that the
primitive *human* victim was commuted thus.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[27:1](pte04.htm#fr_18.md) Some words are here
lost, but their sense appears from the context to have been what I
supply in the translation.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[28:1](pte04.htm#fr_19.md) The Bull that was kept
at Memphis.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[28:2](pte04.htm#fr_20.md) Is this the long sought
for root of "Cameo?" The Nicolo was distinguished by the Romans as
"Ægyptilla," and compared by them to the eye.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[30:1](pte04.htm#fr_21.md) Another proof of Indian
origin, relics of a Buddha being indispensable for the foundation of any
*dagobah*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[31:1](pte04.htm#fr_22.md) Or wind.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[35:1](pte04.htm#fr_23.md) This has no connection
with the Hebrew name, which means "Placed," "Settled."

<span id="fn_24"></span>[36:1](pte04.htm#fr_24.md) ἑτερομήκης is applied to
Eighteen, because it may be represented by a parallelogram of which the
sides are 6 and 6, 3 and 3, alternately: two of these multiplied give
the area of the figure, which also is Eighteen—the same comparison of
numbers to mathematical figures Plato uses in the beginning of the
Theætetus.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[38:1](pte04.htm#fr_25.md) A passage is lost here,
containing a description of this rite, in which it is evident a dog
played the principal part.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[39:1](pte04.htm#fr_26.md) The Epicurean and Stoic
theories of the government of the universe, as opposed to the
Neo-Platonic.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[39:2](pte04.htm#fr_27.md) Alluding to the Homeric
picture of Jove, and his two vases of good and evil.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[40:1](pte04.htm#fr_28.md) The same notion is
expressed in the Jewish Sephiroth.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[44:1](pte04.htm#fr_29.md) ἀνιᾶται, in text, for
ἀνίεται.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[44:2](pte04.htm#fr_30.md) In the crocodile's
gullet, and so prevents his gulping down the bird.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[46:1](pte04.htm#fr_31.md) The Greeks mistaking
ὄσιρις for ὁ Σείριος. "Egyptians" in text must be a slip of the scribe.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[49:1](pte04.htm#fr_32.md) The right-angled.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[52:1](pte04.htm#fr_33.md) The deity, so frequent
on Gnostic talismans, bearing the caduceus of Hermes, and accompanied
with the Cock.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[52:2](pte04.htm#fr_34.md) To typify infernal
flames.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[53:1](pte04.htm#fr_35.md) Alluding to the old
tradition about Danaus, &c.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[53:2](pte04.htm#fr_36.md) κύων, as if from κύειν:
these derivations cannot be preserved in translation.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[54:1](pte04.htm#fr_37.md) Hence the idea of
driving away the Devil by the sound of bells.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[55:1](pte04.htm#fr_38.md) Showing the original
colour of the Cat to be tabby.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[57:1](pte04.htm#fr_39.md) Another allusion to the
spread of Christianity, the preachers of which drew their strongest
arguments from the, apparently, absurd symbolism of the old religions.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[58:1](pte04.htm#fr_40.md) Translation of the
Coptic inscription upon the amulet, perhaps the famous "Abracadabra."

<span id="fn_41"></span>[58:2](pte04.htm#fr_41.md) Some words are lost
here; the sense requires, I enjoin on you in these matters, as the
priests do him, &c.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[58:3](pte04.htm#fr_42.md) Delphi, where many of
these small treatises were written, as appears from incidental remarks.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[59:1](pte04.htm#fr_43.md) The Celts; the regular
expression for them in the early Greek writers.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[59:2](pte04.htm#fr_44.md) This seems connected
with the belief of the Gauls that they sprung from *Dis Pater*, as Cæsar
mentions.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[61:1](pte04.htm#fr_45.md) Crested serpent, much
resembling the Hindoo *cobra*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[63:1](pte04.htm#fr_46.md) The ceremony of the
scape-goat.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[66:1](pte04.htm#fr_47.md) Allusive to the primary
sense of κοσμὸς, *order*, *arrangement*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[66:2](pte04.htm#fr_48.md) The early Egyptians.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[70:1](pte04.htm#fr_49.md) Rather, "they of
themselves lull people to sleep."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Cessation of Oracles](pte05.md)
