[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pte00)  [Next](pte02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142863326X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays*, tr. by Charles William King,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span id="img__00500"></span> ![\[Gryphon\]](img/_00500.jpg)  
\[Gryphon\]

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> works which go by the name of
Plutarch's "Morals" (though certainly not all from his hand) are a
collection of short treatises upon a great variety of subjects—Ethics,
History, Politics, Preservation of Health, Facetiæ, Love-stories, and
Philosophy. The last of these comprise dissertations upon the nature of
the unseen world and spiritual beings, upon the creation and government
of the universe, upon the human soul, upon the hidden sense of religious
institutions, and similar speculations, which the ancients classed under
the general head of "Theosophy," that is, "knowledge of the things
pertaining unto God." In this series is preserved the only complete and
circumstantial account of the religion of Egypt that has come down to
us; and written at a time when that religion was still in full vigour,
when, in fact, it alone (besides the Mithraic), of all the ancient
creeds, as yet preserved its. original vitality—written, too, by a
person who had been initiated into its deepest mysteries, and who had
sought out the hidden sense of its myths and ceremonies with equal
intelligence and industry. That the present treatise "upon Isis and

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Osiris," became,
from the time of its publication, the chief authority upon the subject,
is evident from the influence it exerted upon the writings of the
Emperor Julian of the same character, such as his "Hymns to the Mother
of the Gods, and to the Sun." Three other essays are devoted, more or
less, to the subject of Oracles, and to the discussion of the question
whether their inspiration proceeded from natural or supernatural causes;
in which discussions the parts of the "rationalist" and the "believer"
(in modern phrase), are most ably supported by the interlocutors of the
dialogue. This is, perhaps, the most curious and most interesting
phenomenon in the history of ancient civilization. These three
treatises, therefore, are of the highest value, for, in the first place,
they preserve the only particular description now extant of the most
important of these fountains of prophecy, of the physical facts
connected with its working, and the mode in which its powers were
employed, and, what is yet more to the purpose, we have here the
observations made upon all these circumstances by a clear-headed and
highly educated man, far removed from all religious enthusiasm (which
had not, at that time, been roused to blind partiality through
opposition and vituperation from the other side); and who, residing in
the neighbourhood of the mystic cavern, and regularly attending the
consultation, had ample opportunity of detecting any deception or
jugglery on the part of its ministers. We can, therefore, accept for
truth what he relates concerning the visible and sensible effects of the
Pythonic vapour; but of the conflicting theories as to its final cause
(between which the writer himself is evidently at a loss to choose), we
may decide upon the one best adapted to our own modes of thought. And if
we substitute modern terms for ancient, and read "Scriptural" for
"Delphic" inspiration, we can from the disputes of the present day form
a very accurate notion of the state of

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

feeling upon this subject that prevailed in Plutarch's times. We find
then also, people urging the same objections against the Divine origin
of sacred teachings, based upon the imperfections of the vehicle
conveying them to. mankind; and parried by the same arguments derived
from the consideration of the nature of such vehicles. And in the same
connection, how curious it is to discover that the Divine government of
"more worlds than one" was even then, too, a problem that puzzled far
brighter minds than those which have attempted its solution in these
later days!

In order to place the trustworthiness of Plutarch, as our guide in
similar researches, in a still clearer light by exhibiting his own view
of religion, I have added his short treatise "On Superstition," one of
the most eloquent and closely reasoned compositions of the kind to be
found in antiquity; and which, from its intrinsic merit (the sterling
coin of every period) might be studied with advantage by many a
religious disputant of the present day.

It is now almost three centuries since my ancient brother-fellow, the
indefatigable Philemon Holland, published his gigantic translation of
the whole "Moralia." Although he has done his work admirably, its
unwieldy bulk, sufficient to deter most readers, in itself furnishes me
with a plausible excuse for presenting a single section of its contents
in a new dress. My translation was made some years ago, in the course of
collecting materials for an undertaking then in hand, but now through
untoward circumstances of necessity abandoned. The text used was
principally Wyttenback's; it is in many places hopelessly corrupt, words
and even whole sentences are often missing; the source was, apparently,
a single manuscript, and that in bad condition. In such cases,
conjectural emendations and supplements were unavoidable: but notice of
all such attempts has always been given at the foot of the page.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> My translation
keeps as close to the original as our language will allow—much too
closely, indeed, to admit of any elegance of style; the faithful
rendering of the sense in this antique report of discussions often very
abstruse and curiously involved, being the sole object I kept in view
when making it.

<span class="smallcaps">C. W King</span>.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Trinity College,
Cambridge</span>,  
         *May* 6, 1882.</span>

<span id="img__00800"></span> ![\[Apollo seated before the Delphic
Tripod\]](img/_00800.jpg)  
\[Apollo seated before the Delphic Tripod\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](pte02)
