[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pte06)  [Next](pte08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142863326X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays*, tr. by Charles William King,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### ON THE E AT DELPHI.

<span class="smallcaps">I Lately</span>, my dear Serapion, met with some
little verses, that are not bad; which Dicæarchus supposes Euripides to
address to Archelaus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I do not choose to offer thee a gift,  
 For I am poor, whilst thou art passing rich;  
 Else thou will either take me for a fool,  
 Or think that in my *giving* I am *begging*.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For he does no
favour who gives a little out of a little to those possessing much, and
being suspected of not giving for no return, he incurs to boot the
character of servility and meanness. In the same degree, therefore, that
substantial presents fall short both in respectability and in beauty of
those proceeding from reason and learning, is it a fine thing for the
latter to be given, and for the giver to demand a return in kind from
the receivers. For I, in sending off to you, and through you to our
friends at the same place some of our Pythian conversation, in the way
of first fruits, boldly confess that I expect from you in return others
both longer and better done; seeing that you have the advantage of a
very great city, and plenty of leisure in the midst of books and
lectures of every kind. <span id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md) Now, our
friend Apollo appears to cure and to settle all difficulties connected
with life, by giving responses

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

to such as consult him; but of himself to inspire and suggest doubts
concerning what is speculative, by implanting in the knowledge-seeking
part of the human soul an appetite that draws towards the truth; as is
manifest from many other things, and from the dedication of the E. For
this is not likely to have been done by chance, nor yet by lot only, in
settling the precedence of all the letters of the alphabet before the
god, did it obtain the rank of a sacred offering and object of
admiration: but either those that first speculated about the god saw in
it some peculiar and extraordinary virtue of its own, or else they used
it as a symbol of some important mystery, and admitted <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md) it on those grounds. This question,
though often propounded in the school, I had always quietly evaded and
put off, until lately I was taught by my sons, uniting in entreaty <span
id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174.md) with some others, visitors whom, as they
were about to depart from Delphi, I could not politely divert from the
point, nor excuse myself to them, anxious as they were to get some
information upon the subject. Having, therefore, made them sit down
about the Shrine, I began partly to investigate the matter myself,
partly to put questions to them \[being reminded\], <span
id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_175.md) both by the place and by their words of
what I had heard long ago (when Nero was visiting the spot), from
Ammonius and others, when the same questions had been similarly started.

II\. "That the god is no less a philosopher than a prophet, Ammonius
proved to the satisfaction of all by adducing his titles one by one, and
showing that he is 'Pythian' to such as begin to learn and to inquire;
'Helius' and 'Phanæus,' when part of the truth is already disclosed, and
a glimpse thereof given; 'Ismenius,' when people have got the knowledge;
and 'Leschenoieos' when they

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

are active and enjoy that knowledge, and begin to converse and
philosophize with one another. Now, since to philosophizing belongs to
inquire, to wonder, and to doubt, it was natural, said he, that most
parts of what related to the god should be hidden in enigmas, because
they elicit discussion as to the wherefore, and information about the
cause. For instance, in the case of the everlasting fire, that *pine*
should be the only wood burned there, and *bay-leaves* used for incense;
and the fact that *two* Fates are set up here, whereas everywhere else
*three* are the regular number: also the rule that no woman is allowed
to approach the Oracle; and the existence of the Tripod—and all such
instances, which, when brought before people that be not entirely
brutish and soulless, act as baits, and draw them on to inquire, to
listen, and to argue with one another, Look, too, at the maxims written
up here, the 'Know thyself,' and the 'Nothing in extremes'—how many
philosophical inquiries have they not excited; and what a crop of
discussions has there not sprung up from them, as though from one sowing
seed; and no less prolific do I think is the question now raised."

III\. And when Ammonius had said this, my brother Lamprias replied: "And
yet the explanation I have heard is a simple one, and very short; for
they say that those Wise Men, by some denominated 'Sophists,' were
really but *five*—namely, Chilon, Thales, Solon, Bias, Pittaeus—f or the
Cleobulus Tyrant of the Lindians, and Periander the Corinthian, though
they had no share either of virtue or wisdom, yet through their power,
their friends, and their interest, forcibly took possession of the
character, and usurped the name of the Wise Men, and sent forth and
spread abroad all over Greece certain maxims and words similar to those
uttered by the former, at which these being indignant, did not choose to
expose their arrogance, nor to quarrel publicly for fame, and incur the
hostility

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

of persons of great power; having, therefore, held a meeting here, and
conferred together, they dedicated that letter of the alphabet, which
both holds the fifth place there, and also signifies the number
Five, <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176.md) testifying to the god that
they were but *Five*, and discarding and casting off the seventh and the
sixth as not belonging to their number. That all this is not said at
random, any one may know, from hearing those belonging to the Temple,
calling the *golden* E that of Livia, <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177.md) wife of Cæsar; the *bronze* one, that of
the Athenians; whereas the original and most ancient one, wooden in
material, they call the E of the Wise Men, not of *one*, but the joint
offering of them all."

IV\. Now Ammonius, quietly smiling, and suspecting that Lamprias was
asserting an idea of his own, while he pretended it a legend and a
report heard from others, upon a matter admitting of no disproval \[made
no reply\]. <span id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_178.md) But someone else of
those present observed: "All this is like the nonsense which the
Chaldean visitor lately talked: that there are *seven* of the letters
that utter a sound of their own; *seven* stars that move in the heavens
with an independent and unconnected motion of their own. For at the time
spoken of, the E was from the beginning, the *second* in place of the
vowels, and the Sun, after the Moon, of the planets—now, all the Greeks,
so to speak, regard Apollo as the same with the Sun. But this sort of
stuff is

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

mere idle talk. <span id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_179.md) And indeed
Lamprias has unwittingly stirred up the people belonging to the Temple
against his argument, for what he has told us nobody at Delphi knows
anything about; but all assert the common opinion and that of the
guides, pretending that it is not the appearance nor the sound of the
letter, but only the name of it that has any significance."

V. "Furthermore, as the Delphians themselves suppose, and as Nicander
the priest said in his address, the letter is the vehicle and the form
of the demand made to the god, and it holds the place of honour <span
id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_180.md) in the queries of those consulting the
Oracle and asking, *If* they shall be victorious? *If* they shall marry?
*If* it is advisable to make a voyage? *If* to turn farmer? *If* to go
abroad? The god, wise as he is, sends the logicians about their
business, who believe that nothing comes out of the particle *If*, and
the demand that goes along with it; for the Word both conceives the
questions subordinate to this particle as real things, and accepts them
as such. And since inquiry is his peculiar right, in his character of
prophet; and prayer to him, is a joint right in his character of god,
they think that this letter represents the precatory <span
id="fr_181"></span>[3](#fn_181.md) no less than the inquiring element. For
each one of such as pray begins with 'Oh, if,' and Archilochus says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'If I only were permitted Neobule's hand to
touch!'</span>

</div>

"And in εἴθε someone says the second syllable is an expletive, as in
that verse of Sophron's, Ἅμα τέκνων θὴν δυσμένεα, and that of Homer, ὥς
θὴν καὶ ἔγω σὸν λύσωμένος, for that the precatory meaning is more than
sufficiently expressed in the εἴ."

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

VI\. When Nicander had finished this—you know my companion Theon? well,
he asked Ammonius if Logic was allowed free speech, after being so
insulted? And when Ammonius encouraged him to speak and defend her, he
began: "That the god is a very great logician, his own responses show,
for it, forsooth, is the business of a logician both to invent and to
solve double-senses. For as Plato said when an oracle was given
commanding the doubling (squaring) the *cubical* dimensions of the
altar, not the *linear*, which latter any mason could have done by
simple measurement. An oracle had been given commanding the doubling the
size of the altar at Delos, which is a problem requiring the utmost
skill in geometry, that it was not this the god required, but that he
encouraged the Greeks should study geometry. In the same way, the god by
giving forth responses with double meanings promotes and establishes
Logic, as being indispensable for all such as intend to understand him
rightly. And if truly this bodily constitution of ours has its greatest
force through Logic (Reasoning), inasmuch as it gives form to the most
rational distinction, then assuredly such a conclusion as this is bound
up with it, because even brute animals have a knowledge of the being of
things, but to man alone hath Nature given the power of seeing and of
judging *consequences*. For instance, that it *is* day, and *is* light,
wolves, dogs, and birds understand; but that *if* it is day, it is
light, no other creature understands save man alone; because he alone
has the conception of *prior* and *posterior*, of appearance, and of
connection, and of the relations of these things to one another; from
which considerations proofs derive their most important principle. If,
therefore, philosophy is busied about truth, and the light of truth is
proof, and the foundation of proof is connection—with good reason has
the faculty that embraces and causes this, been consecrated

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

by wise men to the god that most of all loves truth: and the god himself
is a diviner, but divination is an art busied about the Future, derived
from things present or past. For of no one thing is the birth without a
cause, or the signification without a sense; but all things that be,
follow after and are connected with those that have been, and those that
will be with those that are, in a succession bringing them to pass from
the beginning to the end; so he, that by a natural gift understands how
to connect together, and interweave with each other their causes, the
same person knows how to foretell—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'What is, what shall be, and what was
before.'</span>

</div>

"And rightly hath Homer mentioned the Present first, and then the Future
and the Past: because the reasoning comes from the things that *are*,
according to the force of the connection; as for example, if this thing
*is*, that thing precedes it; and conversely, if this thing *is*, that
thing shall be, for what belongs to art and reasoning is the knowledge
of consequences; but it is perception that gives the preconception to
reason: whence, though it be indecent to say it, I will not shrink from
saying *this* is the tripod of Truth, namely, Reason, which laying down
as foundation the sequence of the ending to the preceding event, and
then taking into account the existence, crowns all with the conclusion
of the proof. And the Pythian god, if he really takes delight in music,
and in the voices of swans and the twangings of the lyre—what wonder is
it if he embraces and loves, out of fondness for logic, this part of the
Reason of which he sees philosophers making chief and most frequent use?
And Hercules, though he had not yet set Prometheus free, nor conversed
with sophists like Chiron and Atlas, but being yet a youth, and a
thorough Bœotian, though at first he knocked down logic, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182.md)

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

and laughed the E to scorn; yet, taken at a later time, he was seen
forcibly dragging away the Tripod, and fighting with the god for the
possession of the art, since as he advanced in age he too became, it is
likely, an excellent diviner, and at the same time, logician."

VII\. And when Theon had done, Eustrophos, the Athenian, I think it was,
who said to us: "You see how courageously Theon has defended Logic, all
but putting on the lion's-skin for the purpose. In the same way we must
count for nothing the whole lot put together, all things whatsoever, the
natures and principles of men or gods, and consider this one as the
leader and master of all things beautiful and precious—but we must <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183.md) hold our tongues, and sacrifice to this
god the first fruits of his darling mathematics, because we believe that
the E excels not the other vowels either in virtue, shape, or
expression, but that it has been put in the post of honour as the symbol
of a *number* which is great with reference to the whole and a capital
one, that is the *Five*, from which the wise used to call reckoning
'counting by fives.'" <span id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184.md) This, said
Eustrophos, not in joke, but because I, at that very tune, was zealously
applying myself to mathematics, for as he lived in the Academy, he was
perhaps disposed to pay particular respect to the maxim:

<span class="small">"Nothing in extremes."</span>

VIII\. I therefore replied that Eustrophos solved the difficulty well by
means of the Numeral. "For," I continued, "as all numeration is divided
into even and odd, and as

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

unity is common to both, in power: it being added makes the even number
odd, and the odd number even: for people hold the two for the beginning
of the even, and the three for that of the odd: and the five is produced
when these numbers are mixed with each other; so with good cause has it
obtained honour, as being the first product of the first; and has been
named 'Marriage,' from the comparison of the even to the feminine, and
again of the odd to the masculine. For in case of divisions into equal
parts, the even number being every way parted asunder, leaves behind a
receptive principle, <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185.md) as it were,
in itself, and a space; but when the odd is treated in the same way, a
middle part still survives that is productive of division; in which way
it is more generative than the other, and when united thereto it
prevails, but it never overcomes; for the even comes from both in no
conjunction of the two, whereas the odd does in all. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_186.md) Furthermore, when added and joined to
itself, each of the two exhibits its own distinctive property; for no
even number united to an even number produces an odd one, nor goes
beyond its proper allotment; because through weakness it is unproductive
of offspring different from itself, and imperfect; whereas uneven
numbers united with uneven numbers generate many even numbers by reason
of their universally prolific nature. The other differences and
properties of numbers one cannot go through with on the present
occasion. The Five, therefore, the Pythagoreans denominate as
'Marriage,' as being generated through the resemblance of the odd number
to the male and the even to the female, and, somewhere or other, it has
been called 'Nature,' because by multiplication into

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

itself, it finally ends in itself again; like as Nature having received
what is the seed, and buried the same, produces in the meanwhile divers
forms and figures, through which she moves her work on towards her end,
and at last she exhibits the wheat again, and restores the beginning at
the end of all; in like manner the other numbers, when they are
multiplied <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187.md) result in different
numbers through the augmentation, whereas the numbers five and six
alone, taken as many times, reproduce and resuscitate themselves: for
six times six becomes thirty-six, and five times five becomes
five-and-twenty: and again, this is the case with the six but once, and
singly; that is, when squared into itself; but the same thing happens to
the number five \[frequently\] <span id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188.md) in
the multiplication, and also, in a way peculiar to itself, in addition:
for it makes either itself or the number ten, when alternately added to
itself, and this is the case throughout, for the number copies the Final
Cause. For as *that* Principle watches over and produces the world out
of itself, and in return produces itself out of the world, as Heraclitus
says:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Exchanging all for fire, and fire for all,  
 Like goods for gold, or gold in place of goods;'</span>

</div>

similarly the conjunction of the five with itself by its own nature
generates nothing incomplete nor different in kind, but undergoes
strictly defined changes; for it produces either itself or the number
ten—that is, either its own property, or that which is perfect."

IX\. "If, then, anyone should ask, What has this to do with Apollo? We
reply: It has to do not only with him, but with Bacchus, who has no less
property in Delphi than Apollo himself. We therefore hear theologians,
partly in verse, partly in prose, setting forth and chanting

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

how that the god, though by nature incorruptible and eternal, yet, as
they tell, through some decree of fate, submitted to changes of
condition, at one time set all Nature on fire, making all things like to
all; at another time he was metamorphosed and turned into various
shapes, states, and powers, in the same way as the universe now
exists—but is called by the best-known of all his names. <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189.md) The wiser sort, cloaking their meaning
from the vulgar, call the change into Fire 'Apollo,' on account of the
reduction to one state, <span id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_190.md) and also
'Phœbus' on account of its freedom from defilement and purity: but the
condition and change of his turning and subdivision into airs and water
and earth, and the production of animals and plants, they enigmatically
term 'Exile' and 'Dismemberment.' They name him 'Dionysos' and 'Zagreus'
and 'Nycteleos' and 'Isodi'; they also tell of certain destructions and
disappearances and diseases and new births, which are riddles and fables
pertaining to the aforesaid transformations: and they sing the
dithyrambic song, filled with sufferings, and allusions to some change
of state that brought with it wandering about and dispersion. For
Æschylus says: 'It is fitting the dithyrambus, with its confused roar,
should accompany Dionysos: but Apollo, the orderly and sober pæan.' The
latter god they represent in pictures and images as exempt from age and
youthful; but the other, under many guises and forms; and, generally, to
the one they assign invariableness, order, and unmixed seriousness;
whilst ascribing to the other a mingled playfulness and mischief,
gravity and madness, they proclaim him 'Evius inciter of women,
flourishing with frenzied honours, Dionysos!'—not wrongly taking

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

what is the characteristic of either change. For, since the duration of
the periods of such changes is not equal, but that of the one which they
call 'Satiety' is the longer of the two, and that of the oracle giving
the shorter, they observe the due proportion here, and during the rest
of the year they employ the pæan at the sacrifices; at the beginning of
winter they revive the dithyramb and put a stop to the pæan, and invoke
the god with the former instead of the latter chant for the space of
three months: which makes three to one the space of time they believe
that the creation <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191.md) lasted compared
to that of the conflagration."

X. "But this discussion has been prolonged beyond the fitting limits—it
is, however, clear that they appropriate the number five to him <span
id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_192) (Apollo.md), sometimes taking it by itself
as *Five*, sometimes as generating the number Ten out of itself, as \[he
does\] the *World*. But with the art most acceptable to the god, namely
Music, we do not think this number has anything to do: seeing that the
chief business of harmony is, as one may say, connected with the notes.
That these are five and no more, reason disproves if anyone unreasonably
attempts to hunt out such a number upon the harp-strings, and in the
holes of the flute. For all notes receive their birth in the proportions
of arithmetic: and the proportion of the diatessaron is one and a third,
that of the diapente one and a half, that of the diapason double; that
of the diapente and diapason triple; and that of the diapason
quadruple. <span id="fr_193"></span>[3](#fn_193.md)

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But as to the note
which the harmonists add to these, calling it the diatessaron and
diapason, that goes out of the measure, it is not right for us to accept
it, and comply with the irrational sense of hearing in a matter of
reason, as in <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194.md) the case of a law.
That, therefore, I may dismiss the five 'threes' of tetrachords, and the
first five whether they are to be called 'tones,' 'tropes,' or
'harmonies,' according as, through tension or slackening of the strings,
they are screwed up more or less, bass or sharp notes are
produced—whilst the intervals are not *many*, but rather infinite in
number—are not the melodies produced only *five?* namely, dieses,
semi-tone, tone, tone and a half, double tone, and no other place in the
voice, either less or greater, as defined by flatness or sharpness, can
be possibly sounded."

XI\. "Passing over many other instances of the same kind" (I continued),
"I will adduce Plato, who says the world is one, but that if there be
other worlds around this, and this be not the only one, they are five in
number, and no more. Not but that, even if the world be one and
only-created (as Aristotle supposes) it may in a certain sense be
considered as composed and compacted out of five other worlds; for
example, the one is of earth, the other of water, the third of fire, the
fourth of air; the fifth element some call *heaven*, some *light*,
*others æther*, others call this same thing the 'Quintessence,' <span
id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195.md) to which alone of all bodies belongs by
nature the revolving in a circle: and that not out of compulsion, or
extraneous cause. For which reason truly having observed the five most
beautiful and most perfect figures of things in nature, namely, the
pyramid, the cube, the octahedron, the dodecahedron,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

the eikosihedron, and the duodecahedron, I have appropriately assigned
each of them to a different element." <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196.md)

XII\. "There are some philosophers who identify with those primitive
elements the powers of the senses which are the same in number: <span
id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197.md) they see the touch repulsive and
earth-like; the taste, by means of moisture, appreciating the properties
of the things tasted; whilst air being struck becomes in the hearing,
voice and sound; and of the two remaining, smell, which the olfactory
sense has obtained for its share, being an exhalation and generated by
heat, is a fiery substance. And of sight, that is transparent with æther
and light by reason of its affinity thereto, the constitution and the
action are of like condition with those elements. Other sense has
neither living thing, nor other nature does the world possess, that is
simple and unmixed; but there has been made, to all appearance, a
certain wonderful distribution and acceptance of the one five
between <span id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_198.md) the other five."

XIII\. At the same moment, as it were checking myself, and leaving off,
I exclaimed: "What have we been thinking of, Eustrophos, to have all but
passed over Homer, as though not the first to divide the world into five
portions? The three intermediate he has assigned to the three gods, the
two extremes, Olympus and Earth, whereof the one is the boundary of
things below, the other of things above, he has left common to all and
unallotted to any. But 'the argument must be carried back,' as Euripides
saith, for they that venerate <span id="fr_199"></span>[4](#fn_199.md) the
number Four do not ill to teach that by reason of this number every body
has its

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

origin. For since every thing that is solid consists in length and
breadth admitting of depth; and before length exists a point set down in
the way of unity; and as length is called a line without breadth, and
*is* length: and the motion of a line in the direction of width gives
origin to surface in the number three; and when depth is added to all
these in four ways, the aggregate advances into a solid body—it is clear
to everyone that the number four, after having carried. Nature forward
up to completing a body and producing \[double\] <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200.md) bulk and resistance, has yet left it
deficient in the most important article. For the thing inanimate, to
speak generally, is helpless, imperfect, and serviceable for nothing at
all, without a soul to direct it; but the motion or disposition, being a
change produced in five different ways, generates therein a soul,
imparts perfection to its nature, and possesses a value superior to the
number four, in the same degree that the living thing surpasses the
thing without life. Furthermore, the proportion and force of the number
five, being the more powerful, hath not suffered animate nature to run
off into infinite varieties, but hath produced five species only of
things animate: for there are gods (I suppose), and dæmons, and heroes,
and the fourth kind of men; and then the irrational and brute creation.
Again, if you divide the soul itself according to its constitution, the
first and darkest part of it is the nutritive, the second the sensitive,
the third the appetitive, the next to this the irascible, and having
arrived at the faculty of reason, and completed its nature, it takes its
rest in the fifth principle as upon the highest point."

XIV\. "And whilst the number possesses so many and such great virtues,
its origin is likewise beautiful; not being that which we have lately
discussed, springing out

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

of the two; but what the beginning of the odd, coupling itself with the
square, produces. For the beginning of all numbers is unity; and the
first square is the four; and out of these as from a pattern or material
having a limit, comes the five. But if, indeed, some are right in
supposing the unit the first square number, being a power in itself and
producing the same out of itself—in that case also the five, as
generated out of the first two squares, has not lost its highest place
of nobility."

XV\. "But the main point," I continued, "I fear if enounced will press
hard upon our friend Plato, in the same way as he himself used to say
that Anaxagoras was pressed hard by the name of the Moon, when he
appropriated some very ancient notion amongst those current respecting
her illuminations (phases); has he not said this in the Cratylus?" "Yes,
certainly," replied Eustrophos, "but what similarity there is in the
present case I do not perceive." "And yet," said I, "you surely know
that in the 'Sophist' he makes out the most important principles to be
five in number, namely, Being, Sameness, Diversity, and fourthly and
fifthly, after these, Motion and Rest. But in the 'Philebus' he uses a
different mode of division, and says that *One* is infinite and *Other*
definite, and that all generation is composed from these two mixed
together: and the Cause by which they are so mixed together he supposes
the fourth kind; <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201.md) whilst the fifth
he leaves us to conceive as that through which the two mixed principles
again obtain separation and division. But I conjecture that these things
are predicated as being images of those ideas just mentioned, that which
is born being the image of that which is, the infinite that of Motion,
the finite that of Rest; Sameness being the mixing principle, Diversity
that which separates. And if these are otherwise, even on that
supposition, they will similarly be

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

classed in five kinds and differences. Some one, forsooth, previous to
Plato had put the question \[to the Oracle\] and had learned this fact,
and therefore dedicated two E's to the god, as an indication and symbol
of the number of the all. But again, the same person may have done so
because he had discovered that the Good is imagined \[as being
manifested\] five kinds—whereof the first is what is moderate, the
second what is consistent, the third Mind, the fourth the sciences,
arts, and true conceptions dwelling in the soul; the fifth kind,
whatever pleasure is pure and unalloyed with pain." Here he ceased,
quoting the line of Orpheus:—

<span class="small">"'In the sixth period still the rage of
song.'"</span>

XVI\. After the discourse aforesaid, he continued to us: "One thing
more, briefly, I will sing to the intelligent, like Nicander <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202.md) and his friends. On the sixth day of the
new moon, when you conduct the Pythia to the Townhall, the first casting
of the three lots takes place …  you throw neither three nor two <span
id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_203.md)—is it not so?" "It is so," replied
Nicander; "but the reason must not be divulged to others."
"Consequently," I said, smiling, "so far as the god allows us that be
\[not\] sanctified to know the truth, this rule also has something to do
with what has been said on the subject of the number five. So the list
of the arithmetical and mathematical praises of the letter E, as far as
I recollect then, is now concluded."

XVII\. Ammonius, inasmuch as he was one who held that by no means the
least important part of philosophy lay in mathematics, was delighted
with what had been said, and remarked, "To argue very critically against
all this is not

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

fitting for us beginners: yet each one of the numbers taken by itself
will furnish much scope for such as wish to praise it. And what need is
there to talk about the others, when the Seven, sacred to Apollo, will
alone exhaust the whole day, should one attempt to enumerate all its
properties? In the next place, we shall prove that the Wise Men
quarrelled with common custom as well as with long tradition, when they
pushed down the Seven from its place of honour and dedicated the Five
unto the god as the more properly pertaining to him. Neither number,
therefore, nor rank, nor conjunction, nor any other of the remaining
parts of speech, I think, does the letter signify, but that it is an
*address* to the god, or an *invocation*, complete in itself, that
together with the utterance thereof puts the speaker in mind of the
power of the deity. For the god addresses each one of us here, when
approaching him, as if with a salutation, in the words, Know thyself,'
which is neither more nor less than 'Hail,' whilst we, in requital to
the god, say, 'Thou art,' <span id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_204.md) as
though paying to him the true, undying, and sole property of himself,
the predicate of *existence*."

XVIII\. "For we ourselves have in reality no part in existence; for all
mortal nature being in a state between birth and dissolution, presents
no more than an illusion, and a semblance, shapeless and unstable of
itself, and if you will closely apply your thought, out of the wish to
seize hold of the idea, just as the too strong grasping at water when it
is pressed together and condensed, loses it, for it slips through your
fingers, in the same way Reason, in pursuing after the *appearances*, so
extremely clear as they look, of each one of the conditions of life as
they pass along, misses its aim; impinging on the one side against its
coming into existence, on the other, against its going

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

out; without ever laying hold upon it as a permanent thing, or as being
in reality a power. It is not possible, according to Heraclitus, to step
into the *same* river twice; neither is it to lay hold of mortal life
twice, in the same condition; but by reason of the suddenness and speed
of its mutation, it disperses and again brings together, or rather,
neither *again* nor *afterwards*, but at one and the same time it
subsists and it comes to an end; it approaches and it departs, wherefore
it never ripens that of it which is born into actual being, by reason
that Birth doth never cease nor stand still, but *transforms;* and out
of the seed makes the embryo, then the child, then the youth, young man,
full-grown man, elderly man, old man—obliterating the former growths and
ages by those growing up over them. But we ridiculously fear *one*
death, although we have already died, and are still dying, so many; for
not only, as Heraclitus says, 'When fire dies is the birth of air, and
when air dies is the birth of water,' but still more plainly may you see
it from ourselves: the full-grown man perishes when the old man is
produced, the youth had before perished into the full-grown man, and the
child into the youth, and the infant into the child; and the 'yesterday'
has died into the 'to-day,' and the 'to-day' is dying into the
'to-morrow,' and no one re mains, nor is one, but we grow up many around
one appearance and common model, whilst matter revolves around and slips
away. Else how is it, if we remain the same, that we take pleasure in
some things *now*, in different things *before;* we love contrary
objects, we admire and find fault with them, we use others words, feel
other passions; not having either appearance, figure, nor disposition
the same as before? To be in different states, without a change, is not
a possible thing, and he that is *changed* is not the *same* person; but
if he is not the same, he does not exist … this very thing (the change)
he

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

changes <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205.md)—growing one different
person out of another; but Sense, through ignorance of reality, falsely
pronounces that what appears *exists*."

XIX\. "What then is really existing? The answer is, the eternal, unborn,
undecaying, to which no length of time brings about a change: for Time
is a thing movable and making move, making its appearance conjointly
with matter; leaking and not holding water, as it were, a vessel full of
decay and growth; for is not the predicate 'After' and 'Before,'
'Future,' and 'Past,' of itself an acknowledgment of non-existence? For
to say that what has not yet been, or what has ceased from being, is in
being, how silly and absurd! For in this way especially do we apply the
notion of Time, and predicate the terms 'Instant' and 'Present' and
'Now' … <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206.md) this, in turn, Reason
distributes too much, dissolves and destroys. For it (Time) is diverted,
like a ray of light, into the Future and the Past, necessarily
separated, when we attempt to see it. And if the Nature that is measured
is in the same condition as that which measures it, nothing is either
stable or existing, but all things are either being born or perishing,
according to their distribution with respect to time. Consequently it is
not allowable so much as to say of Being <span
id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_207.md) that 'it was' or that 'it will be;' for
all these modes are tenses, transitions, and interchanges of the thing
formed by nature, never to stand still in existence.

XX\. "But the god *is*, we must declare; and *is* with reference to no
time, but with reference to the eternal, the immovable, timeless, and
indeclinable; that which there is nothing before nor after, nor more,
nor past, nor older

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

nor younger, but He being *One* with the one 'Now,' hath filled up the
'Ever;' <span id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208.md) and that which really
*is*, alone *is* with reference to Him; neither born, nor about to *be*,
nor growing, nor to have an end. In this way, therefore, ought we, when
worshipping, to salute Him, and to address Him, or even, truly, as some
of the ancients did, 'Thou art One!' For the Deity is not *several*, as
each one of us is, made up out of an infinite number of different things
in conditions of existence—a motley assemblage of articles of all sorts
and gleanings. But that which *is* must necessarily be *One*, just as
*One* must be that which is; for <span id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_209.md)
difference of that which is, springs out of that which is not, in form
of births, consequently the first of the names (by which he is called)
well suits the god, as also the second and the third. For 'Apollo,'
inasmuch as it means 'denying many,' signifies also 'rejecting
plurality.' <span id="fr_210"></span>[3](#fn_210.md) He is also Ἰητος,
because *one* and alone. 'Phœbus' the ancients called everything clean
and chaste, and even now the Thessalians say that their priests, when
living by themselves outside the city on the fast-days, 'are living
Phœbus.' But the One is single and pure, for the mixing of one thing
with another constitutes pollution; as Homer somewhere calls ivory
turned purple by a dye 'polluted,' and dyers call the running together
of colours 'being spoilt,' and such mixture they term 'corruption.'
Hence, to be one and always unmixed belongs to the Immortal and the
Pure.

XXI\. "But those who hold Apollo and the Sun for one and the sane, we
ought to welcome and love for the omen's sake, because they embody the
idea of the god in the thing

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

which they most honour of all the objects that they know and long for.
As though, therefore, they were dreaming about the god in the most
beautiful of dreams, let us wake them up, and exhort them to carry their
thoughts yet higher, and contemplate what is above them, and the
essence; to honour indeed the *Type*, and venerate the creative force
residing therein, as that which converts the Intelligible into the
Sensible, and the Permanent into the Transitory—the type that shows
forth in some way or other glimpses and images of the benevolence and
felicity that dwell around that god. But as for his migrations and
changes which bind him together when he emits fire, as they tell, and
again quenches it, and directs it upon earth, sea, the winds, animals;
and the dreadful sufferings of plants and living things, all such it is
impiety even to hear mentioned. Otherwise the Deity would be worse than
the child in the poem, as to the game it plays with a heap of sand,
first built up and then thrown over: He would be playing the same game
with the universe and the world; first making things that are not, then
destroying what is made. For, on the contrary, whatever has been
generated, in whatever way, in the world, *this* binds all existence
together, and checks the infirmity inherent in the medley <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211.md) that tends to destruction. And to me
what seems most opposed to, and testifying against the aforesaid legend
is this very word, the addressing 'Thou art' to the god, as though
neither change of place or transformation were possible with respect to
*him*, but are applied to some other god (or better say dæmon) appointed
to preside over Nature as working in production and dissolution, to
whom <span id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_212.md) it pertained

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

to do and suffer such things, as is evident at first sight from our
god's titles, so contrary and contradictory to such a conception of his
character. For the one is called Apollo, the other Pluto; the one is
styled Delius (*apparent*), the other Aidoneus (*invisible*); the one
Phœleus (*bright*), the other Scotios (*full of darkness*); and by the
side of the one stand the Muses and Memory, beside the other Oblivion
and Silence; the one is entitled from completion and giving light, the
other is the 'lord of unseeing Night and unworking Sleep;' the one is
'of all the gods most hateful to mankind,' touching whom Pindar hath
said, not unpleasantly, 'He hath been condemned to be the most
undelightful unto mortals.' With good cause, then, Euripides says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Drink offerings to the dead and gone.  
  Chants that the god with golden hair.  
  Phœbus, receiveth not.'</span>

</div>

and, before him, Sophocles, 'Above all things, sports and songs doth
Apollo love; but mourning and groans Pluto hath gotten for his share.'
Sophocles also has distinctly assigned to each of them his proper
instruments in these words,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Neither the mournful flute, nor merry
lyre.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For it was late
and only yesterday that the flute gave forth its sound at scenes of
merriment; in old times it drawled out in lamentations, at funerals, and
held this office (not a very respectable or cheerful one) at scenes of
the kind. Afterwards, however, it was admitted to everything. But, to
say the truth, those who have mixed up things relating to gods with
those relating to dæmons, have brought themselves chiefly into trouble.
But indeed the maxim, 'Know

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

thyself' appears to run counter to the 'Thou art,' and again, in one
way, to harmonize with it; for the one is addressed through awe and
veneration to the god, the other is a reminder to mortality of the
nature and frailty that envelopes it."

<span id="img_19600"></span> ![\[The Delphic E\]](img/19600.jpg.md)  
\[The Delphic E\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173:1](pte07.htm#fr_172.md) Serapion lived at
Athens, as appears from the last treatise.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174:1](pte07.htm#fr_173.md) προσέσϑαι must be
προσίεσϑαι, "be pleased with."

<span id="fn_174"></span>[174:2](pte07.htm#fr_174.md) ξυμφιλοτιμούμενος
must be … ων.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[174:3](pte07.htm#fr_175.md) Not in text, but
clearly fallen out in the copy.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[176:1](pte07.htm#fr_176.md) This explanation, as
all the rest, is founded on nothing but fancy, as a single consideration
proves. The symbol, which is preserved to us by amulets, was indeed
similar in shape to the lunar ϵ, but then *that* character was unknown
before Imperial times. In all probability it was an Indian cast mark;
and imported like the Swastika or Fylfot, and many other Indian symbols,
in prehistoric times.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[176:2](pte07.htm#fr_177.md) In compliment to her
husband, who wished to be thought son of the god:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Casta fave, Lucina, tuus jam regnat Apollo."

</div>

<span id="fn_178"></span>[176:3](pte07.htm#fr_178.md) This has dropped out
of the text, but is indispensable for the sense.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[177:1](pte07.htm#fr_179.md) ἐκ πίνακος καὶ
πυλαίας. Means, I suppose, fortune-tellers' technical talk.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[177:2](pte07.htm#fr_180.md) All inquiries begin
with Εί, the sound of the Greek ε.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[177:3](pte07.htm#fr_181.md) As we should say the
εἴ stands for both notes of interrogation and exclamation.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[179:1](pte07.htm#fr_182.md) In his fight with the
Centaurs, regarded as sophists. Here is the <span id="page_180">p.
180</span> common play upon the various senses of , impossible to be
translated.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[180:1](pte07.htm#fr_183.md) The text has εἰδως
for εἰκὸς.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[180:2](pte07.htm#fr_184.md) πεμπάζειν, literally
"to five fold" or "to quintuple." In early Greek numeration, the numbers
up to 5 were denoted by as many vertical strokes; 5 by π; to which again
were subjoined the proper amount of verticals up to 10, expressed by Δ.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[181:1](pte07.htm#fr_185.md) According to the
Platonic plan of treating numbers as solid bodies. Cut a square body in
two equal parts; these being separated, leave an empty space in the
middle, a receptacle for anything else.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[181:2](pte07.htm#fr_186.md) The union of an odd
and even number always produces an odd number.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[182:1](pte07.htm#fr_187.md) Into themselves, that
is.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[182:2](pte07.htm#fr_188.md) Not in text, but
required by context.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[183:1](pte07.htm#fr_189.md) *i.e.* retains his
usual name under all his changes.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[183:2](pte07.htm#fr_190.md) As if derived from ἀ
privative, and πολλοί, and signifying "Destroyer of plurality"—the most
preposterous of all the absurd derivations recorded by our Author.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[184:1](pte07.htm#fr_191.md) The work of creation
took thrice as long a time as did its destruction by fire.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[184:2](pte07.htm#fr_192.md) in text .

<span id="fn_193"></span>[184:3](pte07.htm#fr_193.md) The copyist has made
inextricable confusion of the passage, from want of knowing the
"difference between tweedledum and tweedledee;" and being myself in the
same condition, I am totally unable to correct him.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[185:1](pte07.htm#fr_194.md) Any more than it
would be obeyed in the case of a law, *i.e.* these matters are to be
judged by calculation, not by the sense of hearing.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[185:2](pte07.htm#fr_195.md) πεμπτὴ οὐσία, which,
from the property here mentioned, Julian calls τὸ εἱλικτὸν σῶμα; and
says is symbolized by Atys.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[186:1](pte07.htm#fr_196.md) The Chinese have a
similar theory, making the Cube represent Earth.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[186:2](pte07.htm#fr_197.md) From these theorists
Simon Magus stole the idea of appropriating the Rivers of Paradise to
the Senses.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[186:3](pte07.htm#fr_198.md) Of the five senses to
the five elements.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[186:4](pte07.htm#fr_199.md) The Pythagoreans.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[187:1](pte07.htm#fr_200.md) This word makes
nonsense; and has slipped into the text from elsewhere.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[188:1](pte07.htm#fr_201.md) That is, Motion.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[189:1](pte07.htm#fr_202.md) Already mentioned as
the High Priest of Delphi, and therefore appealed to in a mystic matter.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[189:2](pte07.htm#fr_203.md) This passage is
hopelessly corrupt. Perhaps the meaning is that the dice so used wanted
the *deuce* and *tierce* pips.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[190:1](pte07.htm#fr_204.md) Equivalent in sense
to the Hebrew "Jehovah," and the ὁ ζῶν θεὸς of the Athenians.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[192:1](pte07.htm#fr_205.md) Some words lost here:
but probably to the effect that man's condition is not to be termed
Existence, but Change.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[192:2](pte07.htm#fr_206.md) All confusion here in
text, but it clearly alludes to the foregoing comparison of water
slipping through the fingers when clutched at.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[192:3](pte07.htm#fr_207.md) That is, of true
existence, not measured by Time.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[193:1](pte07.htm#fr_208.md) A beautiful and most
expressive metaphor!

<span id="fn_209"></span>[193:2](pte07.htm#fr_209.md) ετερότης might be
well rendered by "otherness," did such a word exist. But as it is, write
"Variety, which is," &c.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[193:3](pte07.htm#fr_210.md) Ἀπόλλων being derived
from ἀ and πολλοὶ. Ἴητος, really "Archer," is here derived from the
archaic ἵος = εἵς.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[194:1](pte07.htm#fr_211.md) The origin of the
Gnostic μῖγμα, out of which it is Christ's business to extract the seeds
of Light.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[194:2](pte07.htm#fr_212.md) The office of Siva,
whose Puranic attributes are exactly described in what follows. As the
god of Change he is regarded as the god of <span id="page_195">p.
195</span> Death and destruction, which is in reality but a separation
of collected particles for the purpose of reconstruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon](pte08.md)
