[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pte05)  [Next](pte07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142863326X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays*, tr. by Charles William King,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

### ON THE PYTHIAN RESPONSES

##### "Why are the Pythian Responses no longer given in verse?

BASILOCLES—PHILINUS.

#### I. *Bas*.

"<span class="smallcaps">You</span> have made it late in the evening,
Philinus, by escorting your guest about amongst the dedicated things: I
lost all patience in waiting for you both."

*Phil.* "Yes, Basilocles, for we strolled along slowly—sowing as we
went, and forthwith 'reaping words with fighting,' that sprung up and
emerged along our path, like the crop of the Dragon's Teeth, spiteful
and contentious."

*Bas.* "Will it then be necessary to appeal to one of those who were
present at the time; or are you willing yourself to gratify us, and
repeat what the talk was, and who were the talkers?"

*Phil.* "The task, as it seems, is mine, for none of the others will you
easily find in the town, for I saw the most of them again going up in
company with the visitor to the Corycium, and the Lycoreia."

*Bas.* "How fond of sight-seeing, and extravagantly fond of hearing
stories, our stranger is!"

*Phil.* "Nay, rather, fond of history, and fond of learning: and not so
much to be admired for these two points, as for a gentleness combined
with much elegance of manner, and an incredulity and fondness for
disputation,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the result of intelligence, that has nothing in it ill-tempered or
stubborn in receiving one's explanations: so that after being a little
while in his company you exclaim, 'The child of a good father!' for you
are acquainted with Diogenianus, that best of men?"

*Bas.* "I have not seen him personally; but have met with many of those
who greatly approve of the conversation and the character of that man,
and say just the same things of him as you do of the youth. But what
starting point and pretext had this discussion of yours to begin?"

II\. *Phil.* "The guides went through their appointed duties, <span
id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127) paying no heed to our entreaties that
they would cut short their long tales, and the reading the greatest part
of the inscriptions. The sight and artistic merit of the statues did not
so much attract the notice of the visitor, who had in all likelihood
seen many fine things of the sort elsewhere; but he admired the colour
of the bronze, which was not like dirt or verdigris, but shone with a
dark blue dye, so as to contribute considerably to the effect of the
statues of the admirals (for he had begun his round with them), standing
as they did, sea-like as it were in colour, and truly men of ocean-deep.
Had there been then, he asked, some mode of alloying and preparing the
bronze, used by the ancient artificers, like the traditional
tempering <span id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_128) of swords, which process
being lost, then bronze obtained exemption from all warlike employments?
For it is known that the Corinthian metal acquired the beauty of its
colour not through art, but through accident, when a fire consumed a
house containing a little gold and silver, but a great quantity of
bronze there stored up; all which being mixed and melted together, the
preponderating part, by reason

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

of its largeness, originated the name of the bronze." Theon, taking him
up, said: "We have heard another story, more clever than yours—that a
man at Corinth, a brasier by trade, having found a hoard containing much
gold, and being afraid of detection, broke up little by little and
quietly mixed the gold with his bronze, which acquired thereby a
wonderful quality, and sold his metal at a high price, as it was much
sought after on account of its colour and beauty. But both the one
account and the other is a fable. It was, in all probability, a peculiar
alloying and treatment of the metal—just as nowadays by alloying gold
with silver they produce a peculiar and extraordinary pale colour, that
looks to me sickly, and a mere spoiling of its beauty." <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129)

III\. "What then," asked Diogenianus, "do you say has been the cause of
the peculiar colour of the bronze in this place?" And Theon replied:
"Inasmuch as of the greatest and most natural things that are and shall
be—namely, Fire, Water, Earth, Air—there is not one that comes near to,
or has to do with the bronze except Air, it is clear that the metal has
been thus affected by this element, and has acquired the peculiarity
which it possesses by reason of this being always about it, and pressing
upon it: you know, surely, that this once took place in the case <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130) of Theognis, according to the comic
poet? But what property the air has, and what influence it exerts in its
contact with the bronze—these are the two things, Diogenianus, that you
desire to learn?" and upon Diogenianus assenting: "so

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

do I, my dear boy; therefore, if you please, let us investigate the
matter in concert: and as a beginning—for what reason does oil, above
all other liquids, coat bronze with verdigris, <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) for it does not generate the verdigris
simply by being rubbed over the metal, because it is pure and clear when
applied to the surface." <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132) "By no
means," replied the young man, "does this seem to me to be the reason:
but because the oil being thin, pure, and transparent, the verdigris
falling upon it, is very perceptible, whereas in other liquids, it
becomes invisible." "Well done," my dear boy," said Theon, "… but
examine, if you please, the reason that is assigned by Aristotle." "I
wish to do so," replied he. "Aristotle, therefore, asserts that
verdigris, if put upon other liquids, runs through them and is
dispersed, because they are porous and fluid; whereas it is arrested by
the solidity or density of the oil, and remains collected in a mass. If,
therefore, we can ourselves devise some hypothesis of the kind, we shall
not be entirely at a loss for some charm or cure against the present
difficulty."

IV\. "Thus then," said he, "did we pronounce and agree, that the air at
Delphi, being dense and compact, and receiving tension from the
repercussion and resistance of the surrounding mountains, is at the same
time biting and penetrating, as the facts about the digestion of food
clearly evince: this air, then, by reason of its subtile quality enters
into and cuts the bronze and so scrapes off verdigris in plenty, and
that of an earthy nature, which again it holds suspended and compresses,
because its own density does not allow of its unlimited diffusion …

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[but, on the
contrary\] <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) permits it to settle
down by reason of its abundance, and to bloom, as it were, and get
brilliancy and polish over the surface." And upon our admitting this,
the visitor said that the one supposition (of the density) was
sufficient for the explanation. "The subtile quality," said he, "would
seem to contradict the asserted density of the air: and it is assumed
without any necessity; for the bronze does of itself emit and discharge
the verdigris, while the density of the air compresses and thickens it,
and makes it visible in consequence of its abundance." Then Theon,
interrupting him, said: "What is there to prevent the same thing from
being a£ once both fine and dense, like silken and linen tissues,
touching which Homer hath said:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'From the bright linen dropped the liquid
oil:'</span>

</div>

indicating the accuracy and the fineness of the weaving by the oil's not
adhering to it, but slipping off by reason of its closeness, does not
penetrate the texture. And again one may bring into play not only for
the abrasion of surface in the bronze, the subtility of the air, but the
same cause is likely to render the colour also more agreeable and bluer,
because it mingles lustre with the azure atmosphere."

V. After this silence followed, and the guides again set to work with
their stories. And upon the recital of a certain oracle in verse
(concerning, I believe, the reign of Ægon the Argive) Diogenianus
observed that he had often wondered at the badness and vulgarity of the
verse in which the responses were uttered: although the god is the
"Leader of the Muses," and the glory of the so-called oracle-making no
less interests him, than that of tunes, songs, and auspicious words; and
yet both Hesiod and Homer far excel him in utterance,—and the most part
of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

his oracles we see are both as to the metre and as to the expressions a
tissue of blunders and badness. Serapion, therefore, the poet from
Athens, who was present, replied: "As we consider these verses to be the
gods’ own, we 'must sing this over again,' as the saying is; and make no
use of the beauties of Hesiod and Homer, but correct our taste by means
of bad habit." <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) To this Boëthus the
mathematician (you know the man who has lately gone over to the
Epicureans), answered: "Did you ever hear the story about Pauson the
painter?" "Not I ever," replied Serapion. "This Pauson, having been
commissioned to paint a horse rolling about, drew it as running. His
customer being angry at this, Pauson, with a laugh, turned the picture
about, so that it was upside down, when the horse was shown not
galloping but rolling on its back. For the same reason some people will
say not that the Oracles are well-made because they are the god's, but
that they are not the god's, because they are badly made; because the
first position is a matter of uncertainty, but the other, namely, that
the verses containing the Oracles are not well-made is, to a critic like
you, friend Serapion, a thing as clear as day. For you write poems
yourself in a philosophic and serious style, which in force, elegance,
and finish as to the diction, are inferior rather to Hesiod and to
Homer, than to those uttered by the Pythian Virgin."

VI\. "Yes," replied Serapion, "because we are diseased both in ears and
eyes, through our luxury and effeminacy, so that we think pleasant
things fine things, and declare them so. Perhaps we shall find fault
with the Pythia for not declaiming more musically than Glance, the
lyrist nor using perfumes or clothing herself in purple robes when she
goes down into the cave; nor burning on the altar

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

cassia, or ladanum, or frankincense, but only bay-leaves and
barley-meal. Do you not see," replied he, "what grace the songs of
Sappho possess, that soothe and enchant all hearers? But the Sibyl,
according to Heraclitus, 'uttering with raving mouth things without a
smile, without embellishment, and without perfume, reaches down to a
thousand years by means of the god.' And Pindar says that Cadmus heard
the god giving forth 'a music that was neither correct, nor sweet, nor
luxurious, nor yet broken and uneven in the tunes.' For the Passionless
and the Pure does not admit Pleasure, but she hath been thrown down here
below together with Pain, and the far largest portion of her, as it
seems, has flowed in a stream into the ears of men." <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135)

VII\. And upon Serapion's saying this, Theon observed with a smile:
"Serapion has given his customary scope to his feelings, by taking
advantage of the conversations having turned upon the subject of
pleasure; but we, Boëthus, even though these verses may be very much
worse than those of Homer, let *us* not suppose that the god himself
made them, but that while he supplied the origin with the *inspiration*,
the *verses* are the productions of each of the prophetesses in her
turn. For if she were obliged to write down, and not to utter, the
responses, we should not, I suppose, believe the handwriting to be the
god's, and to find fault with it, because it is inferior in point of
calligraphy to the imperial rescripts, for neither the old woman is the
god's, nor her voice, nor her diction, nor her metre; but it is the god
alone that presents the visions to this woman, and kindles light in her
soul as regards the Future: for the inspiration is *this*. And to speak
generally, it is impossible to evade you disciples of Epicurus (for
*you* manifest yourself carried away by him), for you

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

accuse of badness both the ancient prophetesses because they made
inferior verses, and also those of the present day because they speak in
prose and in every-day language, in order that they may not be
responsible for headless, broken-backed, and deficient lines." Then
Diogenianus: "Do not joke, for heaven's sake, but solve the problem for
us, as it is a fine one; besides, there is no one but is seeking after
the cause and reason why the Oracle has given up employing the metre and
expression of poetry." But Theon in reply: "Nay, my dear boy, we already
seem to have defrauded the guides of their proper business, by making
experiments of our own: suffer them, therefore, to finish what they have
to do, and then let us discuss this question at our leisure."

VIII\. And as we were now going forward and come opposite the statue of
Hiero the tyrant: the visitor, although already knowing all about him,
nevertheless out of good nature showed himself a patient listener to the
guide's tale. But on hearing that a bronze column, the gift of Hiero,
standing further up, had fallen down of itself upon the very day on
which Hiero's death happened at Syracuse, he expressed his surprise, and
at the same time reminded him (the guide) of other occurrences of like
nature, for instance of Hiero <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) the
Spartan, how the eyes fell out of his statue at the moment of his death
in the battle of Leuctra; and how the Twin Stars had vanished at the
same time, which Lysander had dedicated after the sea-fight at
Aigospotamoi; and the marble statue of Lysander himself shot forth wild
briar and grass in

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

such great quantity as to conceal his face; and how, on the other hand,
in the Sicilian disasters of the Athenians, the golden dates dropped off
the Palm-tree, and the shield of the little image of Pallas, ravens
pecked all around. And the Crown of the Cnidians, which Philomelus,
tyrant of the Phocians, had given to Pharsalia the ballet-girl, was the
cause of her death after she had migrated from Greece into Italy, and
was at Metapontum, disporting herself around the temple of Apollo. For
the young men rushing to seize her crown, and quarrelling with each
other for the gold, tore the poor creature into pieces. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137)

Now Aristotle used to say that Homer alone made "words that *walked*,"
on account of their vividness; but I say that of the statues standing
here, very many *walk* and *aid* in foreshowing the fore-knowledge of
the god; and of these no one part is void, or senseless, but all filled
with the godhead. Then Boethus: "Nay, truly, is it not enough for us
that the god is shut up once a month in a mortal body, but we must knead
him up with every stone and piece of metal, just as though we had not a
satisfactory explanation of all accidents of the sort you have
mentioned, in Chance or in Nature?" "Then," replied I, "does each one of
such events seem to you to resemble mere accident and self-movement: and
is it credible that your 'atoms' should slip off, be separated, and move
obliquely, neither before nor after, but exactly at the moment when each
one of the dedicators was about to come to a bad or good end? And
Epicurus benefits you by what he said or wrote three hundred years
ago, <span id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) but the god, unless he

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

brings and shuts himself up in everything, and is mingled up with all,
is not thought by you to supply anything that exists, either with the
final cause of motion, or the efficient cause of passion?"

IX\. In this way did I reply to Boethus, and much else to the same
effect respecting the Sibylline oracles. For when we were arrived, and
stopped opposite to the Rock, over against the Council-house, upon which
they tell that the first Sibyl used to sit, having travelled thither
from Helicon, where she had been brought up by the Muses (some say she
came to Maleon, and was child of Lamia, daughter of Neptune), Boethus
mentioned the Sibylline verses wherein she says, "That not even after
death shall she cease from prophesying, but shall travel around in the
Moon, and become what is called the Face in the Moon: her breath
mingling with the Air is ever borne alone in rumours and airy tongues;
out of her body, metamorphosed in Earth's bosom, shall spring shrubs and
grass on which shall browse sacred herds that carry on their entrails
all kinds of. colours, forms, and qualities, whence omens of the future
come to men." But Boethus laughed at these Oracles yet more openly than
at the others. On which the visitor observed that even if these tales
are much like fables, yet to the reality of these Oracles bear witness
the uprootings and removals of many Greek cities, the sudden appearances
of barbarian invasions, and the takings off of great personages. Again,
these quite recent <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139) and new
calamities at Cumæ and Dicæarchia, hymned forth long ago and sung in the
Sibylline verses, hath not Time made them good as though he were in debt
for the same? "Burstings forth of mountain fire, boilings up of the sea,
castings up by wind of rocks and fiery masses, destructions of so many
and such great towns, so that

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

with returning day all memory and trace was lost as to whereabouts they
had stood, from the country being turned upside down." That such things
have happened it is hard even to believe *now*—far more to *foretell*,
without divine assistance so many centuries ago.

X. Then Boethus: "What kind of calamity, my good sir, is not Time in
debt to Nature for? What is there amongst things strange and improbable
with respect to sea or land, cities or persons, that one can prophesy,
and it not come true at last? And yet this is almost the same as not
*foretelling* but *telling*, or rather casting out and scattering words
that have no final cause into infinite space; which words as they wander
about Chance encounters, and coincides with them of her own accord. For
there is a great difference, I think, between a thing that has been said
coming to pass, and a thing that is to come to pass being said; because
the saying that foretells things that are not, keeps the failure <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) in its own hands unfairly, and waits for
its confirmation from accident; and does not adduce a real proof of its
foretelling, when it knows the event that has happened after the
prediction; because infinity of time offers all sorts of events (to fit
the prophecy): 'He that guesses well,' whom the proverb has proclaimed
'the best diviner,' is like unto one that hunts for the footprints, and
follows the track of the Future, through probabilities. The Sibyls and
the Bacides flung aimlessly into all Time, as it were into an ocean,
just as it chanced, the names and epithets of all sorts of calamities
and accidents; amongst which number, though some few do come to pass
through chance, nevertheless what is told by them to-day is a lie all
the same, even though hereafter, by some chance or other, it may come to
happen."

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

XI\. When Boethus had finished, Serapion said: "Boethus has well
expressed his opinion with respect to predictions, made indefinitely and
without foundation, like such as this, 'If victory hath been foretold to
a general, he hath conquered; if ruin to a city, it hath fallen;' but in
cases where the thing that is to happen is not only told, but where and
when, and after what event, and through whose means, then it becomes not
a guess at what may perhaps happen, but a foreshowing of things that
certainly shall be. Take for instance this upon the lameness of
Agesilaus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Beware, O Sparta! tho’ thou be so vain,  
  Lest thy sound goings hurt a limping reign,  
  Unhooked for troubles are in store for thee,  
  When rolls the war upon the murderous sea.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And that again
upon the island which the sea threw up off Thera and Therasia, and this
upon the war between Philip and the Romans:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'When Trojan race hath beat Phœnicians bold,  
  Then things beyond belief shalt thou behold:  
  With fire the sea shall shine, in upper air  
  Whirlwinds from lightnings thro' the waves shall tear;  
  Mingled with rock: but it shall stand for aye,  
  Unnamed by man, an island on that day.  
  And weaker men shall on the battle field  
  By force of arms, the stronger make to yield;'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That is, that in a
short time the Romans should overcome the Carthaginians by entirely
defeating Hannibal, and that Philip, having engaged in war with the
Ætolians and Romans, should be worsted in battle; and, lastly, that an
island should rise up out of the deep, along with much fire and boiling
waves. No one will say that all these things hit and coincided together
by mere chance and spontaneously; but their succession proves manifestly
the fore-knowledge of the prediction, and the fact that she (the Pythia)
foretold to the Romans, about five hundred years

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

beforehand, the time in which all the nations of the world together
should war with them (that is they should war with the revolted slaves);
in all this there is nought said at random, or blindfold, or where the
explanation must be sought after in perplexity, and depend upon
accident; but it presents many sureties derived from experience, and
points out the path along which destiny walks. For I do not imagine
anyone will say in this case that events turned out in the way they were
predicted, by mere chance; else what hinders us, my dear Boethus, from
saying that Epicurus did not *write* his established doctrines, but that
from the letters impinging upon one another by chance and spontaneously
the book was brought about?"

XII\. Whilst this talk was going on, we continued to advance. And in the
Hall of the Corinthians, when gazing at the Palm-tree in bronze, which
is still remaining there of the offerings, the snakes and frogs in
relief around the root of the tree occasioned surprise to Diogeneanus,
and certainly to ourselves as well; because the palm is not like other
trees, a native of marshes, nor is it a water-loving plant; neither have
frogs anything to do with the Corinthians, so as to become a symbol or a
badge of the city, in the same way that the people of Selinus are said
to have once dedicated a parsley-plant in gold, and those of Tenedos an
axe, from the crabs that are only found amongst them around the place
called Asterion, because they are the only sort, it seems, that have the
figure of an axe painted upon their upper shell. And, indeed, one would
think ravens, and swans, and wolves, and hawks, and anything else than
these reptiles would be agreeable to the god. And upon Serapion's saying
that the artist had intimated thus the nutrition of the Sun from
moisture, and his origin and exhalation, whether that he had heard
Homer's—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Hasten the Sun to quit the beauteous pond,"</span>

</div>

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

or whether he had seen the Egyptians representing the beginning of
sunrise as a new-born babe seated upon a lotus. Then I, laughingly,
"Where, my good friend, are you pushing on the Porch, and still slipping
into the story your 'lightings up' and your 'exhalations;' you certainly
are not drawing *down* the moon and sun, like the Thessalian witches,
because, according to you, they grow up and originate here below, out of
earth and the waters. For Plato hath called Man 'a celestial plant,'
because he is carried up from the head as from a root; but you laugh
Empedocles to scorn for saying 'that the sun when going round the earth
breaks off fragments of heavenly light, but again shines against Olympus
with undismayed countenance;' whilst you yourselves make him out to be
some earth-born animal or plant-lacustrine, and register him in the
family of frogs or water serpents. But this sort of thing let us give up
to stoical bombast; and the accessories of artists let us examine in a
matter-of-fact sort of way; for in many cases they are ingenious enough,
though they have not everywhere avoided the pedantic and over-refined.
For example, he that placed the Cock upon the hand of Apollo, intimated
thereby the morning tide and the hour of approaching sunrise; in the
same way one may say the frogs here were made the symbol of the spring
season, when the sun begins to get power over the air, and to loosen the
bonds of winter; that is, if we must, like you, consider Apollo and the
Sun, not as two different deities, but as one and the same." "What!"
asked Serapion, "do not you think it so? and do you hold that the Sun is
different from Apollo?" "Yes," replied I, "as much as the Moon differs
from the Sun, but she hides the Sun not frequently nor from all men at
once; whereas the Sun hath caused all people to forget Apollo, by
diverting their attention, by the means of the sense, from the Real to
the Apparent."

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

XIII\. After this, Serapion asked the guides, "Why do you name this
Hall, not from Cypselus who first dedicated it, but from the
Corinthians?" From their silence, there seems to me, at least, to be
some uncertainty about the cause. "How, pray," said I, laughing, "do you
expect them either to know or to remember anything at all, scared out of
their wits as they be by your subtle disquisitions? We have already
heard them telling how the Corinthians, when the tyranny was put down,
were wishing to inscribe both the gods’ statue that was at Pisa and the
Treasury here with the name of the *City:* the Delphians granted the
thing, as being just, and consented to it; but the Eleans refused it out
of envy, whereupon the Corinthians passed a law that excluded them from
the Isthmian Games; and from thenceforth no man of Elis has ever been a
competitor at the Isthmian Games; but the slaughter of the Molionidæ by
Hercules, near Cleonæ, is not the cause, as some think, why the Eleans
are so excluded; for, on the contrary, it would have been natural to
exclude them, had they quarrelled with the Corinthians on account of
that slaughter, which they did not." Thus farther spoke I.

XIV\. And when the guide showed us the Hall of the Acanthians and
Brasidas, the place where the iron spits <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141) of Rhodope the courtesan formerly lay,
Diogenianus, being indignant, exclaimed, "’Twas surely right and proper
for the same city to grant Rhodope a place wherein to deposit the tithes
of her prostitution, and to put to death Æsop, her fellow in slavery."
Then Serapion: "Why are you angry, my fine fellow, at this? look up
there above, and behold amongst captains and kings the Mnesarete <span
id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_142) in

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

gold, which Crates said was dedicated as a trophy over the incontinence
of Greece." "But," said the youth, "was not this said of Phryne by
Crates?" "Yes, truly," answered Serapion, "her real name was Mnesarete,
but she got the nickname of *Phryne* <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143) by reason of her paleness; for the
nicknames often obliterate the true names: for example, Alexander's
mother, Polyxena, they say, was afterwards called Myrtale, then Olympias
and Stratonice; and the Corinthian Eumelis most people to the present
day call Cleobule by her family name; also Herophile of Erythræ, a woman
with the gift of prophesy, they entitle Sibylla; and you will hear the
grammarians pretending that Leda was named Mnesinæa, and Orestes Achæus.
But how," said he, looking towards Theon, "do you intend to refute this
charge with respect to Phryne?"

XV\. And he, with a smile: "In such a way that I in my turn accuse you
of censuring the very smallest of all Grecian faults. For like as
Socrates, in the case of Callias, quarrels only with his perfuming
himself, and puts up with the sight of dances of boys, and tumblers, and
kisses, and buffoons, in the same way you seem to me to be shutting out
of the sacred ground a poor wench for making use of her personal beauty
in no very respectable manner; but though you see the god here
surrounded on all sides with the first-fruits and tithes of slaughter,
wars, and plunderings, and his temple filled with Grecian spoils and
trophies, you do not get angry, nor call the Greeks most disgraced on
the score of their fine offerings of the sort, when you read such
inscriptions as 'Brasidas and the Acanthians, from the Athenians;' and
'The Athenians from the Corinthians;' and 'The Phocians from the
Thessalians;' and 'The Orneatæ from the Sicyonians;' and 'The
Amphictyons from the Phocians.' But Praxiteles offended Crates

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

only with his mistress, and met with his reward of her in such a
place; <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) whereas Crates ought rather
to have commended him because he set up amongst these golden kings a
courtesan in gold, thereby casting reproach on gold, as possessing
nought that is to be admired or venerated; seeing that it is becoming to
lay before the god the offerings of virtue, or temperance, and of
magnanimity, both for kings and rulers, not those of golden luxurious
wealth wherein even the men of most infamous lives have their part.

XVI\. "You do not mention the fact," said the other of the two guides,
"that Crœsus caused to be made and dedicated here the golden statue of
the woman, his baker … not out of wanton insult to the holy place, but
because he had an honourable and just cause for so doing. For the story
goes that Algattes, father of Crœsus, had taken a second wife, and had
children by the same; this woman plotted against the life of Crœsus, and
gave poison to the baker, ordering her to knead it up in a loaf for
Crœsus; but the bakeress privately told Crœsus, and set the bread before
the children of his step-mother; in return for which Crœsus, when he
came to the throne, requited the woman's kindness, taking, as it were,
the god for witness of his gratitude, in which, truly, he did well. For
which reason," added he, out of many cities, "such an offering as this,
one of the Opuntians is deserving to be admired and honoured; for after
the tyrants of the Phocians had melted down many of the gold and silver
offerings and coined money therewith, and distributed it around
different States, the Opuntians collected all that

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

silver coin, and sent back a water-vessel <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) to the god, which they dedicated to him.
I commend the people of Myrina and of Apollonia for sending hither
wheat-sheaves in gold, but yet more those of Eretria and of Magnesia who
presented the god with the first-fruits of human beings, as the giver of
fruits paternal, presiding over generation, and the friend of man. But I
blame those of Megara, because they, almost alone of those in this
place, set up the god with a spear in his hand, in memory of the fight
in which, after the Persian War, they drove out the Athenians who had
already got possession of their town; afterwards, however, they
dedicated to the god a plectrum of gold, taking the hint, probably, from
Scythinus <span id="fr_146"></span>[2](#fn_146) saying of the lyre:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                 "'Which Apollo takes,  
Jove's beauteous offspring,  
he that comprehends  
Of all things the beginning and the end;  
And has the sun-light for his shining *plectrum*.'"</span>

</div>

XVII\. And when Serapion was attempting to make some remarks upon the
subject, the visitor interrupted him with: It is indeed pleasant,
listening to tales of this kind; but I am under the necessity to demand
the fulfilment of your promise about the cause that has made the Pythia
desist from delivering oracles in epic verse, or in other metres.
Wherefore, if you please, let us suspend the rest of the sightseeing;
let us hear something upon that point, sitting down here, since that
subject is the one that most nearly concerns the credit of the Oracle,
because one of two things must be the case—either that the Pythia no
longer approaches the place where the divine thing resides, or else that
the exhalation is extinguished, and its power come to an end."

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We therefore went
round, and sat down upon the southern steps of the shrine, looking
towards the Temple of the Earth and the Water; so that Boethus
immediately observed that the place itself assisted the visitor in his
inquiry, for there was a temple of the Muses by the pool <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) of the Spring, which too they used for
making libation as Stesichorus sings:—

"There, from above is drawn the pure water for the basins of the Muses
with their beautiful locks."

And again, somewhat more elaborately, Simonides addresses Clio as,—

"Chaste guardian of lustral basins, draw the far-famed water from the
deep recesses—not cloaked in gold, but perfumed, undying, and much to be
desired."

Eudoxus, therefore, was wrong in believing those who make out that this
was called the "Water of Styx." They therefore set up the Muses for
companions of Prophecy, and for guardians round about the stream itself,
and also built the Temple of the Earth, to whom the Oracle is said to
have first belonged. … <span id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148) The
delivering of oracles in epic verse and poetry. But others assert that
the heroic measure was heard here for the first time:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Collect your feathers, birds; your wax, ye
bees"—</span>

</div>

… \[On its\] becoming necessary to the god to … cast away his gravity.

XVIII\. Then Serapion: "This language is more gentle and more civil than
what you used before; for we must not quarrel with Theon, and abolish
along with the prophetic Power, Providence, and the Divinity as well;

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

but rather seek for explanations of the facts that appear to run counter
to these ideas; and not to cast away the pious faith of our fathers."
"You say rightly, my excellent Serapion," replied I, "for neither do we
despair of Philosophy as entirely destroyed and ruined, because in old
times philosophers used to publish their dogmas and their arguments in
the shape of poems, as for instance, Orpheus, Hesiod, Parmenides,
Xenophanes, and Empedocles, and Thales—but afterwards they gave it up,
and ceased making use of verses—all but yourself; for by your means
Poetry doth once more descend into Philosophy, exhorting youth in
martial and noble tone: nor has Astronomy been shorn of her glory by the
schools of Aristarchus, Timocharis, Aristyllus, and Hipparchus writing
in prose, whereas Eudoxus, Hesiod, and Thales formerly wrote in verse;
if, indeed, Thales really did compose the 'Astronomy' attributed to him.
And Pindar confesses that he himself is quite at a loss about the
neglect of the use of verse, and is astonished. … <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149) It is neither wicked nor absurd for
people to inquire into the causes of changes of the sort; but to do away
with the sciences themselves if anything belonging to them be meddled
with or changed, is very unfair."

XIX\. Then Theon taking up the conversation: "These sciences have indeed
undergone many changes and innovations: but as for things here, we know
that many predictions in those old times were uttered in plain prose,
and those too about matters of no ordinary kind. For when the
Lacedæmonians consulted the Oracle concerning their war with the
Athenians it predicted to them victory and success, and also that it
would help them, asked or unasked; and that if they did not restore
Pausanias, they would

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

have to plough with a silver ploughshare. To the Athenians also, when
consulting the Oracle about their expedition into Sicily, it advised
them to bring up from Erythræ the priestess of Minerva. Now the wench
was called 'Quiet' by name. And when Dinomenes the Sicilian consulted
the Oracle about his sons, it responded that all three should be
tyrants. That is, with a mischief to them—'is it not so, my Lord
Apollo?' asked Dinomenes. 'This, too, I make you a present of, and give
into the bargain as response,' it was the reply. You all know that Gelon
reigned with the dropsy, Hieron with the stone, and Thrasybulus after
passing a short time in the midst of war and seditious was driven out of
his power. Procus, tyrant of Epidaurus, had destroyed many people
cruelly and unjustly, and when Timarchus had come to him from Athens
with money in his possession, after receiving him with great show of
friendship, he murdered him secretly, put the body into a hamper, and
sank it in the sea. This he did by the hand of Cleander of Ægina,
unknown to all the rest. But afterwards, when his affairs were growing
troubled, he despatched hither his brother Cleotimus, to consult in
private the best means for escape and emigration. But the god responded
'that he granted Procus escape and emigration to where he had bidden his
Æginetan friend to deposit the hamper; or else where the stag puts down
his horn.' The tyrant, therefore, understanding that the god bade him
either drown or bury himself (because stags bury and hide in the earth
their antlers when shed), <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) waited a
little while, and then his affairs being utterly ruined, was driven into
exile. But the friends of Timarchus got hold of him, and having put him
to death, flung his dead body into the sea. And, what is the greatest
fact of all, the laws by which Lycurgus regulated the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lacedæmonian
constitution were given to him word for word at this place. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) Now, though Alyrius, Herodotus,
Philochorus, and Istrus, the persons most zealous in collecting oracles
in verse, have also recorded responses not in metre, Theopompus, who has
been as careful as any man in the matter of the Oracle, has sharply
rebuked such as believed at that time that the Pythia no longer
delivered metrical responses; and then, wishing to give proof of his
assertion, found be had but a very scanty supply, inasmuch as even then
the responses were usually delivered in prose. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152)

XX\. "Even at the present day some Oracles run out in metre, of which I
cite an example that has made a great noise in the world. There is in
Phocis a temple of Hercules the Misogynist, where it is the law that the
appointed priest shall not have to do with women during his year of
office; for which reason they elect for priests men tolerably advanced
in years. Not long ago, a young man, not a bad one, but ambitious,
having an amour with a servant-girl, obtained the appointment, and at
first was continent, and kept out of the way of the wench; but as he lay
asleep after drinking and dancing, she fell upon him and he did her
business for her. <span id="fr_153"></span>[3](#fn_153) Being terrified
and troubled in mind at what he had done he had recourse to the Oracle
and inquired of the god about his sin, if there were any remedy or
expiation for it; and he received this response—

"'God pardons everything that can't be helped.' <span
id="fr_154"></span>[4](#fn_154)

"Not but that even if you grant that no response is delivered without
metre in our days, will you be any the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

more perplexed with respect to the ancient Oracles delivering their
answers sometimes in metre, sometimes without it. For neither the one
nor the other, my dear boy, is contrary to reason, if only we entertain
correct and unprejudiced notions about the deity, and do not suppose it
was *himself* that composed the verses in former times, or that now
prompts the Pythia and speaks through her as though through a mask.

XXI\. "But it is worth while to say something more at length, and to
inquire about these points, and as we have taken a brief view of the
present one, let us bear in mind that the body employs many organs, the
soul employs the body and the members of the body, the soul itself is
the organ of the god. Now, the goodness of an instrument lies in
imitating that which employs its natural power, and in its producing the
object of the design involved in its construction; though it is not
competent to exhibit what that design was in its Maker, unmixed,
impassive, and without error, but produces it mingled with much that is
extraneous; for by itself it is senseless to us, but when made to appear
another thing, and worked by the agency of another, it is then filled
with its proper nature. And I pass over wax, and gold, and silver, and
bronze, and whatever other sorts of plastic materials receive one form
of resemblance modelled out of them, but yet each adds from itself a
different variation to the copy. <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155)
And the innumerable distortions of the appearances and images from one
object in mirrors flat, or convex, or concave: for they are … But there
is nothing so like in form, or organ created for the use of Nature, that
can afford us a more convincing proof, than does the Moon. For, though
she receives from the Sun both that which is shining and that which is
fiery, she does not send it back

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

to us the same as it was, but when mingled with herself it both changes
its colour, and acquires a different quality: its heat is entirely gone,
and its light is also deficient by reason of its weakness. And I fancy
you know the saying in Heraclitus, that the sovereign, whose Oracle is
at Delphi, neither hides nor reveals the future, but *hints* at it.'
Make an addition, therefore, to this, so well said, and conceive the god
here as employing the Pythia for *hearing* \[being heard\] in the same
way as the Sun employs the Moon for *seeing* \[being seen\], she shows
his thoughts aloud, but she exhibits them mixed with something else, by
the agency of a mortal body, and a soul that is not able to keep
quiet. <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) Unable to present herself,
standing by herself, unmoved to the moving power, but as it were in a
state of agitation, feeling about and entangled with the emotions in
herself, and the passions that trouble her. For just as the whirlpools
do not entirely master the bodies that are carried around with them, but
as partly they be carried round in spite of themselves, partly tend to
the bottom by their own nature, of both which forces the result is a
confused and irregular circumvolution—in like manner the so-called
inspiration is probably the mixture of two impulses, the one of the soul
moved by external impressions; the other, as it is moved by its own
nature. For since it is not easy to use inanimate and motionless objects
for a purpose to which they are \[not\] <span
id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_157) naturally adapted, by using force to
them, as for instance,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

to treat a cylinder as a sphere or as a cube, or a lyre in the manner of
a flute, or a trumpet in the way of a guitar. But if, as is reasonable,
the using each object according to the rules of art is no other than the
using it for the purpose for which it is made: surely, then, it is
impossible to say how anyone can handle that which is animated and
self-impelled, and endowed with appetite and reason, otherwise than
consistently with its constitution; … <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) one attempting to move by musical means
one ignorant of music, or by grammatical, one who knows no grammar, or
by logic, one who has neither the theory nor the practice of logic.

XXII\. "Homer himself bears me out, by representing nothing at all, so
to speak, as coming to pass without the intervention of a god: not,
indeed, that he makes the god use all means indiscriminately to all
purposes, but each one according to its respective talent or force. Do
you not see (said I), my dear Diogenianus, Minerva when she wants to
persuade the Greeks to anything, incites Ulysses to speak; when she
wishes to break the treaty she looks out for Pandarus; when the Trojans
are to be routed she has recourse to Diomede: because one is robust and
valiant; another an archer and thoughtless; another eloquent and wise.
For Homer did not hold the same belief with Pindar, if indeed it were
Pindar that wrote, 'If God pleases, you may go to sea upon a hurdle.'
But he knew that different faculties and natures are made for different
ends; each one of which is moved in a different manner, and \[by that
cause\] in which resides that which moves all collectively: as, for
instance, that which moves the pedestrian has no power in the way of
flying, or that moving the stammerer in the way of distinct utterance,
or the man with squeaking voice in that of a fine voice; although

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Battus, I ween,
for this very cause, when he came to his full stature, did his friends
send out as colonist to Libya, because he was a stammerer and had a
squeaking voice, but possessed the qualities of a king, a statesman, and
a philosopher—in the same way he is incompetent to discourse poetically
who is unlettered, and has never listened to verses. For just as she who
at present is servant to the god at this place was born legitimately and
honourably, and has spent her life in a virtuous manner; but having been
bred up in the house of poor country folks has acquired nothing from
education or from practice or help of other sort, when she goes down
into the oracular cave; but just as Xenophon recommends that the bride
should cone to her husband, having seen as little as possible, having
heard as little as possible, so doth she hold converse with the god,
without experience, all but without hearing of anything, and truly a
virgin in her soul. But we believe that the god, to signify his will,
makes use of crying herons, wrens, and ravens; and we do not demand, in
case they be the messengers and envoys of the gods, that they shall
speak everything plainly and rationally. But the voice and language of
the Pythia we demand to be presented to us as though from off the stage,
not unadorned and plain, but in verse, bombast, and affectation, with
metaphors of names, and declaimed to the accompaniment of the flute.

XXIII\. "What then shall we say about the Oracles of old? Not one thing,
I fancy, but many. In the first place, they also generally declared
themselves in prose. Secondly, those old times produced temperaments and
constitutions of body that had quite a different tendency to poetry than
ours, upon which immediately grew up desires, inclinations, and
proclivities of soul, that required but a small hint or impulse front
without, and made them very ready to be drawn along to what was
congenial to

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

their nature. As Philinus observes, we have known, not merely
astrologers and philosophers, but persons under the influence of wine,
or some powerful passion, either of overwhelming sorrow, or of sudden
joy, sliding involuntarily into poetical language … have filled feasts
with amatory verses and songs, and books with compositions of the same
kind. For Euripides hath said,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Love makes a poet of a clown before"—</span>

</div>

not that Love puts in him the poetical and musical faculty, but only
stirs up, and excites what before was concealed and dormant. Or must we
say, Mr. Stranger, that nobody falls in love nowadays, and that Cupid is
gone and vanished, because no one now, as Pindar hath it, 'In verses or
songs swiftly shoots at youths his sweet-voiced strains?' Absurd
this—for hosts of Loves drive man about, and consort with souls not
indeed disposed by nature, or fitted for poetry—Loves, truly, that be
unprovided with flute, unarmed with lyre, yet no less loquacious and
fervent than those of old. For it is not allowable so much as to say
that the Academy was loveless, nor Socrates and the school of Plato;
since you may meet with their amatory treatises, and their amatory
poems <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159) are not yet obsolete. For
what difference is there in saying that Sappho was the only woman that
ever was in love, and in asserting that the only prophetess was the
Sibyl, or Aristonica, or all such as delivered oracles in verse. For
wine, as Chæremon says, mixes itself up with the tempers of such as
drink it; whilst the prophetic inspiration, like the amatory, acts upon
the subject faculty, and moves each one of those who take it in
according to the way in which each is constituted by nature.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

XXIV\. "Not but that if we consider the question of the god and his
foreknowledge, we shall find the change made for the better. For the use
of language is like the exchange of coin that acquires a different value
at different times \[and of it what is familiar and well-known passes
current\] <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160). There was a time when
people used for the currency of speech, verses and tunes and songs,
converting into music and poetry, all history, all philosophy, every
passion, and to speak generally, every circumstance that required more
dignified utterance. For things that nowadays few people listen to,
everybody then used to hear, and took pleasure in their being sung;
'ploughmen and fowlers too,' as Pindar hath it. Nay, through this
aptitude for poetry most persons admonished others by means of the lyre
and song: they spoke their minds, they comforted others, they did their
business with fables and with songs; furthermore they caused to be made
in verse and songs the hymns of the gods, prayers, and thanksgivings;
partly from natural aptitude that way, partly from old custom. For which
reason, the god did not begrudge decoration and grace to the oracular
power either, nor did he drive away from hence the honoured Muse from
the Tripod; on the contrary, he invited her hither, by stirring up and
welcoming poetic temperaments and himself inspiring their imaginations,
whilst he helped to promote the high-flown and verbose style in the
responses, as appropriate and admired. But when, from the world's
suffering change along with its vicissitudes and its tempers, Custom
cast off everything superfluous, and removed the golden top-knots \[of
the god\] and divested him of his soft gown, and perhaps cropped his too
luxuriant locks, and unstrung his lyre; at which time

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

we accustomed ourselves, not wrongly, to oppose the charms of economy to
extravagant expense, and to hold in honour that which is simple and neat
rather than what is ostentatious and over-refined. In the same way, from
language changing together with the times, and similarly stripping
itself bare, History descended out of verse, as it were out of a
chariot, <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) and the *true* was
distinguished from the *fabulous* chiefly by the use of prose.
Philosophy also, having embraced the clear and instructive in preference
to the sensational style, pursued her investigations in ordinary
language. The god too made the Pythia cease from calling her
fellow-citizens "firebrands," the Spartans, "serpent-eaters," men
"seers," and rivers "mountain-drinkers." He took away from his responses
their heroic verses, glosses, circumlocutions, and obscurity; he
presented them, so to speak, to such as consult him in the same form as
laws speak to citizens, kings reply to their subjects, and scholars hear
their teachers speak, and adapted himself to what is intelligible and
persuasive.

XXV\. "For you ought to know that the god is, according to Sophocles,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'To wise men, an oracular riddle-maker,  
  To fools a bad instructor even in trifles.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And together with
intelligibility thus introduced, Faith also took a turn, sharing in the
change of all the rest; for whereas of old time, whatever was unusual
and not public, but obscure and regularly veiled, the vulgar construed
into something hallowed, and were astounded thereby and revered the
same; but afterwards being content with the learning things plainly and
easily, and without bombast or fiction, they found fault with the poetry
that enveloped the responses, as being an obstacle to understanding them

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

in their true sense, because it mixed up obscurity and shade with the
thing revealed. Nay, already had they viewed with suspicion all
circumlocutions, enigmas, and double-senses, as contrived for loopholes
and refuges for the blunders of prophecy. And one might hear many
asserting that certain men of poetical faculty were ever sitting round
about the Oracle, receiving and catching up all sounds, and weaving
heroic verses, metres, and rhythms, like so many envelopes wrapped all
about the responses, out of their own heads. And persons like
Onomacritus and Prodotes and Cinesion—what blame did they not get on the
score of their Oracles, for having added tragic phrases and bombast to
what was in no need thereof—I omit to mention, or to join in the cry
against them. <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162) The greatest
discredit, however, of all, was brought upon poetry by the set of
mountebanks, and market-haunters that roam about, and play off their
buffoonery round the temples of the Great Mother, and those of Serapis:
and who manufacture Oracles, some out of their own head, some according
to lot from certain books, for the benefit of servants and poor wenches,
who are led away more by the metre than by the poetical merit of the
words. For which reason most of all, Poetry being seen to prostitute
herself to cheats, jugglers, and false prophets, hath been expelled from
the domains of Truth, and the oracular tripod.

XXVI\. "I shall not, therefore, be surprised if some of the ancient
responses required a double, involved language, and obscurity. For in
those times such and such a one did not go to consult the Oracle about
the purchase of a slave, or another about the success of his
speculations in trade, but mighty republics, and kings, and tyrants
extravagantly proud, conferred with the god about their own affairs,
whom to vex, and excite to hostility by their hearing before-hand many
things contrary to their wishes,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

was by no [means](errata.htm#2) to the advantage of the keepers of the
Oracle. For the god doth not obey Euripides when he, as it were, lays
down the law and says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Phœbus alone must prophesy to men;'</span>

</div>

but inasmuch as he employs *mortal* servants and mouthpieces, whom he is
bound to care for and protect, that they be not annoyed by bad men when
ministering to the god—he chooses not to obliterate the truth, but he
deflects the manifestation thereof, like a sunbeam, in poetry, where it
suffers many refractions, and is dispersed and scattered about in many
directions, and thereby got rid of its offensiveness and harshness. The
point was that tyrants should not <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163)
be ignorant of what was coming, and that their enemies should not
perceive the same beforehand. Wherefore he \[Apollo\] wrapped up all
this in hints and double meanings, that concealed from the rest of the
world what was meant, yet did not escape nor disappoint the persons
themselves who requested his counsel and gave their minds to understand
it. Hence the man is a great simpleton who now that the state of things
is entirely changed, finds fault and cavils because the god thinks
proper to help us in a different way from before.

XXVII\. "Besides, there is nothing in poetry more useful than in prose,
beyond the fact that things told when bound in the fetters of metre and
strung together, are better remembered and retained. Men of those times
were far from possessing good memory, 'for of old the descriptions of
places, the proper seasons for divers occupations, the festivals of the
gods, the secret sepulchres of heroes, so hard to be discovered beyond
seas, were all told in verse <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164) in
the far-distant parts of Greece.' For

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

you know the Chian, and the Cretan history—about Nesichus and
Phalanthus, and all the other founders of colonies, how they by the aid
of all necessary indications (from the Oracle) discovered the seat
assigned and best suited for each of them. Of whom, some made a mistake,
as did Battus; for he thought he had missed the sense of the Oracle,
because he had not got possession of the place to which he had been
despatched: he, therefore, came a second time to consult; the god
replying, said: 'To Libya, nurse of sheep, udder of earth, thou hast not
gone. I greatly admire thy wisdom in coming here,' <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) and so sent him out again, and Lysander
being entirely ignorant that a hill was called Archelades, and also
Allopæus, and a river Hoplites, and 'Earth's crafty son, the dragon,
from behind approaching' <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166)—being
beaten in a fight, he fell in the places so named by the people by whom
the district \[was so called, and by the hand of\], <span
id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) a man of Haliartus, carrying a shield
which had for device a serpent. But to enumerate more of these ancient
examples, hard of interpretation, hard to recollect as they are, to you
who know them already, is superfluous for me.

XXVIII\. "The now established state of things as concerns inquiries of
the god, I for my part am content with and embrace. Profound peace and
tranquillity prevail, war has ceased, so have migrations and factions,
no more tyrannies or other distempers and evils of Greece, that stood in
need, as it were, of variously remedial and extraordinary powers. For
where there is nothing complicated,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

nor to be kept secret, nor dangerous, but all inquiries turn upon small
and domestic affairs, like themes in a school, such as: Should one
marry? should one make a voyage? should one lend money? and the most
important matters belonging to States that are referred to the Oracle
are the yield of corn, the produce of grapes, or the health of the
public—in such cases to put forward verses, to invent metaphors, to
stick epithets upon questions that require only a simple and brief
answer, is the part of an ostentatious pedant, decorating the response
for the sake of show; and the Pythia is by disposition high-minded, and
when she descends into the cave, and is in company with the god, more …
cares not for fame, or whether men praise, or find fault with her words.

XXIX\. "We, perhaps, should behave in the same way. But as it is, as
though we were struggling and fearful lest the place should lose its
three thousand years’ old reputation, and some should despise and go
away from it, like a Sophist's school, we make excuses and invent causes
and reasons for things that we neither know, nor is it fitting for us to
know; whereby we encourage the faultfinder, and argue with him, instead
of bidding him go his way:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'For he will be the first to feel the
smart,'</span>

</div>

for entertaining such an opinion of the god as to accept and admire
those maxims of the Wise Men, the 'Know thyself,' and the 'Nothing in
excess,' no less on account of their brevity, as containing in itself
condensed and close-*hammered* sense, in small compass—and yet finding
fault with Oracles because they tell most things briefly, plainly, and
in a straightforward manner; and these maxims of the Wise Men are in the
same condition as streams pent up in narrow space, for they have no
transparency or lucidity of meaning, yet if you examine what has been
written and

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

talked about them by such as wish to discover their full sense you will
not easily find other treatises more lengthy than theirs. And the
language of the Pythia, just as mathematicians define a straight line as
'the least one of those having the same extremities,' so it makes
neither curve, circle, double, or zig-zag, but goes straight to the
truth, and though liable to be overthrown by facts, and subject to the
test of experience, it has never, to the present day, suffered any
impeachment of its veracity, but has crowded the Oracle with the
offerings and presents of both barbarians and Greeks, and with all the
beauties and decorations of buildings erected by the Amphictyons. For
you see, I suppose, many additions of buildings not previously existing,
and many restorations of such as were dilapidated and tumbled down. For
as with thriving trees, others spring up by their side; so doth the
Pylæa <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168) renew its youth together
with Delphi, and fattens in her company by reason of the opulence
flowing from this source; and receives a beauty, shape, and decoration
of temples, public offices, and fountains, such as it never had for the
thousand years preceding. Now they that dwell round about the "dairy" of
Bœotia were made sensible of the manifestation of the god in the flesh,
by the abundance and excess of the milk: 'From all the flocks flowed
down, as the best water from the rocks, nourishing milk, and they
hastened to fill their pitchers; not one wine-skin or pitcher remained
idle in the houses, pails and wooden casks were all filled to the brim.'
But to us, better, more brilliant, and clearer signs than these, promise
to restore to us, as it were after the drought of our former desolation
and poverty, both opulence, honour, and splendour, <span
id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169) and yet I congratulate myself on having
been zealous and useful in these affairs, in concert with Polycrates and

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Piræus. I likewise
congratulate him that was governor of the State <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170) at the time, and who planned and
provided for most of these works But it is not possible that such and so
great a change should take place in a short time, but for the god being
present here, and inspiring the Oracle to that purpose.

XXX\. "But just as in those old times there were people that found fault
with the obliquity and obscurity of the responses, so nowadays some
censure their too great plainness—whose conduct is equally unfair and
silly. For little children take greater pleasure and delight in looking
at rainbows, halos, and cornets, than at the sun and moon; so do they
these cavillers regret the riddles, allegories, and metaphors, that are
the *reflections* <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171) of the prophetic
power upon the mortal and imaginative subject: and if they cannot find
out the cause of the change to their own satisfaction, they immediately
blame the gods; and not us, or themselves, as being unable to arrive by
reasoning at the gods’ intention."

<span id="img_17200"></span> ![\[The Pythia, before the
Tripod\]](img/17200.jpg)  
\[The Pythia, before the Tripod\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[139:1](pte06.htm#fr_127) Curious, as showing
the establishment of regular *custodi* for the benefit of visitors.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[139:2](pte06.htm#fr_128) This shows that the
good temper of the old bronze weapons was as much a problem to the
Romans as it is now to us.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[140:1](pte06.htm#fr_129) Referring to the
electrum, then much in vogue for table plate on account of its superior
brilliancy; and witch was gold largely alloyed with silver, to one-fifth
of its weight.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[140:2](pte06.htm#fr_130) πρίν in text must be
περὶ. The joke probably was that Theognis got his red face from the
contact of the atmosphere—not from the bottle; as some philosopher once
attributed the paleness of our Fellows to the great brasier formerly
warming the Hall; now, alas! banished, but without any benefit to their
complexions.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[141:1](pte06.htm#fr_131) The ancient receipt
for "patinating" statues was by "oleo et sole," to use Pliny's words;
not by washing them with acid, as at present.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[141:2](pte06.htm#fr_132) The text is very
corrupt here, merely from the confusion of nominative and dative
terminations of the pronouns and articles: but the sense is clear
enough, that the oil, a pure liquid, cannot coat a surface with rust,
but must produce it by some secret action of its own.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[142:1](pte06.htm#fr_133) Some words have
dropped out here, but their sense is easily supplied.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[143:1](pte06.htm#fr_134) *i.e.* must accustom
ourselves to think this bad poetry beautiful; and not take Homer and
Hesiod for the standard of excellence.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[144:1](pte06.htm#fr_135) Men get more pleasure
through their ears than through any other sense.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[145:1](pte06.htm#fr_136) Probably a false
reading for Cleombrotus, King of Sparta, who fell at Leuctra. The story
shows that paste eyes were not a Roman invention for statues. *See
above*. Feuardent has a bronze statue of a youth, half life-size, with
carbuncle-garnets for eyes. It was discovered in the sand on the coast
of Rhodes. From the posture it seems to have been a Palæmon seated on a
dolphin.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[146:1](pte06.htm#fr_137) This crown,
therefore, was of little weight, doubtless, from its distension, in the
shape of a wreath of bay leaves, for the girl to have worn it
constantly. Gold at the time was exceedingly scarce in Greece and Italy,
as numerous recorded instances attest.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[146:2](pte06.htm#fr_138) Epicurus died B.C.
270; whence we get an approximate date for this Dialogue.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[147:1](pte06.htm#fr_139) This allusion shows
this piece to have been written under Domitian, soon after the great
eruption of Vesuvius, A.D. 79.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[148:1](pte06.htm#fr_140) Never confesses to a
failure of a prediction, but waits for some lucky accident in the course
of time to turn up corresponding to the prediction.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[152:1](pte06.htm#fr_141) This offering,
besides its appropriate symbolism (which alone was remembered in
Plutarch's days), had considerable pecuniary value at the time of its
dedication, considering the then scarcity of the metal.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[152:2](pte06.htm#fr_142) Another celebrity of
the same profession.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[153:1](pte06.htm#fr_143) A toad; paleness
being yellowness in the south: "pallidior buxo, semianimisque fui."

<span id="fn_144"></span>[154:1](pte06.htm#fr_144) A far-fetched
argument—Crates ought to have been more offended by an offering in
*gold* being made to the god, than by the character of the person
represented. "Golden" merely signifies *gilt*, or rather overlaid with a
thick leaf of gold. And this multitude of statues was in existence after
Nero had carried off *five hundred* at one swoop!

<span id="fn_145"></span>[155:1](pte06.htm#fr_145) ὑδρία, the largest
size of vase, made out of the sacrilegious coin, thus restored to its
old destination. The fact shows that the coinage of the Phocian tyrants
was known by its type—what has become of it all?

<span id="fn_146"></span>[155:2](pte06.htm#fr_146) Error for the name of
some famous poet.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[156:1](pte06.htm#fr_147) ἀναπνοὴ, *i.e.* where
the stream tumbling from the rock finds a resting-place.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[156:2](pte06.htm#fr_148) Evidently parts of
the same sentence displaced, and wanting some words to complete it,
probably \[and who invented\]. Then Plutarch cites another tradition,
ascribing the same thing to the latest owner, Apollo.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[157:1](pte06.htm#fr_149) The quotation has
been omitted by the copyist, who (like other people), did not understand
Pindar: or else "*pardonably*" thought he was talking nonsense.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[158:1](pte06.htm#fr_150) Which stags do *not*
do; the god recommended the tyrant to use a *tree*, against which stags
are in the habit of rubbing their antlers.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[159:1](pte06.htm#fr_151) The Spartans, as King
Areius’ letter to Simon Maccabeus shows believed themselves of the same
stock as the Jews: this may have something to do with their assumption
of a divine legislator.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[159:2](pte06.htm#fr_152) The fourth century
B.C., he being a scholar of Isocrates.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[159:3](pte06.htm#fr_153) διεχρήσατο.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[159:4](pte06.htm#fr_154) ἅπαντα τἀναγκαῖα
συγχωρεῖ θεός.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[160:1](pte06.htm#fr_155) The same object
modelled in different materials, has a different appearance.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[161:1](pte06.htm#fr_156) μὴ δυναμένη cannot
begin a sentence, and therefore must receive a final s and finish the
preceding one. The first word of the next is lost, being probably of
similar sound. It is curious to observe how, throughout all these
treatises, the copyist has transcribed anecdotes and interesting matter
correctly enough, but when he comes to dry philosophy he scribbles away
without caring for or understanding what he is about, omitting words,
and inserting them again in wrong places, as things quite immaterial to
the reader.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[161:2](pte06.htm#fr_157) μὴ has certainly
dropped out here.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[162:1](pte06.htm#fr_158) Some words lost here
to the effect: To act otherwise would be like ….

<span id="fn_159"></span>[164:1](pte06.htm#fr_159) Such as Plato's lines
to Agatha

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"τὴν ψυχὴν Ἀγαθῶνα φιλῶν ἐπὶ χείλεσιν ἔσχον,  
ἦλθε γὰρ ἡ γλήμων ὦς ἀποβησομένη."

</div>

<span id="fn_160"></span>[165:1](pte06.htm#fr_160) καὶ δόκιμον μὲν αὐτοῦ
ἐστὶ ξύνηθες καὶ γνώριμον, which seems both imperfect and out of its
place, there being no δὲ to correspond in tho same sentence.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[166:1](pte06.htm#fr_161) As we should say,
"from off the stage," referring to the old expression έξ ἁμάξης λέγειν.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[167:1](pte06.htm#fr_162) μεταβόλαις in text
must be διαβόλαις.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[168:1](pte06.htm#fr_163) In text μὴ has
certainly dropped out—else we get a contradiction to the argument.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[168:2](pte06.htm#fr_164) "Verse" is required
by the context; the passage is incomplete, but clearly a quotation from
an ancient poet.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[169:1](pte06.htm#fr_165) Battus, sent by
Apollo to Libya, at first colonized the island Platea off the coast: the
colony not prospering he again consulted the god, whose answer was: "If
thou who hast never gone to Libya, knowest Libya better than I who have
been there, I greatly admire thy cleverness," and so sent him off once
more.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[169:2](pte06.htm#fr_166) Or "darting,"
according to the breathing of the initial.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[169:3](pte06.htm#fr_167) This has fallen out
of the text, but can be supplied from the Life of Lysander. He was slain
by a sudden sally of the garrison.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[171:1](pte06.htm#fr_168) The little town
itself, dependent upon Delphi, the sacred ground.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[171:2](pte06.htm#fr_169) πεποιηκὼς here
belongs evidently to the next sentence.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[172:1](pte06.htm#fr_170) The Roman governor of
the province.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172:2](pte06.htm#fr_171) Referring to the
foregoing simile of rainbows, halos, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the E at Delphi](pte07)
