[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pte07)  [Next](pte09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142863326X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Plutarch's Morals: Theosophical Essays*, tr. by Charles William King,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### ON THE APPARENT FACE IN THE ORB OF THE MOON.

#### I.

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> said Sylla, "These things belong to
my story, and form part of it: but if you come at all into collision
with these popular notions, that are in everybody's mouth, about the
Face in the Moon, I think I should be glad to learn it." "Why should we
not," I replied, "driven back as we are by the difficulty in the first
case, to the latter subject—just as people in lingering diseases, when
they have lost all hope in the common remedies, and usual courses of
diet, fly for refuge to purifications, spells, and dreams: in the same
way it is a matter of compulsion in obscure and insoluble problems, when
common, accredited, and customary arguments fail to convince, to make
trial of others more out of the way, and not despise them; but to chant,
as it were, over ourselves some old-fashioned charm, and hunt out the
truth in all quarters.

II\. "For you see at once how absurd is the explanation that the
apparent figure in the moon is merely an affection of the sight, which
is dazzled by the brightness, by reason of its own weakness; a thing we
call … it <span id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_213) takes no notice that
this effect should rather take place in regard

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

to the Sun, which strikes upon the eye both sharp and forcibly; whence
Empedocles hath described the difference between the two, not
inelegantly,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The shrill-voiced sun, the softly whispering
moon,'</span>

</div>

designating in this way the attractive, cheerful, and inoffensive
character of the latter luminary. Afterwards, giving the reason why dim
and weak eyes discern no difference of form in the moon, but her orb
strikes upon them as smooth and completely filled up, whilst those that
have sharp and strong sight make out better, and distinguish the
lineaments of the Face, and seize upon the difference more clearly. For
the contrary ought to be the case, if that appearance were produced from
the eye's being overcome; because where the sense affected was weaker,
the stronger <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_214) would be the
impression produced. But the inequality \[of the surface\] refutes this
explanation, for the sight does not rest upon a continuous and confused
shadow. And Hegesianax in describing it hath not ill said,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'With fire she shines all round, but in the midst  
  More blue than black appears a maiden's face  
  And moisten’d <span id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_215) cheeks, that blush
to meet the gaze.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For in reality the
shaded parts, as they go round, creep under the bright ones, and are in
turn cut away and compressed, <span id="fr_216"></span>[3](#fn_216) and
in a word, are interwoven one with the other. So that the figure
resembles a sketch in outline, <span id="fr_217"></span>[4](#fn_217)
according to Clearchus; which seems plausibly said to *your*
Aristotle—for *Aristotle* is a man of your own, being, as he was, fond

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

of antiquity, although he did introduce into it a good deal of the
Peripatetic philosophy.

III\. And upon Apollonius taking up the conversation, and asking what
was the opinion of Clearchus: "It better suits," replied I, "any other
person than yourself to be ignorant of the story, inasmuch as it
proceeds from the very focus of geometry: for the fellow says that the
so-called face is only reflected images and appearances of the great sea
(the ocean) that are shown upon the moon; for that her external
circumference when concave <span id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218) is
naturally adapted to catch the reflections rising up from various
quarters, whilst the full moon is of all mirrors, in point of polish and
of brilliancy the most beautiful and the most clear. For just as you
suppose that the rainbow, when the light is reflected against the sun,
is impressed upon the clouds that have received gradually a watery
smoothness and surface, in the same way, that writer says, the external
sea (our ocean) is reflected on the moon, not indeed from the place it
occupies, but from where the reflection of the air has made the image of
it, that is to say, its surface and reflection. And Agesianax, in
another place, has said:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Or some great wave of ocean, rising steep,  
  Shows like an image on the blazing mirror."'</span>

</div>

IV\. Apollonius then was amused, and exclaimed: "How original and
entirely new is the construction of this theory—it bespeaks a man
possessed of audacity as well as wit! But in what way is it open to
objection?" "In the first place," I replied, "because the nature of the
outer sea is one and the same, a uniform and unbroken expanse of water;
whereas the appearance of the dark parts in the moon is not one and the
same, but shows as it were projecting tongues of land, because the
bright part diversifies

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

and defines the dark; so that from each of these being separated, and
having a boundary of its own, the projections of the bright parts upon
the darkened, assuming the form of elevations and depressions, arrange
in a most natural manner the features that appear around the eyes and
lips; so that we must either suppose there are several outer seas
intersected by tongues of land and continents, which supposition is both
absurd and false, or else there being but one it is not reasonable that
the image of it should be reflected diversified in this way. It is,
however, safer to ask the question than to demonstrate, when *you* are
present, whether the habitable world, being equal in length and width,
it is possible for all the view at once from the moon to be reflected
and reach the sea… nay, more, to such as are sailing on the great ocean,
and live in the middle of it, like the Britons—and this too, whilst the
earth, as you have told us, does not occupy the place of a centre with
regard to the sphere of the moon." <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219)
"It is your business," I replied, "to investigate this problem; the
reflection of the prospect, however, against the moon, is neither your
business to investigate, nor that of Hipparchus, although it is an
interesting question. But many amongst natural philosophers are not
satisfied to hold this doctrine of similar effects with respect to the
sight; but it is more probable that the thing is a *collision*, or as it
were impact and rebound of particles, in the same way as the *atoms*
invented by Epicurus. Your Clearchus will not, I fancy, suppose the moon
a ponderous and solid body, but a star composed of æther, and luminous,
to use your language, … it is natural she should reflect the view or the
impact to the same extent that the reflection has gone away from her.
And if he requires anything more, we will ask how it comes that the face
in the moon alone is

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

the reflection of the ocean, and not in any other of the stars, numerous
as they be: and yet probability demands that the sight should be thus
affected with respect to all alike, or no one at all. Look at Lucius,
and remind him of what was said at first starting."

V. Then Lucius: "But for fear we should seem to be insulting Pharnaces,
by passing over the Stoical doctrine on the subject, without a word said
for it, pray make some reply, by all means, to the man that supposes the
moon a mixture of air and liquid fire, and asserts that as when a ripple
runs over the sea in a calm, so when this air blackens, an appearance
like definite shapes is produced … \[on the moon's face\]." "You act
kindly," replied I, "my dear Lucius, in thus cloaking their absurdity
under decent names; but not so did our friend, who used to say, 'they
gave the moon a black eye,' by thus covering her face with spots and
dark patches, at one and the same time proclaiming her *Artemis* and
*Athene*, and then making her out a composition and mass of dusky air
and coaly fire, not possessing any kindling spark or light of her own,
but to be a body hard of separation, and scorched by fire: just like
those pieces of earthenware styled by the poets <span
id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_220) 'lustreless and ashy.' Because, however,
a charcoal fire, such as they make out the moon's to be, has neither
permanence nor consistence, unless it gets hold of a material that
retains and at the same time feeds it, I fancy those philosophers have
seen farthest into the matter who say in joke, that Vulcan is said to be
*lame*, because fire cannot go on without *wood* any more than a lame
man without a *stick*. If, then, the moon is *fire*, from whence is so
large a quantity of air generated in her? for the region that revolves

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

above and around her is not of air, but of a superior element, that has
the natural property of sublimating and setting on fire everything in
its reach. And if this air has been generated, how comes it that it
continues so long a time, and does not fly off and change its form,
being set at liberty by the fire, but maintains itself and co-exists
such a length of time together with the fire, like a nail fixed in the
same place and riveted close? For it behoves it, as being subtile and
diffused, not to remain stationary, but to fly abroad; for that it
should be condensed is not possible, inasmuch as it is mixed up with
fire, and has no particle of moisture nor of earth, by which things
alone are as naturally disposed to be solidified. And velocity of flight
inflames the air contained in stones and in that cold substance,
lead, <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) much more, then, that
contained in fire, whirling along too with such immense swiftness. For
they (the Stoics) quarrel with Empedocles for making the moon 'a
congelation of air, of the nature of hail, embraced by a sphere of
fire;' whilst they themselves pretend that the moon, a ball of fire,
contains air dispersed in different directions, and this, too, though
she has neither fissures in her surface, nor deep places, nor cavities
(things which those that make her out an earthly substance concede to
her), but this same air is lying, forsooth, superficially upon her
convexity. This arrangement is preposterous with respect to
permanence, <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222) and impossible with
respect to sight in the times of full moon; for, in that case, it ought
not to define anything black and shaded, but either be hidden and
darkened \[completely\], or else to be lighted up at the same time when
the moon is taken possession of by the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

sun. For amongst ourselves, the air in the deep places and hollows of
the earth, whither the light doth not enter, continues obscure and
unilluminated; whilst that from without diffused around the earth
acquires brightness and a lustrous colour, for it readily mixes itself
with every kind of property, or force, by reason of its liquid nature,
and especially if it but 'lay hold of the light,' as you call it, and
touch the same, then is it entirely converted and lighted up. This
selfsame fact, therefore, though it may seem to do good service to such
as are for thrusting the air in the moon into her deep places and
ravines, yet refutes those of you who *knead up* and compose her sphere,
I know not how, out of air and fire; for it is not possible for shade to
be left upon her surface, when the sun illuminates with his light the
whole extent of the moon that we take in with the sight."

VI\. Then Pharnaces, whilst I was still speaking, broke in with: "Just
what I expected conies against us, borrowed from the Academy, when we
are engaged in arguing with other people: never to furnish proof of what
they assert themselves, but they needs must treat as defendants such as
do not attack them, whatever the case maybe. But *me*, at any rate, you
will not draw into making a defence of the theory you impute to the
Stoics, before I get satisfaction out of you for turning the affairs of
the universe upside down." "Only," replied Lucius laughing, "do not
bring an action for impiety against us, just as Cleanthes thought it
right that the Greeks collectively should impeach Aristagoras <span
id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223) the Stoic, of impiety, for overthrowing
the altar of earth, because the fellow attempted to account for visible
phenomena by supposing that the sky remains fixed, and that the earth
rolls round down an oblique circle, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_224) turning at

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

the same time upon its own axis. We, however, say nothing out of our own
heads; whilst they who suppose the moon an earth, how do they turn
things upside down, any more than you do who place the earth here in the
air, although it be, by far, bigger than the moon, as mathematicians
calculate her magnitude during her eclipses, and by the length of
time <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225) consumed in her passage
through the shadow? For the shadow of the earth is projected of lesser
size by the illuminating body being the larger; and that the upper part
of the shadow itself is fine and narrow, was not unknown, as he says, to
Homer also, for he entitles night 'swift,' <span
id="fr_226"></span>[2](#fn_226) by reason of the *pointed* form of the
shadow. But by this philosopher the moon is convicted on the strength of
her eclipses, and gets off with hardly three of her own (apparent)
magnitudes, for consider to how many moons the earth is equal, if it
projects a shadow, which, al the shortest, is thrice the diameter of the
moon. But yet you are afraid for the moon, lest she should tumble down;
but as for the earth, Eschylus perhaps has reassured you, like Atlas,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'He stands, the pillar of the sky and earth,  
  Propping a load not easy for the arms;'</span>

</div>

that is, if there flows under the moon only thin air, not competent to
support a solid body; whilst the earth, according to Pindar,
'adamantine-shod columns keep in on every side.' And for this reason
Pharnaces himself is under no apprehension of the earth's falling,
whereas he

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

compassionates such as lie under the roadway of the moon, namely, the
Ethiopians and people of Taprobane, lest so vast a weight should drop
upon them; and yet, a safeguard to the moon against falling down is her
motion, and the rapidity <span id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227) of her
gyration, just as objects placed in slings have a hindrance from falling
out in the circular whirling. For the natural tendency acts upon each
object, unless it be diverted by some extraneous force. Consequently,
her own weight does not act upon the moon, because by means of her rapid
rotation its downward tendency is neutralized; there were rather cause
to wonder at her not remaining stationary, like the earth, and not
rolling out of her place. As it is, the moon has the greatest reason for
not being carried in our direction; but the earth, as being destitute of
other motion, it was natural should remain fixed through the force of
gravity alone, because it is heavier than the moon, not by the same
proportion as it is the larger of the two, but in still greater degree
inasmuch as the latter is all the lighter through heat and burning up of
her substance. And, in fine, the moon, from what you say, if she be
*fire*, naturally stands in need of earth and matter, in which she
walks, and clings to, and keeps together, and fans the flame of her
force. Now fire cannot be imagined as being maintained without fuel, but
earth, you assert, remains fixed without either foundation or root."
"Certainly so," replied Pharnaces, "because it occupies its proper and
natural place, as being itself the centre, for this is the place around
which all weights gravitate and rest, and are carried and tend together
from all parts; whereas the whole upper region, even though it should
receive some earthy substance forcibly thrown up, immediately excludes
it—better say, discharges it, to be carried downwards in the way its own
natural tendency directs."

VII\. In return for this, I wishing to obtain a little respite

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

for Lucius whilst refreshing his memory, called to Theon: "Who was it,
Theon," said I, "of the tragic writers that remarks of physicians that,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'With bitter drugs they purge the bitter
bile?"</span>

</div>

and on his answering, "Sophocles," "This privilege must be granted to
them," said I, "whether we will or no; but we must not listen to
philosophers when they choose to defend absurdities by other
absurdities, and in fighting for the monstrosities of their doctrines
invent others yet more strange and wonderful, just as these men bring in
the gravitation to the centre'—a notion, what amount of extravagance
does it not involve? Do not they make out earth to be a sphere, though
it contains such depths and heights and inequalities of surface? Do not
they make the Antipodes live like caterpillars or lizards, turned upside
down, clinging to the earth? And they represent ourselves as not walking
erect to stand firm upon it, but wavering away all on one side, like so
many drunken men! Don't they pretend that masses of a thousand talents
weight falling through the depths of earth, when they arrive at the
centre are arrested, though there be nothing to encounter or support
them? and that if, carried along by their velocity, they shoot past the
centre, they are turned back again and retrace their course
spontaneously? Do not they teach that sections of beams, sawed off on
each side of *earth*, <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228) do not tend
downwards continually, but when they fall upon the ground <span
id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_229) are repelled from without, and are come
together again at the centre, <span id="fr_230"></span>[3](#fn_230) and
that

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

an impetuous stream of water flowing downwards, should it come to the
central point (which they pretend is incorporeal) stands fast suspended
in a circle around the pole, incessantly lifting up, and being lifted up
incessantly? Some of these notions, indeed, they do not assert without
foundation, if one should strain himself to the utmost to present them
to his conception. This is indeed turning things upside down and making
them run backwards, to make as far as the centre 'downwards,' and under
the centre 'upwards.' So that if a person out of sympathy for the earth,
should occupy the centre thereof, and should stand upon his head,
holding at the same time his head upwards and his feet also, <span
id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231) and dig through all the space opposite
him, he would emerge turned upside down and be dragged along on coming
to the surface; and if forsooth, another man be imagined as walking
opposite to him the feet of both would be, and also be called, turned
'upwards.'

VIII\. "Of such and such great absurdities not a walletful, but rather a
whole juggler's stock and shopful, have these men strapped upon their
backs and drag after them, and yet they say others are idle chatterers
for placing the moon, being an earth, up aloft, not where the centre is.
And yet truly, if every ponderous thing does tend towards the same
point, and presses with all its particles upon its own centre—earth will
claim for herself all ponderous things, not so much because earth is the
centre of the universe, as because they are particles of herself; and
the fact of things gravitating downwards will be a proof, not of the
centripetal force towards earth, but of affinity and sympathy, as it
were, with earth, in particles once separated from her, and now flying
back to her again. For in the same way that the sun attracts to himself
the

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

particles out of which he is composed, so doth earth receive the falling
stone, and carries it to the place where in course of time each one of
such bodies is made one with and assimilated to herself. But if it
happens to be some other body, not assigned to earth from the beginning,
nor a fragment separated from herself, but having a composition and
nature of its own (as those men will say of the moon)—what prevents it
from existing by itself, separately, following its own tendency, and
fettered by its own particles? By no means is earth proved to be the
centre of the universe, and the connection and relation of the latter
here with earth, guide us to the manner in which it is probable the
phenomena relating to the moon take their course. I do not see why the
philosopher who forces all earthy and ponderous particles into one and
the same place, and makes them out portions of one and the same body,
does not concede the same natural tendency to such as are without
weight, but allows so many composite bodies of fire to exist separately,
and does not imperatively collect into one lump all the stars that be,
and demand that there should be one common body of all upward tending
and fiery particles."

IX\. "But," said I, "you assert that the sun, my dear Apollonides, is
distant infinite myriads of miles from the superior circumference, while
the Morning Star, and Mercury, and the other planets, all placed below
him, keeping far aloof from the fixed stars, and at great distances from
each other, pursue their course; <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232)
whereas for the ponderous and earthy particles you suppose the universe
offers no free space, nor interval between each other in its whole
extent. You see it is ridiculous if we shall assert that the moon is not
an earth *because* she is posted remote from the lower space, but should
call her a *star*, seeing her

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

thrust away so many myriads of miles from the superior circumference,
and crept as it were into some hole and corner of creation: at least she
is so much below the other stars that one cannot express the measure of
the distance, but arithmetic fails you mathematicians in calculating the
same; whereas, in a manner, she touches Earth, and revolving near,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'As of a chariot, follows in the rut,'</span>

</div>

says Empedocles. 'She around the point …'

"For neither does she often overpass the shadow \[of Earth\], and
elevate herself a little, by reason that the illuminating body is
exceeding great, but she appears to revolve so close to, and as it were
in the embrace of Earth, as to be screened against the Sun by it,
without ever soaring above this shady terrestrial and darksome region
which is the allotment of Earth. Wherefore I think we must confidently
declare the moon to be within the limits of Earth, and to be overcast by
the point of Earth's shadow. <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)

X. "And consider, leaving out of the case the other fixed stars and
planets, what Aristarchus points out in his treatise 'Upon Magnitudes
and Distances,' that the distance of the sun is more than eighteen
times, but less than twenty times the distance of the moon, by which she
is separated from us: and yet the computation that gives the greatest
elevation to the moon says she is distant from us fifty-six times the
space from the centre of the earth \[to the circumference\]: <span
id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_234) this length is of forty thousand <span
id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_235)

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

stadia, according to those who make a moderate calculation of it. And,
calculated from this basis, the sun's distance from the moon amounts to
over four thousand and thirty myriads of stadia. So far, then, is she
separated from the sun by reason of her weight, and approximated to
earth, that if one must define substances by localities, the
constitution and beauty of Earth attracts the moon, and she is of
influence in matters and over persons upon Earth, by reason of her
relationship and proximity. And we do not go wrong, I think, when we
assign to those bodies above denominated such immense depth and
distance, and leave to that which is below a certain circular course and
broadway as much as lies between earth and the moon: for neither the man
who pretends the summit of heaven to be the sole 'above,' and
denominates all the rest as 'below,' is reasonable in his definition;
nor yet is he who circumscribes 'below' by the limits of Earth, or
rather by the Centre, to be listened to: but even moveable … inasmuch as
the universe allows of the interval required by reason of its own
extensiveness. But in reply to such as demand that all which is separate
from earth shall be consequently 'above' and 'on high,' another directly
responds with the contrary axiom, that all which is reckoned from the
fixed circumference is to be considered as 'below.'

XI\. "And, finally, in what sense, and in reference to what thing is
Earth said to be 'intermediate?' For the universe is infinite; now that
which is infinite hath neither beginning nor limit, so it does not
belong to it to possess a *middle:* for infinity is the deprivation of
limits. But he who makes out Earth to be the middle not of the universe,
but of the *world*, is ridiculous for his simplicity if he does not
reflect that the world' itself is liable to the very same objections:
for the universe hath not left a middle place for it also, but it is
borne along without house or

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

home in the boundless vacuum, towards nothing cognate to itself; perhaps
it has found out for itself some other cause for remaining fixed, and so
has stood still, but certainly not owing to the nature of its position.
And it is allowable for one to conjecture alike with respect to Earth
and with respect to the moon, that by some contrary soul and nature they
are <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236) …, differences, the former
remaining stationary here, the latter moving along. But apart from these
considerations, see whether a certain important fact has not escaped
their notice. For if whatsoever space, and whatever thing exists away
from the centre of Earth, is the 'above,' then no part of Earth is
'below,' but Earth herself and the things upon Earth; and, in a word,
everybody standing around or investing the centre, become the 'above;'
whilst 'below' is one sole thing, that incorporeal point, which has the
duty of counterbalancing the whole constitution of the world; if,
indeed, the 'below' is by its nature opposed to the 'above.' And this is
not the only absurdity in the argument, but it also does away with the
cause through which all ponderous bodies gravitate in this direction,
and tend downwards: for there is no mark below towards which they move:
for the incorporeal point is not likely (nor do they pretend it is) to
exert so much force as to draw down all objects to itself, and keep them
together around itself. But yet, it is proved unreasonable, and
repugnant to facts, to suppose the 'above' of the world to be a whole,
but the 'below' an incorporeal and indefinite limit: whereas that course
is consistent with reason, to say, as we do, that the space is large and
possessed of width, and is defined by the 'above' and the 'below' of
locality.

XII\. "Not but that we may, if you please, suppose that motions in the
heavens are contrary to the nature of those of terrestrial bodies; and
let us examine the matter quietly,

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

not in the tragic style, but in a good-humoured way, how such an
assumption as this does not make out the moon not to be an earth, but
only an earth in a position for which it is not naturally adapted. For
the phenomena at Etna underground are against the order of Nature; but
'fire is there, and the blast imprisoned in the bellows is the upward
force;' <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_237) whereas that which by
nature is imponderous, comes, in spite of itself, into places for which
it was not made. And the Soul itself," I continued, "is it not locked up
by God in the body against its own nature: the one swift, the other
slow; the one fiery, the other frigid (as you assert); the one
invisible, the other an object of sense? For this reason, therefore, let
us not say that the soul is nothing to the body; but that it is a thing
divine, which by reason of its gravity and density, travels round all
heaven, earth, and sea, at one and the same moment, and being parcelled
out pervades the flesh, the sinews, the marrow of our bodies, the cause
of feelings in infinite variety, when coupled with moisture. But this
Jupiter of ours doth not follow his own nature, nor is one great
continuous fire; but occasionally he withdraws himself, bends downwards,
and changes his form, having turned and still turning himself into every
object in the course of his changes. But take heed, my good sir, and
consider, lest by transposing and drawing away each thing in turn from
the place where it is naturally meant to be, you philosophically bring
about the dissolution of the world, and introduce the 'Discord' of
Empedocles into its affairs; or, rather, lest you stir up to war upon
Nature, the Titans and Giants of old, and should desire to see again the
fabled terrific disorder and lawlessness of their times; apart
everything ponderous, and apart everything light:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Where no one views with awe Sol's glorious face,  
  Nor Earth's own shaggy breed, nor Ocean's kind,'</span>

</div>

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

as Empedocles says; nor did Earth participate in heat, nor Water in air,
neither was there anything of the ponderous up above, or of the
imponderous down below, but unmixed, unsocial, solitary were the
principles of the universe—not admitting the union of one with another,
nor communication, but fleeing and shrinking away from each other,
carried along by individual and independent impulses, they were so
circumstanced as is everything from which God is absent, according to
Plato (that is, just as our bodies are circumstanced, when mind and soul
have left them); until what time *Desire* came upon Nature by the
sending of Providence, when Amity was engendered, and Venus and Love, as
Empedocles declares, as also say Parmenides and Hesiod, in order that
they, by exchanging places and borrowing forces from one another, and
the one set being bound by the necessity of motion, the other by that of
rest, compelled to emerge and change pace from the position where Nature
placed them, towards a better one, they might bring about the union and
fellowship of the Whole.

XIII\. "For if no other part of the divisions of the world were placed
contrary to its nature, but each lay where it was naturally fit,
standing in need of no change of place nor re-arrangement, and without
having needed anything of the sort at the beginning, I am puzzled to see
what is the business of a Providence, or of what Jupiter has been
creator and father, 'that most skilful artificer.' For there is no use
of marshallers in a camp, if each one of the officers knows out of his
own head the rank, station, and moment, that he is bound to occupy and
to observe; nor of gardeners or builders, if the water of itself is
disposed to move upon the things that require it, and to flow over and
irrigate the same; and in the other case, the bricks, timbers, and
stones following their natural tendencies and inclinations, should of
themselves

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

take up the requisite arrangement and position. And if this argument
does not downright subvert the doctrine of a Providence, but leaves to
God the government and distribution of things that be—why should we be
surprised that Nature has been so ordered and divided, that here is
fixed Fire, there Stars; and again, the Earth here, and overhead the
Moon; all of them bound by a stronger chain than the natural one, that
is, by the one in accordance with *Reason?* <span
id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238) Wherefore, if all things must needs
follow their natural tendencies, and move on in the manner for which
they were created, then let not the Sun revolve in a circle, nor yet
Venus, nor any other of the planets, do the same—for it is *upward*, and
not in a *circle*, that imponderous and fiery bodies were created to
move. But if Nature possesses such a power of exchange, in spite of the
locality, <span id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_239) that *here* Fire as it
moves, moves upwards, but after it has arrived at heaven, it is carried
around in company with the celestial revolution. What is there to be
surprised at if it comes to pass with ponderous and earthy bodies, when
transferred into another form of motion, that they be overpowered by the
influence of the element that encompasses them? For in fact, it is not
consistent with Nature that the upward tendency of imponderous bodies
should be neutralized by the motion of the heavens; but rather that it
should not be able to master such as be ponderous and gravitate
downwards; nay rather, on occasion, when it has transposed the latter
also by its own power, it should employ their nature to a better end
than for what it was created.

XIV\. "Not but that if one must dismiss the notion of habits violently
overcome, and speak one's opinion without disguise, it is probable no
part of the universe possesses either place, order, or motion, of its
own, which we can universally style its *natural* one; but that when
each

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

thing shows itself usefully and properly moving to that end on account
of which, and for which, it was born or has been manufactured, and
submitting to, or doing that which is conducive to its own preservation,
perfection, or efficiency, it then appears to possess its natural place,
motion, and disposition. Man himself, at any rate, who as much as
anything that exists is naturally made, holds upward the ponderous and
earthy portions of himself, especially about the head, and in his
*centre* the hot and fiery particles. And of the teeth, part are planted
above, part below, and yet neither set are placed contrary to Nature;
nor of Fire, is the part that shines in the eyes placed *according* to
nature, and that detached in the belly and the heart placed *contrary*
to nature; but each respectively is stationed properly and serviceably:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Truly the snail and thick-skinned
tortoise,'</span>

</div>

and the nature of every shell-fish, as Empedocles says from his own
observation:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Where earth thou shalt behold above their
flesh,'</span>

</div>

and the stony substance does not oppress their constitution, nor crush
it by its incumbent weight; neither, on the other hand, doth the heat,
by reason of its lightness, fly off and escape upwards; but they are
mingled with each other and ranged together, in accordance with the
nature of each.

XV\. "In the same way, therefore, is it probable the world is
constituted, that is, if it be a *living thing*, containing earth in
many places, in many others water and fire, and air, not forcibly
compressed, but arranged in order by Reason. <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240) For neither is the eye *squeezed out* of
the mass

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

into the place it now fills in the body, in consequence of its levity,
nor did the heart slip down and fall into the breast by reason of its
weight, but because it was better each of the two should be so placed.
Therefore, let us not think, of the parts of the world, either that
Earth is lying here because she hath tumbled down through her own
weight, or the Sun (as Metrodorus the Chian supposed) was shot up into
the upper region, through his levity, after the manner of a bubble, or
that the other stars got into the places where they now are, because
they gravitated thither as though according to the discrimination of a
pair of scales. <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241) But, inasmuch as
He that rules by *reason* is the master, they, like light-giving eyes,
are fixed in the brow of the universe, and stray about: whilst the sun
fills the place of a heart, and, like blood and breath, distributes and
disperses from out of himself both heat and light. Earth and sea the
world uses according to Nature for whatever purposes an animal uses its
belly and bladder: whilst the moon placed between Heaven and Earth, like
the liver between the belly and the heart, or some other soft intestine,
diffuses here the warmth from above, and the exhalations rising hence
she subtilizes by a certain process of digestion and purification,
around herself, and emits them again. But whether her earthy and solid
part contains any region adapted for the reception of other things, is a
matter we cannot ascertain. And in every case, the better part masters
the subordinate part. And what can we gain, so consistent with
probability as this, out of what those philosophers assert? They assert
that the luminous and subtile part of the æther, was converted into sky
by reason of its liquidity; and the condensed and conglomerated part
into air, and that the moon is the most sluggish part of these two, and
also the most turbid. But in spite of this, it is in anybody's power to
see that the moon is not cut off from

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the æther, but rather floats on much of it in the space around herself,
and having under her the wind in abundance … revolve the comets. Thus,
each one is put in its fold,' not in accordance with their tendencies
depending on the gravity or levity of substance, but as having been
arranged by another cause, namely *Reason*."

XVI\. After these things had been said, and I banded over the subject to
Lucius, as I was advancing to the proofs of the theory, Aristotle said
with a smile: "I testify that you have been directing your whole
argument against such as suppose the moon to be half made of fire, and
who pretend that universally some bodies tend upwards, others downwards,
of their own accord. For if there is anyone that says the stars revolve
in a circle by their own nature, and are made of an element entirely
different from the four we know—something has just occurred to my
recollection very opportunely to get them out of the difficulty." "But,"
said Lucius, "if we make all the other stars, and the whole of heaven,
into one pure and unmixed nature, freed also from all necessity of
change consequent upon passiveness, and if we trace out an orbit along
which they all \[shall move\] with never-ceasing revolution—no one,
perhaps, will quarrel with us on the present occasion; although a
thousand difficulties are left still unsolved. And when the argument
shall comprehend and touch upon the moon, she no longer keeps her
impassiveness, and that vaunted beauty of her substance. But to pass
over the other inequalities and differences \[she exhibits\], this very
Face that appears in her, is produced either by seine affection of her
own substance, or by the admixture of some different one. Now that which
is mixed with another suffers something, for it loses its own purity,
being infected by the quality of the inferior element. But her own
spurious nature, the weakness of her pace, her heat so inefficient and
dull, whereby, according to Ion, 'no grape is ripened black'—to

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

what shall we attribute all this except to her feeble nature and
passiveness; that is, if passiveness belongs to an eternal and celestial
body? and, to sum up, my dear Aristotle, considered as an Earth the moon
shows herself to be a perfectly beautiful, awful, and well-ordered
thing; but viewed as a star or a luminary, or some divine and celestial
body, I fear she will prove shapeless and uncomely, and bring shame upon
that glorious appellation, if of all the so numerous bodies existing in
the heavens, she alone goes about begging light from another, according
to Parmenides,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'With eyes aye fixed upon the solar beams.'"</span>

</div>

Now my opponent in the dispute, quoting the saying of Anaxagoras, "The
sun grafts brightness in the moon," was applauded by the company; but I
will not repeat what I learnt either from you, or conjointly with you;
but will gladly go on to what is left. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_242) "That the moon, then, is illuminated,
not like glass or crystal, by the direct or transmitted light of the
sun, is a probable supposition; nor again, by reason of collected
illumination or collected reflection, in the same way as torches
do, <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_243) when the light is augmented;
for in that ease it will be full moon to us none the less at the times
of new moon, or first and third quarters, if she neither covers nor
blocks out the sun; but the light rather passes through her by reason of
her fluidity, or else it shines into her by way of intermixture, and
lights up all around her. For it is not possible to lay the blame in the
case of her dark quarters upon her deviations, or retreatings, as in the
cases when she shows half her orb, or the same gibbous or
crescent-shaped; but, according to Democritus, she stands in a vertical
line to the illuminating

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

body, and receives and takes in the sun: so that it were probable that
she at the same time is illuminated and illuminates that body. But she
is very far from doing this; for at that moment she is invisible, and
she frequently hides, and causes him to disappear, 'she strips him of
his beams,' as Empedocles says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Till up aloft, she veils so much his face  
  As the width measures of the *blue-eyed* <span
id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244) moon:'</span>

</div>

as though the \[sun's\] light fell upon night and darkness, and not upon
another star. And as to what Posidonius says, that 'the light of the sun
does not pass through her, on account of the depth of the moon,' is
plainly confuted by the fact; for the air, though unlimited and having a
depth many times greater than the moon's, is entirely illuminated and
shone upon by his rays. There is left, therefore, the doctrine of
Empedocles, that it is by means of a certain reflection of the sun upon
the moon that the illumination which proceeds from her here below is
brought about. Consequently it \[her light\] conies to us neither warm,
nor brilliant, naturally enough, as there has been a kindling and a
mingling of different lights in that case; but just as voices in the
case of reflections send back the echo of the sound more dull, and the
blows of shots that rebound from an object fall with greatly diminished
force,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"So the ray striking on the moon's broad
disk,'</span>

</div>

makes a feeble and dull rebound upon us, being deprived of its strength
by reflection."

XVII\. Then Sylla taking up the conversation said: "Certainly, this
notion possesses some degree of probability, but the thing that is the
strongest of those that

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

make against it, pray, does it admit of any softening down, or has it
escaped my companion's observation?" "What is this?" replied Lucius, "do
you mean the question about the half-moon?" "Yes, certainly," answered
Sylla; "for the assertion has some reason on its side, that, since all
reflection takes place at equal angles, when the moon, showing but half
her disk, rides in mid-heaven, the light from her does not travel
towards us, but glides off to the part opposite to earth; for the sun,
being upon the horizon, touches the moon with his rays; consequently,
being refracted at an equal angle, it \[the light from the sun\] will
rebound to the other extremity, and not throw the light so far as us; or
else there will be a great distortion and parallax of the angle, which
thing is not possible." "Nay, but indeed," replied Lucius, "this thing
has been asserted;" and looking, as he was talking, towards Menelaus the
mathematician, "I am ashamed, my dear Menelaus, to take up a
mathematical question in your presence, which serves as the very
foundation for the whole science of Opticks, but there is no help for
it," he continued, "for the fact that all reflection extends itself at
equal angles, is neither self-evident nor universally admitted, but is
contradicted in the case of convex mirrors, when they make images larger
than the objects themselves to one point of vision. It is also
contradicted in the case of double mirrors, which being inclined to each
other, and an angle formed between them, each of the surfaces presents
the appearance of a double one, and gives four images from one face, two
of them looking towards the left parts from outside, and two others,
indistinct, looking to the right, in the depth of the mirror. Of the
production of which images, Plato explains the cause; for he has said
that in consequence of the mirror's having got height, <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245) on this side and

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

on that, the eyes transfer the reflection, as they change their place
from one side to the other. If, therefore, of the images some run back
directly to us, whilst some slipping to the other side of the mirror are
thrown back again from thence to us, it is not possible that all
reflections take place in equal angles, as many as … joining battle,
they demand to do away with the equality of angles by means of the
*emanations* flowing from the moon upon the earth, because they suppose
this theory more plausible than the former. Not but that if we must
needs gratify your great darling, Geometry, and concede the Point,—in
the first place it is likely enough that such happens <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_246) in the case of reflectors made very
exact as to their polished surfaces; whereas the moon offers many
inequalities and asperities of surface, so that rays from a great body
\[like the sun\] going astray at considerable elevations, that allow of
their reflecting and exchanging with one another, are reflected in all
sorts of ways, and entangled with each other, and kindle up the lustre
in itself, <span id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_247) because it is thrown
upon us from several reflectors at once. In the next place, even though
we allow the reflections upon the moon herself to be at equal angles, it
is not impossible that the rays, travelling through so vast a distance,
may get reflections and circular slips of their own, so that the light
is brought into one, and made to shine. Some, too, write to show that
she casts many of her beams upon earth in the line … under the inclined,
subtended. To construct a diagram in illustration of this theory, and
that, too, for many spectators, would be quite impracticable.

XVIII\. "To sum up, I wonder how they manage about the half-moon's
reaching us, together with the full round, and

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

the crescent. For if the mass of the moon, illuminated by the sun, were
made of æther, or of fire, he would not have left her hemisphere shaded,
and without lustre to the sense \[perceptible\], but had he touched her
in ever so small a degree, in going round her, it would have been a
natural consequence that the sun should fill her substance, and
penetrate through the whole of it with his all-pervading light, from the
want of any resistance. <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_248) For where
wine touches water at the edge, or a drop of blood falls into any
liquid, the whole quantity turns red, and changes to the colour of
blood; in like manner, they pretend that the air itself is illuminated,
not by emanations of any sort, or rays mingling themselves in it, but by
a conversion and transformation due to impact and contagion: how do they
imagine that star touches star, and light light, without mixing together
or making any confusion or change at all, but to illume those objects
only which they touch upon their surface? For the circle which the sun,
as he goes round, traces and turns about with reference to the moon, at
one time falls upon the line which divides the visible from the
invisible portion of her body, at another time rises up vertically so as
to cut them, and to be cut by the moon, producing various inclinations
and relations of the lighted to the darkened part, the complete circle
and the crescent forms in her appearance, all which proves more than
anything else that her illumination is not the result of *mixture* but
of *contact*, not *ignition* but *irradiation*. And since not only she
is lighted up, but transmits hither the image of her light, she supplies
yet further reason for our insisting upon our own explanation of her
nature; for reflections are produced by no object that is porous or of
loose texture. There is no such thing as light

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

rebounding back out of light, or fire out of fire, easily conceivable;
but the object that will produce opposition and fracture must
necessarily be something ponderous and solid in order there may be
impact against it, and resilience *from* it. At any rate the sun <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_249) himself penetrates the air because it
neither furnishes obstacles, nor offers resistance; whereas from sticks
and stones and clothes exposed to the light the sane sun gives back many
reflections and irradiations. Thus, in fact, we see the entire earth
illuminated by her, for she does not admit the light to a depth like
water, nor through the whole substance like air, but whatever kind of
orbit of the sun moves round the moon, and for as large a portion of her
as is cut off thereby, just such another circle goes round the earth,
and just so large a portion is there illuminating, and leaving the other
not lighted up; for the hemisphere that is illuminated seems to be
little larger in either case. Allow me to speak geometrically according
to analogy, that if, there being three things which the light from the
sun touches, namely, the earth, the moon, and the air, we see the moon
illuminated, not in the same way as the air, but rather in the same way
as the earth; it necessarily follows the two have the same nature, being
made to be affected in the same way by the same agent."

XIX\. And when all had applauded Lucius, "Well done," I exclaimed, "you
have added a good defence to a good subject; for I must not defraud you
of your due." And he replied with a smile, "In the second place then, we
must further make use of analogy in order that we may demonstrate the
moon's affinity to Earth, not only from both being similarly acted upon
by the sane thing, but by their both producing the sane effects. For
that there is no one thing so similar to another amongst

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

the phenomena connected with the sun, as the sun's being eclipsed is to
his actual setting, <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250) you must allow
to me if you call to mind the eclipse which took place the year <span
id="fr_251"></span>[2](#fn_251) before this meeting, when many stars
became visible in different parts of the sky directly at the beginning
of midday, and a mixture \[of light and darkness\] resembling daybreak
pervaded the atmosphere, otherwise this Theon here will bring down upon
us Mimnermus, and Cydias, and Archilochus, and Stesichorus, and Pindar
to boot, all lamenting for 'the brightest one stolen away, and night
coming on at midday, and the sun's ray \[travelling\] the path of
darkness' … as they say. And above all, Homer, telling how 'men's
countenances were covered over with night and darkness, and the sun was
lost out of heaven and vanished around the moon,' … this happens when
one lunar month is ending and the next commencing. The rest, with the
accurate calculations of mathematicians, has been worked out and brought
to a certainty; namely, that night is the shadow of the earth, and the
eclipse of the sun is the shadow of the moon, when the light comes to be
in it. For <span id="fr_252"></span>[3](#fn_252) the sun when setting,
is blocked up by the earth against the sight; but when eclipsed he is
blocked up by the moon, and both phenomena are occultations, but that of
setting is due to the earth, that of eclipse to the moon, because she
intercepts the view of him with her shadow. What takes place is easily
understood from the following considerations. If the effect is the same,
the agents are the same; for it is a matter of necessity that

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the same things should happen in the same case from the same causes. But
that the darkness attending eclipses is not complete darkness, and does
not condense the atmosphere in the same degree that night does, is a
circumstance we ought not to be surprised at; for the *substance* is the
same of the object that causes night and that causes the eclipse, but
the *magnitude* of each is not equal: for the Egyptians, I think, say
the moon is the seventy-second part of earth in size; Anaxagoras, that
she is as big as the Peloponnesus. But Aristarchus proves that the
moon's diameter bears a proportion \[to that of earth\] which is less
than sixty to nineteen, but somewhat greater than one hundred and eight
to forty. Consequently earth entirely takes away the sun from sight, by
reason of her magnitude; for the obstruction she presents is extensive,
and endures the space of a night, whereas the moon, even though she may
occasionally hide the sun, the occultation has no time to last, and no
extensiveness, but some light shows itself round his circumference that
does not allow the darkness to become deep and unmixed. Aristotle (the
ancient one, I mean <span id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_253)) gives as one
cause, besides some others, of the moon's being seen eclipsed more
frequently than the sun, 'that the sun is eclipsed by the obstruction of
the moon, whereas the moon is …' But Posidonius thus describes the
phenomenon: 'The eclipse is the conjunction of the sun and the shadow of
the moon, of which the eclipse … for to those people alone is the
eclipse visible from whom the moon's shadow shall occupy and block out
the sight of the sun.' And when he agrees that the shadow of the moon is
projected as far as us, I do not know what more he has left himself to
say, for of a *star* there can be no shadow, because that thing which is
unillumined is designated *shadow*—now light does naturally not produce
shadow, but destroy it."

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

XX\. "But after this," said he, <span id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_254)
"what further evidence was adduced?" "The moon," I replied, "received
the same explanation as to her eclipse." "You have done well to remind
me," said he, "but beforehand, on the supposition that you are all
convinced and hold that the moon is eclipsed because she is overtaken by
the shadow, I now direct myself to the reason—or would you prefer that I
should make a lecture and a display of eloquence beforehand, by
enumerating the various attempts at the explanation, one after the
other?" "Yes, truly, Theon," I replied, "lecture on these points; for I
too require some persuasion, having only heard the question stated in
this way—that the three bodies being come upon one straight line,
namely, the earth, the sun, and the moon, the eclipses then happen,
because the earth takes away the sun from the moon; on the contrary, the
moon takes away the sun from the earth, for the sun is eclipsed when the
moon, and the moon when the earth stands in the middle of the three; of
which cases the one happens in the conjunction, <span
id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_255) the other in the time of
full-moon." <span id="fr_256"></span>[3](#fn_256) Then Lucius remarked:
"These are about the most important of the theories current; but first
of all, take in hand, if you please, the explanation derived from the
figure of the shadow; for it is a cone, as though a great fire or light
projected a mass, less indeed than a sphere, but still spherical in
form, for which reason in eclipses of the moon the outlines of the
darkened parts against the bright ones have their edges circular; for
whatever sections a round thing coming in contact with another round
thing, may either receive or produce, as they go off in all directions,
they are made circular by reason of their resemblance \[to what produced
them\]. In the second place, I fancy you know that the moon is first
eclipsed on

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

the parts towards the east; whereas the sun is on those towards the
west, because the earth's shadow moves towards the west from the east.
The sun and the moon, on the contrary, move towards the east. All this,
visible facts enable us to discover, and may be understood without very
lengthy explanations, and from them the shadow as the cause of the
eclipse is established. For when the sun is eclipsed by being
*overtaken* by, and the moon by *meeting* that which causes the eclipse,
probably, or rather, necessarily, the sun <span
id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_257) is first overtaken from behind, the moon
from the front, for the occultation begins from that side where the
object in front first casts the shadow, and the moon first casts it upon
the sun from the west, as she is racing against him, but upon *her* he
casts it from the east, because she is moving below in a contrary
direction, from the east. Thirdly, then, consider the question of the
duration, and of the *extent* of her eclipses. When she is eclipsed high
in heaven and at her apogee she is obscured for only a short time, but
being in her perigee and low when thus affected, she is greatly
oppressed, and emerges with difficulty from the shadow. And yet, when
she is low, she is making the greatest movements, but when high the
smallest of all. But the cause of the difference lies in the shadow, for
it is broadest at the base, as all cones are, and contracting gradually,
at the top it ends in a sharp and fine point. Consequently, the moon
entering into this shadow when she is low down, is caught by it in its
largest circumference and passes through its deepest and darkest part,
but when up high, just grazing the shadow, as though in shallow water,
she quickly makes her escape. I shall pass over all that has been said
with special reference to *bases* <span id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_258)
and *transits;* because they admit the cause so far as possibility

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

goes. But I return to the argument before me, that has ocular
demonstration for its starting point. For we see that fire out of a
shady place shows itself and shines abroad all the more; whether through
the density of the obscured air not allowing of divergences and
dispersions, but keeping together and compressing the element in one
place; or else this is an affection of the sense \[vision\], just as hot
things compared with cold seem hotter, and pleasures compared with pains
seem more intense, even so bright things contrasted with dark become
conspicuous, because they exaggerate their appearance through the
opposite affections of the sense: the former supposition of the two is
likely to be the more probable, for in the sunshine every sort of fire
doth not only lose its brightness, but through yielding thereto becomes
inoperative and duller; because the heat disperses and diffuses its
proper force. If then the moon possesses an infantine and ineffective
fire, being 'a feminine star,' as these philosophers pretend, it befits
her to be affected in none of the ways in which she is affected at
present, but altogether the contrary of them all; she ought to appear
where now she is hidden, and be hidden exactly where she now appears:
that is to say, be hidden for the rest of the time as being obscured by
the circumambient æther, but emerge and become visible every six months,
and again every five, when she enters into the shadow of the earth. For
the 365 revolutions of the ecliptic full moons contain 404 periods of
six months, and the rest of five months each. It would therefore be
necessary that the moon should be visible at intervals of so many
months, because she became conspicuous in the shadow; <span
id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_259) but she … becomes eclipsed and loses her
light, but recovers it again, when she emerges from the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

shadow, and often shows herself by day, as being anything rather than a
fiery or star-like substance."

XXI\. Lucius having said this, Pharnaces and Apollonides in a way came
into collision with each other \[in their eagerness to answer him\], but
when Apollonides gave up the turn, Pharnaces continued, "This fact
*does* most of all prove the moon to be a fire or a star, for she is not
*entirely* invisible during eclipses, but displays the hot-coal <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_260) and grim colour which is her own proper
hue." But Apollonides stood firm with respect to the shadow, "for \[he
said\] the mathematicians always so denominated the unillumined place,
and that the heavens did not admit of 'shadow.'" "This \[said I\] is
rather the disputing captiously with a *name* than dealing
philosophically and mathematically with the *fact*, for the place
obstructed by the earth, if one chooses not to call it 'shadow,' but
'unillumined region,' it is all the same unavoidable that the moon, on
coming into it … and altogether," added I, "it is silly to say the
shadow of the earth does not reach so far.… the shadow of the moon
impinging upon the sight, and … towards the earth, causes an eclipse of
the sun. I will now turn to you, Pharnaces, for that coal-like and
glowing <span id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_261) colour, which you pretend
is the natural complexion of the moon, is really that of a body that
possesses density and depth; for in things unsubstantial no remnant or
vestige of flame is accustomed to remain; nor is there any food for fire
except in a solid body that will receive and nourish the spark kindling
it; as Homer also hath sung,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'When the fire-flower was spent and quenched the
blaze,  
  Spreading the ashes wide.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For the 'charcoal'
is probably not *fire*, but an ignited substance, and affected by fire
dwelling upon, and wearing

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

itself out upon a mass which is both solid and possessed of durability;
whereas the flames are but the lighting up and jets of an unsubstantial
nutriment and material, speedily consumed by reason of its weakness.
Consequently, nothing could have been so convincing a proof that the
moon is an earthy and dense substance, than if 'smouldering coal' were
proper to her as her colour. But is it not the case, my dear Pharnaces,
that moons in eclipse assume various colours; and mathematicians
(astrologers) define these colours, and distinguish them according to
the time and the season? For instance, if the moon be eclipsed in the
evening, she appears dreadfully black up to the third <span
id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262) and one-half hour, but if at midnight
she emits this \[just mentioned\] purplish light, and fire, and
flame-colour, whilst from the hour of morning <span
id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_263) and half an hour later, the blush rises
on her face; and finally at daybreak she puts on a dark blue and
cheerful complexion, from which in reality the poets and Empedocles
style her the 'Blue-eyed.' <span id="fr_264"></span>[3](#fn_264) When,
therefore, we see the moon putting on so many different colours when in
the shadow, they do not deal fairly in dwelling upon a single one of
them, namely, the smouldering coal, which we really may say is the most
uncongenial to her of them all; and is rather a mixture and remnant of
the fire shining through the shadow round about her; but her natural
colour \[we define\] to be dark-blue and earthy. For whereas here below
shady places in the vicinity of lakes and rivers that catch the sun are
similarly dyed and made brilliant in robes of purple, yea, even of
*scarlet*, <span id="fr_265"></span>[4](#fn_265)

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

and give forth many various images of colour, through the reflections of
the light, what wonder is it if the vast flood of shadow, falling as it
were into a celestial ocean of light, not steady nor at rest, but
agitated by stars infinite in number, and receiving mixtures and changes
of all kinds, should extract different colours at different times, and
give them out from the moon? A star, or a fire, would not in the shadow
show itself black, or glaucous, or dark blue; but over mountains, or
plains, or sea, many variations of colour from the sun go and come; and
he casts the lustre of the dye, <span id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_266)
tempered with shadows and with mists, as with the hues of the painter's
palette; whereof that of the sea, widely diffused, Homer hath given a
name to, calling it 'violet-coloured,' <span
id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_267) and 'wine-faced ocean,' and elsewhere
the 'purple wave;' and, again, 'blue-green sea,' and the 'white calm;'
whereas the variations about earth of colours showing themselves
differently at different times he has passed over in silence as being
endless in quantity. The moon is not likely to possess only a *single*
visible appearance like the sea; but much more so to resemble the earth
in her nature, concerning which Socrates of old told a fable, whether
that he was hinting at this, or describing, it may be, some other
creation. <span id="fr_268"></span>[3](#fn_268) For it is neither
incredible nor astonishing if she, having nothing in herself that is
corrupting or turbid, but extracting the pure light out of heaven, and
being full of heat, not of a consuming and fierce fire, but one that is
liquid and harmless, and consistent with her nature, should possess
wondrous beauties

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

of scenery, flame-coloured hills, zones of purple, gold and silver, not
dug out from her bowels, but cropping up in abundance to the surface, or
overlaid upon polished eminences. <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269)
And if the sight (vision) of these things penetrates through the shadow
differently at different times, as far as us, by reason of some
difference and variation of the surrounding medium (atmosphere), the
moon doth not thereby lose the preciousness nor the holiness of her
glory, which … being held sacred by mankind, she is something more than
'a turbid and dreggy fire,' as the Stoics pretend. Fire, however, with
the Medea and Assyrians enjoys honours well suited to barbarians, who
worship things hurtful before things worthy of reverence, by way of
deprecating their anger; but the name of Earth is, I ween, dear to all,
and to the Greek even venerable, and with us <span
id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_270) it is the hereditary rule to worship her
in the same way as any other deity. We men are far from thinking the
moon, which is a celestial earth, to be a body without life, and without
mind, and destitute of those things which the gods have a right to
enjoy, when we, by law, pay the requital for her blessings, and
naturally respect that which is superior in virtue and in power, and
therefore to be respected. Wherefore let us believe that we do not
offend in supposing her an earth; and as for this her *face* visible to
us, just as our own earth contains deep recesses \[let us believe that\]
in the same way she too is opened out into vast gulfs, containing either
water or darkened air, into which the sun's light doth not descend, or
even touch, but falls short of them entirely, and produces a reflection
that is dispersed and lost in those places."

XXII\. Then Apollonides, scornfully interrupting, exclaimed: "What,
then, in the Moon's own name, does it

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

seem to you possible that this appearance is nothing but shadows of
streams or of deep ravines, and comes all the way from the moon to us
here to our sight? Perhaps you do not consider the consequences, must I
tell them? Listen, then, even though you be not ignorant of them
already. The diameter of the moon measures twelve fingers’
breadth, <span id="fr_271"></span>[1](#fn_271) as it appears to the eye,
at her mean distances; whilst of the black and shaded parts each one
appears larger than a half digit, so as to be larger than the
twenty-fourth part of the diameter; and, again, if we should estimate
the circumference of the moon at thirty thousand stadia <span
id="fr_272"></span>[2](#fn_272) only, and the diameter at ten thousand,
according to the rule, then each one of the shaded parts in her, will
not be less than five hundred stadia. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[3](#fn_273) Consider, pray, in the first place,
whether it be possible that such cavities and such great inequalities of
surface should exist in the moon as to produce an obscuration of this
extent. In the next place, being so large, why are they not
perceptible <span id="fr_274"></span>[4](#fn_274) to us? "And I, smiling
at him, replied, "Well done, Apollonides, to have invented such a
demonstration, on the strength of which you will make out both yourself
and me to be bigger than those Aloads <span
id="fr_275"></span>[5](#fn_275) of old; not, however, at all times of
day, but chiefly at sunrise and sunset; you think that because the sun
makes our shadows enormous, the fact furnishes this fine argument to the
sense, that if the shadow cast be big the thing casting the shadow must
be exceeding great. In Lemnos neither of us, I well know, has ever been;
both of us, however, have often heard that popular iambic line—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Athos has hid the flank of Lemnian Cow.'</span>

</div>

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For the shadow of
the mountain, as it seems, strikes upon a little cow of bronze,
extending a length of no less than seven hundred <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_276) stadia across the sea … <span
id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_277) to be the height that casts the shadow;
for the reason that the divergences of the light make the shadows many
times greater than the bodies themselves. Come, pray, and consider that
the sun is at his greatest distance from the moon at what time she is
full, and produces the most distinct figure of the face by reason of the
deepness of the shading; for it is the receding of the illumining light
that makes the shade deep, not the greatness of the inequalities on the
surface of the moon. And, again, neither do the rays of the sun allow
the projecting parts of mountains to be discerned by day, whereas their
deep places, valleys, and shaded parts are visible from a great
distance; it therefore is nothing strange if it is not possible to
discern distinctly the reception (of solar light) and the illumination
of the moon, whilst the strong contrasts of the shaded against the
bright parts do not escape our sight and observation.

XXIII\. "But the fact," continued I, "which seems still more to upset
the alleged reflection of light from the moon, is that when people are
standing in reflected lights, it comes to pass they see not only the
thing illuminated but the thing that illuminates. For when a bright
light cast from water is dancing up and down against a wall, the sight
of it takes place in the point that is illuminated in consequence of the
reflection; it (the sight) distinguishes three different things, namely,
the reflected light, the water producing the reflection, and the Sun
himself from whom the ray, falling upon the water, has been reflected.
These points being confessed and evident, (the Stoics) recommend such as
assert the earth to be illuminated by

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

the moon, <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278) to demonstrate that the
Sun shows himself (is reflected) in the moon in the same manner <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279) by night, when the reflection from him
is produced. But as he does not appear then, they believe that the
illumination takes place in some other way than by *reflection:* but if
this be not so, then neither is the moon an earth." "What answer, then,
must be made to them?" replied. Apollonides, "for the phenomena of
reflection are in all probability universal, and like our own."
"Certainly," said I, "in one way they *are* universal, but in another
way they are not universal. In the first place, observe how these people
take the phenomena of the spectrum, upside down and inside out: for upon
earth and below it is the *water*, but above earth, and on high, it is
the *moon*. <span id="fr_280"></span>[3](#fn_280) Consequently the
reflected rays make the form of the angle corresponding—the one having
its apex <span id="fr_281"></span>[4](#fn_281) above upon the moon, the
other having it below upon the earth. Let them, therefore, not demand
that it shall produce every image proper to mirrors, or an equal
reflection from every distance—for in so doing they are fighting against
demonstration. But those who make out the moon to be a body, neither
polished nor fluid like water, but ponderous and earthy, I understand
how they borrow from the sun what the appearance is in her that meets
the sight: for neither does milk produce the same kind of mirrors, <span
id="fr_282"></span>[5](#fn_282) nor render back reflections (as the
water), owing to the inequality and density of its particles: by what
means, therefore, is it possible that the moon should send out from
herself an image in the same way as the more brilliant surfaces of
mirrors? And yet, even in these, if a cobweb, or rust, <span
id="fr_283"></span>[6](#fn_283) or roughness should cover the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

focus from which the image is generated it is \[not\] <span
id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_284) reflected and imaged; and the mirrors
themselves are seen, but give back no reflection. And whoso pretends
that either our sight should reflect upon the sun, or else that the moon
should not reflect the sun from herself upon us, is ridiculous <span
id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_285) by his requiring the eye to be a sun,
the sight the solar beam, and the moon the heavens. For that the Sun's
reflection, impinging with a blow upon the moon by reason of its
intensity and brightness, should be carried as far as us, is reasonable
enough; whereas the sight being feeble, unsubstantial, and ever so small
a fraction \[of the solar light\], what wonder is it if it neither
produces an impressive stroke, nor in rebounding preserves its
continuity, but is broken up and comes to an end; not possessing a large
stock of light, so as not to be dissipated around the inequalities and
roughnesses of the (moon's) surface? From mirrors, indeed, and other
reflecting surfaces, it is not impossible for the proceeding reflection
to strike upon the eye, as it is near to its origin; but from the moon,
even though there should be some slippery glances of herself, they will
be feeble and indistinct, and come prematurely to au end by reason of
the length of the distance they have to travel. And, besides, concave
mirrors make the reflected light more intense than that surrounding
them, so as frequently to emit a flame; whilst the convex and spherical
kinds, by reason of the light striking on them from all sides, produce a
feeble and indistinct For you observe, <span
id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_286) indeed, when two rainbows appear, from a
cloud enveloping another cloud, that the one enclosing the other shows
its hues weak and confused: because the exterior cloud, lying further
off from

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

the sight, produces a reflection neither intense nor powerful. And what
need is there to say more, when the sun's light reflected from the moon
doth lose all its heat, and of its brightness there comes to us merely
an unsubstantial and ineffectual remnant? Surely, when the sight travels
along the same course, is it conceivable that a single particle of a
remnant shall reach the sun from the moon? I do not think it. Consider,
too," added I, "that if the sight is similarly affected in the case of
water and of the moon, the full moon would be obliged to render back the
images of earth, plants, men, and stars, in the same way as the other
reflecting surfaces return them. But if reflections (repercussion) of
the view do not take place against the latter object, through its own
weakness, or through the unevenness of the moon's surface, we must not
demand that they shall be produced upon the sun."

XXIV\. "We therefore," I continued, "have now related to you all the
different theories that have not slipped our memory. But it is now high
time to call upon Sylla, nay, rather to *exact* from him his story, as
having been our hearer upon certain conditions. Wherefore, if you
please, let us end our walk, and, sitting down upon the steps, <span
id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_287) furnish him with a stationary audience."
This was agreed to; and when we had sat down: "I," said Theon, "desire
as much as any one of you to hear what is about to be said,
Lamprias; <span id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_288) but previously I would
be glad to hear about those said to live in the moon—not *who* they are
that dwell there, but whether it is *possible* to inhabit there: for if
that is not possible, it is absurd to say the moon is an earth, for she
will appear to have been made for no purpose, but all in vain, if she
neither bears crops, nor furnishes men of some sort with habitation,
birth, and

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

living: for the which ends we say *this* earth was made, according to
Plato, for our nurse, and unwearied keeper both by day and night, and
our artificer.' For you see that many tales are told, both in jest and
earnest, about these matters. For to those dwelling *under* the moon, as
they say, she is suspended overhead, as though they were so many
Tantali; those, again, living upon her surface, fast bound like so many
Ixions, with such incredible velocity of revolution … and yet she does
not move with a single motion; but, as is said somewhere, she is a
'traveller on three roads,' at one and the same time carried onwards
lengthways towards the Zodiac, and broadways, <span
id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289) and deepways. Of which motions, the
first the mathematicians call the 'circuit,' the second the 'spiral,'
and the third, I know not why, the inequality:' although they have
observed nothing *equal* or regular in her recessions. Consequently, if
a *lion* <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_290) once fell down into the
Peloponnesus from her rapid gyration, it is \[not\] surprising—it is, on
the contrary, a wonder we do not continually see showers of men, and
heaps of cattle, <span id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_291) diving down from
thence, and turning round and round in the air. For it is ridiculous to
argue about a residence there, if she is not capable of containing
generation or stability. For whilst the Egyptians and Troglodytes, over
whose heads the sun stands vertically for a single day at the solstice,
and then departing, hardly escape being burnt up through the dryness of
the atmosphere, pray is it likely people in the moon can stand twelve
summer days in each year, when month by month the sun stands plumb-line
over them, and remains stationary, when it is full-moon? At any rate,
winds and clouds and showers,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

without which there is no growth of plants, or nourishment for things
produced, cannot possibly be thought of under such circumstances, as
being brought together, in consequence of the heat and rarefaction of
the atmosphere; for neither do the mountains there, however lofty,
harbour the furious and ascending winters; but … now, the air kept in
perpetual agitation through its lightness, escapes this settlement and
condensation—unless, forsooth, we shall say, that like as Minerva
dropped down nectar and ambrosia over Achilles, when he refused all
food, so the moon that is both named and is Minerva, feeds her
inhabitants, by issuing out unto them daily ambrosia, in the same way as
Pherecydes of old supposes the gods are fed. As for the Indian root,
which Megasthenes says they neither eat nor drink, but, as they are
*without mouths*, they burn and use like incense, and are nourished by
the fume <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_292)—how is it to be found
growing there if the moon is never rained on?"

XXV\. When Theon had spoken this, … "Well done," I replied; "by the
sportiveness of your discourse \[you have relieved\] the seriousness of
the subject: which inspires us with courage to pursue the dispute,
inasmuch as we do not look for a very spiteful or grave examination from
our audience. For truly they differ greatly from the people that believe
these tales \[but they equally differ from those\] who are disgusted
with and utterly disbelieve them, and are not willing to consider
dispassionately what is possible and probable. In the first place, then,
it does not necessarily follow that because the moon is not inhabited by
men, she was made for no purpose, and in vain. For neither do we see
this earth of ours universally utilized and inhabited, but only a small
portion thereof, like so many capes or peninsulas jutting out into the
vasty deep,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

is capable of breeding animals and plants, whilst the rest lies partly
desert and barren by reason of winters or of drought, whilst the greater
portion of her surface is submerged under the spreading ocean. But you
who love and admire Aristarchus do not attend to Crates when he
acknowledges,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Ocean, to all, the origin ordained  
  Both men and gods, spreads over most of earth.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But these things
are far from being created to no purpose, for the sea sends up mild
exhalations, and the most refreshing airs in the height of summer;
whilst from the uninhabited and frozen quarter, the snows quietly
melting away, relax and disperse … For the sake of day and night, an
unwearied guardian in the midst, "according to Plato," and creator.
There is no objection then to the moon's being really devoid of all
living things, but affording reflection to the light diffused around
her, and a rallying-point for the rays of the stars, and meeting-place
within herself, in which she digests the exhalations rising up from
earth, and in concert with the sun extracts the over fiery and harsh
part of the same, and discharges it. And if we concede so much to
ancient tradition, that she is named 'Artemis,' <span
id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_293) we shall say, as before, that she is
*unfruitful* (like that virgin goddess), yet in other respects full of
help and beneficial. For her revolution being accomplished with great
evenness and tranquillity, smooths down and distends the atmosphere that
moves against (encounters) her, so that there is no danger of those
dwelling upon her falling off, or slipping down. For this \[revolution\]
and the varied and erratic nature of her motion is not a sign of
irregularity and confusion, but, as astronomers make out, of a

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

wonderful order in these phenomena, and of a course in cycles revolving
around other cycles, in which they confine her; some of them making her
immovable, others travelling forwards with the same velocity \[as the
cycles\] in the opposite direction. For these progressions of the
cycles, their revolutions and their relations towards each other and to
us, bring about in the most regular manner all the phenomena of the
lunar motion, such as her elevations and depressions, her deviations in
the direction of her breadth, and revolutions in that of her length. As
for the intense heat and perpetual roasting \[of her inhabitants\] by
the sun, you need not be too much afraid of all that, if you oppose to
the eleven summer conjunctions all the full moons; and secondly, the
continuity of the change, as a set off against the excessive heats, that
indeed do not last for a long time, which circumstance produces a
peculiar temperature, and softens down either extreme, and the mean
between them, in all likelihood, produces a temperature resembling that
of spring. In the next place, the \[sun\] sends down on us his heat
through turbid air, <span id="fr_294"></span>[1](#fn_294) and with much
effort, which heat is nourished by the exhalations \[of earth\]; but
there above, the air is rarefied and transparent, and disperses and
diffuses the sun's rays, that have no excessive heat or substance. Wood
and corn the rains themselves nourish, but in a different way: as up the
country about Thebes, with you and at Syene, it is not the rain water
\[that nourishes\], but the earth herself that drinks the earth-born
water and employs the mind and dews, yet will not, I fancy, submit to a
comparison, <span id="fr_295"></span>[2](#fn_295) in point of fertility,
with the best rain-watered soil, by reason of its goodness and natural
constitution. Plants the same in kind amongst us, even though they be
greatly pinched

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

by the frosts, bring forth abundant and fine fruit; whereas in Libya and
amongst you in Egypt they are difficult of cultivation, and very
susceptible of the frosts. <span id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_296) Whilst
Gedrosea and the Troglodyte country, which reaches down to the ocean, is
barren through want of rain, and entirely destitute of water, yet in the
seas lying adjacent, and spreading round it, grow wonderful monsters of
plants, and spring up from the bottom; some of which they call olive
trees, some laurels, others Isis-hair. The plants called
'anacampsaroles,' <span id="fr_297"></span>[2](#fn_297) not only live,
when taken out of the ground, if hung up as long as you please, but even
flower.… Some \[crops\] are sown towards winter, others again, for
instance, sesame at midsummer, and millet, also thyme or centaury, if
planted in good and rich soil, and watered and irrigated, degenerates
from its natural character and loses its virtue, but loves dryness and
reverts thereby to its own nature. And if it be true, as people say,
that they <span id="fr_298"></span>[3](#fn_298) do not even bear the
dews, like most of the Arabian plants, which fade away when moistened
and are destroyed—what wonder is it if there should grow in the moon
roots, seeds, and woods that require neither rain nor winter, but are
naturally adapted for a summer-like and rarefied atmosphere? Why is it
improbable that the moon herself emits genial airs, and that currents
(of air) are produced by the very rapidity of her gyration, that quietly
supply dews and a slight moisture, which being diffused and dispersed
assist the vegetation, and that her actual temperature is neither

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

fiery nor droughty but soft and humid? For no feeling of dryness comes
down to us from her, but on the contrary many proofs of moisture and a
feminine nature; the growth of plants, the putrefaction of meat, the
conversion \[fermentation\] and settling of wine, the softening of
timber, the easy delivery of women. <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_299) I am afraid of again provoking and
stirring up Pharnaces, now that he is quiet, by talking of the tides of
the ocean (as his own sect pretend), and the flooding of straits that
are overspread and swollen by the action of the moon, through the
renewal of their fluidity. <span id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_300)
Consequently, I will rather turn myself to you, my dear Theon; for you
say, quoting to us those lines of Alcman's:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Daughter of Jove, nourishing Dew! and  
  Nurse of the sacred moon.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Because here he
calls the air Jupiter, and says that he, being *moistened* by the moon,
*dissolves* <span id="fr_301"></span>[3](#fn_301) into the dew. She
appears, my friend, to possess a nature the opposite to the sun's, that
is, if not only whatever he is naturally disposed to condense and to dry
up, she by her nature softens and dissolves, but also she moistens and
cools down the heat proceeding from him, when it impinges upon and is
mingled with herself. <span id="fr_302"></span>[4](#fn_302) Those who
think the moon to be a fiery

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

and burning substance, are in the wrong; and they who demand that living
creatures up there shall possess all the things that those here below
require for their birth, nutriment, and existence, seem to pay no
consideration to the disparities in nature of the two worlds, in which
it is perhaps possible <span id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_303) to find
greater and more numerous differences and disparities of the living
things between one another than are found between things that do not
live at all \[here on earth\]. Granting that there be no such things in
reality as men without mouths, and nourished by the smell, unless … not
seem, the virtue of which Ammonius told us about, and Hesiod has hinted
at, when he says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Or how much enjoyment lies in the mallow and
asphodel.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But Euripides
really hath made it plain, by teaching that Nature with quite a small
spark warms up and keeps together the living being, "if it shall have
received the bigness of an olive, <span id="fr_304"></span>[2](#fn_304)
standing in need of no assistance more." And that those living upon the
moon must be slender in person, and are content to be fed upon what
comes to hand, is probable enough; for that the moon herself is, like
the sun (which is a fiery living thing and many times bigger than the
earth), said to be nourished by the moist vapours rising from the earth,
as are also the other stars innumerable as they are: in the same way
they suppose the necessary animals that the upper region produces are
light and attenuated. But these facts we do not perceive, <span
id="fr_305"></span>[3](#fn_305) nor that there is place, nature, or
other constitution of things

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

adapted for them. As if, therefore, we were unable to approach or touch
the sea, but only to stand afar off and contemplate it, and learning by
inquiry that the water is bitter, undrinkable, and briny, someone should
tell us that living creatures, numberless, huge, and varied in shape,
are nourished in its depths, and that it swarms with wild creatures that
use the water just as we do the air, you would think he was imposing
upon you with fiction and prodigies. We appear to be similarly situated
and to experience the same thing with respect to the moon in
disbelieving that men of some sort inhabit her. *They* on their
[part](errata.htm#3) will, I fancy, much more wonder as they look down
upon our earth, lying like the sediment and dregs of the universe
amongst damps, mists, and clouds; showing through them a lightless, low,
immovable spot, *they* must wonder whether it breeds and maintains
living creatures endowed with motion, breath, and warmth. And if
perchance they may have heard Homer's lines,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Horrible dark, which dread the very gods:  
Sunk below hell as far as heaven from earth,'</span>

</div>

they will declare that all this is said with reference to *this* place,
and that hell and Tartarus lie here; and that the one and only earth is
the moon, which is equally distant from those upper and lower regions."

XXVI\. Almost whilst I was still speaking, Sylla took up the discourse
with "Stop, Lamprias, and shut to the wicket of your speech lest you
unwittingly run the fable aground, and throw this play of mine into
confusion, for it has a different scene and plot. Now, I am the player,
but first I will tell you the author of the piece, if there is no
objection, who begins after Homer's fashion with,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'An isle Ogygian lies far out at sea,'</span>

</div>

distant five days’ sail from Britain, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_306) going westwards, and

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

three others equally distant from it, and from each other, are more
opposite to the summer visits of the sun; in one of which the barbarians
fable that Saturn is imprisoned by <span id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_307)
Jupiter, whilst his son lies by his side, as though keeping guard over
those islands and the sea, which they call 'the Sea of Saturn.' <span
id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_308) The great continent by which the great
sea is surrounded on all sides, they say, lies less distant from the
others, but about five thousand stadia from Ogygia, <span
id="fr_309"></span>[3](#fn_309) for one sailing in a rowing-galley; for
the sea is difficult of passage and muddy through the great number of
currents, and these currents issue out of the great land, and shoals are
formed by them, and the sea becomes clogged and full of earth, by which
it has the appearance of being solid. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[4](#fn_310) That sea-coast of the mainland Greeks
are settled on, around a bay not smaller than the Mæotis, the entrance
of which lies almost in a straight line opposite the entrance to the
Caspian Sea. <span id="fr_311"></span>[5](#fn_311) Those Greeks call and
consider themselves *continental* people, but *islanders* all such as
inhabit this land of ours, inasmuch as it is surrounded on all sides by
the sea; and they believe that with the peoples of Saturn

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

were united, later, those who wandered about with Hercules, and being
left behind there, they rekindled into strength and numbers the Greek
element, then on the point of extinction, and sinking into the barbarian
language, manners, and laws; whence Hercules has the first honours
there, and Saturn the second. But when the star of Saturn, which we call
the 'Informer,' but they 'Nocturnal,' comes into the sign of the Bull
every thirty years, they having got ready a long while beforehand all
things required for the sacrifice and the games … they send out people
appointed by lot in the same number <span
id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_312) of ships, furnished with provisions and
stores necessary for persons intending to cross so vast a sea by dint of
rowing, as well as to live a long time in a foreign land. When they have
put to sea, they meet, naturally, with different fates, but those who
escape from the sea, first of all, touch at the foremost isles, which
are inhabited by Greeks also, and see the sun setting for less than one
hour for thirty days in succession; and this interval is night, attended
with slight darkness, and a twilight glimmering out of the west. <span
id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_313) Having spent ninety days there, treated
with honour and hospitality, being both considered and entitled 'holy,'
thenceforward they voyage with the help of the winds. No other people
inhabit the islands save themselves and those that had been sent out
before; it is, indeed, allowed to such as have served thirteen <span
id="fr_314"></span>[3](#fn_314) years in waiting upon the god, to return
home, but the greatest part prefer to remain there, partly out of habit,
partly because they have all things in abundance without toil and
trouble, as they pass their time in

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

sacrifices and hymn singing, or in studying legends and philosophy of
some sort. <span id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_315) For wonderful are both
the island and the mildness of the climate; whilst the deity himself has
been an obstacle to some when contemplating departure, by manifesting
himself to them as to familiars and friends, not by way of dreams or by
tokens, but conversing with them in a visible form with many apparitions
and speeches of genii. For Saturn himself is imprisoned in a vast
cavern, sleeping upon a rock overlaid with gold; for his sleep has been
contrived by Jupiter for his chaining—whilst birds fly down from the
rock, which are ordained to carry ambrosia to him, whilst the island is
overspread with fragrance, diffused from the rock as from a fountain.
Those genii wait upon and nurse Saturn, who had been his companions at
the time when truly he used to reign over both gods and men; and they,
being endowed with prophecy, foretell, on their own account, many
things, but important matters, and such as concern the highest things,
they go down into the cavern and report as the dreams of Saturn; for
whatsoever things Jupiter is devising for the future, Saturn
dreams <span id="fr_316"></span>[2](#fn_316) what they are about, and
that which is kingly and divine. <span id="fr_317"></span>[3](#fn_317)
The stranger having been carried there, as he told us, and waiting upon
the god at his leisure, he gained acquaintance with astrology <span
id="fr_318"></span>[4](#fn_318) and

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

geometry as far as it is possible to advance, whilst he took up 'natural
science' for his department of philosophy. <span
id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_319) But, seized at last with a desire and
longing to become acquainted with the 'great island,' for so, as was
natural, they denominate the territories inhabited by ourselves; when
the thirty years had expired, <span id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_320) and
the successors were come from home, he took leave of his friends and
sailed away, having provided himself carefully with all other stores,
and carrying his travelling expenses in \[the shape of\] cups of
gold. <span id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_321) All that he endured, and how
many nations he passed through, consulting their sacred books, and
receiving initiation into all their mysteries, would take a whole day to
enumerate in the way that he related it to us, describing the
circumstances very well and particularly; but as much of them as is
connected with the present inquiry you must now hear, for he spent a
very long time at Carthage, inasmuch as he received great honours
amongst us for having discovered, deposited in the earth, some sacred
parchments, which had been secretly carried off at the time when the
former city was destroyed, and which had been concealed a very long
time. Of the visible powers, he said we ought (and exhorted me also)
especially to worship the moon, as being in reality, and also reputed,
the sovereign of life."

XXVII\. When I was astonished at this, and begged for some clearer
information, "Many things, Sylla," said he, "are told amongst the
Greeks, but not all rightly, concerning the Gods. For instance, at
starting, you are right

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

in calling the same person 'Demeter,' and the 'Maid,' but not right in
supposing the place of each as one and the same, and that both were
occupied by the same things, for the one is on the earth, and mistress
of things upon earth, the other in the moon, and of the things
pertaining to the moon. She is named the 'Maid,' and 'Persephone,' <span
id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_322) the latter as being the *bringer of
light*, but 'maid' because we call *maid* (pupil) that part of the eye
in which the image of the spectator is reflected, just as the image of
the sun is reflected in the moon. In the legends told about their
wandering and going in search, there is a \[certain amount of\] truth;
for they long for each other when they are apart, and often embrace
under the obscuration. Now the being at one time in heaven and in the
light, at another in the darkness and the night, is not false as regards
the Maid; but the time has occasioned error in the counting, since it is
not *during* six months, but at *intervals* of six months that we see
her enveloped in shadow by the earth as if by a mother, but rarely
experiencing this at intervals of five months; for it is impossible for
her to leave the shades, and from them pass, as Homer disguising the
thing hath not ill said,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Into Elysian plains and Earth's recess.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For where the
earth's shadow ceases to reach, this point we supposed the limit and end
of earth. <span id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_323) To this place no bad or
unpurified person ascends; but the good, after decease, being carried
hither, continue here enjoying a very tranquil life, not, however, a
blissful one, nor that of gods, until the Second Death."

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

XXVIII\. "What, pray, is this, Sylla?" said I. "Do not ask questions
about it," replied he, "for I am going to relate it all. Man most people
rightly think a *composite* being, but wrongly think a composite of
*two* parts only, for they reckon the *mind* as only a part of the
*soul*, being no less in error than they who think the soul to be only
part of the *body;* for the mind is as much better and more divine than
the soul, as the soul is superior to the body. For the conjunction of
body and soul produces <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_324) … .
*Reason*, whereof the one is the origin of pleasure and pain, the other,
of vice and virtue. Of these three combined things, the earth furnished
for the birth the *body*, the moon the *soul*, the sun the *mind*, just
as he supplies light to the moon. The death which we die makes the man
*two* instead of *three*, the second (death) makes him *one* out of
*two*. The first takes place in the region of Demeter \[because the
earth\] and also the dead are subject to her, whence the Athenians of
old used to call the \[dead\] "Demetrians." The second \[death\] takes
place in the moon, the dominion of Persephone; and of the former the
consort is the Earthly Hermes, of the latter, the Heavenly. The former
separates the soul from the body, hastily and with violence; but
Persephone gently and slowly loosens the mind from the soul, and for
this reason she has been named the "Only-begotten," <span
id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_325) because the best part of the man becomes
*single* when separated from the rest by her means. Each of these
changes happens, according to nature, as follows: every soul, whether
without mind, or joined to mind, on departing from the body, is ordained
to wander in the region lying <span id="fr_326"></span>[3](#fn_326)
between the moon and

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

earth for a term, not equal in all cases; but the wicked and incontinent
pay a penalty for their sins; whereas the virtuous, in order, as it
were, to purify themselves and to recover breath, after the body, as
being the source of sinful pollution, must pass a certain fixed time in
the mildest region of air, which they call the "Meadow of Hades." Then,
as though returning to their native land after enforced banishment, they
taste of joy, such as the initiated into mysteries feel, mingled with
trouble and apprehension, joined with a peculiar hope, for <span
id="fr_327"></span>[1](#fn_327) it drives off and tosses away many of
them when already making for the moon, and they \[the virtuous\] also
see the ghosts of people there turned upside down, and, as it were,
descending into the abyss. <span id="fr_328"></span>[2](#fn_328) Such as
are arrived above, and have got firm footing there \[on the moon\], like
victors in the games, crowned with wreaths, encircle their heads with
crowns called crowns of "Constancy," <span
id="fr_329"></span>[3](#fn_329) made of feathers, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[4](#fn_330) because the irrational and passionate
part of the soul they have in life presented to Reason, manageable and
kept in restraint. <span id="fr_331"></span>[5](#fn_331) In the next
place, their sight resembles a sunbeam, and the soul, wafted on high by
the air surrounding the moon, gains tone and vigour from the same, just
as here below steeled

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

tools gain it by the tempering; for that which was unsubstantial and
diffuse becomes solid and transparent, so as to be nourished by the
exhalation it meets with there; and Heraclitus hath well said that
'Souls in Hades have the sense of smell.'"

XXIX\. "They contemplate, in the first place, the magnitude and beauty
of the moon; also her nature, which is not simple and unmixed, but as it
were a combination of star and earth; for just as earth mixed with air
and moisture becomes soft, and the blood mingling itself with the flesh
produces sensibility, in like manner they say the moon being mixed
up <span id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_332) from her inmost depth, becomes
both animated and generative, and at the same time has the symmetrical
arrangement of its levity around the centre of the mass for a
counteracting force to its own gravity. For it is in this way that our
world, being composed out of elements that by their own nature tend some
upwards, some downwards, is free from all motion in its place. These
facts Xenocrates appears to have discovered through a certain admirable
process of reasoning, having taken his starting-point out of Plato. For
it is Plato who proved that also each one of the stars is composed of
earth and fire, by means of the ascertained analogy of the intervening
substances; because nothing comes within the reach of sense that has not
some portion of earth and of fire mingled with it. Now Xenocrates says
the sun is composed of fire and the First Solid; but the moon of the
Second Solid and her own air; and the earth out of water, fire, and the
Third of the Solids; and, generally, that neither the solid, taken by
itself, nor the fluid, is capable of a soul. Thus much, then, for the
physical constitution <span id="fr_333"></span>[2](#fn_333) of the moon.
The breadth, and the magnitude of her is not what the geometricians
assert, but much larger; for

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

she measures the shadow of the earth only a few times <span
id="fr_334"></span>[1](#fn_334) with her own magnitude, not in
consequence of her smallness, but because she puts out all her speed,
that she may pass through the darkened spot, and carry out with her the
souls of the good, that are eager for it and cry aloud to her; because
they hear no longer, whilst they are in the shadow, the harmony of the
heavens, and at the same time, the souls of those suffering punishment
rush up towards her from below through the shadow, wailing and shouting
(for which reason, during eclipses, most people clatter their brass pots
and clap their hands, and make a noise to scare away the ghosts), for
the so-called Face frightens them when they come nigh, looking grim and
horrible. Such it is not really, but like <span
id="fr_335"></span>[2](#fn_335) as our earth has deep and great
gulfs—one of them flowing inwards towards us through the Pillars of
Hercules; others flowing outwards as the Caspian, and those in the Red
Sea—in like manner there are deep places and gulf-like in the moon,
whereof the largest is called 'Hecate's dungeon,' in which the souls
either suffer or inflict punishment, for the things which they have
either done or endured, when they have already been made genii: as for
the two smaller depths, because the souls pass through them on the way
towards heaven and towards earth back again, the one is denominated the
'Elysian Plain,' the other the 'Passage of Persephone the Terrestrial!'"

XXX\. "The genii do not always pass their time upon her (the moon), but
they come down hither and take charge of Oracles; they are present at
and assist in the most advanced of the initiatory rites \[in the several

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mysteries\], as
punishers and keepers of wrong-doers they act, and shine as saviours in
battle and at sea; <span id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_336) and whatsoever
thing in these capacities they do amiss, either out of spite, unfair
partiality, or envy, they are punished for it, for they are driven down
again to earth and coupled with human bodies. Of the best of these genii
they told him were those who <span id="fr_337"></span>[2](#fn_337) wait
upon Saturn now, and the same in old times were the Idæi Dactyli in
Crete, the Curetes in Phrygia, the Trophonii in Bœotia Lebadea, and
others without number in various parts of the world, of whom the holy
places, honours, and titles still remain; though of some the powers have
ceased since they have experienced a removal of their virtue to another
locality. This change they suffer, some sooner, some later, when the
*mind* has been separated from the *soul*. The mind separates itself out
of a desire of reaching the Image in the sun, <span
id="fr_338"></span>[3](#fn_338) through which shines forth the
Desirable, and Beautiful, and Divine, and Blissful, to which every
unmixed nature aspires in different ways. For the moon herself, out of
desire for the sun, revolves round and comes in contact with him,
because she longs to derive from him the generative principle. The
nature of the soul is left behind in the moon, retaining vestiges as it
were and dreams of life; and on this account you must suppose it rightly
said:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Like to a dream, the soul took wing and
fled.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For the soul does
not suffer this all at once; nor as soon as separated from the body, but
afterwards when she has become desolate and solitary, when the mind is
departed. <span id="fr_339"></span>[4](#fn_339)

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Homer (said
he) appears to have spoken especially through divine inspiration about
the whole question:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'There midst the rest strong Hercules I marked,  
  His spectre—for himself dwells with the gods.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For each
individual of us is not anger, nor fear, nor desire, just as he is
neither pieces of flesh nor humours; but that wherewith we think and
understand is the soul, impressed by the mind, and in its turn
impressing the body, and impinging upon it from all parts it models the
form; <span id="fr_340"></span>[1](#fn_340) so that, though it may
continue a long time separated from both (the mind and the body), yet as
it retains the likeness and imprint, it is properly denominated the
"Image" (or *Spectre*). <span id="fr_341"></span>[2](#fn_341) Of these
images the moon is the element: for they are resolved into her
substance, like as bodies into earth, of the dead. Quickly resolved are
the temperate, such as have led a tranquil, philosophic, and leisurely
life on earth; for being let go from the mind, and no longer subject to
the passions, they wither away. Of those ambitious, busy, amorous, and
irascible when in the body, the souls are visited, like dreams, with
recollections of their past life, and are troubled with them; like that
of Endymion of old. For their restless and passionate character stirs
them up, and draws them away from the moon towards a second birth; she
suffers them not, however \[to escape\], but recalls them to herself,
and soothes them to remain. For it is far from quiet or orderly work,
when souls, separated from mind, get possession of a body subject to
passions. <span id="fr_342"></span>[3](#fn_342) Of such souls came
perchance the Tityi and the Typhons, and that Typhon <span
id="fr_343"></span>[4](#fn_343)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

who used to hinder and trouble the oracular power at Delphi: for they
are destitute of reason, and actuated by the passionate part, puffed up
with pride and self-conceit. But, in time, even these the moon absorbs
into herself, and reduces to order. In the next place, the sun having
*impregnated* <span id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_344) the mind with vital
force, produces new souls. And, thirdly, earth furnishes a body: for
earth takes back after death that which she gave at birth; whereas the
sun *takes* nothing, only *takes back* the mind, which he gave: but the
moon both takes and gives, and puts together, and separates; in virtue
of two different powers, of which the combining power is named
'Elithyia,' the separative one 'Artemis.' And of the Three Fates,
Atropos, seated in the sun, supplies the origin of birth; Clotho, moving
about the moon, unites together and mingles the various parts; lastly,
Lachesis, on earth, who has most to do with Fortune, puts her hand to
the work. For the inanimate part is powerless, and liable to be acted
upon by others; but the mind is impassive and independent; and the soul
is of mixed nature, and intermediate between the two: just as the moon
hath been made by the Deity a mixture of things above and of things
below, 'a great, full horn,' bearing the same relation to the sun that
the earth bears to the moon.

"All this," said Sylla, "I heard the stranger recounting; and the
chamberlains and ministers of Saturn <span
id="fr_345"></span>[2](#fn_345) had related it, as he said, to him. You,
Lamprias, are at liberty to make what use you please of the story."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_213"></span>[197:1](pte08.htm#fr_213) This explanation of
optical illusion.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[198:1](pte08.htm#fr_214) This word has dropped
out of the text, but is indispensable.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[198:2](pte08.htm#fr_215) Or perhaps plump and
polished, as the Italian "*bagnato*."

<span id="fn_216"></span>[198:3](pte08.htm#fr_216) πιέζει in text, for
πιέζεται.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[198:4](pte08.htm#fr_217) γραφικὴ, drawing in
outline, the first thing taught in Greek schools, as Pliny notes under
"Pamphilus." This whole paragraph is in inextricable confusion.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[199:1](pte08.htm#fr_218) When the moon takes
the form of a crescent.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[200:1](pte08.htm#fr_219) All this is in
confusion, and some part quite lost, for the end of the sentence must be
part of Apollonius's reply.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[201:1](pte08.htm#fr_220) A curious reference
to the old times of Greece, when the painted vase manufacture was of the
same importance as the porcelain of our times. With the Romans
earthenware served only for the commonest household usage.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[202:1](pte08.htm#fr_221) Referring to the
heating of sling-bullets—produced in reality by impact, but supposed by
the ancients to be generated during their flight—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Volat atque incandescit eundo."

</div>

<span id="fn_222"></span>[202:2](pte08.htm#fr_222) Because it would
necessarily slip off a convex surface.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[203:1](pte08.htm#fr_223) *Aliter*,
Aristarchus.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[203:2](pte08.htm#fr_224) The Zodiac. Modern
*savants* pass this theory slightingly by, as "a guess amongst many;"
but the rule in such cases assures every one <span id="page_204">p.
204</span> who can use his common sense that Aristarchus had his own
arguments, derived from observation of the phenomena, that satisfied
himself and his disciples of the soundness of Isis hypothesis. How
unfortunate that Plutarch did not take the trouble to give some brief
notice of them, as he has done here of so many others of less value.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[204:1](pte08.htm#fr_225) τῆς ἐποχῆς should be
in the dative, else I cannot see how the passage can be construed.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[204:2](pte08.htm#fr_226) Or "acute."

<span id="fn_227"></span>[205:1](pte08.htm#fr_227) ῥιζῶδες must be
ῥοιζῶδες, of similar sound.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[206:1](pte08.htm#fr_228) This must be an error
for "centre."

<span id="fn_229"></span>[206:2](pte08.htm#fr_229) Meaning the outer
circumference of the globe.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[206:3](pte08.htm#fr_230) A curious
illustration, much bungled by the scribe. "Saw a beam in two at the
centre, the globe being supposed hollow, each piece falls in an opposite
direction until it strikes against earth's crust, when it is repelled,
and the two pieces meet again at the centre."

<span id="fn_231"></span>[207:1](pte08.htm#fr_231) His head would be
*upwards* with respect to the other surface of the globe; his feet with
respect to ours.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[208:1](pte08.htm#fr_232) If all the heavenly
bodies can more about at great intervals from each other, why must all
earthly bodies gravitate into one mass?

<span id="fn_233"></span>[209:1](pte08.htm#fr_233) αὐτῆς in text for
σκίας?

<span id="fn_234"></span>[209:2](pte08.htm#fr_234) A radius of 4,000
miles, making the moon's distance from earth 224,000. The text,
therefore, should read myriad for thousand in the sum, as also appears
from what follows.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[209:3](pte08.htm#fr_235)

|                  |                   |
|------------------|-------------------|
| 4,000 × 10,000 = | 40,000,000        |
| 30 × 10,000 =    | <u>   300,000</u> |
|                  | 40,300,000        |

About 40,300,000 miles.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[211:1](pte08.htm#fr_236) \[Actuated, the
consequence of the diversity being.\]

<span id="fn_237"></span>[212:1](pte08.htm#fr_237) A quotation from some
poet.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[214:1](pte08.htm#fr_238) The Platonic term for
the Divine Will, or the "Logos."

<span id="fn_239"></span>[214:2](pte08.htm#fr_239) Natural position of
each element.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[215:1](pte08.htm#fr_240) Better rendered by
Wisdom, for it is the Achamoth of the Alexandrine Jews, and the Second
Person, "the Spirit of God," in their Divinity.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[216:1](pte08.htm#fr_241) In proportion to the
weight of each.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[218:1](pte08.htm#fr_242) This Treatise being
in the form of a reported conversation.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[218:2](pte08.htm#fr_243) The moon does not
collect a stock of light within her body—otherwise her light would not
be intermittent. "When the light of torches is augmented" by the
kindling of additional torches.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[219:1](pte08.htm#fr_244) Or "owl-faced," a
far-fetched sense of γλαυκώπις quite in Empedocles’ style.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[220:1](pte08.htm#fr_245) There is sufficient
head room in the mirror-face for the images to be repeated as the eyes
involuntarily change their position.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[221:1](pte08.htm#fr_246) The doctrine of the
equality of the angles of incidence and reflection may hold good for
truly polished surfaces, but not for irregular surfaces.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[221:2](pte08.htm#fr_247) Independently of the
moon, but somewhere in the heavens on the way towards her.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[222:1](pte08.htm#fr_248) Supposing the moon
made of æther, the sun on the least contact would illuminate the whole
orb, so there could be no half-moons or crescents.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[223:1](pte08.htm#fr_249) "Sun" and "Air" have
got interchanged in the text; but the true sense is obvious.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[224:1](pte08.htm#fr_250) The phenomena
attending an eclipse of the sun closely resemble those attending a
regular sunset.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[224:2](pte08.htm#fr_251) April 30, A.D. 59: a
notice fixing the date of this Treatise.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[224:3](pte08.htm#fr_252) When the sun is
setting, the view of his orb is obstructed by the elevation of the
horizon between him and the spectators; but when he is eclipsed, our
sight of him is intercepted by the moon coming between us and him.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[225:1](pte08.htm#fr_253) Not the gentleman
present.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[226:1](pte08.htm#fr_254) The person to whom
Plutarch is relating the discussion.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[226:2](pte08.htm#fr_255) σύνοδος for moon's
conjunction with sun = dark quarter.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[226:3](pte08.htm#fr_256) διχόμηνος when the
moon is in *opposition* to the sun = full-moon.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[227:1](pte08.htm#fr_257) τὸ μὲν, in text for
μὲν, which is necessitated by the ἡ δἑ following.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[227:2](pte08.htm#fr_258) Doubtless "phases"—β
being written for φ in the text, in consequence of the similarity of
sound, as the scribes pronounce it.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[228:1](pte08.htm#fr_259) If the moon were of
the nature of a star, self-lighted, she would be conspicuous when
passing through earth's shadow; whereas she now becomes invisible in her
passage through it.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[229:1](pte08.htm#fr_260) ἀνθρακώδης,
"smouldering," like that of a hot piece of charcoal, ἀνϑραξ being always
taken in an active sense.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[229:2](pte08.htm#fr_261) διακαὴς, not
smouldering, but, like charcoal, fully alight.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[230:1](pte08.htm#fr_262) Counting from sunset,
as the Romans still do.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[230:2](pte08.htm#fr_263) At what time
"morning," as distinct from "day-break," commenced, I cannot discover.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[230:3](pte08.htm#fr_264) Plutarch's
explanation cannot stand; a general epithet cannot be derived from a so
transient state, and of rare occurrence.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[230:4](pte08.htm#fr_265) Our "Sultan red," the
brightest dye the ancients could produce with their *coccus*, kermes.
Their "purple" was a very dark red, bluish viewed in one light.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[231:1](pte08.htm#fr_266) βαφὰς must be βαφὴς.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[231:2](pte08.htm#fr_267) What flower the ἴον
was is now impossible to define. The epithet "flame-coloured," given to
it by Dioscorides, inclines me to think it the reddish-purple cyclamen,
so common in South Europe: but W. G. Clark was in favour of the
heartsease which he observed growing abundantly in Greece—clearly it was
not our violet.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[231:3](pte08.htm#fr_268) The "True World,"
described in such Apocalyptical terms in the "Phædo."

<span id="fn_269"></span>[232:1](pte08.htm#fr_269) Quoting Socrates’
description of the True World.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[232:2](pte08.htm#fr_270) Citizens of Delphi;
where the Oracle at first belonged to "Mother Earth," before she ceded
it to Apollo.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[233:1](pte08.htm#fr_271) Nine inches English.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[233:2](pte08.htm#fr_272) 3,750 miles English.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[233:3](pte08.htm#fr_273) Fifty-two miles.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[233:4](pte08.htm#fr_274) Perceptible as actual
cavities in the moon's surface, not as mere patches of colour.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[233:5](pte08.htm#fr_275) The biggest giants of
the Titans.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[234:1](pte08.htm#fr_276) Eighty-five miles
across the sea.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[234:2](pte08.htm#fr_277) \[You do not imagine
this is the actual height of the mountain.\]

<span id="fn_278"></span>[235:1](pte08.htm#fr_278) With her reflected
light.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[235:2](pte08.htm#fr_279) As in the experiment
just cited.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[235:3](pte08.htm#fr_280) That throws back the
solar ray.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[235:4](pte08.htm#fr_281) κορυφή.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[235:5](pte08.htm#fr_282) "Reflecting medium,"
as water does: referring to what was said before of the spectrum cast
from dancing waves upon a wall.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[235:6](pte08.htm#fr_283) Mirrors in Plutarch's
time were all made of speculum metal, and liable to be spoilt by rust.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[236:1](pte08.htm#fr_284) The negative here is
certainly demanded by the sense of the whole argument.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[236:2](pte08.htm#fr_285) Rather, "makes
himself ridiculous."

<span id="fn_286"></span>[236:3](pte08.htm#fr_286) ὁρᾶτι must be ὁρᾶτε.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[237:1](pte08.htm#fr_287) The grand flight of
steps leading up to the Temple of Apollo, in front of which the
conversation was held.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[237:2](pte08.htm#fr_288) Plutarch's brother,
who relates this conversation.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[238:1](pte08.htm#fr_289) Sideways and
downwards.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[238:2](pte08.htm#fr_290) λέων for λίϑος, of
which Anaxagoras predicted the fall; or was there some story of a *bonâ
fide* lion tumbling out of the moon?

<span id="fn_291"></span>[238:3](pte08.htm#fr_291) βίων must be βοῶν.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[239:1](pte08.htm#fr_292) This looks like some
tradition of the use of tobacco, brought by some prehistoric Columbus.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[240:1](pte08.htm#fr_293) ὠφελεῖν must be ὦ
φίλε, which makes the passage intelligible: "Nothing," my dear Theon,
"of what has been said proves that her being inhabited is impossible."

<span id="fn_294"></span>[241:1](pte08.htm#fr_294) The sun's heat
strikes on us so forcibly because it has to pass through thick
atmosphere and exhalations rising out of earth.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[241:2](pte08.htm#fr_295) *i.e.*, suffer by
comparison.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[242:1](pte08.htm#fr_296) An evident slip of
the pen for *heats:* the argument being that fruit trees that thrive in
the North, in spite of the frost, will not answer in a hot climate.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[242:2](pte08.htm#fr_297) Probably the kind of
Sedum, now called the Air plant, which grows when hung from a ceiling.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[242:3](pte08.htm#fr_298) The name of the plant
is lost here; but, from the connection with Arabia, must be the
frankincense tree (our olibanum), her special product:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Molles sua thura sabæi."

</div>

<span id="fn_299"></span>[243:1](pte08.htm#fr_299) This curious effect
of moonlight, whether actually observed, or only fancied by the
ancients, sufficiently explains the apparent anomaly of making the
virgin Artemis to preside over parturition:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Qum laborantes utero puellas  
 Ter vocata audis adimisque letho."

</div>

<span id="fn_300"></span>[243:2](pte08.htm#fr_300) The flow of the tides
not produced by a mere return of water from the open sea, but by the
actual increase of the quantity of water, due to lunar influence in the
diminished bed of the strait.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[243:3](pte08.htm#fr_301) In the same manner as
the female nature dissolves the male in the act of copulation.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[243:4](pte08.htm#fr_302) Because she converts
the heat she receives from the sun into chilly and humid moonbeams.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[244:1](pte08.htm#fr_303) Possibly, the
differences between living beings in the Moon and on Earth, are even
greater than the differences between the various kinds of inanimate
things here below.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[244:2](pte08.htm#fr_304) We have lost here
some Egyptian story about nutriment compressed in marvellously small
compass. \[*This phrase occurs extensively in the Talmud to indicate a
small amount of food, and it may have also been used in the Hellenic
world.—JBH*.\]

<span id="fn_305"></span>[244:3](pte08.htm#fr_305) Learn by the evidence
of our senses.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[245:1](pte08.htm#fr_306) Ireland, probably,
which lies at this distance from Rutupiae, the <span id="page_246">p.
246</span> only British port known to Plutarch. The Romans had marched
across the island as far as Anglesea in Nero's reign.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[246:1](pte08.htm#fr_307) Previously quoting
the same legend, he says, by Briareus. "Visits" I can only understand by
"risings," which makes these three isles lie N.Nϵ. of the large one.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[246:2](pte08.htm#fr_308) All in confusion
here, but by reading φρουρὰν for φρουρὸν, and putting ὡς before ἔχοντα,
there is some remedy.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[246:3](pte08.htm#fr_309) This looks like a
vague tradition of the existence of America: by reading "myriads" for
"thousands" of stadia, we should get the proper distance. This exchange
we have had convincing reason for making in a former passage.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[246:4](pte08.htm#fr_310) Probably a vague
tradition of icebergs and pack-ice seen by some very adventurous
explorer, like Pytheas of Massilia.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[246:5](pte08.htm#fr_311) The Caspian Sea was
believed by the Greeks to communicate with the ocean. This may really
have been the case in historical times, for its waters are even now
rapidly shrinking up, and may have extended indefinitely a few thousand
years ago.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[247:1](pte08.htm#fr_312) As the period of
years between each expedition, *i.e.*, thirty.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[247:2](pte08.htm#fr_313) This looks like a
vague tradition of an actual visit to the Shetlands: this particular
could never have been *invented* by a Greek. The Romans knew the North
Sea as "Mare Cronium."

<span id="fn_314"></span>[247:3](pte08.htm#fr_314) This seems a false
reading for "thirty," when the arrival of the next expedition would
relieve them of their duties.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[248:1](pte08.htm#fr_315) Some wandering Greeks
having got amongst the Druids of Ireland, are probably the authors of
the story. If admitted to all the privileges of the sacerdotal order,
they certainly could not better their condition by returning home. The
Druidical students, according to Cæsar, spent all their time in learning
by heart interminable religious stories in verse, together with a
"course of Natural Science."

<span id="fn_316"></span>[248:2](pte08.htm#fr_316) εῖναι δὲ ἀνάστασιν in
text, must be εῖναι, ἀνάστησι δὲ, because sleep stirs up within him
prophetic passions and emotions of the soul.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[248:3](pte08.htm#fr_317) The text in utter
confusion here, but probably intended in this sense.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[248:4](pte08.htm#fr_318) γένηται makes no
sense, but reading γίνεται, gives "is, of its own self, pure and
unmixed."

<span id="fn_319"></span>[249:1](pte08.htm#fr_319) Pliny remarks that
"Britain cultivates *Magia* \[astrology\] with such zeal that any one
would suppose it was she who had communicated it to Persia." Now Britain
was regarded in Gaul as the fountain-head of religion.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[249:2](pte08.htm#fr_320) From this we can
correct the reading "thirteen" at [p. 247](#page_247).

<span id="fn_321"></span>[249:3](pte08.htm#fr_321) Perhaps ring-money,
with the large cup-shaped extremities, is here meant. The whole story is
evidently based upon the report of a visit to some Druidical
sanctuary—perhaps Mona, or even Ireland.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[250:1](pte08.htm#fr_322) Of Demeter's long
searchings after Persephone; and the abduction of the latter by the Lord
of the Shades.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[250:2](pte08.htm#fr_323) A very far-fetched
interpretation of Homer's word "Recess," by which he meant the abode of
departed spirits in the vast *hollow* of the globe.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[251:1](pte08.htm#fr_324) "Sensation" must be
the word lost here; as plainly appears from what comes next.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[251:2](pte08.htm#fr_325) Perverted into an
active sense, as "begotten of one."

<span id="fn_326"></span>[251:3](pte08.htm#fr_326) "The Middle Space,"
which figures so largely in the theology of the *Pistis Sophia*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[252:1](pte08.htm#fr_327) The word is lost
here, but probably was "the incredible velocity of new gyration," or
something to that effect.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[252:2](pte08.htm#fr_328) The spirits of the
good rest above in a fearful hope, for from their place of rest they can
see the ghosts of the wicked repelled by the circumference of the moon,
tossed about, and falling headlong, as they fancy, into the abyss below.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[252:3](pte08.htm#fr_329) εὐσταθείας,
"steadiness."

<span id="fn_330"></span>[252:4](pte08.htm#fr_330) Perhaps suggested by
the plumed cap, the badge of the Egyptian priesthood.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[252:5](pte08.htm#fr_331) Conversely, Dante
sees the souls that had in life subjected their reason to their
appetite, tossed about by whirlwinds in mid air:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Intesi ch’ a cosi fatto tormento  
   Eran dannati i peccator carnali,  
 Che la ragion sommettono al talento."

</div>

<span id="fn_332"></span>[253:1](pte08.htm#fr_332) Being a mixture of
starry and earthy natures.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[253:2](pte08.htm#fr_333) The Druidical story
is here taken up again.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[254:1](pte08.htm#fr_334) The breadth of
earth's shadow appears to be many times greater than the moon's
diameter; not from the smallness of the latter, but from the rapidity of
her transit.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[254:2](pte08.htm#fr_335) There is no actual
Face, but the depressions of surface represent its features when viewed
from afar.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[255:1](pte08.htm#fr_336) Appearing as the twin
star, St. Elmo's Fire, upon the ship's mast.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[255:2](pte08.htm#fr_337) οἵ τε for τούς τε.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[255:3](pte08.htm#fr_338) The sun being the
visible type of the supreme godhead, to union (absorption) with whom
every pure nature aspires: the grand Buddhist doctrine.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[255:4](pte08.htm#fr_339) ἀπαλλαττομένη for …
νου.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[256:1](pte08.htm#fr_340) Moulds the soul into
a shape oaf its own.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[256:2](pte08.htm#fr_341) εἴδωλον; the portrait
of the intelligence which has flown away from it. after moulding it to
her own likeness.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[256:3](pte08.htm#fr_342) Read τοῦ παθητικοῦ,
governed by ἐπιλάβωνται.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[256:4](pte08.htm#fr_343) Error for "Python,"
whom Apollo destroyed, in order to recover his Oracle.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[257:1](pte08.htm#fr_344) This doctrine
explains a curious gem (Matter, "Hist. Crit. du Gnosticisme," Pl. I. F.,
No. 1), exhibiting the Mithraic Lion copulating with a woman,
*quadrupedum ritu*, in a cartouche placed over an outstretched corpse.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[257:2](pte08.htm#fr_345) A proof that the
whole theory came from the Druids, who, according to Cæsar, devoted
themselves to speculations of this sort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Superstition](pte09)
