[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm04)  [Next](hm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### III

### THE GOD LONO

HENRY thinks that the Hawaiian Lono as "Great Lono dwelling in the
waters" (Lono-nui-noho-i-ka-wai) is the Tahitian god Ro‘o, messenger of
the gods and especially of Tane, who "sets himself in the cloud" and
feeds upon it, is born and matured there, and travels on with it. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) Lono in Hawaii is associated with cloud
signs and the phenomena of storms. According to some old Hawaiians, the
god "with head hidden in the dark clouds above" (po‘o huna i ke ao lewa)
is primarily Lono. In the address of the priest to the returning Lono at
the Makahiki he is associated with the clouds:

Your bodies, O Lono, are in the heavens,  
A long cloud, a short cloud,  
A watchful cloud,  
An overlooking cloud; in the heavens (it is),  
From Uliuli, from Melemele,  
From Polapola, from Ha‘eha‘e,  
From Omao-ke-ulu-lu,  
From the land that gave birth to Lono.  
Behold Lono places the stars  
That sail resplendent through the heavens.  
High resplendent is the great image of Lono;  
The stem of Lono links our dynasties with Kahiki, Has lifted them up,  
Purified them in the ether of Lono. . . . <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36)

\[paragraph continues\] In prayers to Lono the signs of the god are
named as thunder, lightning, earthquake, the dark cloud, the rainbow,
rain and wind, whirlwinds that sweep the earth, rocks washed down
ravines by "the red mountain streams \[stained with red earth\]

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

rushing to the sea," waterspouts, the clustering clouds of heaven,
gushing springs on the mountains.

Lono the rolling thunder,  
The heaven that rumbles,  
The disturbed sea,

says the chant.

The Lono order of priests in the days of Kamehameha set up heiaus to
pray for rain, abundant crops, or escape from sickness and trouble. A
prayer to Lono, recorded in the Fornander collection under Thrum, shows
how, after the coming of Kane and Kanaloa and the establishment of the
ancestral line through Kumuhonua and Lalohonua and its spread over the
island through Wakea and Papa, from whom were born the chiefs, there
came Lono also from the ancestral birth-place, to whom were offered the
redfish, the black coconut, the whitefish, and the growing awa; to Kane
and Kanaloa were made sacred the red fowl, the pig, and awa: "Ku, Kane,
and Kanaloa are supreme in Kahiki." The coming of Lono is heralded by
cloud signs in the heavens and finally:

Lono and Keakea-lani,  
Living together, fructifying the earth,  
Observing the tapu of women,  
Clouds bow down over the sea,  
The earthquake sounds  
Within the earth,  
Tumbling down there  
Below Malama. <span id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37)

Kea in the chant is the goddess Nuakea. Nuakea, descended from Maweke of
Oahu, lived on earth as a prophetess and became the wife of Keolo-ewa,
ruling chief of Molokai and son of Kamauaua. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_38) Her name is coupled with Lono's in the
ceremony for weaning a boy child, in which the symbolic gourd of Lono
plays an important part. The common people remembered the fructifying
powers of Lono in the shape of a symbolic food gourd, which, like the
stone of Kane, was used for

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

family prayers only. Each householder kept in his house of worship,
called the mua, a food gourd (hulilau) called kuaahu (altar) or ipu
(gourd) of Lono, covered with wickerwork and hung by strings to a
notched stick. Inside the gourd were kept food, fish, and awa, and a
little piece of awa was tied to the handle outside. Morning and evening
the pious man took down the gourd, laid it at the door of the house,
and, facing outward, prayed for the chiefs, commoners, and for the good
of his own family, then ate the food from the gourd and sucked the
awa. <span id="fr_39"></span>[5](#fn_39) The gourd prayer quoted by Malo
for the ceremony at the weaning of a male child invokes both Lono and
(Nua) kea, the goddess who provides milk for the nursing mother and is
now petitioned to stop the supply. Both god and goddess are called upon
to eat the food provided, Kea to see to the child's prosperity, Lono to
send propitious cloud omens, and both to guard against the malice of
sorcery. After this ceremony the child is transferred to the men's house
and eats no more with the women. <span id="fr_40"></span>[6](#fn_40) The
chant runs:

My vine branch this; and this the fruit on my vine branch.  
Thick set with fruit are the shooting branches, a plantation of gourds.
. . .  
How many seeds from this gourd, pray, have been planted in  
this land cleared-by-fire? have been planted and flowered out in
Hawaii?  
Planted is this seed. It grows; it leafs; it flowers; lo! it
fruits--this gourd-vine.  
The gourd is placed in position; a shapely gourd it is. Plucked is the
gourd; it is cut open.  
The core within is cut up and emptied out.  
The gourd is this great world; its cover the heavens of Kuakini.  
Thrust it into the netting! Attach to it the rainbow for a handle! . . .

Lono as god of fertility was celebrated in the Makahiki festival held
during the rainy season of the year, covering a

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

period of four months from about October to February. During this time
the regular tapu days were suspended; the people left off their ordinary
occupations and practised athletic games. Meanwhile ritual ceremonies
took place and a procession moved through each district collecting
offerings out of the abundance provided by the god in response to the
prayers and offerings of the preceding year.

Lono-makua (Father Lono) was the name given to the material form which
represented the god at this time. It was a straight wooden post or mast
about ten inches in circumference and ten to fifteen feet long "with
joints carved at intervals," says Malo, and a figure at the upper end
which Alexander identifies as a bird. Near the top was tied a
cross-piece about sixteen feet long to which were hung feather wreaths,
imitations of the skeleton of the kaupu bird, and at each end long
streamers of white tapa cloth which hung down longer than the pole. This
was the so-called "Long-god" of the Makahiki.

Before the Long-god was brought out, fires were lighted on the beach and
the people bathed ceremonially in the sea and put on fresh garments.
This bathing festival was called hi‘u-wai (water-splashing). <span
id="fr_41"></span>[7](#fn_41) For five days thereafter the high priest
was kept blindfolded and "merry-making, boastful demonstrations of
prowess, and boxing were the occupations of the day." Offerings to the
god were collected from each district. The Long-god was borne along the
seacoast, the procession moving clockwise, with the land side to the
right. A Little-god was in the meantime borne along through the uplands
in the opposite direction, followed by the people, who gathered huge
packs of edible fern as they went, and returned that same evening to the
point of departure. It might take twenty days for the Long-god to make
the circuit. At each chief's place the carriers were fed, the chief's
wife hung a fresh tapa-cloth girdle about the god, and the chief clasped
an ivory tooth ornament upon it. "Hail to Lono!" cried the people while
the priest prayed to the god and pointed out the clouds from Tahiti
which were the signs of his coming. Meanwhile

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

the keepers of each god hung bundles of roasted taro tops on the sides
of their houses to break the tapu on labor. Fires were lighted on the
night of Kane, and if they burned brightly and there was no rain the
bandage was removed from the eyes of the high priest and the next day
all could go fishing and eat the fish caught. When the Long-god
returned, the ruling chief sailed out in a boat to meet the god and on
his return he was met by a company of spearmen; one of these threw a
spear which he or his attendant parried, and another touched him with a
spear. A mock battle followed and that night the ruling chief offered a
pig in sacrifice at the heiau. A naked impersonator of Ka-hoali‘i spent
the following night in a temporary booth and the next day all the people
feasted on roast pig. A large-meshed net, the net of Maoloha (Maoleha),
filled with vegetable food was shaken out and if none clung to the net
it was a sign of a prosperous year. A structure of wickerwork was sent
out to sea "to take Lono back to Kahiki" and an unpainted canoe "coursed
back and forth in the sea." Finally, to free the pork tapu it was
necessary for the ruling chief to spend a night in each of four booths
in succession; and to free the fishing tapu on the aku fish, which
alternated for six months with that for the opelu, the Kahoali‘i
impersonator ate an eye of an aku fish and one of a man killed in
sacrifice. "Now began the new year," concludes Malo. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[8](#fn_42)

During the passage of the Long-god from district to district, offerings
for the god were collected in the form of vegetable food, live animals,
dried fish, bark-cloth garments, ornaments, and other valuable property.
If the offering was considered too small, the god remained overnight
until more could be gathered, and the land overseer was likely to be
dispossessed. In Kamehameha's day a kind of game was made of such an
event; the pole was let down, and the whole following were at liberty to
raid the district and take what property they pleased, but if anyone
took anything after the pole was set straight again, he was subject to
the owner's retaliation. <span id="fr_43"></span>[9](#fn_43)

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

A comparison of harvest festivals reported from other South Sea groups
shows that the idea is common, but the form each takes and the god to
whom the occasion is dedicated must be regarded as dependent upon the
special social system and special religious setup locally developed
within the group. In Tahiti, a first-fruit festival is celebrated called
the parara‘a matahiti, beginning in December or early January and
invoking Roma-tane (Ro‘o-ma-tane), god of Paradise. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[10](#fn_44) In the Marquesas, harvest festivals are
celebrated in the autumn at the seasons of ehua and mataiki. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[11](#fn_45) In Fiji, the Lord from Hades comes to the
Tailevu coast in December and pushes the young yam shoots through the
soil. Silence is imposed during this moon; at the end a great shout is
raised and the news is carried from village to village that pleasure and
labor are again free for all. <span id="fr_46"></span>[12](#fn_46) In
Tonga, at the time of presentation of the first fruits, the sports of
wrestling, club-fighting, and boxing are indulged in. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[13](#fn_47) In San Cristoval, at the time of first
fruits, the priest offers sacrifice as the news is sent forward from
village to village and the people go forth, the men bearing weapons and
sham-fighting as they go, the women carrying a fire stick for the
sacrifice. They chant a song and set up symbols at a sacred tree in
order that the creepers may be strong for climbing, the cooking
successful, the adzes sharp, the craftsmen skilful at house building,
the mat making prosperous. They burn sacrifices of puddings made from
the first crops. Then they send on word to the next village, where a
similar ceremony is performed. <span id="fr_48"></span>[14](#fn_48)

The legend given by Henry Lyman of the way in which Lono came to
institute the Makahiki games is as follows:

### LEGEND OF THE MAKAHIKI

Lono sends out two of his brothers as messengers to find him a wife on
earth. They travel from island to island and finally in the Waipio
valley on Hawaii beside the falls of Hi‘ilawe they find the beautiful
Ka-iki-lani dwelling in a breadfruit grove

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

companioned by birds. Lono descends on a rainbow and makes her his wife
and she becomes a goddess under the name of Ka-iki-Tani-ali‘i-o-Puna.
They live at Ke-ala-ke-akua and delight in the sport of surfing. A chief
of earth makes love to her and Lono hears him singing a wooing song. He
is angry and beats her to death, but not before she has assured him of
her innocence and her love for him. Lono then institutes the Makahiki
games in her honor and travels about the island like a madman
challenging every man he meets to a wrestling match. He builds a canoe
such as mortal eyes have never seen since, with a mast of ohia wood and
a sail woven of Ni‘ihau matting and cordage twisted from the coconuts of
Keauhou. The people bring heaps of provisions and pile them up before
him. Forty men bear the canoe to the launching place, but Lono sails
forth alone. His words of promise to the people are that he will return
to them, not by canoe but on an island shaded by trees, covered over by
coconuts, swarming with fowl and swine. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[15](#fn_49)

 

The story opens much like the version given by Ellis of the institution
of the Arioi society by the god Oro, in the person of Oro-tetefa as
Mühlmann thinks, whom he takes to be the earthly Oro and perhaps a
historical person. <span id="fr_50"></span>[16](#fn_50)

### LEGEND OF ORO

(*a*) *Ellis and Mühlmann versions*. Oro desires a wife of the daughters
of Ta-ata, the first man. He sends his two brothers, Tu-fara-pai-nu‘u
and Tu-fara-pai-ra‘i, to seek for such a wife. They visit island after
island and finally at Moua-tahataha-rua (Red-ridged mountain) on
Borabora they find the beautiful Vai-raumati. Oro makes of the rainbow a
pathway to earth. He finds the girl bathing at Ovaiaia at Vai-tape on
Borabora and makes her his wife. Hoa-tabu-i-to-rai is the child born to
him. His younger brothers come in search of him, Oro-tetefa and
Uru-tetefa. Finding the wife and having no suitable gift to present to
her, one turns himself into a pig and a bunch of red feathers and the
other makes the offering. To reward his brothers,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Oro deifies them and makes them leaders of the
Arioi society. <span id="fr_51"></span>[17](#fn_51)

(*b*) *Moerenhout version*. Oro himself descends to earth on the island
of Borabora and with his two sisters, the goddesses Teouri and Oaaoa,
attends all the festivals where women are gathered. At Vaitapé he finds
a girl of rare beauty bathing in the pool Ovaiaia, Vairaumati by name.
The sisters approach her on his behalf and she consents to have an
affair with him provided he is young, handsome, and a chief. Each night
he descends on a rainbow to his bride. His brothers come to seek him
and, finding him with the girl and having with them no presents to
offer, one takes the body of a pig, the other of a bunch of red feathers
and, retaining also their human bodies, they present their gifts. That
night the pig bears seven little ones which are dedicated to the Arioi,
which a man named Mahi now initiates at Oro's request. Oro quits
Vairaumati in a column of flame after bidding her name the child
Oa-tabou-te-ra‘i (Sacred friend of the gods). This child becomes a great
chief and rules well. At his death he ascends to the heavens where his
father and mother dwell. <span id="fr_52"></span>[18](#fn_52)

 

The likeness between this late Hawaiian Lono story and that collected
early in Tahiti as the origin of the Arioi society under the patronage
of Oro does not argue for an original identity of Lono with the Tahitian
god Oro, whose worship at the great temple at Raiatea probably arose
later than the migration period to Hawaii. The theme of the descent of a
god from heaven to a beautiful woman of earth is a stock theme in
Polynesian mythology and recurs repeatedly in Hawaiian chant and story.
Further investigation is needed to prove that it originally belonged to
the Lono myth, tempting as is the hypothesis. Its application to the
figure of this new god--who is said to have been introduced late from
Maui into the orders of priesthood and who was worshiped without human
sacrifice as a god of peace and of fructification of the earth, in
contrast to the severe Ku ritual directed toward

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

the preservation of the ruling chief in time of war or danger from
sorcery and the enforcement of the tapu system upon which a chief's rank
and power depended--would explain some mythical allusions which are now
obscure. But the theme uniformly connected with the Lono myth and his
institution of the Makahiki games is the jealousy motive and this does
not appear in the Tahitian Oro myth, although it bears some resemblance
to an episode in the life of the navigator Hiro. It gets mixed up in
Hawaii with the late history of a grandson of Umi named
Lono-i-ka-makahiki, to which it does not belong. A song of the god Lono
in an epic form unusual in Hawaiian poetry is quoted in translation in
the notes taken on the visit to Honolulu of H.M.S. *Blonde* in 1825. The
allusion in the fourth couplet is to the play of pieces in the game of
checkers (konane) in which Lono and his wife are engaged, but its secret
meaning, divined by the chief, suggests getting rid of the lady's
present lover in favor of the one who sends the message. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[19](#fn_53)

### SONG OF LONO

Rono \[Lono\], Etooah \[akua or god\] of Hawaii, in ancient times,
resided with his wife at Karakakooa \[Kealakekua or Path of the gods\].

The name of the goddess, his love, was Kaikirani-Aree-Opuna
\[Kaikilani-ali‘i-o-Puna\]. They dwelt beneath the steep rock.

A man ascended to the summit, and from the height thus addressed the
spouse of Rono:

"O Kaikiranee-Aree-Opuna, your lover salutes you: keep this, remove
that: one will still remain."

Rono, overhearing this artful speech, killed his wife with a hasty
stroke.

Sorry for this rash deed, he carried to a morai the lifeless body of his
wife, and made great wail over it.

He traveled through Hawaii in a state of frenzy, boxing with every man
he met.

The people astonished said, "Is Rono entirely mad?" He replied, "I am
frantic on her account, I am frantic with my great love."

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Having instituted games to commemorate her death, he embarked in a
triangular boat (piama lau), and sailed to a foreign land.

Ere he departed he prophesied, "I will return in after times, on an
island bearing coconut trees, and swine, and dogs."

 

A second question of relation with the Oro figure in Tahiti arises in
connection with the Arioi society, of which Oro was the patron
god. <span id="fr_54"></span>[20](#fn_54) The dramatic dances whose
performance was an important part of the program of this society
correspond to the schools of dancing in Hawaii organized under expert
leaders and dedicated to gods of the hula, whose elaborate performances
on the island of Hawaii were witnessed by Vancouver in the latter part
of the eighteenth century. That these were connected with the Makahiki
festival and hence must have been on this island under the patronage of
the god Lono is proved by the fact that Kamehameha and his queen were
obliged at this time to withdraw before the dance "as they are
prohibited by law from attending such amusements, except on the festival
of the new year \[that is, the Makahiki festival\]" and that the
performance itself on that day "was contrary to the established rules of
the island" and only permitted out of compliment to the foreign
visitors. <span id="fr_55"></span>[21](#fn_55)

The hula dance in Hawaii is developed in connection with the Pele
deities, and these deities are invoked together with Lono in the prayers
offered to Kane in the heiau. Laka is the male god named as patron of
the hula dance. He is represented in the ohia lehua tree, whose red
blossoms were used for decoration of the altar in the religious
ceremonies of the dance. Emerson identifies Lono with Laka, and there is
some ground for the association in the fact that in the Ku ritual Lono
is invoked with Ku in prayers connected with the setting up of the Ku
image cut from an ohia lehua tree of the forest. Lono-makua, the name
given to the Long-god of the Makahiki festival, is also the name of
Pele's fire keeper as

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

represented in the fire sticks, symbol of fertilization. Laka as a form
of Lono, god of fertility, would give a further objective idealization,
in the fiery red flowers of the lehua which grows native on the
mountainside about the volcano, to the symbolic association between fire
and fertilization. Lightning is also an attribute of storm clouds as
well as the rolling thunder. The word Lono belongs not only to the idea
of sound but also to that of hurling, as a spear. On the Kumuhonua
genealogy Laka is named as the son of Kumu-honua (Earth foundation) and
Lalo-honua (Earth below), thirty-six generations earlier than Wakea and
Papa, the first parents of the Kane people. It is tempting to think that
this Laka, god of the wildwood, son of Ku (Kumuhonua), the ancestral god
of the first Hawaiian immigrants through union with a woman from below,
came to be replaced after the rise of the Kane gods by the great god
Lono dwelling in the heavens.

The relation of the god Lono to the Kamau-nui family of Maui, from whom
Kamapua‘a the hog man is descended and with whom the Kamauaua family of
Molokai seem by their name to be connected, will be discussed in
connection with the legend of the hog kupua. It would seem likely that
Lono was the god worshiped by this family. Lono names are common in the
Kamapua‘a story and appear on the genealogical line of ruling chiefs of
the island of Maui. The close relation felt between a god and his
offspring or his worshiper on earth makes it increasingly difficult to
disentangle the threads of myth from those of accumulated legend and to
identify figures in story or in ritual worship which have branched off
from the main source through the storyteller's instinct for fresh
combinations out of an old stock of tradition, or the worshiper's for
dreaming such a recombination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[31:1](hm05.htm#fr_35) 369-371.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[31:2](hm05.htm#fr_36) Malo, 191-192,
translation by N. B. Emerson.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[32:3](hm05.htm#fr_37) For. Col. 6: 505-506.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[32:4](hm05.htm#fr_38) For. Pol. Race 2: 31-32.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[33:5](hm05.htm#fr_39) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*, August
24, 1867; *HAA* 1910, 56-57; 1911, 156.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[33:6](hm05.htm#fr_40) Malo, 120-127.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[34:7](hm05.htm#fr_41) Malo, 190, 202; Kepelino,
96, 193; Pogue, 19.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[35:8](hm05.htm#fr_42) Malo, 186-210; Pogue,
18-19; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, February 17, 1870; For. Col. 6: 34-44.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[35:9](hm05.htm#fr_43) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*, July
6, 1867.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[36:10](hm05.htm#fr_44) Henry, 177.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[36:11](hm05.htm#fr_45) Handy, *Bul.* 9: 218.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[36:12](hm05.htm#fr_46) Thomson, 114.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[36:13](hm05.htm#fr_47) Collocott, *Bul.* 46:
53.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[36:14](hm05.htm#fr_48) Fox, 80-81.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[37:15](hm05.htm#fr_49) Thrum, *Tales*, 108-116;
see Handy, *Bul.* 34: 112.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[37:16](hm05.htm#fr_50) *Tour*, 75.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[38:17](hm05.htm#fr_51) Ellis, Researches 1:
231-234; Mühlmann, 37-40.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[38:18](hm05.htm#fr_52) Moerenhout 1: 484-489.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[39:19](hm05.htm#fr_53) Byron, 20-21.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[40:20](hm05.htm#fr_54) Mühlmann; Ellis,
*Researches* 1: 229-247; Henry, 230-246; Moerenhout 1: 484-489; Handy,
*Bul.* 79: 61-65; 9: 39-42; N. Emerson, *Songs of the Hula*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[40:21](hm05.htm#fr_55) Vancouver, 5: 63-75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Kane Worship](hm06)
