[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm07)  [Next](hm09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### VI

### MYTHICAL LANDS OF THE GODS

IN myth Kane and Kanaloa are represented as gods living in the bodies of
men in an earthly paradise situated in a floating cloudland or other
sacred and remote spot where they drink awa and are fed from a garden
patch of never-failing growth. Often this land is located upon one of
the twelve sacred islands under the control of Kane believed to lie off
the Hawaiian group "within easy reach of and having frequent intercourse
with it." These islands are frequently mentioned in ancient chants and
stories before the last Paao migration from Tahiti. Today they are
called the "lost islands" or "islands hidden by the gods." At sunrise or
sunset they may still be seen on the distant horizon, sometimes touched
with a reddish light. They may lie under the sea or upon its surface,
approach close to land or be raised and float in the air according to
the will of the gods. They are sacred and must not be pointed at. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109)

The land of Kane-huna-moku (Hidden land of Kane) is one of these
islands. Here live Kane and Kanaloa with other spirits who are Kane's
direct descendants; such as, "Kane of the thunder," "Kane of the water
of life," "Kane who shakes the earth," twenty of whom are listed by
Rice. It is a middle land between heaven and earth where spirits enjoy
all the delights of earth without labor and without death, and "in
extreme old age return to earth, either in the bodies of men or as
spirits," or "become gods and live in the clouds." <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) Kepelino calls it the land where the
first man was made. Here he lived until Kumuhonua transgressed the law
of Kane and was driven from this good land. "There is no land to be
compared to it in excellence." <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111)
Hawaiians today say that this land had its birth from Niu-roa-hiki, a
land belonging to Hawaii but

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

which does not approach these islands, and that those who have kept the
tapus may go there after death.

Kane-huna-moku is still worshiped as an aumakua or guardian spirit, who
will bear away his worshiper in the body at death. Some thirty years ago
a family who worshiped Kane-huna-moku, living at Hana on the island of
Maui, fixed upon a certain day when the island would pass by and take
them away in the flesh. When the day came there were strange shapes in
the clouds and excitement ran high. There are also stories of those who
have caught sight of the hidden island. Mrs. Pukui relates, from the
account given her by her grandmother when she was a child in Ka-u on
Hawaii, that when Kane-huna-moku passes by one can hear cocks crowing,
pigs grunting, see flickering of lights and waving of sugar cane and
persons moving about the island. An old woman is its guardian. She holds
an implement of destruction for anyone who lands without invitation. On
the island is a pool of water called Ka-wai-ola-a-Kane which keeps
people young and heals all manner of diseases. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_112)

In myth Kane-huna-moku appears off Wailua on Kauai and carries off
Kauakahi-ali‘i, who thus disappears forever. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[5](#fn_113) Waha-nui and his voyagers pass it on
their way to "tread on the breasts of Kane and Kanaloa" and see men on
the island "gathering coral for food." <span
id="fr_114"></span>[6](#fn_114) Two fishermen from Pu‘uloa were blown
off to this island and brought back breadfruit to Hawaii. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[7](#fn_115) The old Hawaiian saying is, "Here the
breadfruit grew and was eaten (Ulu no ka ulu, a ai no)." In the chant of
Kumulipo, when birds are born "they cover the land of
Kanehunamoku." <span id="fr_116"></span>[8](#fn_116)

Of two important Hawaiian myths of the hidden island of Kane and
Kanaloa, one is a secular story which tells of a pious worshiper who is
allowed to visit the land and taste its delights before returning to his
ordinary life on earth, the other an esoteric myth purporting to relate
the establishment of the land and the life of its ruler. Of the first,
Rice's version is

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

by far the fullest, but concludes with an *Arabian Nights'* touch which
can hardly belong to a native original.

### LEGEND OF MAKUAKAUMANA

(*a*) *Rice version*. Makua-kau-mana is a pious worshiper of Kane and
Kanaloa who lives in north Oahu at Kaulua-nui with his only son, whose
mother died at his birth, and cultivates daily his garden patch, being
careful always to call upon his gods in so doing. The two gods visit him
in the disguise of strangers, note his piety and his hospitality to
strangers, and give him a digging stick and a carrying pole to relieve
his labor. They come again disguised as old men and teach him how to
pray, offer sacrifices, and keep the tapus for Kane-huli-honua, giver of
land, and Kane-pua‘a, god of rich crops; for Hina-puku-ai, goddess of
vegetable food, and Hina-puku-i‘a, who gives abundance of fish. A third
time they come dressed like chiefs and bring a red loincloth (malo
pukuai) and a colored bedspread (kuina-kapa-papa‘u). To test Makua's
steadfastness they complain that his son has broken the eating tapu of
the gods. Makua would have slain his son, but the gods stay his hand.
They send a great fish and when Makua goes to dive from its back, they
cause the fish to swallow him and bear him away to the hidden land of
Kanehunamoku where he may live with Kane and Kanaloa in the "deathless
land of beautiful people." It is, however, forbidden to weep in this
land and the gods prepare an illusion in which he sees his son forced
into the sea by his wife and a shark devouring him. Makua cannot
restrain his tears. He is accordingly borne back to his old home and
cast upon the beach, where his son rejoices over him but his friends
reproach him for losing the joys of that good land. He lives to a good
old age and is buried on Oahu. <span id="fr_117"></span>[9](#fn_117)

(*b*) *Green version*. A certain pious man calls so constantly upon his
gods that they weary of attending to him upon so trivial occasions. They
carry him to their paradise underseas, where they appear to him in human
bodies and chide him gently for his simplicity before returning him to
his mourning friends. <span id="fr_118"></span>[10](#fn_118)

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

(*c*) *Westervelt version*. At Kaipapau near Hauula, north Oahu, lives
an old kahuna who has Kane and Kanaloa as his gods. They come to visit
him, rest and drink awa with him, and for his piety give him ulua fish,
never known before in those waters. They forbid him to go down to the
beach, whatever noise of shouting he may hear. A great fish comes
inshore near a place called Cape-of-the-whale and the people use its
back to leap from. The kahuna cannot resist joining the sport. The fish
swallows him and carries him away to Tahiti. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[11](#fn_119)

(*d*) *Kohala version*. A whale gets stranded on the coast of Kohala and
men begin cutting it up. Hamumu comes along with taro, gets on the head
of the whale, begins to cut, and is carried away to Kahiki. There he
learns temple building and other arts. He returns inside a coconut shell
whose contents have been cleaned out through the eye and the shell
sealed up with gum. This is the origin of the building of the Mo‘okini
temple of Kohala to which belongs the Hulahula ritual. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[12](#fn_120)

(e*)* *Lanai version*. In time of famine a fisherman builds a hut by the
sea and comes daily with the fish he has caught to lay a morsel before
the god, although this god he does not know by name. One day two men
appear, to whom he gives what he has. The next morning they inform him
that they are Kane and Kanaloa who have heard his prayers. A time of
plenty follows, and a terraced heiau is built on the spot. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[13](#fn_121)

 

The story probably belongs to the popular South Sea myth of Longa-poa
and the tree of plenty discussed under Haumea. Closely corresponding
concepts are contained in the myth of the hidden island, Kane-huna-moku,
the conclusion of which is discussed under that of the Mu and Menehune
people. Thrum does not say where he obtained the story.

### MYTH OF KANEHUNAMOKU

Kane and Kanaloa are lords over the children of the gods who peopled the
earth in early days. Kane-huna-moku (Kane's

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

hidden island) is their son. When he is born, thunder crashes and
lightning flashes. From the union of Mano-i-ku(kiu)-lani (Male head of
the clouds in the blue sky) and of Hihikalani (Female head of the
rolling clouds) arose a mist out of which blood-tinted pyramidal clouds
separated. Kane-huna-moku is therefore descended from these two.

When he becomes a man he desecrates the flower garden of Kaonohi, whose
pool is called Mano-wai, and is banished with Kaonohi to a floating land
where their people are to be dwarfs who build upon rocky soil. He comes
to himself in this land and questions where he is. He sees an abundant
growth of trees and fruits, drinks of a spring, but cries, "Where am I,
living in the shadow of night, below, below?" A mysterious voice bids
him to continue "over the blue ocean, the deep sea, the red sea" because
of his pride, and upon its asking him what he desires, he asks for a
wife who shall be Kaonohiula. The voice answers from the budding ti
plant. Thunder and lightning play. Many white chicks come running toward
him. The voice tells him that his land is sacred and shall not be seen
in the light of day. It shall be seen only at certain tapu periods in
July and August. When it hovers near Haena, Kauai, then he shall be near
"on the floating land of Kaonohiula."

This land is a beautiful floating cloud of Kane and Kanaloa.
Ka-onohi-ula is his companion there. Bowling is to be their favorite
sport. The children of Kane-huna-moku and Ka-onohiula in this land are a
mo‘o (Mo‘o-nanea), a dog (Pili-a-mo‘o), a caterpillar (Halulukoa), a
beautiful girl with supernatural powers (Halalamanu), a girl of fire
(Kuilioloa), Ioio-moa "endowed with sacredness, upholding family
purity," and an ordinary child (Kaonui).

The land of Kane-huna-moku is composed of three strata, the outer called
Kane-huna-moku after himself, the second called Kueihelani where live
his wife and children and the dwarf people, the inner called
Ulu-hai-malama where fragrant flowers grow. Uhawao and Uhalaoa are
overseers of this garden and they lead the migration of the people of
Kane-huna-moku toward vegetable growth. Kauhai is the one who sets in
motion the island, which is driven through space by the wind, but only
at night is it in motion. Kui-o-Hina is the one "who makes possible the
equilibrium

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of Kane-huna-moku in the night of Mohalu (twelfth night of the moon as
it begins to round and first of the Kane nights) as it revolves in
space," as also during the periodical visits of Kane and Kanaloa on the
night of Akua (full moon). <span id="fr_122"></span>[14](#fn_122)

 

Rice gives Ulu-koa (Barren breadfruit) as an alternative name for
Kane-huna-moku. Ulu-koa is named by Kamakau as one of the unknown
aumakua worlds of the dead by the "upright walls of Kane" to which the
dead are conducted by Kane-huna-moku. Some say it belongs to Samoa. In
the story of Anelike it is called Ulu-ka‘a (Uala-ka‘a). It is an island
of women reached by a young swimmer who teaches the use of cooked food
and weds its chiefess, as in the South Sea story of Kai, and which rolls
(ka‘a) up to the shore to bring wife or son to the husband and father.

The most famous of these floating islands is Paliuli, as it has come to
be called regularly, although Pa-liula with reference to the twilight or
mirage (liula), as in Westervelt's story of Ke-ao-melemele, would seem
to be a more natural original. Fale-ula is the "bright house" in the
ninth heaven in the Samoan creation story. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[15](#fn_123) Paliuli is pictured as an earthly
paradise of the gods "supposed to float above the clouds or to rest upon
the earth at the will of its keeper" and also identified, like
Kane-huna-moku and Ulu-koa, with the original paradise where the first
two human beings were made and where they first dwelt, as in the
chant, <span id="fr_124"></span>[16](#fn_124)

O Paliuli, hidden land of Kane,  
Land in Kalanai Hauola  
In Kahiki-ku, in Kapakapaua of Kane,  
Land with springs of water, fat and moist,  
Land greatly enjoyed by the god.

\[paragraph continues\] In ancient story it is to be reached deep under
the seas. In the Aukele legend the seeker after the water of life wings
his way "straight toward the rising sun" and then descends a pit

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

to reach the place where it is guarded. In the Kumulipo the lines run,

Surely it must be dismal, that unknown deep,  
’Tis a sea of coral from the depth of Paliuli.

Today the fertile land of Paliuli is definitely localized in the uplands
of Ola‘a in the forest between Hilo and Puna districts on Hawaii "west
of Pana-ewa and a little east of the house of the Rev. Desha" at a place
known as Thirteen Miles. Nauahi of Hilo is said once to have chanced
upon this enchanted spot, but in an attempt to prove his boast and guide
a friend to the spot he looked for the path again in vain; "The gods had
hidden it." It is here that romance places the ever-fruitful garden of
the gods, described as a land "flat, fertile, and well-filled with many
things desired by man" where "the sugar cane grew until it fell over and
rose again, the bananas fell scattering, the hog grew until the tusks
were long, the chickens until the spurs were long and sharp, and the
dogs until their backs were broadened out."

The three mythical lands already named are to be found, in the myth of
Kalana-i-hauola, as appellations for the earthly paradise situated in
the first land made by the gods, and as the place where the gods placed
the first man and the first woman they had made. Kalana-i-hauola is in
Kahiki-honua-kele (Kahiki the land that moved off), or in Mole-o-lani
(Root of heaven), or in Hawaii-nui-kua-uli-kai-o‘o (Green-backed Hawaii
of spotted seas) in Kahiki-ku. It has a multitude of names all belonging
to Kane and referring to the nature of the land; as, Spirit land, Sacred
land, Dark land, Tapu land, Hidden land, or to the traditional bark
cloth, mountain apple, breadfruit, which the god has placed in that
land; and it contains also the "water of the gods of Kane"
(wai-akua-a-Kane) and the "water of life" (wai-ola) of Kane. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[17](#fn_125) Kane as preserver is invoked as "Kane
of the water of life." <span id="fr_126"></span>[18](#fn_126)

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

This "water of life" is described as a spring "beautifully transparent
and clear. Its banks are splendid. It had three outlets: one for Ku, one
for Kane, and one for Lono; and through these outlets the fish entered
the pond. If the fish of this pond were thrown on the ground or on the
fire, they did not die; and if a man had been killed and was afterwards
sprinkled over with this water, he did soon come to life gain." <span
id="fr_127"></span>[19](#fn_127)

In Maori tradition Taranga-i-hau-ola (Kalana-i-hau-ola) is the place
"where the first members of mankind were created." Tiki, the creative
being, comes from Taranga, the place of creation. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[20](#fn_128) Hau (or Wai)-ora is the name of the
third heaven, the place where the spirit of man comes to him at birth.
To Hauora or Te-wai-ora-a-Tane comes the spirit of the child about to be
born and from this heaven the soul is sent to the newborn child. When
the body of the dead is burned, when all is consumed but the buttocks,
the person conducting the operation pokes them up with a stick, causing
sparks to fly upward, and this is said to take the spirit to the
Wai-ora-nui-a-Tane. <span id="fr_129"></span>[21](#fn_129) Some Maori
say that the moon is concerned with the giving of life to the child.
"The moon is the real husband of all women. According to the knowledge
of our ancestors and elders, the marriage of man and woman is of no
moment; the moon is the true husband." <span
id="fr_130"></span>[22](#fn_130) The moon, when it is wasted away,
bathes in the lake of Aiwa (Aewa) in the living water (wai ora) of Tane
and renews its life. <span id="fr_131"></span>[23](#fn_131) In Tahiti,
Vai-ora-a-Tane, the Milky Way, is above in the highest heaven. It is
called "the water for the gods to lap up into their mouths." <span
id="fr_132"></span>[24](#fn_132) At a royal child's first bath he is
said to be bathed in the Vai-ora-a-Tane. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[25](#fn_133) In Tonga, in Bulotu where the gods live
is the spring Vai-ola near the talking tree "under whose shadow the gods
sit down to drink kava, the tree acting as master of ceremonies and
calling out the name of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

him to whom the bowl shall be carried." It is when the gods sail away
from Water-of-life, people the earth, and lose the way back to Bulotu
that they become mortal. <span id="fr_134"></span>[26](#fn_134) In San
Cristoval life-giving power is attributed to water, which even causes
conception. <span id="fr_135"></span>[27](#fn_135) In the rite of the
child's first bath the water is "charmed" to take away sickness and give
life. <span id="fr_136"></span>[28](#fn_136)

Similar stories of wandering islands are told in the Tuamotus. Uporu and
Havaiki are two ancestral lands said to be visible to those on a ship
halfway between. An ancient homeland called Hoahoamaitu is described as
sinking beneath the waves. In a romance from Ana‘a, Vaireia goes to meet
Hinauru in the wondrously beautiful land of Hekeua which rises from the
sea and to which no man has ever come before. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[29](#fn_137) In the legend of Tane and Kiho-tumu,
when Tane visits the older god, Kihotumu tests him by sending him to
pursue the swiftly flying island Nuku-tere, where he has deposited his
sacred diadem. If Tane succeeds in this quest his power will equal that
of Kihotumu. The chant runs:

Here is the Sailing Island, the swiftly fleeing land,*  
*Poised to depart on the long voyage to the far shore of Hivanui,*  
*Great land of darkness,*  
*Flocking birds, wheeling above the clouds, trail their fleeting shadows
on the land,*  
*The Vanishing-Isle is as a migratory bird flashing in undeviating
flight, now launched upon the wind. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[30](#fn_138)

The legend played a real part in South Sea island life. Marquesans know
the hidden islands of the gods where the priests say food abounds and
which may be seen on the horizon at sunset. They frequently leave home
to go in search of them; more than eight hundred are known to have set
out for these lands and only one canoe was ever heard from. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[31](#fn_139) Fison describes Tongan efforts to reach
the lands hidden by the gods.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

South Sea descriptions of an earthly paradise where the spirits of the
dead are sent to enjoy the delights of earth without the fear of death
differ only in detail from the Hawaiian myth. Rohutu noanoa (fragrant
Rohutu) is the earthly paradise of the Arioi society in Tahiti, situated
in the air above the mountain of Tamehani-unauna in the northwest of
Raiatea, and invisible to human eyes. It is ruled by Romatane. Souls are
directed thither by the god Tu-ta-horoa. There they enjoy all the
delights of life without labor and are immune from death. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[32](#fn_140) In Samoa, Bulotu is the paradise
dominion of Save-a-siuleo, human above and fish below, with a house
whose pillars are made of the bones of dead chiefs. Here the spirit
bathes in the water of life and becomes strong again. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[33](#fn_141) In Aitutaki, to avoid baking in Miru's
oven, a piece of coconut and one of sugar cane are placed over the
stomach of the dead. The soul will then go to Iva, where souls feast at
ease under the guardianship of Tukaitaua. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[34](#fn_142) In Rarotonga warriors may go to a
paradise called "Tiki's reed house." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[35](#fn_143) In Niue there is a "bright land of
Siva" in the sky to which some dead go. <span
id="fr_144"></span>[36](#fn_144) Among the d’Entrecastreux a few
warriors go to the sky, where life is one great feast. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[37](#fn_145) Some Andaman islanders say that souls
go to live in the sky with a mythical being named Tomo, the first
ancestor, where they have plenty of pork and dancing. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[38](#fn_146) On San Cristoval souls, after living in
Rodomana where they join their friends, swim on to the island of Maraba
where is "a paradise of souls, feasting and dancing" and a "river of
living water" called Totomanu where the soul bathes and, if it is that
of a devout man, is absorbed into A‘unua and becomes immortal without
losing personality. <span id="fr_147"></span>[39](#fn_147) The Fiji
elysium is an island to the northwest of Vitilevu called Burotu or
Morotu. Here lives Hikuleo, the tailed god, beside the water of life and
the speaking tree that calls out the order of precedence at the
feast. <span id="fr_148"></span>[40](#fn_148) About 1885 a new

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

religion spread in Fiji called the Tuka religion. Life immortal in
Mburotu kula (red paradise) was the teaching of this religion. It told
of a fountain of life, a house of sleep and pleasant dreams, "interwoven
with poetry and romance." It was said to be allied to a religion
invented in New Zealand by a "mad prophet" called Kooti, and it centered
in the region of the mountain Kauvandra, on Viti-levu, shrine of the
snake god Ndengei. <span id="fr_149"></span>[41](#fn_149)

Such hopes of an earthly paradise where the religious may enjoy the
delights which are the perquisite of the gods whom they worship are
common to many if not all priest-guided religions. In ancient Japan,
Toko-yo-no-kuni is the "eternal land," the retreat of gods and spirits
not to be reached by common man. <span id="fr_150"></span>[42](#fn_150)
The Indian poet Somadeva tells of the heavenly abode of Siva, "untouched
by the calamities of old age, death and sickness, . . . home of
unalloyed happiness. . . . Wonderful are the magic splendours of the
Vidyadharas, since they possess such a garden in which enjoyments
present themselves unlooked for, in which the servants are birds, and
the nymphs of heaven keep up a perpetual concert." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[43](#fn_151)

The Kane-huna-moku aumakua worship in Hawaii is to-day plainly concerned
with the fate of the spirit after death. The symbolism of the hidden
islands in the original Kane worship seems rather to center in the birth
of the child descended from high chiefs and his care before reaching
maturity. The term Ulu-pa‘a to designate "a girl before her first period
of menstruation and a boy before hair develops on his body" would
perhaps explain the persistence of the bread-fruit (ulu) in the
symbolism. The picture of the earthly paradise corresponds with the care
taken of such a young chief who is brought up under tapu. It is
significant that in the romances, as soon as a marriage is arranged for
the young person so cared for, the place is shut up and activities are
carried on elsewhere. The connection between this land and that in which
the first man and the first woman are made argues

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

still further that the underlying idea is of the period of maturing of
the reproductive energy, both in man and in nature, during which the god
Kane repeats the process by which he first produced man. The esoteric
symbolism involving the sexual life, the period of chastity to which
high-born children were subjected under tapu, the selected marriage, are
very well illustrated in the romances as they will appear later. It
looks as if an ancient teaching connected with Kane worship, its phallic
symbolism, and its interest in reproduction, had been adapted to the
biblical account of Adam and Eve in Eden in a kind of harmonizing
between the old teaching and the new Christian mythology.

Other mythical lands mentioned in the Kane-huna-moku myth and occurring
constantly in chant, legend, and romance seem to be without the
particular machinery of the hidden land, although pictured as lands
inhabited by the ancestral gods and closed after the migration of their
descend-ants. Kuai-he-lani (Supporting heaven) is the name of the
cloudland adjoining earth and is the land most commonly named in visits
to the heavens or to lands distant from Hawaii. In the legend of Ka-ulu
it is the place where Kane and Kanaloa drink awa with the spirits
(called also Lewa-nu‘u and Lewa-lani). <span
id="fr_152"></span>[44](#fn_152) It is the chant name for the land from
which Olopana came <span id="fr_153"></span>[45](#fn_153) and which Kila
visits; <span id="fr_154"></span>[46](#fn_154) the land in which Pele
was born, <span id="fr_155"></span>[47](#fn_155) or to which she goes
after leaving Polapola; <span id="fr_156"></span>[48](#fn_156) the land
from which came the grandparents of Kamapua‘a; <span
id="fr_157"></span>[49](#fn_157) the "legendary land" in which
Mo‘o-inanea cares for the gods and where the children of Ku and Hina are
born and the parents live until all migrate to join Kane and Kanaloa on
Oahu, when it is "shut up" by the mo‘o guardians and indeed called "the
hidden land of Kane"; <span id="fr_158"></span>[50](#fn_158) the land in
which Keanini is born and where he lives and from which he departs for
the underworld, <span id="fr_159"></span>[51](#fn_159) and that from
which Ku-waha-ilo

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

comes to woo the grandmother of Keanini in the Pukui version; the land
in Kahiki to which Ka-pua-o-ka-ohelo-ai is banished by her parents and
which is her mother's ancestral home; <span
id="fr_160"></span>[52](#fn_160) the home of Laukia-manu's father in
Kahiki, to which she travels on a banana shoot; <span
id="fr_161"></span>[53](#fn_161) home of the Iku family to which Aukele
belongs; <span id="fr_162"></span>[54](#fn_162) the land visited by
Ku-a-lanakila, keeper of Moku-lehua. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[55](#fn_163) In the myth of Kane-hunamoku it is
described as constituting the second stratum of the "floating land"
created by Kane and Kanaloa for their son, and the home of his wife and
children, inhabited by the Menehune and the Mu-ai-maia or banana
eaters. <span id="fr_164"></span>[56](#fn_164) In the dirge to
Kahahana <span id="fr_165"></span>[57](#fn_165) it is the land of the
deified dead:

Aia i Kuaihelani ka hele-ana-e  
O ka onohi ula o ka lani ko inoa.

"There in Kuaihelani you have gone  
The rainbow of the heaven is your name."

\[paragraph continues\] It lies to the west, for two chiefesses who
travel thence voyage eastward to Hawaii; after a voyage of forty days
the sweet smell of kiele flowers hails their approach to its
shores. <span id="fr_166"></span>[58](#fn_166) It is called in chant,

The divine home land  
The wonderful land of the setting sun  
Going down into the deep blue sea, <span
id="fr_167"></span>[59](#fn_167)

and a migration from Kuaihelani is described as

The ali‘i (chiefs) thronging in crowds from Kuaihelani  
On the shoulders of Moanaliha (Ocean). <span
id="fr_168"></span>[60](#fn_168)

Above Kuaihelani lies Nu‘u-mea(meha)-lani (Sacred raised place of the
heavenly one), the land in the clouds to

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

which Haumea retires in anger with all her retainers when the bird-man
carries off her favorite grandchild, and whence she releases the hot
season to parch the land; <span id="fr_169"></span>[61](#fn_169) the
place to which she returns to dwell with the gods after the tree
blossoms which she has received from Olopana in payment for his
daughter's painless delivery; <span id="fr_170"></span>[62](#fn_170) the
land above, to which Namaka-o-kaha‘i pursues the Pele sisters to spy out
their movements; <span id="fr_171"></span>[63](#fn_171) the land to
which Papa retires after her quarrel with Wakea; <span
id="fr_172"></span>[64](#fn_172) the land above Ke-alohi-lani to which
the guardian of that land "flies up" when he discovers the arrival of
Kahala-o-mapuana and her carrier, in order to bring back with him his
magician brother; <span id="fr_173"></span>[65](#fn_173) the land in
"the highest place in the heavens" in which the mo‘o guardian builds
"out of clouds" in Ke-alohi-lani a house "turning like the ever-moving
clouds" for Ke-ao-melemele, the child of Ku and Hina; <span
id="fr_174"></span>[66](#fn_174) the inner third stratum of the floating
land created as a home for Kane-huna-moku and his family and surrounded
by a garden of fragrant flowers. <span id="fr_175"></span>[67](#fn_175)
In all these cases it is thought of as a land in the heavens situated
above Kuaihelani or its equivalent. Fragrance, brightness, elevation,
and a special sacredness are the attributes of this mythical land.
According to Emerson, Nu‘umealani is the aumakua of clouds. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[68](#fn_176)

Accustomed as they are to dividing up the universe according to rank,
Hawaiians easily think in terms of above and below, drawing an invisible
line in space between Kuaihelani and Nu‘umealani, between Lewa-lani,
that region of air which lies next to the heavens of the gods, and
Lewa-nu‘u which lies below, next to the treetops. Here spirits may live
in the bodies of human beings and enjoy the delights of earth. We say of
men who live on a scale beyond that enjoyed by most that they "live like
gods"; the Polynesians say of their gods that they live like men in the
enjoyment of earthly abundance.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[67:1](hm08.htm#fr_109) Rice, 31.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[67:2](hm08.htm#fr_110) *Ibid*., 116, 125-128.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[67:3](hm08.htm#fr_111) 46.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[68:4](hm08.htm#fr_112) Kepelino, 189; Kamakau,
*Ke Au Okoa*, October 13, 1870.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[68:5](hm08.htm#fr_113) Dickey, *HHS Reports*
25: 28.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[68:6](hm08.htm#fr_114) For. Col. 5: 518.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[68:7](hm08.htm#fr_115) *Ibid*. 678.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[68:8](hm08.htm#fr_116) Liliuokalani, 19.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[69:9](hm08.htm#fr_117) 116-132.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[69:10](hm08.htm#fr_118) 61-63.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[70:11](hm08.htm#fr_119) *Honolulu*, 145-147.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[70:12](hm08.htm#fr_120) *HAA* 1925, 77-78.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[70:13](hm08.htm#fr_121) Bastian, *Heilige
Sage*, 132.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[72:14](hm08.htm#fr_122) *HAA* 1916, 140-147.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[72:15](hm08.htm#fr_123) *JPS* 1: 186, 187.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[72:16](hm08.htm#fr_124) For. Pol. Race 1:
77-78.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[73:17](hm08.htm#fr_125) For. Col. 6: 266-268,
273-275.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[73:18](hm08.htm#fr_126) Malo, 208.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[74:19](hm08.htm#fr_127) For. Pol. Race 1:
77-78.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[74:20](hm08.htm#fr_128) Tregear, *TNZI* 20:
389-390.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[74:21](hm08.htm#fr_129) *JPS* 6: 162.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[74:22](hm08.htm#fr_130) *Ibid*. 8: 101; Izett,
12, 19, 20.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[74:23](hm08.htm#fr_131) White 1: 141-142.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[74:24](hm08.htm#fr_132) Henry, 356.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[74:25](hm08.htm#fr_133) *Ibid*., 184.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[75:26](hm08.htm#fr_134) Fison, 16-17.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[75:27](hm08.htm#fr_135) Fox, 253.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[75:28](hm08.htm#fr_136) *Ibid*., 181.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[75:29](hm08.htm#fr_137) Stimson MS.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[75:30](hm08.htm#fr_138) Stimson, *Bul.* 111:
39-41.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[75:31](hm08.htm#fr_139) Handy, *Bul.* 9:
19-20.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[76:32](hm08.htm#fr_140) Ellis, *Researches* 1:
245-246, 397-398; Henry, 201; Moerenhout 2: 434.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[76:33](hm08.htm#fr_141) Turner, 257-260.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[76:34](hm08.htm#fr_142) Gill, 175.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[76:35](hm08.htm#fr_143) *Ibid*., 170.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[76:36](hm08.htm#fr_144) *JPS* 2: 15.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[76:37](hm08.htm#fr_145) Jenness, 146.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[76:38](hm08.htm#fr_146) Brown, 169.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[76:39](hm08.htm#fr_147) Fox, 235.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[76:40](hm08.htm#fr_148) Thomson, 117.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[77:41](hm08.htm#fr_149) Brewster, 236-260;
Thomson, 140-145.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[77:42](hm08.htm#fr_150) Chamberlain, 87.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[77:43](hm08.htm#fr_151) Penzer edition 8: 152,
162, 170.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[78:44](hm08.htm#fr_152) For. Col. 5: 364.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[78:45](hm08.htm#fr_153) For. Col. 6: 321.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[78:46](hm08.htm#fr_154) *Ibid*. 320.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[78:47](hm08.htm#fr_155) N. Emerson, *Pele*,
ix; Westervelt, *Volcanoes*, 5.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[78:48](hm08.htm#fr_156) Rice, 7.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[78:49](hm08.htm#fr_157) For. Col. 6: 251.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[78:50](hm08.htm#fr_158) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 148.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[78:51](hm08.htm#fr_159) For. Col. 6: 354;
Westervelt, *Gods and Ghosts*, 170, 182, 214

<span id="fn_160"></span>[79:52](hm08.htm#fr_160) For. Col. 4: 540-542.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[79:53](hm08.htm#fr_161) *Ibid*. 596.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[79:54](hm08.htm#fr_162) *Ibid*. 32, 108.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[79:55](hm08.htm#fr_163) *Ibid*. 6: 320.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[79:56](hm08.htm#fr_164) *HAA* 1916, 140-141.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[79:57](hm08.htm#fr_165) For. Col. 6: 296.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[79:58](hm08.htm#fr_166) *Ibid*. 4: 540, 546.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[79:59](hm08.htm#fr_167) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 146.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[79:60](hm08.htm#fr_168) *Ibid*., 208.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[80:61](hm08.htm#fr_169) *HAA* 1926, 12.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[80:62](hm08.htm#fr_170) Westervelt,
*Honolulu*, 49.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[80:63](hm08.htm#fr_171) For. Col. 4: 106.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[80:64](hm08.htm#fr_172) Malo, 24.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[80:65](hm08.htm#fr_173) *RBAE* 33: 554.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[80:66](hm08.htm#fr_174) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 127-129.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[80:67](hm08.htm#fr_175) *HAA* 1916, 143.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[80:68](hm08.htm#fr_176) *HHS Papers* 2: 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Lesser Gods](hm09)
