[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm08)  [Next](hm10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### VII

### LESSER GODS

THE great gods each had his own form of worship, his priests and heiaus,
his own special symbols of ritual distinction. "Ku by fives" is the old
saying. Conquering chiefs took pains to recognize in their worship the
gods of the lands they took over. Nothing is more characteristic of
Hawaiian religion than the constantly increasing multiplicity of gods
and the diversity of forms which their worship took. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_177) Even of the heiau Thrum says there was
"no one alike." <span id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_178) Besides the great
gods there were an infinite number of subordinate gods descended upon
the family line of one or another of the major deities and worshiped by
particular families or those who pursued special occupations. Says Malo,
"Each man worshiped the akua that presided over the occupation or
profession he followed, because it was generally believed that the akua
could prosper any man in his calling." <span
id="fr_179"></span>[3](#fn_179) Says another: "Below the four great gods
were fifty lesser gods \[some say forty, others an indeterminate
number\], each named after some attribute of the god appropriate to the
special department over which he presided; fifty Kane gods, fifty Lono
gods, and also subordinate gods. Over these the great gods presided.
These in turn ruled fifty lesser Kane, Ku, Lono \[and Kanaloa\] deities,
and so on, the whole system comparable to a tree with trunks, branches,
twigs." <span id="fr_180"></span>[4](#fn_180) Some worshiped their gods
in the form of images. "There were many of them, about forty or twice
forty of feather idols," says one describing the ceremonial of a royal
sacrifice. <span id="fr_181"></span>[5](#fn_181) Others worshiped
without any concrete form. Kepelino distinguishes between the way in
which were regarded the gods who were worshiped by the forefathers, "the
gods who made heaven and earth," and the spirits (uhane), a numberless
body, "millions upon

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

millions," whom he divides into the bodiless spirits of the air (uhane
lewa) created by Kane to serve the gods, and the bodiless spirits of the
dead who have become guardian spirits (aumakua) for their descendants on
earth. <span id="fr_182"></span>[6](#fn_182) In order not to omit any
one of the host of lesser deities formed out of the spittle of the god
when he was shaping the earth, it was customary to add to or open an
invocation with the formula, "Invoke we now the 40,000 gods, the 400,000
gods, the 4,000 gods" (E ho‘oulu ana i kini o ke akua, Ka lehu o ke
akua, Ka mano o ke akua), and to add to these ritual numbers expressive
of an innumerable multitude such identifications as, "the ranging of the
gods by rank, the circle of the gods, the coming together by twos, the
coming together by threes, the murmur of the gods," with reference to
"that countless rout of little gods . . . whose shouts (ikuwa) were at
times distinctly to be heard." <span id="fr_183"></span>[7](#fn_183)

All forms of nature were thus thought of as bodily manifestations of
spirit forces. The hierarchies of the gods corresponded to the social
system, which recognized a minute classification of society into ranks
according to blood inheritance. National worship of the great gods,
conducted by ruling chiefs, was an expression of descent from a common
stock. The slave class who bore no such relationship were hence
out-casts; they lived apart and were forbidden intermarriage or even
association, except of a limited sort, with the freeborn. Worship of a
god as special guardian or aumakua of a particular family was also an
expression of kinship and commanded the service of whatever nature
spirits belonged, either by descent or by adoption, to the family of the
god. Even the great gods Ku, Kane, Lono, Kanaloa might be addressed in
prayer as "aumakua." Romances and hero tales are rich with implications
of this relationship in which nature shares in the signs and
acclamations which attend the footsteps of a divine offspring. Says a
Fornander story:

At sight of Kila the crowd began to shout, admiring his beauty. Even the
ants were heard to sing in his praise; the birds

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

sang, the pebbles rumbled, the shells cried, the grass withered, the
smoke hung low, the rainbow appeared, the thunder was heard, the dead
came to life, the hairless dogs were seen and countless spirits of all
kinds. . . . All these things mentioned were the people of Moikeha, who,
upon the arrival of Kila his son, caused themselves to be seen in
testimony of Kila's high rank. <span id="fr_184"></span>[8](#fn_184)

\[paragraph continues\] And again, at the appearance of another divine
chief:

The woods rejoiced, the winds, the earth, the rocks; rainbows appeared,
colored rain-clouds moved, dry thunder pealed, lightnings flashed.

Ka-onohi-o-ka-la (Eyeball of the sun), who lives in the sun, when he
puts off his divine nature and comes to earth in a human body thus
announces his approach:

When the rain falls and floods the land, I am still here. When the ocean
billows swell and the surf throws white sand on the shore, I am still
here; when the wind whips the air and for ten days lies calm, when
thunder peals without rain, then I am at \[the border of the heavens\].
When the thunder peals again, then ceases, I have left the taboo house
at the borders of Kahiki . . . my divine body is laid aside, only the
nature of a taboo chief remains and I am become a human being like
you. <span id="fr_185"></span>[9](#fn_185)

Compare the ascent to heaven of Tawhaki in Maori legend, who divests
himself on the top of a mountain of his earthly garment and clothes
himself with lightning, <span id="fr_186"></span>[10](#fn_186) and the
journey of Paliula's brother to Hawaii in his divine form of lightning
in the romance of Ke-ao-melemele; or the account from Tahiti of Tafa‘i's
apotheosis. <span id="fr_187"></span>[11](#fn_187) In Mangaia:

"Birds, fish, reptiles, insects, and *specially inspired priests*, were
reverenced as incarnations, mouth-pieces, or messengers of the gods. . .
. The earth is not made, but is a thing dragged up from the shades; and
is but the gross outward form of an in-visible essence still in the
underworld. . . . Many of their gods were originally men whose spirits
were supposed to enter into

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

various birds, fish, reptiles, and insects; and into inanimate objects,
such as the triton shell, particular trees, cinet, sandstone, bits of
basalt." <span id="fr_188"></span>[12](#fn_188)

American Indian peoples far removed from the South Seas cherish a
similar attitude toward animate nature. When a warrior of the Omaha
takes a new name it is necessary to announce it to the thunder, rocks,
hills, trees, worms, animals, and birds. Riggs is quoted as saying of
the Dakota Sioux, "They pray to the sun, earth, moon . . . to any
object, artificial as well as natural, for they suppose that every
object, artificial as well as natural, has a spirit which may hurt or
help, and so is a proper object of worship." <span
id="fr_189"></span>[13](#fn_189) Of Siwash, god of earth of a California
tribe, the story says:

So he took some of the people and of them he made high mountains, and of
some smaller mountains. Of some he made rivers and creeks and lakes and
waterfalls, and of others, coyotes, foxes, deer, antelopes, bears,
squirrels, porcupine, and all other animals. Then he made out of the
other people all the different kinds of snakes and reptiles and insects
and birds and fishes. Then he wanted trees and plants and flowers and he
turned some of the people into these things. Of every man or woman that
he seized he made something according to its value. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[14](#fn_190)

Specifically comparable with the Hawaiian concept is the American Indian
assertion that "each class of animals or objects of a like kind
possesses a peculiar guardian divinity which is the mother
archetype." <span id="fr_191"></span>[15](#fn_191) It is this class god
who is worshiped as an aumakua through the particular member of the
species recognized as a child of the god. Nor are natural objects alone
thus regarded. A sledge introduced early from the Northwest Coast was
worshiped, says Ellis, under the name of Opae-kau-ari‘i (Crab for a
chief to rest on). <span id="fr_192"></span>[16](#fn_192) Worshipers of
Nu‘u, guardian of excrement, were forbidden to allow fire to touch their
excrement. <span id="fr_193"></span>[17](#fn_193) Some saw their old
gods

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

in printed words (palapala). They say that "in ancient times the gods
came to Hawaii from overseas with their families and followers and
peopled the group. Up to that time only spirits dwelt here. For a long
time they lived with their people as visible, personal gods, but when
they became disgusted with their evil ways they left them and went
elsewhere. But they left a promise that some day they would return in
diminutive size and speaking strange tongues so that the people would
not recognize them. When the white men came with their strange language
and their art of printing, the tradition was recalled to the minds of
some: 'E ho‘i mai ana makou mai ka aina e mai, e olelo ana i na olelo
malihini, a iloko o na hua makali‘i, a e ho‘ohewahewa no kekahi o oukou
i ko oukou akua' (We shall return from a foreign country speaking a
strange language and in little forms, and some of you will not recognize
your gods). The Hawaiians hence felt that their gods had returned in the
Bible. The size of the type used in its printing caused them to think
that their gods had come in that shape." <span
id="fr_194"></span>[18](#fn_194)

Star lore has yet to be recorded from Hawaii. Stars were named and were
associated with gods and chiefs, but no star incarnations or apotheoses
are related in Hawaiian story. Sun and moon are represented in myth,
either as habitations of gods who descend and live on earth in human
form, or as divine bodies of gods who are worshiped as aumakua by their
descendants. At noon when the body casts no shadow the full strength of
the sun passes into its worshiper. Ka la i ka lolo (the hour of triumph,
or, literally, the sun on the brain) it is called. The very small part
played even in ritual story by so striking a natural object as the sun,
which we know had its worshipers, leads one to suspect a suppression of
myth which was phallic in nature or else was so tied up in sorcery as to
invite secrecy. First perhaps Ku and then Kane were looked upon as the
male procreative gods into whose family on earth the whole Wakea
genealogy is drawn. Maui with, in some groups, his dazzling phallus may
be regarded in the same light.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

The wind god (or goddess) La‘ama‘oma‘o causes the wind and storm to
arise, but in story the action is altogether concerned with the human
means of attaining control over these powers. La‘ama‘oma‘o himself is
worked into the migration legend of Moikeha as a helpful companion who
stops off at Hale-o-Lono in Kaluakoi on Molokai (a cave on the north
coast near Kalaupapa) or at Waipio, as the party coasts along the
islands. <span id="fr_195"></span>[19](#fn_195) Maui is said to have
obtained the "Gourd of constant winds" (Ipu-makani-a-ka-maumau) from the
kahuna Kaleiiolu in Waipio valley to fly his kite by. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[20](#fn_196) The famous tale of Paka‘a, which
belongs to a period rather late in the history of the ruling chiefs of
Hawaii but is probably put together out of much older material, also
shows the wind god well under the influence of his human worshipers
through their knowledge of the chants which enumerate his attributive
names, and their possession of the bones of his keeper (kahu).

### LEGEND OF PAKA‘A

*Rice version*. Paka‘a is the son of the head steward of Keawenui-a-Umi
and of La‘a-ma‘oma‘o, daughter of a chief at Kapa‘a on Kauai \[note the
play on the name\], whom the steward marries incognito and leaves with
child upon return to his master, without revealing to the family his
high rank but bestowing upon the mother the customary tokens of his
paternity. The fatherless boy is despised by the mother's family. He
invents the use of a sail and wins a racing contest. The mother gives
him a finely polished calabash containing the bones of his grandmother
Loa, who in her life had controlled the winds of every district from
Hawaii on the east to Kaula on the west of the group, and teaches him
how to open the calabash and call the name of whatever wind he desires,
and she then sends him to seek his father.

The boy is recognized by the tokens and at his father's death succeeds
to his father's offices of chief councilor, diviner, treasurer, and
navigator for the chief. Jealous enemies conspire against him and the
office of navigator is taken from him. He

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

leaves the ruler in anger and hides himself on a remote coast of Molokai
\[at a spot where the foundation of his house is pointed out today\] and
there takes a wife and engages in agriculture against the coming of his
chief. To his son Kuapaka‘a he teaches all his own lore of the winds and
rains \[some hundreds of which are quoted in the Fornander version\].
When Keawe comes seeking his favorite, he conceals himself, but the boy
calls up a storm and brings the party ashore, where the chief is
entertained in the old style and becomes even more wistful over the loss
of his old friend and servant, until finally the navigators who have
usurped his place are drowned in a storm and the chief himself is
constrained to put to death the others who have plotted against
him. <span id="fr_197"></span>[21](#fn_197)

 

The account makes no claim for Paka‘a as a personified wind god and it
is only through material possession of the ancestral bones and the no
less important oral recitation of the sacred names that godlike power
becomes his. All this is in line with definite priestly training and has
nothing to do with allegory.

Wind imprisonment by noted magicians occurs in other South Sea
areas. <span id="fr_198"></span>[22](#fn_198) Cloud shapes, rainbows,
and other such appearances are, like the stars, definitely connected
with chief families and their comings and goings. There is no attempt to
dramatize the phenomena themselves save in relation to the human action
in which they play a part in the service of the family to which they
belong. Stories in which nature spirits are the actors represent them as
marrying, fighting, giving birth, exactly like human beings, but colored
with the attributes of the forms they represent. Poliahu, goddess of the
snow-covered mountain, who vamps the lovers of the lady of Paliuli,
wears a white mantle and cold is her attribute. It is often to secure
the powers obviously belonging to the object, or to some other object,
generally analogous in name or attribute, whose nature it is believed to
share, that natural objects are worshiped as gods.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

For this reason stones in general have a potential power.
Kane-poha(ku)-ka‘a (Rolling stone Kane) is the subordinate Kane god who
presides over stones. He was never represented by an image but came to
his worshipers in dreams in human form with a head of stone. He was
invoked by warriors to bless their weapons and make them "strong as
rocks," and by farmers to bless their fields. The saying is, "He ola ka
pohaku a he make ka pohaku," that is, "There is life in the stone and
death in the stone," because stones are used as missiles to kill and as
ovens in cooking. Stone working was a chiefly art, and an elaborate
differentiation of stones suitable for working was known to the adept.
Malo lists fifty-eight varieties and believes "there are many other
stones that have failed of mention."

To secure a god to preside over games, large stones were selected and
wrapped in tapa, and ceremonies were performed over such a stone in the
heiau. If the owner of the god was unsuccessful more than once or twice,
the stone god was thrown away. Rocks have sex: the solid rock, columnar
in shape, is male; the porous rock, loaf-shaped or split by a hollow, is
female. Chiefs and priests worshiped these rocks and poured awa over
them as representatives of the god. If a stone of each sex was selected,
a small pebble would be found beside them which increased in size and
was finally taken to the heiau to be made a god. Iliili-hanau-o-Koloa
(Birth pebble of Koloa) is the mother of rocks for Kau district,
referring to the porous pebbles found especially at the beach of Koloa,
Kau district, on Hawaii. Such stones were supposed to grow from a tiny
pebble to a good-sized rock and to reproduce themselves if watered once
a week. Care had to be taken lest they be stepped upon or otherwise
treated with disrespect. Hence they were carefully wrapped in tapa and
laid away on a high rafter of the house. At a child's naming day or on
other special occasions such as marriages, wars, and fishing expeditions
they were taken down and arranged on ti leaves, together with awa root,
upon a mat or table and their wisdom and blessing invoked. Afterwards
some member of the family would have a dream favorable or unfavorable

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

to the project in hand and this was regarded as sent from the god. A
similar idea is found in Tonga, where black volcanic pebbles and white
pebbles of coral, buried together, are believed to increase. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[23](#fn_199)

According to Fornander, a priest consulted by a person who wished to
steal the property of another would divine the result of the undertaking
by a process of "odd or even" with a pile of some fifty pebbles. If the
would-be thief chose a pile containing an odd number of stones and the
pile left over for the owner was even, the expedition would be lucky; if
the re-verse, unlucky. An odd number or an even number for both sides
was "bad." Pebbles used in the game of kimo (jack-stones) and in the
game of konane (a kind of checkers) are regarded with that sanctity
which surrounds the objects sacred to the use of chiefs. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[24](#fn_200)

Special stones are regarded as sacred because of a traditional
connection with old ancestors. They are gods (akua) and it is bad luck
to disturb them. According to Mrs. Pukui, near the old Hawaiian hotel at
Waikiki is a row of rocks called Pae-ki‘i to which it was the custom in
old days to take strangers caught along the coast and suspected of a war
trip or a search for a human victim for their gods, and hold their heads
under water until they were drowned. This method of putting to death was
called kai he‘e kai. An old Hawaiian who was asked to point them out
refused lest "our lives should pay the forfeit."

Petroglyphs abound about the islands, some as pictographs, a good many
representing crude outlines of the human figure. The most interesting
are in the form of cup-markings surrounded by one or two rings. Those
which occur on the boundaries of Apuki land division in Puna are used by
the old Puna people as depositories for the child's

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

navel cord. The subject has been studied by Baker, <span
id="fr_201"></span>[25](#fn_201) Stokes, <span
id="fr_202"></span>[26](#fn_202) Ellis, <span
id="fr_203"></span>[27](#fn_203) and mentioned by Dibble. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[28](#fn_204)

Stones, as shown in the story of Kuula, are often worshiped as fish
gods. Stories of fish gods and fish transformations are common, since,
as a Fornander informant somewhat enigmatically remarks, "some of the
beings who inhabited this world were gods and some were fishes, and this
fact remains to this day." <span id="fr_205"></span>[29](#fn_205) Fish
altars were built to a number of fishing gods besides Ku-ula, the great
god of the fishing stations; to Kane-makua, Kini-lau (Multitude),
Ka-moho-ali‘i (Shark god of the Pele family), Kane-koa, Kane-kokala, and
others. <span id="fr_206"></span>[30](#fn_206)

Birds are notably potential gods or spirit beings. In the machinery of
romance migratory birds or those which nest in high cliffs are
messengers for the high chiefs in the story. Thus plover (kolea),
wandering tattler (ulili), tropic bird (koae), turnstone (akekeke,
akikeehiale) are sent by the divine chiefs of the story, generally in
pairs, to act as scouts or to carry messages from island to island. The
plover, accompanied by the tattler, remains in Hawaii or flies on south
from August until the following May or June, when it migrates to Alaska
for nesting, leaving behind immature birds and cripples. Cartwright
reports watching flights of these birds for two or three days at a time
from the deck of an ocean steamer going south to Samoa. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[31](#fn_207)

According to a Tongan story, Hama followed the tropic bird to sea to
find out where it got its food and discovered the island of Ata. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[32](#fn_208) In New Zealand thousands of birds
assemble on Spirits Bay, where the spirits of the dead take their
departure for the reinga (heavens), and leave New Zealand for northern
Siberia. A Maori song runs,

Whilst the fleet of canoes o‘er the ocean are paddled  
The flocks of gods are above in the heavens flying.

 

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The godwit (kuaka) arrives in October and leaves
in March by way of Norfolk, New Hebrides, Solomon Islands, New Guinea,
Timor, Celebes, Japan, China, to Siberia. "Who can tell of the nests of
the kuaka?" is a Maori proverb. <span id="fr_209"></span>[33](#fn_209)
On Ellis Island frigate birds are used by native pastors to send
messages. Formerly natives sent pearl fishhooks in this way from island
to island. The birds are kept on perches and fed fish. When they see
another similar perch they alight upon it. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[34](#fn_210) In Samoa the plover (Tuli) is the
messenger of Tangaloa-a-lagi. <span id="fr_211"></span>[35](#fn_211) In
a Marquesan legend the tropic bird (Kotae) and the swallow (Kopea) are
sent to secure songs. <span id="fr_212"></span>[36](#fn_212)

In Hawaiian story subordinate deities and even the great gods appear in
bird bodies. The spirits of relatives serve their descendants in this
form. In Haleole's romance the chiefess of Paliuli is served by birds
and rests upon their wings. Her house is thatched with royal yellow
feathers. The notes of birds mark her progress. The story reads: "When
rings the note of the oo bird I am not in that sound, or the alala, I am
not in that sound; when rings the note of the elepaio then am I making
ready to descend; when the note of the apapane sounds, then I am without
the door of my house; if you hear the note of the iiwipolena, then I am
without your ward's house; seek me, you two, and find me without."

The elepaio bird (*Chasiempis sandwichensis*) or flycatcher is a goddess
worshiped by canoe makers. When a canoe was to be built, a priest would
go to the forest, select a tree, and pray to the gods of the woods to
bless it, then wait for an elepaio bird to alight on the trunk. If it
merely ran up and down, the trunk was sound; but where it stopped to
pick at the bark, that spot was sure to be found rotten and the builder
would run a risk in making use of the trunk. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[37](#fn_213)

Mythical birds called Halulu, Kiwa‘a, Iwa appear in the stories as
bearers overseas or to the heavens. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[38](#fn_214) The kiwa‘a is

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

said to be the pilot bird which conducts the navigator in to the canoe
shed at the landing place. Halulu in the Aukelenui legend is the
man-eating bird from Kahiki who can also take human form. The heiau of
Halulu at Kaunolu on Lanai was the most important on that island. Of the
reference in the Kumulipo, "This is the landing-place of the bird
Halulu," Hawaiians say that the name was given to a chief, also called
Hoolulu, brought here from foreign lands, who landed at Kona on Hawaii
and from whose line Beckley's grandmother stems. The feathers that rise
and fall on the heads of images in answer to a kahuna's petition are
said to come from the mythical birds Halulu and Kiwa‘a--"Wonderful
feathers," says Kamakau, "made out of particles of water from the
dazzling orb of the sun." <span id="fr_215"></span>[39](#fn_215) By Malo
they are said, more prosaically, to come from the iwa or man-of-war bird
(*Fregata aquila*) found on the small islands off Kauai, Kaula, and
Nihoa. <span id="fr_216"></span>[40](#fn_216) Individuals of this
species are worshiped under particular names. The bird Ka-iwa-kalameha
is a great bird ancestress with dwelling places in all the islands and
in Kahiki. <span id="fr_217"></span>[41](#fn_217)
Kiha-haka-iwa-i-na-pali is a great bird sent by Lonopele to vomit over
the canoe of Paao and sink it in the waves. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[42](#fn_218)

A fourth seabird known in myth as the Aaia-nukea-nui-a-Kane (Great white
albatross of Kane), also written with the termination a-ku-lawaia
(standing fishing), is the white albatross (*Diomedea immutabilis*)
which used to be seen commonly along the island coasts and was called
"Kane's bird." <span id="fr_219"></span>[43](#fn_219) So in Tahiti the
common albatross is spoken of as the "shadow" of Ta‘aroa. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[44](#fn_220)

Species of birds which are habitants of the islands hence appear in myth
as kindred and servants of gods who are worshiped as family guardians,
or the god himself may manifest himself on earth in bird form and be
worshiped under the name of his particular manifestation.

Vegetable growth is regarded by Hawaiians with more religious

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

awe than animal life because it is not so intimately associated with
man. All life other than human springs from the gods since it is out of
control of man. It is therefore alive with spirit force. Plants are
thought of as transformation bodies of gods and as such take their place
in myth.

In folk belief the wind god Makani-keoe (Makani-kau), one of the many
gods of love named in Hawaiian lore, has control over plants and can
himself take the form of a tree or cause plants to grow. A branch from
his transformation form will serve as a love charm, but only a brave
person can secure such an amulet because of the voices and visions which
will pursue him. The sisters of Makani-keoe are Lau-ka-ieie, who owns
the cowry shell Leho-ula, and Lau-kiele-ula, who becomes wife of
Moanaliha-i-ka-waokele, one of the remote ancestors of the Kane line and
father of the Maile sisters in the romance of Laieikawai. One turns into
the sacred pandanus vine called ieie, the other into the sacred
sweet-scented kiele blossom of the uplands. A folktale from Kau district
on Hawaii tells how Makani-kau takes pity on a young husband turned out
of the house by his wife's family because of his indolence, and
reconciles the couple by conjuring up food for his protégé when all the
land suffers from famine. Today in Kau when there is a family quarrel
folk say, "Makani-keoe is gone from home," or "has come back" when the
quarrel is patched up. <span id="fr_221"></span>[45](#fn_221)

Hawaiians are extravagantly fond of perfume, and fragrant plants are
invariably associated with deity. Color is also indicative of divine
rank, yellow and red being the colors sacred to chiefs. Yellow seems to
be primarily the Kane color. The use of flower wreaths and decorations
of woodland plants for a dance hall carries with it a sense of divinity
which strengthens the emotional satisfaction with which such things are
regarded. Certain red flowers are sacred to the gods and those whom they
love. Like the red iiwi bird, so is the red iiwi blossom of the vine
sacred. No one not beloved of the gods will dare to pick and wear it
lest he be haunted by a headless woman carrying her head under one arm.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Awa drink from the shrub of the pepper family (*Piper methysticum*) is
invariably used in sacrifice to Kane gods. Different varieties are
distinguished by their color and markings and by the size of the root
sections. Babies were given the juice of the nene variety as a soothing
syrup. "This is a fretful (onene) child and must be given the awa nene,"
is the saying. Only the most common variety could be used by the
commoner; the rarer kinds were reserved for the chiefs. For the gods and
on ceremonial occasions the moi (royal), hiwa (black), and papa
(recumbent) were used, the papa, from which the moi was often an
offshoot, being specially offered to female deities. The most highly
prized was that which sprouted upon trees so that the roots to be
gathered grew exposed on the tree. It was called awa "resting on trees"
(kau laau) or "planted by the birds" (a ka manu).

Awa offered to a god was either poured or sprinkled over the image, or,
if there was no image, the kahuna sprinkled it in the air and drank the
remainder in the cup. The cups used were always made of polished coconut
shells cut lengthwise in the shape called kanoa. The cups were never
placed on the floor itself but on a piece of bark cloth spread before
the priest or server, and never where they might be stepped over or
otherwise desecrated. As soon as the ceremony was over, they were
washed, placed in a net (koko), and hung from the rafters. The strainer
was also carefully washed and hung in a tree to dry. The order of
serving also was important. At the entertainment of a guest, it was
considered an insult to the host if the guest refused the cup or passed
the cup handed to him, as guest of honor, to an inferior chief. Before a
war especially all chiefs drank together a cup of awa, which passed from
hand to hand in order of rank. In passing the cup to a chief it was
customary to utter some appropriate re-mark or sing a chant, but no
particular form was fixed by tradition.

The preparation of the awa did not differ from the methods described for
other groups. The young boys and girls who chewed the chiefs' awa were
especially selected from the chief class for their perfect teeth. The
peculiar sense of sacredness which associated the awa with the body of a
god be-

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

cause of its narcotic effect was still further strengthened by this
ceremonial restraint and the exclusiveness put upon its use. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[46](#fn_222)

Coconut groves are among "those things on earth which are worshiped."
The grove at Kalapana was in old days tapu to all but the descendants of
a certain family of chiefs of whom the following story is told:

### LEGEND OF THE RECUMBENT COCONUTS OF KALAPANA

Long ago two young chiefs of Puna named Hinawale and Owalauahi(-wahie)
who were cousins and intimates stole away incognito to tour the island.
Returning after several months they joined a group of men who were
testing their strength by attempting to bend to earth two full-grown
coconut trees. Unrecognized they waited until all had failed, then they
too made the attempt. Hinawale grasped one tree, Owalauahi the other,
and with a strong downward pull laid them low. The people shouted
applause. Upon discovering that the men were their own chiefs their joy
knew no bounds.

 

The mother of Mrs. Pukui, who tells the tale, is descended from one of
these two chiefs. Visitors to the coconut grove to-day are shown
Naniu-moe-o-Kalapana (The recumbent coconut trees of Kalapana) still
flourishing as of old, although it is said that the two original trees
have been since replaced. The story is told of Queen Emma that when she
found the trees dead and asked her men to bend two more to take their
place none could do so until the queen herself held a leaf of each, when
they were easily bent. A San Cristoval account of the passage to the
land of the dead tells how, at Hauihaiha, the souls are supposed to bend
down the fronds of a coconut called Niu-tarau (Coconut of
crossing). <span id="fr_223"></span>[47](#fn_223) Although not so
stated, the task is probably a test of chief rank. The play of words in
the Hawaiian is upon the word moe, which denotes the rank of a high tapu
chief and also refers to the position of the growing trunks as they lie
as if sleeping (moe) along the ground.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

A good deal of lore centers about the origin of food plants or other
plants useful in the economic life. Stories are told to explain certain
tapus upon them or customs connected with them which are observed in
particular families. A common folktale is that of the relief of famine
out of the body of a god who is living on earth in human form and takes
pity upon his starving family. Sometimes he provides an oven of food out
of his own body, himself emerging unhurt. Sometimes a plant springs from
his body at death, which is his spirit body.

### MYTH OF THE OVEN OF FOOD FROM THE BODY OF A GOD

(*a*) *Emerson version* (told to J. S. Emerson in 1883 at Kaupulehu,
Kona, Hawaii). A stranger comes to the land and takes a wife. The people
have no food. He builds and heats an imu (oven), lies down in it and is
covered with earth. When it is uncovered after a period suitable for
cooking, the oven yields all sorts of cooked food, while the man
himself, perfectly untouched, is seen approaching from the sea. A stream
of fresh water called Wai-kawili (Mingling waters) is found welling up
at the sea where he has emerged after digging his way half a mile from
the oven into which he entered. <span id="fr_224"></span>[48](#fn_224)

(*b*) *Pukui version* (told to her when she was a child by an old lady
of Hilo named Kanui Kaikaina). Hina-i-ke-ahi (Hina in the fire) is a
kupua woman who lives at Hilo, Hawaii, with her sister Hina-i-ka-wai
(Hina in the water). During a famine Hina-in-the-fire builds and heats
an imu. After naming the various foods to be cooked therein and bidding
the family uncover it when they see a cloud shaped like a woman resting
over it, she lies down in it and is covered with earth. When they
uncover the oven, the food named is found within and Hina herself
approaches from the sea wreathed with brown seaweed and goes out
swimming with Woman-of-the-coral, "one of the wives of the god Ku." Her
sister is jealous and attempts to duplicate the feat, but nothing is
found in the oven but her ashes because she has not the same kupua gift
as her sister. <span id="fr_225"></span>[49](#fn_225)

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

(*c*) *Westervelt version*. Hina, mother of Maui the demigod, has four
kupua daughters, Hina-ke-ahi, Hina-ke-kai, Hina-mahuia, Hina-kuluua
(Kuliva). The first has power over fire, the second over the sea, the
last over the rain (ua); Hina-mahuia is the fire goddess of southern
Polynesia, Mafuie. After Hina has prepared the oven and is covered over,
she journeys under-ground and emerges first at a still pool of fresh
water called Moe-wa‘a, then from a great spring of water which bubbles
up at the very shore \[such as old Hawaiians used for a fresh-water bath
after swimming (auau-wai)\]. She commands them to open the oven and
enough food is found within to last until the famine is ended. Her
sister Kulu-ua repeats the experiment but lacks the power. Her body is
burnt to ashes but her spirit escapes and appears as a cloud over the
peaks in sign of rain. In some versions Maui is represented as seeking
his sister's destruction. <span id="fr_226"></span>[50](#fn_226)

 

Stories of the introduction of the breadfruit tree take either a
rational or a mythical turn. The rational legend is that Kaha‘i, son of
Ho‘okamali‘i and grandson of Moikeha, brought the breadfruit from Upolo
to Hawaii and planted it at Pu‘uloa, Kohala. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[51](#fn_227) In the Fornander story of
Namaka-o-ka-paoo, Hawaiian-born son of Ka-ulu-o-kaha‘i (Breadfruit of
Kaha‘i), a great chief in Kahiki-papa-ia-lewa (Faraway land in space), a
gourd containing the tokens his father has left for him the son deposits
at the foot of the "breadfruit impersonation of his father" at Kualakai,
which tree "is standing to this day." <span
id="fr_228"></span>[52](#fn_228) An early schoolboy composition by W. S.
Lokai says that two men who were out fishing were blown to the land of
Kane-huna-moku, inhabited only by gods, and brought thence the
breadfruit, which they planted at Pu‘uloa. Haumea came there to inspect
it and spread it to other lands. <span id="fr_229"></span>[53](#fn_229)

The mythical tale is as follows:

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### ORIGIN MYTH OF THE BREADFRUIT

(*a*) *Lokai versio*n. The breadfruit tree grew up from the testes of a
man who died for his family at Kaawaloa in Kona, Hawaii. The forty
thousand and the four thousand gods first tried the fruit green, then
cooked, and found it palatable, but when they heard where it came from
they began to vomit and so spread the tree all the way between Kona and
their home at Waipio. <span id="fr_230"></span>[54](#fn_230)

(*b*) *Pukui version*. The god Ku loves a woman of earth and the two
live happily until there comes a famine. Bidding farewell to his wife,
Ku stands on his head and disappears into the ground. None but his wife
and child are able to pick the fruit. <span
id="fr_231"></span>[55](#fn_231)

(*c*) *Lyman version*. A man named Ulu lives at Waiakea, Hawaii, and has
a young son named Moku-ola, from whom the island of that name in Hilo
bay is afterwards named. Ulu dies of famine, but, following the
directions of the priests of the heiau at Puueo, the family bury his
body near a spring of running water and remain all night within the
house. During the night they hear the sounds of dropping leaves and
flowers, then of heavy fruit, and in the morning find a breadfruit tree
at their door, with the fruit of which the famine is relieved. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[56](#fn_232)

 

In one story the coconut brought by Kane, "a man of very long bones," is
said to have been formerly low, but when a servant was sent by his
master to pick the coconuts, the tree lengthened as he climbed. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[57](#fn_233) The idea is the same as that of the
tapu upon picking breadfruit with which the Pukui version concludes.

Similar stories tell of the growth of a plant out of a human body after
burial. The most famous of these is that told elsewhere of the lauloa
taro that grew from the embryo child of Papa and Wakea. Others explain
some family tapu upon a

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

particular plant. In Ka-u a legend is related to explain why the family
of a certain chiefess are careful to do no injury to a gourd of a
particular species used for household purposes and to bury it carefully
if broken. The story shows how a natural happening may be interpreted as
a myth.

### LEGEND OF THE BITTER GOURD

A chiefess of a certain family dies and is buried in a cave. From her
navel grows a gourd vine. It finds its way to the garden of a chief of
the seventh district, and there produces a fine gourd. The chief thumps
it to test its ripeness and the spirit of the gourd complains to a
kahuna in a dream. Kahuna and chief trace the vine to its source and the
gourd is thereafter treated respectfully. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[58](#fn_234)

 

Myths tell how a god who has lived on earth takes at death the form of
some plant. From the body of Kaohelo, sister of Pele, grew the ohelo
bushes so abundant on volcanic mountainsides; "the flesh became the
creeping vine and the bones became the bush plant." <span
id="fr_235"></span>[59](#fn_235) The ieie vine is said to be the form in
which the goddess Laukaieie was worshiped "when the time came for her to
lay aside her human body." Kamakau relates of Hina-ai-ka-malama that
"she found a sweet potato from the moon of a kind called hua-lani
(fruit-of-heaven)" and he thinks it may be for this reason that she was
said to be "nourished on the moon" (-ai-ka-malama). Her husband may thus
have had a legitimate reason for cutting off her foot when she escaped
to the moon, according to the popular story, in order to preserve a
planting of the precious new food which may be conceived as the form her
spirit took in its moment of deification. <span
id="fr_236"></span>[60](#fn_236) Of Maikoha, banished son of Konikonia,
the myth says that he wandered away and died at Kaupo on Maui and out of
his body grew a wauke plant (*Broussonetia papyrifera*) of a hairy kind
like the hairy Maikoha and useful for beating out bark cloth. <span
id="fr_237"></span>[61](#fn_237)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

### MYTH OF MAIKOHA

(*a*) *Fornander versio*n. The youngest son of Konikonia and
Hina-ai-ka-malama is a hairy man from whom sprang the wauke plant. The
five girls in the family are Ka-ihu-koa, (Ka-) Ihu-anu, (Ka-) Ihu-koko,
Ka-ihu-kuuna, Ka-ihu-o-palaai. The five boys are Kane-au-kai,
Kane-huli-koa, Kane-milo-hai, Kaneapua, Maikoha. Maikoha breaks up the
sacred things. The father tests the children by tying a beam to the back
of the neck and to the chin to see which one is brave enough not to cry.
Maikoha is judged guilty and banished. He travels to the place in Kaupo
called Maikoha and becomes a wauke plant, which is hairy to this day.
His sisters come to seek him and find his navel at the root of the
plant. They journey on to Oahu where they marry chiefs and change into
fishponds stocked with special kinds of fish. Ka-ihu-o-palaai becomes
the wife of Ka-papa-o-puhi at Hono-uliuli in Ewa and stocks the
fishponds of that region with fat mullet. The oldest, Ka-ihu-koa,
becomes the wife of the handsome chief of Waianae and changes into the
fishing ground just out from Kaena point where the ulua, amber fish, and
dolphin abound. Ihu-koko becomes the wife of Ka-wai-loa at Waialua where
the aholehole fish abound which followed her home. Ka-ihu-kuuna becomes
the wife of Lani-loa at Laie and changes into a famous fishing ground
for mullet. Kane-au-kai follows in search of his sisters in the form of
a lump of pumice or a log of wood and is worshiped as a fish god by two
old men at Kealia, Waialua. <span id="fr_238"></span>[62](#fn_238)

(*b*) *Westervelt version*. Maikoha's body is planted by his daughters
at his own direction at Pu-iwa beside the Nuuanu stream. He is chief god
of tapa makers; his daughter Lau-huiki taught the art of pounding the
wauke bark, his daughter La‘a-hana that of marking the pattern on the
beater. <span id="fr_239"></span>[63](#fn_239)

 

Similar plant-origin stories occur in southern groups. In Tahiti,
Rua-ta‘ata in Raiatea, whose temple is Toa-puhi (Eel rock), and his wife
Rumau-arii, whose temple is Ahunoa, called also Ta-pari, have four
children. In time of famine

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the people eat red clay for food. Rua-ta‘ata pities his hungry family
and, taking leave of them, he goes outside the cave where they live and
becomes a breadfruit tree. <span id="fr_240"></span>[64](#fn_240) Three
children in the form of coconuts become trees which, in one version,
save the people from famine. <span id="fr_241"></span>[65](#fn_241) On
Tonga the story is told of Fevanga and his wife Fefafa on the island of
Eneiki who kill their leprous daughter to serve to the chief Laau with
his kava. Parts of her body are buried and from the head grows a kava
plant, from the intestines the sugar cane which is the accompaniment of
a kava-drinking ceremony. <span id="fr_242"></span>[66](#fn_242) In
Rarotonga, Tangaroa goes to Avaiki-te-varenga and takes a wife. He does
not like the rice food which his wife prepares. Her parent Vai-takere
dies and sends them breadfruit, which they prepare as tatapaka, mashed
and mixed with coconut. <span id="fr_243"></span>[67](#fn_243) In
another Rarotonga story a father dies for his starving son and from his
body develops the first pig. <span id="fr_244"></span>[68](#fn_244) In a
Maori story Tu-taka-hinahina tells his son to watch his grave after his
death. It is a time of darkness. Two maggots develop from his body. The
son cooks them and the sun rises. <span id="fr_245"></span>[69](#fn_245)

Supernatural birth stories are not uncommon. In Samoa the story is told
of Sina who forgets to chew talo for the decoy pigeon. She flees and
bears a child in the form of the pellet she forgot to chew. This,
buried, produces the pula-au taro. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[70](#fn_246) In Tonga, Faimalie swallows the yam of
Pulotu and later gives birth to it on earth. <span
id="fr_247"></span>[71](#fn_247) Among the Maori the story goes that
Rongo-Maui, younger brother of the star Whanui (alpha Lyrae of Vega),
introduced the kumara to this world. His own body was the basket. He
cohabited with Pani-Tinaku. She goes to the waters of Mona-riki to give
birth and learns a chant. Her offspring are the varieties of the sweet
potato. <span id="fr_248"></span>[72](#fn_248) Another story says that
Pani gets kumara by stepping into the water and rubbing her stomach
until her baskets are filled with sweet potatoes. <span
id="fr_249"></span>[73](#fn_249) The Dusun of North

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Borneo say that the first man and the first
woman were made out of earth. Their first child they cut up and out of
its parts grew the different food plants. <span
id="fr_250"></span>[74](#fn_250) In Tonga the Papaia is thought of as
the excretion of a goddess on Eua. <span
id="fr_251"></span>[75](#fn_251) See also the Hawaiian name for the
coarse grass called "Excretion of (Kama) pua‘a" (Kukaepua‘a). The
Japanese story is that the moon god Tsukuyomi is sent by his sister to
earth and finds the goddess Ukemotshi. When he is hungry and asks for
food, out of her mouth come all kinds of fish, animals, vegetables. He
will not eat but cuts her in two in wrath and goes back to heaven. His
sister laments this result and sends a messenger to see if the goddess
is really dead. Out of her body come animals and food plants which the
messenger takes back to heaven. These things become the food for the
chiefs of the human race who until this time have eaten raw food. The
sun goddess introduces agriculture into heaven as men on earth have
practised it thereafter. <span id="fr_252"></span>[76](#fn_252) Somewhat
similar is the Maori story of Rehua, who feeds his guests with birds
that live upon the insects in his hair. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[77](#fn_253) Among the Tami of New Guinea the wives
of a fisherman who always has good luck in fishing are shocked to
discover that he dips his own head into the water and fishes crowd about
it. They cry him shame and he sits with his head on his knees and
disappears into the earth and from the spot where he sat grows the coco
palm. <span id="fr_254"></span>[78](#fn_254)

The myth of the coconut derived from an eel lover is found commonly
throughout the South Seas but has not appeared in Hawaii. <span
id="fr_255"></span>[79](#fn_255)

*Tahiti*. (*a*) Hina, whose gods are sun and moon, is espoused to a
chief who has an eel body. She flees to the god Maui for help. He baits
his fishhook, the eel swallows it, Maui cuts up the body and gives the
head to Hina to take home and plant \[in Gill's version the head is a
gift from a god\]. Hina forgets and puts the head down while she bathes
at Pani and the head

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

sprouts into a coconut. Her daughter carries the coconut to the Tuamotu
group at Taka-horo in the atoll of Ana, whence the plant spreads. <span
id="fr_256"></span>[80](#fn_256)

(*b*) Taitua bathes in the stream Teohu in the depths of Vaiari. She
plays there with an eel. It pursues her and she flees. A trap is built
for it and the eel caught. At night it tells her in a dream to bury the
head and from this springs the coconut tree. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[81](#fn_257)

*Samoa*. Sina has a pet eel for which, as it grows larger, she seeks a
larger pool. She climbs a tree on the bank and shakes down the fruit
into the water. As she gathers it, the eel strikes at and deflowers her.
She flees and it follows. When it is killed, its buried head becomes a
coco palm. <span id="fr_258"></span>[82](#fn_258)

*Tonga*. Hina weeps when her eel is taken from her bathing pool, cut in
pieces and eaten. From its buried head grows the coconut. <span
id="fr_259"></span>[83](#fn_259)

*Mangaia*. Ina-moe-aitu (-with a god lover) is wooed by the eel, Tuna.
It sends a flood and floats to her home, bids her cut off its head and
plant it, whence comes the coconut. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[84](#fn_260)

*Tuamotus*. Tuna lives in the lake Vaihiria at Tahiti. Hina is his wife.
Maui abducts her, Tuna follows, is destroyed by Maui, and from his head
springs the coco palm. <span id="fr_261"></span>[85](#fn_261) The same
story is told of Maui and Tekina from whose head grows the coco
palm. <span id="fr_262"></span>[86](#fn_262)

\[In Fakahina, on the other hand, Tehu, son of Tetahoa and Teahio, six
generations ago brought the first coconut to that island from Tahiti or
one of the western islands in the boat named Kayau. <span
id="fr_263"></span>[87](#fn_263)\]

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

*Pukapuka*. The wife longs for a certain strange fish and the husband
brings many kinds, none of which is the right one. Finally, by uttering
a charm, he hooks Tuna the eel, who tells him to plant its head and give
only the body to the wife. From the head grows the coconut tree, which
bears two coconuts on the top branch, three on the next branch, four on
the next, and so on. The husband tosses the nuts in the air to each of
the islands in the eastern and western Pacific but forgets Pukapuka in
the middle. So only a hard dry nut is left and it is hard to grow
coconuts on Pukapuka <span id="fr_264"></span>[88](#fn_264)

*Kai of New Guinea*. An eel husband seeks his wife. Her new husband cuts
him in bits and out of his body spring yams. Before this, agriculture
was unknown in the land. <span id="fr_265"></span>[89](#fn_265)

*San Cristoval*. A man marries a snake wife. Her son-in-law finds a
snake coiled about his son and chops up her body. The coconut grows from
her head. <span id="fr_266"></span>[90](#fn_266)

 

Extremely heterogeneous origin stories are told of other plants
important in Hawaiian culture. Some of these center upon the discovery
and naming of varieties. Some are fabulous, others rational. The
fabulous either are connected with some mythical figure or are riddling
tales whose significance is now lost. <span
id="fr_267"></span>[91](#fn_267)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[81:1](hm09.htm#fr_177) Malo, 112.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[81:2](hm09.htm#fr_178) *HAA* 1907, 50.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[81:3](hm09.htm#fr_179) 112-115; For. Pol. Race
2: 60.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[81:4](hm09.htm#fr_180) Given by Miss Laura
Green.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[81:5](hm09.htm#fr_181) For. Col. 6: 10.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[82:6](hm09.htm#fr_182) 10-19.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[82:7](hm09.htm#fr_183) N. Emerson, "Hula,"
21-24; Malo, 114.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[83:8](hm09.htm#fr_184) For. Col. 4: 168.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[83:9](hm09.htm#fr_185) *RBAE* 33: 554.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[83:10](hm09.htm#fr_186) White 1: 55.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[83:11](hm09.htm#fr_187) Henry, 558-559.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[84:12](hm09.htm#fr_188) Gill, 20, 21, 32; cf.
16.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[84:13](hm09.htm#fr_189) *RBAE* 3: 324-325; 11:
434.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[84:14](hm09.htm#fr_190) *JAFL* 1 5: 38.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[84:15](hm09.htm#fr_191) *RBAE* 11: 434.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[84:16](hm09.htm#fr_192) *Tour*, 99.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[84:17](hm09.htm#fr_193) Emerson, *HHS Papers*
2: 15.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[85:18](hm09.htm#fr_194) From Mrs. Pukui to
Miss Green.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[86:19](hm09.htm#fr_195) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
January 5, 1867; Malo, 114; Kalakaua, 255-256; For. Pol. Race 2: 53.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[86:20](hm09.htm#fr_196) Westervelt, Maui,
114-118; *Gods and Ghosts*, 59-60.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[87:21](hm09.htm#fr_197) Rice, 69-89; Kamakau,
*Ke Au Okoa*, December 15, 1869-January 5, 1870; For. Col. 5: 72-135;
Thrum, *More Tales*, 53-67.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[87:22](hm09.htm#fr_198) Dixon, 55, and notes
63-65.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[89:23](hm09.htm#fr_199) Bid. 61: 301; *JPS*
30: 230.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[89:24](hm09.htm#fr_200) Malo, 40; Brigham,
*Mem.* 1, No. 4; Ellis, *Tour*, 158; Kalakaua, 40; *HHS Reports* 25: 30;
For. Col. 6: 72; Green, 123; *AA* 26: 243-244; Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 197; and local information collected by Miss Green.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[90:25](hm09.htm#fr_201) See *HAA*, index.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[90:26](hm09.htm#fr_202) BPBM Oc. Papers 4, No.
4.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[90:27](hm09.htm#fr_203) *Tour*, appendix.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[90:28](hm09.htm#fr_204) 88.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[90:29](hm09.htm#fr_205) Col. 5: 266-272,
510-514; Emerson, *HHS Papers* 2: 12-13; Thrum, *Tales*, 270-274.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[90:30](hm09.htm#fr_206) *HAA* 1910, 56.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[90:31](hm09.htm#fr_207) *JPS* 38: 110-111.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[90:32](hm09.htm#fr_208) Collocott, *Bul.* 46:
52-53.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[91:33](hm09.htm#fr_209) *JPS* 16: 172-173; 21:
118-119.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[91:34](hm09.htm#fr_210) Turner, 282.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[91:35](hm09.htm#fr_211) Krämer 1: 392.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[91:36](hm09.htm#fr_212) Handy, *Bul.* 67: 54.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[91:37](hm09.htm#fr_213) Westervelt, Honolulu,
100; For. Col. 4: 458, 462.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[91:38](hm09.htm#fr_214) Emory, *Bul.* 12:
12-13; Westervelt, *Gods and Ghosts*, 66-73; For. Col. 4: 42, 64-67;
*RBAE* 33: 472.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[92:39](hm09.htm#fr_215) *Ke Au Okoa*, February
24, 1870.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[92:40](hm09.htm#fr_216) Malo, 65; For. Col. 6:
451 note 1.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[92:41](hm09.htm#fr_217) Westervelt,
*Honolulu*, 224.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[92:42](hm09.htm#fr_218) Kalakaua, 48.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[92:43](hm09.htm#fr_219) Kepelino, 32; *Moolelo
Hawaii*, 41; Thrum, *More Tales*, 71.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[92:44](hm09.htm#fr_220) Henry, 386.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[93:45](hm09.htm#fr_221) Green, 34-42.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[95:46](hm09.htm#fr_222) Given by Mrs. Pukui.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[95:47](hm09.htm#fr_223) Fox, 234.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[96:48](hm09.htm#fr_224) *HHS* Reports 27:
31-33.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[96:49](hm09.htm#fr_225) Green, 57-59.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[97:50](hm09.htm#fr_226) Maui, 155-164.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[97:51](hm09.htm#fr_227) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
January 12, 1867; For. Pol. Race 2: 54; Col. 4: 392, 393.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[97:52](hm09.htm#fr_228) *Ibid*. 5: 278.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[97:53](hm09.htm#fr_229) *Ibid*. 678, 679.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[98:54](hm09.htm#fr_230) For. Col. 5: 676-679.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[98:55](hm09.htm#fr_231) Green and Pukui, 127.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[98:56](hm09.htm#fr_232) Thrum, *More Tales*,
235-241.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[98:57](hm09.htm#fr_233) For. Col. 5: 596-599.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[99:58](hm09.htm#fr_234) Green and Pukui,
140-143.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[99:59](hm09.htm#fr_235) For. Col. 5: 576, 577.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[99:60](hm09.htm#fr_236) *Ke Au Okoa*, October
21, 1869.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[99:61](hm09.htm#fr_237) For. Col. 5: 270, 271.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[100:62](hm09.htm#fr_238) For. Col. 5: 270, and
see Kane-au-kai.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[100:63](hm09.htm#fr_239) Westervelt,
*Honolulu*, 7, 65.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[101:64](hm09.htm#fr_240) Henry, 423-426;
Ellis, *Researches* 1: 68.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[101:65](hm09.htm#fr_241) Henry, 421-423.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[101:66](hm09.htm#fr_242) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
71-75.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[101:67](hm09.htm#fr_243) *JPS* 8: 65-66.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[101:68](hm09.htm#fr_244) Gill, 135-138.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[101:69](hm09.htm#fr_245) White 2: 48-51.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[101:70](hm09.htm#fr_246) Buck, *Bul.* 75: 533.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[101:71](hm09.htm#fr_247) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
163.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[101:72](hm09.htm#fr_248) *JPS* 28: 26.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[101:73](hm09.htm#fr_249) White 3: 113-115.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[102:74](hm09.htm#fr_250) Evans, 45-46.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[102:75](hm09.htm#fr_251) Collocott, *FL* 46:
45-46.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[102:76](hm09.htm#fr_252) Chamberlain, 59-60.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[102:77](hm09.htm#fr_253) Grey, 50-53; White 1:
82-83; Taylor, 282-283.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[102:78](hm09.htm#fr_254) Neuhauss, 546-547.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[102:79](hm09.htm#fr_255) Dixon. 55, 56.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[103:80](hm09.htm#fr_256) Henry, 615-621; Gill,
80-81.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[103:81](hm09.htm#fr_257) Baessler, *ZE* 37:
921-922.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[103:82](hm09.htm#fr_258) Stuebel 4: 67-68;
Turner, 243-245.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[103:83](hm09.htm#fr_259) Gifford, *Bul*. 8:
181-183.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[103:84](hm09.htm#fr_260) Gill, 77-79.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[103:85](hm09.htm#fr_261) Seurat 20: 438-439;
Caillot 1: 95-109.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[103:86](hm09.htm#fr_262) Montiton, 343.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[103:87](hm09.htm#fr_263) Audran 5: 126.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[104:88](hm09.htm#fr_264) Beaglehole MS.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[104:89](hm09.htm#fr_265) Neuhauss, 180-185.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[104:90](hm09.htm#fr_266) Fox, 82-84, 93-98.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[104:91](hm09.htm#fr_267) For. Col. 5: 656-659;
606-677.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Sorcery Gods](hm10)
